Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


P RE -T RAINING G OAL - BASED M ODELS FOR
S AMPLE -E FFICIENT R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING
 Haoqi Yuan1 , Zhancun Mu2 , Feiyang Xie2 , Zongqing Lu1,3†
 1
   School of Computer Science, Peking University
 2
   Yuanpei College, Peking University
 3
   Beijing Academy of Artificial Intelligence



                                               A BSTRACT

             Pre-training on task-agnostic large datasets is a promising approach for enhancing
             the sample efficiency of reinforcement learning (RL) in solving complex tasks.
             We present PTGM, a novel method that pre-trains goal-based models to augment
             RL by providing temporal abstractions and behavior regularization. PTGM in-
             volves pre-training a low-level, goal-conditioned policy and training a high-level
             policy to generate goals for subsequent RL tasks. To address the challenges
             posed by the high-dimensional goal space, while simultaneously maintaining the
             agent’s capability to accomplish various skills, we propose clustering goals in
             the dataset to form a discrete high-level action space. Additionally, we intro-
             duce a pre-trained goal prior model to regularize the behavior of the high-level
             policy in RL, enhancing sample efficiency and learning stability. Experimental
             results in a robotic simulation environment and the challenging open-world envi-
             ronment of Minecraft demonstrate PTGM’s superiority in sample efficiency and
             task performance compared to baselines. Moreover, PTGM exemplifies enhanced
             interpretability and generalization of the acquired low-level skills. Project page:
             https://sites.google.com/view/ptgm-iclr/.


1        I NTRODUCTION

Deep reinforcement learning (RL) has achieved great success in solving sequential decision-making
tasks (Silver et al., 2016; Vinyals et al., 2019; Hafner et al., 2020). However, many real-world
domains such as indoor robotic tasks (Brohan et al., 2023; Myers et al., 2023) and open-world
games (Team et al., 2021; Johnson et al., 2016) present significant challenges to RL. The complex-
ity and long-horizon nature of these tasks make it difficult for RL to explore and receive positive
rewards, thereby resulting in low sample efficiency. In recent years, we have increasing accessi-
bility to vast datasets of robotic manipulations (Li et al., 2023) and human gameplay videos from
the Internet (Baker et al., 2022; Fan et al., 2022). Pre-training on such datasets to improve RL has
emerged as an important research topic.
These large-scale datasets are often not tailored for specific tasks. For example, VPT (Baker et al.,
2022) gathers extensive data of human players playing the open-world game Minecraft, where the
players explore freely rather than solve a specific task. There is potential to learn models of agent
behaviors (Baker et al., 2022; Ramrakhya et al., 2023) and skills (Pertsch et al., 2021a;b) from these
datasets to aid RL. We study pre-training low-level behaviors and skills, and then train high-level
policies with RL for downstream tasks. This approach lies in hierarchical RL (Sutton et al., 1999),
and provides temporal abstraction for the RL policies, thereby improving sample efficiency.
Existing methods (Pertsch et al., 2021a; Rao et al., 2021; Shah et al., 2021; Pertsch et al., 2021b; Shi
et al., 2023) study pre-training low-level policies in low-dimensional RL environments (Fu et al.,
2020) or narrow robotic domains (Gupta et al., 2020), but they have not scaled to high-dimensional,
complex open-world environments (Li et al., 2023; Johnson et al., 2016) and large datasets (Baker
et al., 2022; Fan et al., 2022). Some methods (Pertsch et al., 2021a;b; Shi et al., 2023) model low-
     †
         Correspondence to Zongqing Lu <zongqing.lu@pku.edu.cn>.


                                                     1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


level skills with latent variables using variational inference. However, they fail to model the complex
action sequences, where the sequence length and the action space are large, in large datasets, e.g.,
Minecraft (Baker et al., 2022). Recent works (Baker et al., 2022; Lifshitz et al., 2023) reveal that
policies with a transformer architecture (Vaswani et al., 2017) trained with behavior cloning on
large datasets can effectively model various behaviors in Minecraft. Steve-1 (Lifshitz et al., 2023)
trains a goal-conditioned policy that can exhibit various short-term behaviors conditioned on goals
in Minecraft. Inspired by this, we introduce Pre-Training Goal-based Models (PTGM) for sample-
efficient RL.
Our method, PTGM, pre-trains a goal-conditioned policy via behavior cloning and hindsight rela-
beling on a large task-agnostic dataset. To learn downstream tasks with RL, we train a high-level
policy that outputs a goal at each step, with the goal-conditioned policy executing for several time
steps in the environment based on this goal.
Training RL in a high-dimensional continuous action space is notably sample-inefficient (Lillicrap
et al., 2015). If we follow the existing methods (Pertsch et al., 2021a;b) and attempt to mitigate
this by reducing the dimensionality of the latent variables in the pre-trained model, the model will
fail to learn diverse behaviors in the large dataset due to the decreased capacity. In our approach,
the high-dimensional goal space presents a similar challenge. However, the generalization ability
of the goal-conditioned policy pre-trained on large datasets enables us to compress the goal space
without significantly diminishing the capacity. Consequently, we introduce a clustering approach to
transform the goal space into a discrete high-level action space. Additionally, we propose to pre-
train a goal prior model which predicts the distribution of future goals given the current state. The
goal prior model provides an intrinsic reward with the KL divergence to the high-level policy in RL,
regularizing the behavior of the agent to improve exploration.
We evaluate our method in a robotic manipulation environment Kitchen (Gupta et al., 2020) which
requires solving subtasks sequentially, and the challenging open-world benchmark Minecraft (Fan
et al., 2022) which contains diverse long-horizon tasks that are challenging for RL. PTGM outper-
forms baselines in terms of sample efficiency and success rates. Ablation studies demonstrate the
necessity of each component in PTGM. Additionally, we demonstrate that PTGM has advantages in
the interpretability and generalizability of the learned low-level skills.
In summary, the primary contributions of this work are:
       • We propose pre-training goal-based models for RL, which holds advantages in the sam-
         ple efficiency, learning stability, interpretability, and generalization of the low-level skills
         compared to existing methods.
       • We propose the method of clustering in the goal space and pre-training the goal prior model,
         providing effective approaches for enhancing the sample efficiency of training high-level
         policies given a pre-trained goal-conditioned policy.
       • Our experimental results validate the effectiveness of our method, demonstrating its capa-
         bility to learn on diverse domains and solve the challenging Minecraft tasks efficiently.

2   R ELATED W ORK
Pre-Training for RL. This line of research can be categorized into two main settings: pre-training
from task-specific datasets and pre-training from large task-agnostic datasets. For the former, imi-
tation learning approaches (Gao et al., 2018; Ramrakhya et al., 2023) pre-train policies for initial-
ization in RL, offline RL approaches (Lee et al., 2022; Zhu et al., 2023) pre-train policies and value
functions, and transformers for RL (Wu et al., 2023; Sun et al., 2023; Escontrela et al., 2023; Xie
et al., 2023) pre-train policies, transitions and state representations via sequence modeling. For the
latter, Sermanet et al. (2018); Laskin et al. (2020); Aytar et al. (2018) pre-train state representations
for image observations, Pertsch et al. (2021a;b); Shi et al. (2023); Rosete-Beas et al. (2023) learn
low-level policies for temporal abstraction, and other works pre-train intrinsic rewards (Bruce et al.,
2022; Zhou et al., 2023) or world models (Yuan et al., 2021; Seo et al., 2022). In this paper, we
study pre-training low-level skills from task-agnostic datasets. Recent works (Baker et al., 2022;
Lifshitz et al., 2023) demonstrate that imitation learning and goal-conditioned learning on a large
task-agnostic dataset can acquire diverse skills effectively, motivating us to pre-train goal-based
models from data.


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Goal-Conditioned RL. Goal-conditioned RL (GCRL) (Liu et al., 2022) solves goal-augmented
MDPs (Schaul et al., 2015) to achieve different goals. Schaul et al. (2015); Plappert et al. (2018);
McCarthy & Redmond (2021) study training agents that can handle various goals and generalize
across different goals in the multi-task learning setting. Andrychowicz et al. (2017); Chane-Sane
et al. (2021); Zhu et al. (2021) address the challenges of RL with sparse rewards via GCRL. Nachum
et al. (2018); Li et al. (2022) focus on temporal abstraction with goal-conditioned policies, devel-
oping hierarchical agents that can operate over high-level goals. Other works study goal represen-
tation learning in forms of images (Srinivas et al., 2018; Islam et al., 2022; Lifshitz et al., 2023)
and languages (Myers et al., 2023; Cai et al., 2023) for GCRL or formulate offline RL with return-
conditioned RL (Chen et al., 2021; Janner et al., 2021). Without RL, some methods perform goal-
conditioned learning on datasets to build agents that can follow language instructions (Mezghani
et al., 2023) or multi-modal prompts (Jiang et al., 2022). Our study falls within training goal-
conditioned policies on datasets, providing temporal abstractions for downstream RL.
Hierarchical RL. Hierarchical RL (HRL) leverages temporal abstractions for sample-efficient
learning in both single-task (Sutton et al., 1999; Kulkarni et al., 2016) and multi-task settings (Tessler
et al., 2017; Veeriah et al., 2021), extensively integrating with model-based RL (Hafner et al., 2022),
multi-agent RL (Mahajan et al., 2019), and imitation learning (Sharma et al., 2019b). We focus
on methods that pre-train low-level policies for downstream RL. This includes unsupervised skill
discovery with information-based objectives (Gregor et al., 2016; Sharma et al., 2019a; Strouse
et al., 2021) and training skills from offline datasets (Pertsch et al., 2021a; Rao et al., 2021; Shah
et al., 2021; Pertsch et al., 2021b; Shi et al., 2023). In this paper, we leverage a pre-trained goal-
conditioned policy to enable temporal abstraction and study methods to improve sample efficiency
for training the high-level policy with RL.


3     P RELIMINARIES

3.1   P ROBLEM F ORMULATION

A task can be formalized as a Markov Decision Process (MDP), defined by a tuple M =
(S, A, P, ρ, R, γ) representing states, actions, the transition probability of the environment, the ini-
tial state distribution, the reward function, and the discount factor. Starting from the initial state, for
each time step, the agent performs an action, then the environment transitions to the next state and
returns a reward. ReinforcementP       learning (RL) learns a policy πθ (a|s) to maximize the discounted
                                         ∞
cumulative reward J(θ) = Eπθ [ t=0 γ t R(st , at )]. RL optimizes the policy by learning from on-
line collected data {(st , at , rt , st+1 )}. For partially observable MDPs (Kaelbling et al., 1998) with
observations o ∈ O, we adopt the same notation as MDP, using st to represent o0:t .
We study tasks that are hard in exploration, where it is non-trivial for the agent to reach states that
bring high rewards through random exploration. RL exhibits low sample efficiency on such tasks,
meaning that it needs to collect a very large number of samples from the environment to improve
task success rates. We assume access to a task-agnostic dataset D = {τ = {(si , ai )}Ti=0 } collected
in the same environment, in which the action sequences depict the non-trivial behaviors over time
                               t+k
(i.e., Pτ ∼D (at:t+k |st ) ̸= Πi=t Pτ ∼D (ai |st )) generated by the agent (e.g. human players) while
performing various tasks in the environment. Though trajectories in the dataset are sub-optimal for
solving downstream tasks, the short-term behaviors at:t+k in the dataset represent meaningful skills
and can be stitched sequentially to accomplish a task (Badrinath et al., 2023).
We now formulate pre-training skills to provide temporal abstractions for RL as pre-training a model
Pϕ (at:t+k |st , zt ) using D, where diverse possible behaviors are modeled in the variable z ∈ Z. To
train a task, RL can be performed on a high-level policy πθ (z|s) which acts on a larger time scale
k and the pre-trained model Pϕ decodes at:t+k to act in the environment. The pre-trained model
increases the probability of RL exploring towards task success by compressing the multi-step action
space Ak into a compact behavior space Z, thereby improving sampling efficiency.

3.2   G OAL - CONDITIONED P OLICY

The pre-trained model is fixed during the RL phase, requiring it to have the capacity to model
all the behaviors in the dataset and to decode action sequences accurately. We find that previous


                                                    3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                          𝑝(𝑔)                                         Dataset

                  Goal Prior                              clustering
      𝑜
                   Model

                                       𝐷𝐾𝐿               Discrete Goal Space
                                                            0
                  High-level                                1
                                                                                 𝑔     Goal-Conditioned
      𝑜                                                                                                         𝑎


                                                           …
                    Policy                                                       𝑜          Policy
                                                            N
                                          𝜋(𝑔)

Figure 1: Overview of PTGM. A goal-conditioned policy and a goal prior model are pre-trained on
the large task-agnostic dataset. The goals in the dataset are clustered into a discrete goal space. In
downstream RL tasks, we train a high-level policy that outputs discrete actions to provide goals for
the goal-conditioned policy, and regularize it with the KL divergence to the goal prior model.


methods (Pertsch et al., 2021a;b; Shi et al., 2023) that model the low-level behaviors with continuous
latent variables struggle to model the complex distribution of action sequences in Minecraft datasets
which feature large amounts of data, long action sequences to exhibit certain behaviors, and a large
action space (more analysis in Appendix B.2). Recent work (Lifshitz et al., 2023) has demonstrated
that training a goal-conditioned policy via behavior cloning with a transformer (Vaswani et al., 2017)
architecture can stably learn various behaviors from these data. Therefore, we employ a similar
approach to pre-train a goal-conditioned model.
A goal refers to the final state of a sub-trajectory in the dataset, representing the outcome of the
short-term behavior. The goal-conditioned model Pϕ uses the state space S to be the space Z and
predicts the action for one step:
                                   Z                                    t+k
                                                                        Y
          P (at:t+k |st , sg ) =                    dst+1 . . . dst+k         Pϕ (ai |si , sg )P(si+1 |si , ai ),   (1)
                                   st+1 ,...,st+k                       i=t

where sg ∈ S is the goal state. Starting from st , Pϕ aims at reaching the goal state sg after executing
the actions sampled from it for k steps.
To learn Pϕ from data, we use a variant of hindsight relabeling (Andrychowicz et al., 2017) to label
each state-action sample in the dataset with a future state as the goal state. For a k-step subsequence
τ = (st , at , · · · , st+k , at+k ) in an episode, we label each sample (si , ai ), t ≤ i ≤ t + k with the
goal state sg = st+k . We train Pϕ with behavior cloning, minimizing the negative log-likelihood of
action prediction:
                                        L(ϕ) = ED [− log Pϕ (ai |si , sg )] .                           (2)
In practice, to enable the model to reach goals after different time steps, we randomly sample k
within a range. When states are compact vectors representing the physical state of objects in the
environment, we use the raw state as the goal. When the environment is a POMDP with image
observations, we use the embedding from a pre-trained image encoder as the goal. For instance,
Steve-1 (Lifshitz et al., 2023) uses the embedding of ot+k−16:t+k from the MineCLIP’s vision en-
coder (Fan et al., 2022) in Minecraft.

4    M ETHOD

In this section, we present the proposed method PTGM, utilizing the pre-trained goal-conditioned
policy Pϕ (at |st , sg ) to provide temporal abstractions for RL in downstream tasks. In RL, we train a
high-level policy πθ (sg |st ) which outputs a goal state to guide the low-level goal-conditioned policy
Pϕ to act in the environment for k steps. To enhance the sample efficiency and stability of RL, we
propose a goal clustering method and a pre-trained goal prior model. Figure 1 gives an overview of
PTGM.


                                                            4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


4.1   C LUSTERING IN THE G OAL S PACE

The goals sg ∈ S from the high-dimensional state space introduce a high-dimensional continuous
action space for the high-level policy, making RL sample-inefficient. To tackle this challenge, we
propose to cluster the states in the dataset to discretize the goal space, constructing a discrete action
space for the high-level policy. We sample a large set of states from D, apply t-SNE (Maaten
& Hinton, 2008) to reduce the dimension of states, and apply a clustering algorithm such as K-
Means (Lloyd, 1982) to group similar goal states together and output N clusters. The discretized
goal space is represented with G = {i : sgi }N               g
                                               i=1 , where si is the goal state of the i-th cluster center.
This converts the action space of the high-level policy into a discrete action space Ah = [N ] and
constrains the high-level policy to output goals in the cluster centers.
We observe that compressing goal states into the discrete goal space does not significantly decrease
the agent’s model capacity to perform various behaviors. The reasons come from two aspects.
Firstly, the clustering algorithm groups similar goals together. The cluster center can represent goals
in its cluster that correspond to similar agent behaviors. Secondly, the goal-conditioned model pre-
trained on the large dataset as the low-level policy can elicit generalizability on goals. The model
can extract behavior information in the goal state, thereby generating correct behaviors even when
the provided goal is distant from the current environment state. Given the same goal, the model
can exhibit diverse behaviors in different states. These claims are substantiated in our experimental
results in Section 5.4. Therefore, using the discrete goal space, the low-level policy still has the
capacity to cover various behaviors in the dataset.

4.2   P RE -T RAINING THE G OAL P RIOR M ODEL

In RL, the agent is able to perform smooth and reasonable behaviors within k consecutive steps
given a goal. However, the high-level policy lacks prior knowledge to provide reasonable goals,
thereby should uniformly explore the goal space to learn the task. We propose to learn this prior
knowledge from the dataset by pre-training a goal prior model, improving the sample efficiency and
stability of training the high-level policy.
The goal prior model πψp (ah |s) has the same structure as the high-level policy, where ah ∈ Ah is the
index of the goal cluster centers. This model is trained to predict the distribution of future goals given
the current state, using the clustered goal space G. Similar to training the goal-conditioned model,
we sample states and subsequent goal states (st , sg ) from the dataset. In the discretized goal
                                                                                               space     G,
                                                                                                 sg    g

                                        g                               h                          i ·s
we match the goal that is closest to s based on cosine similarity a = arg maxi∈[N ] ∥sg ∥·∥sg ∥ .
                                                                                                 i
The training objective for the goal prior model is to minimize the negative log-likelihood of goal
prediction:
                                                 h                  i
                                    L(ψ) = ED − log πψp (ah |st ) .                                      (3)

The pre-trained goal prior model acts as a regularizer for the high-level policy during RL, providing
intrinsic rewards that guide the agent’s exploration towards possible goals in the dataset.

4.3   R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING WITH PTGM

Given the goal clusters G, the pre-trained low-level policy Pϕ , and the goal prior model πψp , we
proceed with training the high-level policy using RL for downstream tasks. At each time step, the
high-level policy πθ (ah |s) selects an index of the goal sgah in the clustered goal space. The fixed
low-level policy acts in the environment for k steps conditioned on sgah . The high-level policy is
updated based on the environment rewards and the intrinsic rewards from the goal prior model.
The overall objective for training the high-level policy is to maximize the expected return:

                                                                                    
                       ∞      (k+1)t
                      X        X
          J(θ) = Eπθ    γt         R(si , ai ) − αDKL π p (ah |skt )∥πθ (ah |skt )  ,
                                                                  ψ                                     (4)
                          t=0       i=kt



                                                     5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


where t represents the number of steps for the high-level policy and α is a hyperparameter balancing
the environmental rewards and the intrinsic rewards. By optimizing this objective, the high-level
policy learns to select goals that lead to task success and align with the behaviors in the dataset,
achieving sample-efficient RL with a discrete action space. In principle, any online RL algorithm
can be used to train the high-level policy in downstream tasks.


5     E XPERIMENTS

5.1   E NVIRONMENTS AND DATASETS

We setup experiments on the following two challenging benchmarks with long-horizon tasks. More
details about the environments and our implementations are presented in Appendix A.
Kitchen. A simulated robotic manipulation environment based on Gupta et al. (2020), where the
agent controls a 7-DoF robot arm to manipulate objects in a kitchen. The dataset is provided in
the D4RL benchmark (Fu et al., 2020), consisting of 150K transition samples. In pre-training, we
use the environment state as the goal, which is a vector representing poses of the robot and objects.
In downstream RL, we train on a long-horizon task consisting of 4 subtasks. The agent receives
a sparse, binary reward for each successfully executed subtask. We use the SAC (Haarnoja et al.,
2018) algorithm implemented in SPiRL (Pertsch et al., 2021a), replacing the max-entropy objective
with minimizing KL-divergence to the goal prior model.
Minecraft. A popular open-world game that has been regarded as a challenging benchmark for
RL (Guss et al., 2019; Baker et al., 2022; Fan et al., 2022). We adopt a video dataset of 39M frames
labeled with actions introduced in Baker et al. (2022), which records the human players playing
the game. In downstream RL, we use 5 tasks in the MineDojo simulator (Fan et al., 2022) which
take thousands of steps to complete and are extremely difficult in exploration. The environment
observations are images and the action space is keyboard and mouse operations discretized into
8641 × 121 choices. The agent receives a binary task success reward and the MineCLIP reward
introduced in Fan et al. (2022). In pre-training, we use the MineCLIP embedding (Fan et al., 2022)
of 16 consecutive frames as the goal. Then, we use PPO (Schulman et al., 2017) to train downstream
tasks, optimizing a weighted sum of the extrinsic reward and the KL reward.


5.2   E VALUATION

To evaluate the performance of PTGM, we compare it to several baselines from recent works. More
details on implementing these baselines are presented in Appendix B.
SPiRL (Pertsch et al., 2021a). This work pre-trains a sequential VAE (Zhu et al., 2020) for k-step
action sequence q(z|st , at:t+k ), p(at:t+k |st , z) along with a skill prior pa (z|st ), modeling skills
with a continuous latent variable z. In RL, the high-level policy outputs a skill z, and then the action
decoder p decodes the action sequence and executes for k steps. For Kitchen, we run the released
code where k = 10. For Minecraft, there is a trade-off for selecting k. If we set k = 100 which is
the same as PTGM, the model fails to reconstruct the long action sequences accurately. Otherwise,
if we keep k = 10, the downstream RL can be less sample-efficient since less temporal abstractions
are provided. Therefore, we run experiments on both settings, present the best result for each task
in the paper, and leave the results of both settings in Appendix D.
TACO (Rosete-Beas et al., 2023). This work pre-trains a low-level policy π(at |st , z) conditioned
on the continuous latent variable z from a learned skill posterior q(z|τ ), regularizes q with KL-
divergence to a skill prior p(z|st , sT ), and proposes offline RL methods to train the high-level policy.
We take an online variant of TACO, where the skill prior p is used to initialize and regularize the
high-level policy for online RL. For each downstream task, we manually provide the task goal sT .
VPT-finetune. VPT (Baker et al., 2022) is a foundation model for Minecraft that trains a behavior-
cloning (BC) policy π(at |o0:t ) on a game playing dataset of 70K hours from the Internet. For
Minecraft tasks, we train RL to either finetune the full model (Baker et al., 2022) or finetune the
transformer adapters (Nottingham et al., 2023). We report the better results for each task in the
paper and leave the results of both methods in Appendix D. Note that PPO from scratch fails on all


                                                    6
     Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                     3.5
                                            Kitchen                                      1.0
                                                                                                      Harvest log in plains                                       Harvest water bucket in plains
                                                                                                                                                            0.4
                     3.0
Completed subtasks   2.5
                                                                                         0.8
                                                                                                                                                            0.3


                                                                          Success rate


                                                                                                                                             Success rate
                     2.0                                                                 0.6
                     1.5                                                                                                                                    0.2
                                                                                         0.4
                     1.0                                                                                                                                    0.1
                                                                                         0.2
                     0.5
                     0.0                                                                 0.0                                                                0.0
                        0.0   0.5     1.0     1.5     2.0    2.5    3.0                    0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00 1.25 1.50                                  0.0    0.2      0.4    0.6       0.8    1.0
                                     Environment steps             1e5                                      Environment steps         1e6                                   Environment steps         1e6

                     1.0
                                    Mine cobblestone                                                         Mine iron ore                                  1.0
                                                                                                                                                                            Combat spider
                     0.8                                                                 0.3                                                                0.8
Success rate


                                                                          Success rate


                                                                                                                                             Success rate
                     0.6                                                                                                                                    0.6
                                                                                         0.2
                     0.4                                                                                                                                    0.4
                     0.2                                                                 0.1
                                                                                                                                                            0.2
                     0.0                                                                 0.0                                                                0.0
                        0.0    0.2      0.4         0.6     0.8     1.0                     0.0       0.2      0.4    0.6       0.8    1.0                     0.0    0.2      0.4    0.6       0.8    1.0
                                     Environment steps     1e6                                          Environment steps      1e6                                      Environment steps             1e6
                                    PTGM          PTGM-no-prior                                   SPiRL        VPT-finetune (BC-finetune)                              TACO         Steve-1

     Figure 2: Training performance of PTGM against the baselines in all the tasks. The vertical axis
     indicates the number of completed subtasks in Kitchen and the success rate in the 5 Minecraft tasks.

     downstream tasks in Minecraft according to Fan et al. (2022); Yuan et al. (2023). For Kitchen, we
     use the same approach to implement a baseline named BC-finetune.
     Steve-1 (Lifshitz et al., 2023). This work builds an instruction-following agent in Minecraft. It
     first trains a goal-conditioned policy π(at |o0:t , g) on the contractor dataset, which is the same as the
     low-level policy in PTGM. Then, Steve-1 adopts a language-labeled dataset to map instructions to
     goals. We test the zero-shot performance of Steve-1 in our tasks by providing task instructions.
     We measure the sample efficiency and task performance for all the methods with the training curves
     of success rates during RL. Figure 2 shows the performance of PTGM and all the baselines. In
     Kitchen, PTGM is able to solve 3 subtasks with high probability, exhibiting higher sample effi-
     ciency and comparable task success rates to SPiRL. Both PTGM and SPiRL outperform BC-finetune
     a lot, indicating that training RL with temporal abstraction provided by the pre-trained models im-
     proves sample efficiency significantly. In Minecraft, we observe that PTGM is the only method that
     achieves good success rates on all tasks after training for 1M environment steps, demonstrating its
     high sample efficiency and the strong capability to complete diverse surface and underground tasks.
     Results in most tasks show that the sample efficiency of PTGM greatly exceeds SPiRL, TACO, and
     VPT-finetune. PTGM is also the only method that completes the challenging Iron-ore task, which
     requires more than 1K exploration steps to obtain the rare item underground.
     VPT-finetune fails in the Cobblestone and Iron-ore task. We believe one reason is that during RL, the
     policy without temporal abstraction may quickly forget the skill to repeat the same action consecu-
     tively to break a block. For Steve-1, we observe that it has the strong ability to cut trees; however,
     its performance on the other four tasks falls short. PTGM enhances the capabilities of Steve-1 by
     learning a high-level policy based on it.
     We observe that SPiRL performs well in the simple domain Kitchen with small datasets, but strug-
     gles to learn challenging Minecraft tasks with large datasets and high-dimensional observations and
     actions, exhibiting worse performance compared to PTGM. We argue that the reasons for SPiRL
     underperforming PTGM in Minecraft include: the VAE in SPiRL struggles to reconstruct the long,
     high-dimensional action sequences; SPiRL trains high-level policies with RL in a continuous action
     space, while PTGM is capable of encoding rich and generalizable behaviors in a discrete action
     space, making downstream RL more sample-efficient. We verify the former reason in Appendix C
     and demonstrate in Section 5.4 that PTGM’s discrete goals exhibit the rich behaviors and general-
     ization capabilities mentioned in the latter reason. Due to the limited size and the lack of diverse be-
     haviors at each state in the Kitchen dataset, it is not easy for PTGM to enhance the goal-conditioned
     policy with strong generalization capabilities, resulting in a smaller advantage in this task.


                                                                                                                7
   Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


               1.0
                          N Cluster - Log                            1.0
                                                                                KL weight - Log                           1.0
                                                                                                                                   Low-level steps - Spider
                                                                              = 0.01                                                k = 10
                                                                              = 0.05                                                k = 50
               0.8                                                   0.8      = 0.5                                       0.8       k = 100
                                                                             no-prior                                               k = 500
Success rate


                                                      Success rate


                                                                                                           Success rate
               0.6                                                   0.6                                                  0.6
                                        N = 10
                                        N = 100
               0.4                      N = 500                      0.4                                                  0.4
                                        N = 5000
                                        no-cluster
               0.2                                                   0.2                                                  0.2

               0.0                                                   0.0                                                  0.0
                 0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00 1.25 1.50                    0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00 1.25 1.50                    0.0    0.2       0.4   0.6       0.8    1.0
                         Environment steps      1e6                            Environment steps     1e6                                  Environment steps         1e6


   Figure 3: These figures show the curves of task success rates for the methods in the ablation study.
   The left figure shows PTGM with different numbers of goal clusters and without clustering (PTGM-
   no-cluster) in the Log task. The middle figure shows RL with different weights of the KL reward
   and RL without the goal prior model (PTGM-no-prior) in the Log task. The right figure shows RL
   with different numbers of low-level steps for each high-level action in the Spider task.

   5.3               A BLATION S TUDY

   We conduct the ablation study on the three main components introduced in PTGM: clustering in
   the goal space, the KL reward provided with the goal prior model, and the temporal abstraction for
   RL. Figure 3 presents results in the Minecraft Log and Spider tasks. More results are presented in
   Appendix E.
   For the number of clusters in the goal space, as shown in Figure 2, PTGM with 100 goal clusters
   is able to accomplish all the tasks. In Figure 3, with a goal space comprising 10 clusters, the agent
   fails to improve the task success rates. This is attributed to the non-existence of the tree-chopping
   behavior within the limited number of cluster centers. However, there remains a probability of task
   success, as the goal-conditioned policy can generalize and leverage goals associated with attacking
   other blocks in Minecraft to attack trees. We find that when the number of goal clusters is large, the
   performance of PTGM is robust to the change of this number. When the number increases to 500
   and 5000, the high-level policy can still accomplish the task with high success rates. For N = 5000,
   the training curve rises a bit slower, indicating that the sample efficiency decreases due to the large
   high-level action space. But it still outperforms PTGM-no-cluster and SPiRL a lot. We find that
   PTGM-no-cluster, in which the high-level policy should output 512-dimensional continuous actions
   to match the original goal space, fails on the task.
   For the intrinsic reward provided with the goal prior model, we find that a proper weight α for the
   KL reward improves both sample efficiency and task success rates for RL. RL with α = 0.01 and
   0.05 outperform others and have low variance across different seeds. PTGM-no-prior exhibits a
   higher training variance than PTGM on the tasks of Log and Iron ore, as shown in Figure 2. We
   argue that without the KL reward, PTGM-no-prior suffers from inefficient random exploration in the
   large discrete goal space, resulting in much larger variance across different seeds. We conclude that
   the KL reward with the goal prior model contributes to both sample efficiency and learning stability
   for RL. As shown in Figure 3, for experiments with a large KL reward of α = 0.5, we find that the
   task success rate increases slower, which may be attributed to the high-level policy easily converging
   to the goal prior model and ignoring the task success reward.
   For the level of temporal abstraction, we observe that when the number of steps for the low-level
   policy is set to a small value (k = 10), PTGM has worse sample efficiency. It is because, under
   such settings, the number of steps required by the high-level policy to complete the task increases,
   making the exploration for task success more challenging. When the number of steps exceeds 50,
   PTGM has great sample efficiency and high success rates, accomplishing the task of combating
   a spider within 200K environment steps. This illustrates the effectiveness of the goal-conditioned
   policy pre-trained on the large dataset in successfully completing goals that involve hundreds of
   steps. In contrast, as detailed in Appendix D, SPiRL with the number of low-level steps set to 100
   fails on several tasks. It is worth noting that with a large number of k = 500, PTGM converges to a
   lower performance compared with k = 100. We argue that in this case, the high-level policy cannot


                                                                                        8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


               tree-        mining                            Test task     Sheep      Pig     Chicken
               chopping
                                                            Success rate     0.82      0.36      0.94
                                                              Test task     Place     Water      Wool
                                                            Success rate     0.65      0.16      0.44

                                                         Table 1: In each row, we pick a goal from the
                                                         goal clusters and test the goal-conditioned pol-
               building   attacking                      icy in three tasks conditioned on this goal. For
                                                         the first two rows, in the 16 frames correspond-
                                                         ing to the goal, the agent is attacking a sheep.
Figure 4: Visualization of goal clustering in            For the last two rows, in the 16 frames, the agent
Minecraft. Each group of 4 pictures is from the          is building a house. In each test task, the target
same cluster, where the picture with a red border        item (mobs or water) is initialized in front of the
is the cluster center. In the middle, each red dot       agent and we test for 100 episodes. The table
means a cluster center.                                  shows the success rates.


switch many goals in an episode, making the task performance limited by the ability to solve the
whole task conditioned on a single goal with the low-level controller. Figure 2 shows that k = 100
is a good choice for all the five Minecraft tasks, where the high-level controller is able to switch
about 10 goals per episode.

5.4   I NTERPRETABILITY AND S KILL G ENERALIZATION

We believe that PTGM is sample-efficient not only because it provides temporal abstraction for RL,
but also because it can encode rich behaviors in the compact discrete goal space. In Figure 4, we
demonstrate that in the goal clusters, each cluster can represent an interpretable behavior of human
players and samples in the same cluster exhibit similar behavior. The discrete goal space contains
the behaviors of tree-chopping, mining, exploration, attacking, and building, which can make up the
various skills required to play Minecraft.
Moreover, a single goal in the discrete goal space can be generalized to perform different skills,
instead of representing a single skill only. As shown in Table 1, conditioned on the goal of attacking
a sheep, the low-level policy can perform many similar behaviors including killing a sheep, killing
a pig, and killing a chicken. Conditioned on the goal of house building, the low-level policy can
place a block, collect water buckets, and harvest wool, since all these skills require right-clicking
the mouse. Note that the test tasks have different terrains and backgrounds to the corresponding 16
frames of the goal. This demonstrates that, when provided with a single goal, the pre-trained goal-
conditioned policy can generalize across various tasks and scenarios. This adaptability enriches the
discrete goal space with diverse behaviors, thereby enabling the high-level policy to learn a variety
of tasks within this compact goal space.


6     C ONCLUSION

In this paper, we introduce PTGM to address the problem of sample-efficient RL in complex environ-
ments with large task-agnostic datasets. By employing a combination of the temporal abstraction
provided with the pre-trained goal-conditioned policy, clustering in the goal space, and behavior
regularization with the goal prior model, PTGM demonstrates superior performance across various
tasks, notably in the challenging benchmark of Minecraft.
However, we recognize a few limitations and directions for future work. Firstly, the goal space in
PTGM is inherently determined by the offline dataset, rendering the acquired skills susceptible to
data bias. The agent may struggle to execute unseen skills, such as milking a cow in Minecraft, as the
used dataset contains few instances of such behaviors. In the future, we plan to use larger Internet-
scale datasets to enhance the capabilities of PTGM. Secondly, the efficacy of goal clustering relies
on a good state representation that can compactly represent goals, especially in environments with
image observations. We leave better goal representation learning for PTGM to future work.


                                                     9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported by NSFC under grant 62250068.

R EFERENCES
Marcin Andrychowicz, Filip Wolski, Alex Ray, Jonas Schneider, Rachel Fong, Peter Welinder, Bob
 McGrew, Josh Tobin, OpenAI Pieter Abbeel, and Wojciech Zaremba. Hindsight experience re-
 play. Advances in neural information processing systems (NeurIPS), 2017.

Yusuf Aytar, Tobias Pfaff, David Budden, Thomas Paine, Ziyu Wang, and Nando De Freitas. Playing
  hard exploration games by watching youtube. Advances in neural information processing systems,
  31, 2018.

Anirudhan Badrinath, Yannis Flet-Berliac, Allen Nie, and Emma Brunskill. Waypoint trans-
  former: Reinforcement learning via supervised learning with intermediate targets. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2306.14069, 2023.

Bowen Baker, Ilge Akkaya, Peter Zhokov, Joost Huizinga, Jie Tang, Adrien Ecoffet, Brandon
  Houghton, Raul Sampedro, and Jeff Clune. Video pretraining (vpt): Learning to act by watching
  unlabeled online videos. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2022.

Anthony Brohan, Yevgen Chebotar, Chelsea Finn, Karol Hausman, Alexander Herzog, Daniel Ho,
  Julian Ibarz, Alex Irpan, Eric Jang, Ryan Julian, et al. Do as i can, not as i say: Grounding
  language in robotic affordances. In Conference on Robot Learning (CORL), 2023.

Jake Bruce, Ankit Anand, Bogdan Mazoure, and Rob Fergus. Learning about progress from experts.
  In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2022.

Shaofei Cai, Zihao Wang, Xiaojian Ma, Anji Liu, and Yitao Liang. Open-world multi-task con-
  trol through goal-aware representation learning and adaptive horizon prediction. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2301.10034, 2023.

Elliot Chane-Sane, Cordelia Schmid, and Ivan Laptev. Goal-conditioned reinforcement learning
  with imagined subgoals. In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2021.

Lili Chen, Kevin Lu, Aravind Rajeswaran, Kimin Lee, Aditya Grover, Misha Laskin, Pieter Abbeel,
  Aravind Srinivas, and Igor Mordatch. Decision transformer: Reinforcement learning via sequence
  modeling. Advances in neural information processing systems (NeurIPS), 2021.

Alejandro Escontrela, Ademi Adeniji, Wilson Yan, Ajay Jain, Xue Bin Peng, Ken Goldberg, Young-
  woon Lee, Danijar Hafner, and Pieter Abbeel. Video prediction models as rewards for reinforce-
  ment learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.14343, 2023.

Linxi Fan, Guanzhi Wang, Yunfan Jiang, Ajay Mandlekar, Yuncong Yang, Haoyi Zhu, Andrew
  Tang, De-An Huang, Yuke Zhu, and Anima Anandkumar. MineDojo: Building open-ended em-
  bodied agents with internet-scale knowledge. In Thirty-sixth Conference on Neural Information
  Processing Systems Datasets and Benchmarks Track, 2022.

Justin Fu, Aviral Kumar, Ofir Nachum, George Tucker, and Sergey Levine. D4rl: Datasets for deep
  data-driven reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.07219, 2020.

Yang Gao, Huazhe Xu, Ji Lin, Fisher Yu, Sergey Levine, and Trevor Darrell. Reinforcement learning
  from imperfect demonstrations. arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.05313, 2018.

Karol Gregor, Danilo Jimenez Rezende, and Daan Wierstra. Variational intrinsic control. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1611.07507, 2016.

Abhishek Gupta, Vikash Kumar, Corey Lynch, Sergey Levine, and Karol Hausman. Relay policy
  learning: Solving long-horizon tasks via imitation and reinforcement learning. In Conference on
  Robot Learning (CORL), 2020.


                                               10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


William H. Guss, Brandon Houghton, Nicholay Topin, Phillip Wang, Cayden Codel, Manuela
 Veloso, and Ruslan Salakhutdinov. MineRL: A large-scale dataset of Minecraft demonstrations.
 Twenty-Eighth International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI), 2019.
Tuomas Haarnoja, Aurick Zhou, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Soft actor-critic: Off-policy
  maximum entropy deep reinforcement learning with a stochastic actor. In International confer-
  ence on machine learning (ICML), 2018.
Danijar Hafner, Timothy P Lillicrap, Mohammad Norouzi, and Jimmy Ba. Mastering atari with
  discrete world models. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2020.
Danijar Hafner, Kuang-Huei Lee, Ian Fischer, and Pieter Abbeel. Deep hierarchical planning from
  pixels. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2022.
Riashat Islam, Hongyu Zang, Anirudh Goyal, Alex Lamb, Kenji Kawaguchi, Xin Li, Romain
  Laroche, Yoshua Bengio, and Remi Tachet des Combes. Discrete compositional representations
  as an abstraction for goal conditioned reinforcement learning. In Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 2022.
Michael Janner, Qiyang Li, and Sergey Levine. Offline reinforcement learning as one big sequence
 modeling problem. Advances in neural information processing systems (NeurIPS), 2021.
Yunfan Jiang, Agrim Gupta, Zichen Zhang, Guanzhi Wang, Yongqiang Dou, Yanjun Chen, Li Fei-
  Fei, Anima Anandkumar, Yuke Zhu, and Linxi Fan. Vima: General robot manipulation with
  multimodal prompts. In NeurIPS 2022 Foundation Models for Decision Making Workshop, 2022.
Matthew Johnson, Katja Hofmann, Tim Hutton, and David Bignell. The malmo platform for ar-
 tificial intelligence experimentation. In International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence
 (IJCAI), 2016.
Leslie Pack Kaelbling, Michael L Littman, and Anthony R Cassandra. Planning and acting in
  partially observable stochastic domains. Artificial intelligence, 1998.
Tejas D Kulkarni, Karthik Narasimhan, Ardavan Saeedi, and Josh Tenenbaum. Hierarchical deep
  reinforcement learning: Integrating temporal abstraction and intrinsic motivation. Advances in
  neural information processing systems (NeurIPS), 2016.
Michael Laskin, Aravind Srinivas, and Pieter Abbeel. Curl: Contrastive unsupervised representa-
 tions for reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2020.
Seunghyun Lee, Younggyo Seo, Kimin Lee, Pieter Abbeel, and Jinwoo Shin. Offline-to-online
  reinforcement learning via balanced replay and pessimistic q-ensemble. In Conference on Robot
  Learning (CORL), 2022.
Chengshu Li, Ruohan Zhang, Josiah Wong, Cem Gokmen, Sanjana Srivastava, Roberto Martín-
  Martín, Chen Wang, Gabrael Levine, Michael Lingelbach, Jiankai Sun, et al. Behavior-1k: A
  benchmark for embodied ai with 1,000 everyday activities and realistic simulation. In Conference
  on Robot Learning (CORL), 2023.
Jinning Li, Chen Tang, Masayoshi Tomizuka, and Wei Zhan. Hierarchical planning through goal-
   conditioned offline reinforcement learning. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, 2022.
Shalev Lifshitz, Keiran Paster, Harris Chan, Jimmy Ba, and Sheila McIlraith. Steve-1: A generative
  model for text-to-behavior in minecraft. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.00937, 2023.
Timothy P Lillicrap, Jonathan J Hunt, Alexander Pritzel, Nicolas Heess, Tom Erez, Yuval Tassa,
  David Silver, and Daan Wierstra. Continuous control with deep reinforcement learning. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1509.02971, 2015.
Minghuan Liu, Menghui Zhu, and Weinan Zhang. Goal-conditioned reinforcement learning: Prob-
 lems and solutions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.08299, 2022.
Stuart Lloyd. Least squares quantization in pcm. IEEE transactions on information theory, 1982.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Laurens van der Maaten and Geoffrey Hinton. Visualizing data using t-sne. Journal of Machine
  Learning Research, 2008.

Anuj Mahajan, Tabish Rashid, Mikayel Samvelyan, and Shimon Whiteson. Maven: Multi-agent
  variational exploration. Advances in neural information processing systems (NeurIPS), 2019.

Robert McCarthy and Stephen J Redmond. Imaginary hindsight experience replay: Curious model-
  based learning for sparse reward tasks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.02414, 2021.

Lina Mezghani, Piotr Bojanowski, Karteek Alahari, and Sainbayar Sukhbaatar. Think before
  you act: Unified policy for interleaving language reasoning with actions. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2304.11063, 2023.

Vivek Myers, Andre He, Kuan Fang, Homer Walke, Philippe Hansen-Estruch, Ching-An Cheng,
  Mihai Jalobeanu, Andrey Kolobov, Anca Dragan, and Sergey Levine. Goal representations
  for instruction following: A semi-supervised language interface to control. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2307.00117, 2023.

Ofir Nachum, Shixiang Gu, Honglak Lee, and Sergey Levine. Near-optimal representation learning
  for hierarchical reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.01257, 2018.

Kolby Nottingham, Prithviraj Ammanabrolu, Alane Suhr, Yejin Choi, Hannaneh Hajishirzi, Sameer
  Singh, and Roy Fox. Do embodied agents dream of pixelated sheep?: Embodied decision making
  using language guided world modelling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.12050, 2023.

Karl Pertsch, Youngwoon Lee, and Joseph Lim. Accelerating reinforcement learning with learned
  skill priors. In Conference on Robot Learning (CORL), 2021a.

Karl Pertsch, Youngwoon Lee, Yue Wu, and Joseph J Lim. Guided reinforcement learning with
  learned skills. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.10253, 2021b.

Matthias Plappert, Marcin Andrychowicz, Alex Ray, Bob McGrew, Bowen Baker, Glenn Pow-
 ell, Jonas Schneider, Josh Tobin, Maciek Chociej, Peter Welinder, et al. Multi-goal reinforce-
 ment learning: Challenging robotics environments and request for research. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:1802.09464, 2018.

Ram Ramrakhya, Dhruv Batra, Erik Wijmans, and Abhishek Das. Pirlnav: Pretraining with imita-
  tion and rl finetuning for objectnav. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
  Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2023.

Dushyant Rao, Fereshteh Sadeghi, Leonard Hasenclever, Markus Wulfmeier, Martina Zambelli,
  Giulia Vezzani, Dhruva Tirumala, Yusuf Aytar, Josh Merel, Nicolas Heess, et al. Learning trans-
  ferable motor skills with hierarchical latent mixture policies. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.05062,
  2021.

Erick Rosete-Beas, Oier Mees, Gabriel Kalweit, Joschka Boedecker, and Wolfram Burgard. Latent
  plans for task-agnostic offline reinforcement learning. In Conference on Robot Learning (CORL),
  2023.

Tom Schaul, Daniel Horgan, Karol Gregor, and David Silver. Universal value function approxima-
  tors. In International conference on machine learning (ICML), 2015.

John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy
  optimization algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347, 2017.

Younggyo Seo, Kimin Lee, Stephen L James, and Pieter Abbeel. Reinforcement learning with
  action-free pre-training from videos. In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML),
  2022.

Pierre Sermanet, Corey Lynch, Yevgen Chebotar, Jasmine Hsu, Eric Jang, Stefan Schaal, Sergey
  Levine, and Google Brain. Time-contrastive networks: Self-supervised learning from video. In
  2018 IEEE international conference on robotics and automation (ICRA), 2018.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Dhruv Shah, Benjamin Eysenbach, Nicholas Rhinehart, and Sergey Levine. Rapid exploration for
  open-world navigation with latent goal models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.05859, 2021.

Archit Sharma, Shixiang Gu, Sergey Levine, Vikash Kumar, and Karol Hausman. Dynamics-aware
  unsupervised discovery of skills. arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.01657, 2019a.

Pratyusha Sharma, Deepak Pathak, and Abhinav Gupta. Third-person visual imitation learning via
  decoupled hierarchical controller. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS),
  2019b.

Lucy Xiaoyang Shi, Joseph J Lim, and Youngwoon Lee. Skill-based model-based reinforcement
  learning. In Conference on Robot Learning (CORL), 2023.

David Silver, Aja Huang, Chris J Maddison, Arthur Guez, Laurent Sifre, George Van Den Driessche,
  Julian Schrittwieser, Ioannis Antonoglou, Veda Panneershelvam, Marc Lanctot, et al. Mastering
  the game of go with deep neural networks and tree search. nature, 2016.

Aravind Srinivas, Allan Jabri, Pieter Abbeel, Sergey Levine, and Chelsea Finn. Universal plan-
  ning networks: Learning generalizable representations for visuomotor control. In International
  Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2018.

DJ Strouse, Kate Baumli, David Warde-Farley, Vlad Mnih, and Steven Hansen. Learning more
  skills through optimistic exploration. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.14226, 2021.

Yanchao Sun, Shuang Ma, Ratnesh Madaan, Rogerio Bonatti, Furong Huang, and Ashish
  Kapoor. Smart: Self-supervised multi-task pretraining with control transformers. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2301.09816, 2023.

Richard S Sutton, Doina Precup, and Satinder Singh. Between mdps and semi-mdps: A framework
  for temporal abstraction in reinforcement learning. Artificial intelligence, 1999.

Open Ended Learning Team, Adam Stooke, Anuj Mahajan, Catarina Barros, Charlie Deck, Jakob
  Bauer, Jakub Sygnowski, Maja Trebacz, Max Jaderberg, Michael Mathieu, et al. Open-ended
  learning leads to generally capable agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.12808, 2021.

Chen Tessler, Shahar Givony, Tom Zahavy, Daniel Mankowitz, and Shie Mannor. A deep hierarchi-
  cal approach to lifelong learning in Minecraft. In Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial
  intelligence (AAAI), 2017.

Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez,
  Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. Advances in neural informa-
  tion processing systems (NeurIPS), 2017.

Vivek Veeriah, Tom Zahavy, Matteo Hessel, Zhongwen Xu, Junhyuk Oh, Iurii Kemaev, Hado P
  van Hasselt, David Silver, and Satinder Singh. Discovery of options via meta-learned subgoals.
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2021.

Oriol Vinyals, Igor Babuschkin, Wojciech M Czarnecki, Michaël Mathieu, Andrew Dudzik, Juny-
  oung Chung, David H Choi, Richard Powell, Timo Ewalds, Petko Georgiev, et al. Grandmaster
  level in starcraft ii using multi-agent reinforcement learning. Nature, 2019.

Philipp Wu, Arjun Majumdar, Kevin Stone, Yixin Lin, Igor Mordatch, Pieter Abbeel, and Aravind
  Rajeswaran. Masked trajectory models for prediction, representation, and control. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2305.02968, 2023.

Zhihui Xie, Zichuan Lin, Deheng Ye, Qiang Fu, Yang Wei, and Shuai Li. Future-conditioned unsu-
  pervised pretraining for decision transformer. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
  pp. 38187–38203. PMLR, 2023.

Haoqi Yuan, Ruihai Wu, Andrew Zhao, Haipeng Zhang, Zihan Ding, and Hao Dong. Dmotion:
  Robotic visuomotor control with unsupervised forward model learned from videos. In Interna-
  tional Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), 2021.


                                                 13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Haoqi Yuan, Chi Zhang, Hongcheng Wang, Feiyang Xie, Penglin Cai, Hao Dong, and Zongqing
  Lu. Plan4mc: Skill reinforcement learning and planning for open-world minecraft tasks. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2303.16563, 2023.
Bohan Zhou, Ke Li, Jiechuan Jiang, and Zongqing Lu. Learning from visual observation via offline
  pretrained state-to-go transformer. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.12860, 2023.
Deyao Zhu, Yuhui Wang, Jürgen Schmidhuber, and Mohamed Elhoseiny. Guiding online reinforce-
  ment learning with action-free offline pretraining. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.12876, 2023.
Menghui Zhu, Minghuan Liu, Jian Shen, Zhicheng Zhang, Sheng Chen, Weinan Zhang, Deheng Ye,
 Yong Yu, Qiang Fu, and Wei Yang. Mapgo: Model-assisted policy optimization for goal-oriented
 tasks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2105.06350, 2021.
Yizhe Zhu, Martin Renqiang Min, Asim Kadav, and Hans Peter Graf. S3vae: Self-supervised
  sequential vae for representation disentanglement and data generation. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2020.


                                               14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Appendices
A     E NVIRONMENTS AND I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS

A.1   K ITCHEN

The Kitchen environment features a kitchen scenario and several interactive objects. The subtasks
in the downstream task involve opening the microwave, relocating the kettle, activating a bottom
burner, and switching on the light. We utilize the ‘mixed’ version of the dataset provided by D4RL.
This dataset comprises trajectories from human operations, with none of the sequences completing
all four tasks. The state is a 60-dimensional vector, representing the positions and velocities of the
7-DoF robot arm and all the objects. The action is a 9-dimensional vector. A reward of +1 is given
upon the successful completion of a subtask.
In pre-training, we set k = 20 for goal relabeling. We represent the goal with a 21-dimensional
vector from the state, representing the positions of objects and the robot arm. In clustering, we
apply t-NSE to reduce the goals to two dimensions, and then use KMeans++ to obtain 50 clusters.
The goal-conditioned policy, the goal prior model, and the high-level policy are 5-layer MLPs with
a hidden layer dimension of 128. The goal-conditioned policy and the goal prior model are trained
until convergence and we select the model with the lowest validation loss.
In RL, we optimize the high-level policy, which is initialized with the weights of the pre-trained goal
prior model. We use the SAC algorithm. To implement the KL reward, we replace the objective of
entropy maximization in SAC with minimizing KL divergence to the goal prior model. Table 2 lists
the hyperparameters of SAC.

                                 Table 2: Hyperparameters of SAC.

                                    Name                  Symbol      Value
                                Discount factor              γ        0.99
                           Initial KL reward weight          α          1
                                KL reward target             δ         0.7
                            Low-level policy steps           k         20
                              Rollout buffer size            --        1e6
                         Training epochs per iteration       --        10
                                   Optimizer                 --      AdamW
                                   Batch size                --       256
                                  Learning rate              --       3e-4


A.2   M INECRAFT

We present the task setup in Minecraft with the MineDojo simulator in Table 3. The observations are
128×128 images in first-person view. The actions are formed by a dictionary representing keyboard
states in binary values and mouse movements in x, y directions, which are finally processed into a
discrete action space of 8641 × 121. The reward for each task consists of two parts: a reward of +1
is given upon task success; and a reward provided by the vision language model MineCLIP, which
computes the similarity between the task description and the last 16 frames of observations.
For the dataset, we use 39M frames from the contractor dataset introduced in VPT, consisting of 4
subsets where the human players are asked to play for different tasks such as house building and
obtaining diamond pickaxe. We randomly sample k between [15, 200] for goal relabeling. We
partition 10K frames from the dataset as the validation set. All models are pre-trained for more than
10 epochs until convergence, and we select the model with the lowest validation loss.
In clustering, we convert the action dictionary into a 25-dimensional one-hot vector and concatenate
the 512-dimensional MineCLIP embedding of consecutive 16 frames with the sum of the corre-
sponding 16 one-hot vectors of actions to form the goal state. Incorporating action information


                                                  15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 3: Settings for the five downstream tasks in Minecraft. Language Description for each task
is used in both computing MineCLIP reward and testing the baseline of Steve-1. Initial Tools are
provided in the inventory at each episode beginning. Max Steps is the maximal episode length.

                   Task                 Language Description         Initial Tools    Max Steps

          Harvest log in plains             "Cut a tree."                 --             2000
                                            "Find water,
     Harvest water bucket in plains                                     bucket           2000
                                        obtain water bucket."
            Mine cobblestone            "Obtain cobblestone."       wooden pickaxe       500
              Mine iron ore               "Obtain iron ore."         stone pickaxe       2000
                                          "Combat a spider
             Combat spider                                          diamond sword        500
                                           in night plains."


improves the distinction between different behaviors in Minecraft. We apply t-SNE to reduce the
goals to two dimensions, and then use KMeans++ to obtain 100 clusters.
For the network architecture, the goal-conditioned policy, the goal prior model, and the high-level
policy all use the architecture of VPT-2x model. It adopts an Impala CNN for image processing,
which is comprised of three subsequent stacks with number of channels {16, 16, 32} followed with a
linear layer, converting the 128 × 128 × 3 image into a 2048-dimensional vector. Then, the sequence
of image embeddings are fed into a causal Transformer consisting of 4 subsequent causal residual
transformer blocks, which can process sequence with a maximal length of 128. The Transformer
output are 2048-dimensional vectors, providing state representations given past sequence of images.
In the goal-conditioned policy, for each timestep, the MineCLIP embedding of the goal image is
mapped to a 2048-dimensional vector with a linear layer and then added to the output of the image
encoder to augment the input image with goal information. Given the Transformer outputs, a linear
layer is followed to output 8641 × 121 categorical actions and another linear layer is used to output
values. For the goal prior model and the high-level policy, we use a linear layer to output categorical
actions with the number of goal clusters instead.
During pre-training, all the model parameters in the goal-conditioned policy and the goal prior model
are optimized. In downstream RL, for the high-level policy, we use the pre-trained image encoder
and transformer from VPT for feature extraction, and only optimize the MLPs in the transformer
output layer, the action head, and the value head during RL. The action head and the value head are
randomly initialized to provide a uniform prior in the goal space.
We use the PPO algorithm in RL. Table 4 lists the hyperparameters of PPO. We train each task for 3
random seeds.


                                  Table 4: Hyperparameters of PPO.

                                     Name                 Symbol       Value
                                 Discount factor               γ       0.999
                               KL reward weight                α       0.05
                             Low-level policy steps            k        100
                               Rollout buffer size             --        40
                          Training epochs per iteration        --         5
                                   Optimizer                   --     AdamW
                                  Learning rate                --      1e-4
                                  GAE lambda                   λ       0.95
                                   Clip range                  --       0.2


                                                  16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B     D ETAILS FOR BASELINES

B.1   VPT-F INETUNE

We adopt two methods to finetune VPT with RL, named VPT-adapter and VPT-full. VPT-adapter
uses the VPT-3x model with 0.5B parameters. The overall architecture is mentioned in Section A.2
while the number of channels in Impala CNN are increased to {64, 128, 128} and the hidden dimen-
sions in Transformer are increased to 4096. We initialize the model with the pre-trained VPT-3x
model and only optimizes the parameters in Transformer adapters and the value head during RL.
VPT-full uses the VPT-2x model with 248M parameters, whose architecture is described in Sec-
tion A.2. We initialize the model with the pre-trained VPT-2x model and optimizes all the parame-
ters during RL. To alleviate the issue of catastrophic forgetting during RL, we add a KL loss between
the output of the training policy and the initialized VPT model in PPO.
For the baseline of BC-Finetune in Kitchen, we use 5-layer MLPs with hidden layer dimensions
of 128 to be the actor and the critic. The actor is pre-trained on the Kitchen dataset with behavior
cloning until convergence. Then we finetune the actor-critic with SAC implemented in SPiRL, using
the same configurations in Table 2.

B.2   SP I RL

To implement SPiRL in Minecraft, we train SPiRL with different action sequence lengths, named
SPiRL-10 and SPiRL-100. For SPiRL-10, we represent the state with the 128-dimensional
MineCLIP embedding of the past 16 frames. The skill prior model is a 6-layer MLP with a hid-
den layer dimension of 128, which takes the current state embedding as input and outputs a 20-
dimensional Gaussian distribution. In the autoencoder for action sequences, we use LSTMs to
process sequence information. Concretely, the skill encoder takes the first state and the subsequent
10 actions as input. The action sequence is processed with an LSTM encoder with 128-dimensional
hidden layers followed with a Linear layer to output a latent skill distribution with a dimension of 20.
In the action decoder, an LSTM decoder with 128-dimensional hidden layers takes the latent skill
and the state as input and decode the 10 actions. For SPiRL-100, we adopt the similar architecture
but employ a larger model with a hidden layer dimension of 256 and a 40-dimensional latent skill
space to increase the model capacity for generating longer sequences. To pre-train the model, we
use a combination of the negative log-likelihood of action prediction, the KL divergence of the skill
encoder to a unit Gaussian prior, and the negative log-likelihood of the skill prediction from the skill
prior model. We set the weight of KL divergence to 10.0 to acquire the best result. In downstream
RL, we use the high-level policy architecture described in Section A.2 and use a 20-dimensional
Gaussian action head. We train PPO with a weight of 0.05 for KL reward.
In Kitchen, we adopt the official implementation of SPiRL.
We analysis the difficulty in extending SPiRL to the Minecraft domain which features large-scale
datasets (with large amounts of data and diverse behaviors) + challenging open-world tasks (with
high-dimensional observation and action spaces, require long action sequences to execute certain
behaviors). The reasons why SPiRL fails are threefold:

       • SPiRL models behaviors in compact Gaussian latent variables p(z|st , at:t+k ) regularized
         with KL divergence, which cannot accurately distinguish diverse behaviors in the large-
         scale Minecraft dataset.
       • The low-level policy in SPiRL decodes multi-step actions at one state π(at:t+k |st , z),
         which cannot accurately reconstruct the high-dimensional long action sequences in
         Minecraft. Thus, it fails to execute many complicated skills in Minecraft (e.g. breaking
         a log requires taking more than 10 attack actions repeatedly).
       • In SPiRL, the high-level policy acts in the continuous skill space z, making downstream
         RL inefficient (especially for long-horizon tasks in Minecraft).

To address these issues respectively, we proposed PTGM that: 1. it models behaviors with goals
(states in the dataset); 2. the goal-conditioned low-level policy π(at |st , sg ) learns one-step action
prediction on each state; 3. the high-level policy acts in the discretized goal space.


                                                  17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B.3   TACO

We implement a variant of TACO that adopts offline skill pre-training and online RL. In Minecraft,
we also use the VPT-2x backbone to implement the models. In the skill posterior, we use the last-
token output in the Transformer to represent the whole trajectory and add a 2-layer MLP with a
hidden layer size of 128 to extract a 20-dimensional Gaussian distribution. The low-level policy
concatenates the state representation from the Transformer and the latent skill sampled from the
skill posterior, using a 2-layer MLP with a hidden layer size of 128 to predict actions. The skill prior
takes the state representation from the Transformer and the image representation of the last frame
from the Impala CNN, using a 2-layer MLP with a hidden layer size of 128 to predict the latent skill
distribution. During pre-training, we set the weight of KL loss to 1 to make both KL loss and action
prediction loss converge to reasonable values.
For downstream RL, our high-level policy has the same architecture to the skill prior and we initialize
it with the pre-trained skill prior. For each task, we manually pick an image in the dataset that
demonstrates task success to provide a fixed task goal for both the skill prior and the high-level
policy. We use PPO to train the high-level policy, setting the weight of KL reward to 0.01.

C     R ESULTS FOR P RE - TRAINING
Figure 5 shows the training loss of PTGM on the Minecraft dataset, with different numbers of goal
clusters. Figure 6 shows the average reconstruction loss for each action in training SPiRL on the
Minecraft dataset. The reconstruction loss of SPiRL-100 is significantly higher than that of SPiRL-
10 after convergence, indicating that SPiRL has poor accuracy in modeling long action sequences
of 100 steps in Minecraft.


                              400                                            N=10
                              350                                            N=100
                              300                                            N=500
                              250
                   Loss


                              200
                              150
                              100
                               50
                                    0   500   1000         1500       2000       2500
                                                Training steps
Figure 5: The training loss for pre-training the goal prior model in PTGM on the Minecraft dataset,
with different numbers of goal clusters.


                             1400                                        SPiRL-10
                             1200                                        SPiRL-100
                             1000
                Recon loss


                              800
                              600
                              400
                              200
                                0
                                    0   500   1000         1500       2000       2500
                                                Training steps
 Figure 6: The action reconstruction loss for SPiRL-10 and SPiRL-100 on the Minecraft dataset.



                                                  18
          Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


          D                A DDITIONAL R ESULTS FOR BASELINES
          Figure 7 shows results for the baseline methods SPiRL-10, SPiRL-100, VPT-adapter, and VPT-full.

                             Harvest log in plains                                                           Harvest water bucket in plains                                              Mine cobblestone
                                                                                                       0.4
                                                                                                                                                                           0.6
                     0.3                                                                                                                                                   0.5
                                                                                                       0.3
      Success rate


                                                                                        Success rate


                                                                                                                                                            Success rate
                                                                                                                                                                           0.4
                     0.2                                                                               0.2                                                                 0.3
                     0.1                                                                                                                                                   0.2
                                                                                                       0.1
                                                                                                                                                                           0.1
                     0.0                                                                               0.0                                                                 0.0
                       0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00 1.25 1.50                                                 0.0     0.2      0.4     0.6         0.8    1.0                     0.0   0.2      0.4    0.6       0.8    1.0
                                   Environment steps                             1e6                                    Environment steps            1e6                                  Environment steps         1e6

                                    Mine iron ore                                                      0.6
                                                                                                                        Combat spider
               0.150
               0.125                                                                                   0.5
Success rate


                                                                                        Success rate

               0.100                                                                                   0.4
               0.075                                                                                   0.3
               0.050                                                                                   0.2
               0.025                                                                                   0.1
               0.000                                                                                   0.0
                    0.0      0.2      0.4    0.6                        0.8       1.0                     0.0     0.2      0.4     0.6         0.8    1.0
                                   Environment steps                             1e6                                 Environment steps     1e6
                                                                              SPiRL-10                          SPiRL-100         VPT-adapter                                 VPT-full

          Figure 7: The RL training curves of SPiRL and VPT-finetune in Minecraft tasks. The vertical axis
          represents the success rate and the horizontal axis represents the number of steps in the environment.
          SPiRL-k means the action decoder takes k actions in the environment for each high-level action.
          VPT-adapter means finetuning the transformer adapters only and VPT-full means training the whole
          VPT model.


                                                                        3.5
                                                                                                                          Kitchen
                                                                        3.0
                                                   Completed subtasks


                                                                        2.5
                                                                        2.0
                                                                        1.5                                                        PTGM
                                                                                                                                   PGTM-no-cluster
                                                                        1.0                                                        SPiRL
                                                                                                                                   VPT-finetune (BC-finetune)
                                                                        0.5
                                                                        0.0
                                                                           0.0                 0.5              1.0          1.5         2.0         2.5                      3.0
                                                                                                                  Environment steps                                         1e5

          Figure 8: Results for different methods in Kitchen. PTGM-no-cluster means using the continuous
          goal space without clustering as the action space in the high-level policy.

          Figure 8 shows results for different methods in Kitchen. BC-finetune pre-trains a behavior-cloning
          low-level policy on the Kitchen dataset and finetunes it with SAC. Its failture is related to the lack
          of temporal abstraction for RL and the forgetting issue during RL finetuning. (Pertsch et al., 2021a)
          also reports the similar results of this baseline in Kitchen.
          Though the dimension of the goal in Kitchen is relatively lower (21 dimensions), we find that PTGM-
          no-cluster fails in this task. We observe that, with the continuous action space, the high-level policy
          should learn to output valid goals that lay in the manifold of states from the dataset to make the low-
          level policy perform reasonable behaviors. On the contrary, for PTGM with discrete goal clusters,
          the output of the high-level policy is always a valid goal (in the clusters), making RL efficient.
          Though the KL reward encourages PTGM-no-cluster to output goals close to the goal prior, it cannot
          make the output accurate enough due to the Gaussian sampling of the action head.


                                                                                                                            19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E    A DDITIONAL R ESULTS FOR THE A BLATION S TUDY

Here, we present additional results of the ablation study in Minecraft tasks.
According to Figure 9, we draw some conclusions on the selection of cluster numbers:

       • With N = 10, the agent fails to improve the task success rates, due to the low capacity
         of behaviors in the small goal space. But the task success rates are non-zero, due to the
         generalization ability of the low-level policy.
       • With an increasing number of goal clusters, the performance of PTGM is robust, while the
         sample efficiency slightly decreases due to the larger high-level action space. In Spider,
         PTGM with N = 5000 underperforms N = 100 and 500 in sample-efficiency and training
         stability.
       • PTGM-no-cluster fails on all tasks, which is caused by ineffectiveness of RL acting in
         high-dimensional continuous action spaces.


                            1.0
                                             Log                                        1.0
                                                                                                              Spider
                                                                                                 N = 10
                                                                                                 N = 100
                            0.8                                                         0.8      N = 500
                                                                                                 N = 5000
                                                                                                 no-cluster
             Success rate


                                                                         Success rate

                            0.6                                                         0.6
                                                           N = 10
                                                           N = 100
                            0.4                            N = 500                      0.4
                                                           N = 5000
                                                           no-cluster
                            0.2                                                         0.2

                            0.0                                                         0.0
                              0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00 1.25 1.50                           0.0   0.2       0.4     0.6     0.8    1.0
                                       Environment steps           1e6                                 Environment steps         1e6



Figure 9: Results for the ablation study of PTGM with different numbers of goal clusters and
without clustering (PTGM-no-cluster) in Minecraft tasks.



                            1.0
                                             Log                                        1.0
                                                                                                              Spider
                                                                                                 k = 10
                                                                                                 k = 50
                            0.8                                                         0.8      k = 100
                                                                                                 k = 500
             Success rate


                                                                         Success rate


                            0.6                                                         0.6

                            0.4                              k = 10                     0.4
                                                             k = 50
                                                             k = 100
                            0.2                              k = 500                    0.2

                            0.0                                                         0.0
                              0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00 1.25 1.50                           0.0   0.2       0.4     0.6     0.8    1.0
                                       Environment steps           1e6                                 Environment steps         1e6


Figure 10: Results for the ablation study of PTGM with different numbers of low-level steps for
each high-level action in Minecraft tasks.

According to Figure 10, we draw some conclusions on the selection of low-level step numbers:

       • With a small number of low-level steps (k = 10), the behavior is offloaded more to the
         high-level policy, resulting in worse sample efficiency of RL.
       • With an increasing number of low-level steps, PTGM shows better sample efficiency and
         success rates. k = 100 is a good choice for all the Minecraft tasks, where the high-level
         controller is able to switch about 10 goals per episode.


                                                                         20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


      • With k = 500, PTGM converges to a lower performance compared with k = 100 because
        the behavior is offloaded too much to the low-level policy. In this case, the high-level
        policy cannot switch many goals in an episode, making the task performance limited by the
        capability of the low-level controller conditioned on a single goal.

Since prior work Pertsch et al. (2021a); Rosete-Beas et al. (2023) usually initialize the high-level
policy with some pre-trained models for downstream learning, we also conduct ablation study that
initialize the high-level policy with the goal prior model for downstream RL. According to Fig-
ure 11, PTGM-prior-init outperforms PTGM on harvesting logs, but has worse performance in other
Minecraft tasks. We find that since chopping trees is the most frequent behavior in the Minecraft
Contractor dataset Baker et al. (2022), the behavior-cloning models learned from such data can draw
higher probabilities on harvesting logs than other behaviors. Thus, PTGM-prior-init is biased to the
task of harvesting logs and fails to explore for other tasks in which the goal prior model draws low
probabilities on the task-relevant goals. On the contrary, PTGM adopts a uniform goal prior for
exploration, showing strong capabilities in solving out-of-distribution tasks.

                            1.0
                                                  Log                                       0.5
                                                                                                           Water bucket
                                                                                                     PTGM
                            0.8                                                             0.4      PTGM-prior-init
             Success rate


                            0.6                                              Success rate   0.3

                            0.4                                                             0.2

                            0.2                          PTGM                               0.1
                                                         PTGM-prior-init
                            0.0                                                             0.0
                              0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00 1.25 1.50                               0.0   0.2     0.4       0.6    0.8         1.0
                                       Environment steps              1e6                              Environment steps             1e6

                                             Iron ore                                       1.0
                                                                                                              Spider
                                     PTGM
                            0.4      PTGM-prior-init                                        0.8
             Success rate


                                                                             Success rate


                            0.3                                                             0.6
                            0.2                                                             0.4
                            0.1                                                             0.2                         PTGM
                                                                                                                        PTGM-prior-init
                            0.0                                                             0.0
                               0.0   0.2    0.4         0.6    0.8         1.0                 0.0   0.2     0.4       0.6    0.8         1.0
                                       Environment steps              1e6                              Environment steps             1e6


Figure 11: Ablation study for PTGM that initializes the high-level policy with the pre-trained goal
prior for RL (PTGM-prior-init) in Minecraft tasks.


                                                                                 21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


F    A DDITIONAL R ESULTS FOR G OAL C LUSTER V ISUALIZATION
Figure 12 provides additional results on goal clusters visualization, where we observe that samples
in the same cluster exhibit similar behavior.



    build


    travel


    place


    inventory


    attack


    chop tree


    mine



    walk
    backwards
    and place



    climb



Figure 12: Additional results on goal clusters visualization in Minecraft. In each row, images are
from the same cluster and the first image in the dotted red border is the cluster center. We manually
annotate the semantic behavior represented by the images on the left.


                                                 22
