Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


S AMPLE -E FFICIENT M ULTI -AGENT RL: A N O PTI -
MIZATION P ERSPECTIVE

 Nuoya XiongвҲ—                                             Zhihan LiuвҲ—
 IIIS, Tsinghua University                                Northwestern University
 xiongny20@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn                          zhihanliu2027@u.northwestern.edu

 Zhaoran Wang                                             Zhuoran Yang
 Northwestern University                                  Yale University
 zhaoranwang@gmail.com                                    zhuoran.yang@yale.edu



                                               A BSTRACT

             We study multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) for the general-sum
             Markov Games (MGs) under general function approximation. In order to find
             the minimum assumption for sample-efficient learning, we introduce a novel
             complexity measure called the Multi-Agent Decoupling Coefficient (MADC) for
             general-sum MGs. Using this measure, we propose the first unified algorithmic
             framework that ensures sample efficiency in learning Nash Equilibrium, Coarse
             Correlated Equilibrium, and Correlated Equilibrium for both model-based and
             model-free MARL problems with low MADC. We also show that our algorithm
             provides comparable sublinear regret to the existing works. Moreover, our algo-
             rithm only requires an equilibrium-solving oracle and an oracle that solves regular-
             ized supervised learning, and thus avoids solving constrained optimization prob-
             lems within data-dependent constraints (Jin et al., 2020a; Wang et al., 2023) or
             executing sampling procedures with complex multi-objective optimization prob-
             lems (Foster et al., 2023). Moreover, the model-free version of our algorithms is
             the first provably efficient model-free algorithm for learning Nash equilibrium of
             general-sum MGs.


1       I NTRODUCTION

Multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) has achieved remarkable empirical successes in solv-
ing complicated games involving sequential and strategic decision-making across multiple agents
(Vinyals et al., 2019; Brown & Sandholm, 2018; Silver et al., 2016). These achievements have cat-
alyzed many research efforts focusing on developing efficient MARL algorithms in a theoretically
principled manner. Specifically, a multi-agent system is typically modeled as a general-sum Markov
Game (MG) (Littman, 1994), with the primary aim of efficiently discerning a certain equilibrium
notion among multiple agents from data collected via online interactions. Some popular equilibrium
notions include Nash equilibrium (NE), correlated equilibrium (CE), and coarse correlated equilib-
rium (CCE).
However, multi-agent general-sum Markov Games (MGs) bring forth various challenges. In partic-
ular, empirical application suffers from the large state space. Such a challenge necessitates the use
of the function approximation as an effective way to extract the essential features of RL problems
and avoid dealing directly with the large state space. Yet, adopting function approximation in a
general-sum MG brings about additional complexities not found in single-agent RL or a zero-sum
MG. Many prevailing studies on single-agent RL or two-agent zero-sum MGs with the function
approximation leverage the special relationships between the optimal policy and the optimal value
function (Jin et al., 2021a; Du et al., 2021; Zhong et al., 2022; Jin et al., 2022; Huang et al., 2021;
Xiong et al., 2022). In particular, in single-agent RL, the optimal policy is the greedy policy with
respect to the optimal value function. Whereas in a two-agent zero-sum MG, the Nash equilibrium
    вҲ—
        Equal contribution


                                                      1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


is obtained by solving a minimax estimation problem based on the optimal value function. Contrast-
ingly, in a general-sum MG, individual agents possess distinct value functions, and thus there exists
no unified optimal value function that characterizes the equilibrium behavior. Moreover, unlike a
zero-sum MG, a general-sum MG can admit diverse equilibrium notions, where each corresponds
to a set of policies. Consequently, methodologies developed for single-agent RL or zero-sum MGs
cannot be directly extended to general-sum MGs.
Recently, several works propose sample-efficient RL algorithms for general-sum MGs. In particular,
Chen et al. (2022b); Foster et al. (2023) propose model-based algorithms for learning NE/CCE/CE
based on multi-agent extensions of the Estimation-to-Decision algorithm (Foster et al., 2021), and
they establish regret upper bounds in terms of complexity metrics that extend Decision-Estimation
Coefficient (Foster et al., 2021) to MGs. In addition, Wang et al. (2023) study model-free RL for
general-sum MGs with the general function approximation. They focus on developing a decentral-
ized and no-regret algorithm that finds a CCE. Thus, it seems unclear how to design a provably
sample-efficient MARL algorithm for NE/CCE/CE for general-sum MGs in a model-free manner.
Furthermore, motivated by the recent development in single-agent RL (Jin et al., 2021a; Du et al.,
2021; Zhong et al., 2022; Foster et al., 2021; Liu et al., 2023), we aim to develop a unified algorith-
mic framework for MARL that covers both model-free and model-based approaches. Thus, we aim
to address the following questions:

 Can we design a unified algorithmic framework for general-sum MGs such that (i) it is provably
 sample-efficient in learning NE/CCE/CE in the context of the function approximation and (ii) it
                  covers both model-free and model-based MARL approaches?

In this paper, we provide an affirmative answer to the above questions. Specifically, we propose a
unified algorithmic framework named Multi-Agent Maximize-to-EXplore (MAMEX) for general-
sum MGs with the general function approximation. MAMEX extends the framework of Maximize-
to-Explore (Liu et al., 2023) to general-sum MGs by employing it together with an equilibrium
solver for general-sum normal-form games defined over the policy space.
Maximize-to-Explore (MEX) is a class of RL algorithms for single-agent MDP and two-agent zero-
sum MGs where each new policy is updated by solving an optimization problem involving a hy-
pothesis f , which can be regarded as the action-value function in the model-free version and the
transition model in the model-based version. The optimization objective of MEX contains two
terms вҖ” (a) the optimal value with respect to the hypothesis f and (b) a loss function computed
from data that quantifies how far f is from being the true hypothesis. Here, the term (a) reflects the
planning part of online RL and leverages the fact that the optimal policy is uniquely characterized
by the given hypothesis. On the other hand, the term (b), which can be the mean-squared Bellman
error or log-likelihood function, reflects the estimation part of online RL. By optimizing the sum
of (a) and (b) over the space of hypotheses without any data-dependent constraints, MEX balances
exploitation with exploration in the context of the function approximation.
However, the first term in MEXвҖҷs optimization objective leverages the fact that the optimal policy
can be uniquely constructed from the optimal value function or the true model, using a greedy
step or dynamic programming. Such a nice property cannot be extended to general-sum MGs,
where the relationship between the equilibrium policies and value function is more complicated, and
each agent has its own value function. As a result, it is impractical to construct a single-objective
optimization problem in the style of MEX over the hypothesis space for general-sum MGs.
Instead of optimizing over the spaces of hypotheses, MAMEX optimizes over the policy space.
Specifically, in each iteration, MAMEX updates the joint policy of all agents by solving for a desired
equilibrium (NE/CCE/CE) of a normal-form game, where the pure strategies are a class of joint
policies of the n agents, e.g., the class of deterministic joint policies. Besides, for each pure strategy
of this normal form game, the corresponding payoff function is obtained by solving a regularized
optimization problem over the hypothesis space aМҖ la MEX. Thus, policy updates in MAMEX involve
the following two steps:

      (i) For each pure strategy ПҖ, construct the payoff function V i (ПҖ) for each agent i by solving
          an unconstrained and regularized optimization problem;
     (ii) Compute the NE/CCE/CE of the normal-form game over the space of pure strategies with
          payoff functions {Vi (ПҖ)}ni=1 , where n is the number of agents.


                                                    2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


The implementation of MAMEX only requires an oracle for solving a single-objective and un-
constrained optimization problem and an oracle for solving NE/CCE/CE of a normal-form game.
Compared to existing works that either solve constrained optimization subproblems within data-
dependent constraints (Wang et al., 2023), or complex multi-objective or minimax optimization
subproblems (Foster et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2022b), MAMEX is more amenable to practical im-
plementations. Furthermore, step (i) of MAMEX resembles MEX, which enables both model-free
and model-based instantiations.
We prove that MAMEX is provably sample-efficient in a rich class of general-sum MGs. To this end,
we introduce a novel complexity measure named Multi-Agent Decoupling Coefficient (MADC) to
capture the exploration-exploitation tradeoff in MARL. Compared to the decoupling coefficient and
its variants (Dann et al., 2021; Agarwal & Zhang, 2022; Zhong et al., 2022) proposed for the single-
agent setting, MADC characterize the hardness of exploration in MGs in terms of the discrepancy
between the out-of-sample prediction error and the in-sample training error incurred by minimizing
a discrepancy function в„“ on the historical data. MADC is defined based on the intuition that if
a hypothesis attains a small training error on a well-explored dataset, it would also incur a small
prediction error. When the MADC of an MG instance is small, achieving a small training error
ensures a small prediction error, and thus exploration is relatively easy. We prove that MAMEX
achieves a sublinear regret for learning NE/CCE/CE in classes with small MADCs, which includes
multi-agent counterparts of models with low Bellman eluder dimensions (Jin et al., 2021a; 2022;
Huang et al., 2021), Bilinear Classes (Du et al., 2021), and models with low witness ranks (Sun et al.,
2019; Huang et al., 2021). When specialized to specific members within these classes, MAMEX
yields comparable regret upper bounds to existing works.

Our Contributions. In summary, our contributions are two-fold.
вҖў First, we provide a unified algorithmic framework named Multi-Agent Maximize-to-EXplore
(MAMEX) for both model-free and model-based MARL, which is sample-efficient in finding
the NE/CCE/CE in general-sum MGs with small MADCs. Moreover, MAMEX leverages an
equilibrium-solving oracle for normal-form games defined over a class of joint policies for pol-
icy updates, and a single-objective optimization procedure that solves for the payoff functions of
these normal-form games. To our best knowledge, the model-free version of MAMEX is the first
model-free algorithm for general-sum MGs that learns all three equilibria NE, CCE, and CE with
sample efficiency.
вҖў Second, we introduce a complexity measure, Multi-Agent Decoupling Coefficient (MADC), to
quantify the hardness of exploration in a general-sum MG in the context of the function approxima-
tion. The class of MGs with low MADCs includes a rich class of MG instances, such as multi-agent
counterparts of models with low Bellman eluder dimensions (Jin et al., 2021a; 2022; Huang et al.,
2021), Bilinear Classes (Du et al., 2021), and models with low witness ranks (Sun et al., 2019; Huang
et al., 2021). When specialized to specific MG instances in these classes, we achieve comparable
regret upper bounds to existing works.
Related Works. Our paper is closely related to the prior research on Markov Games and MARL
with the function approximation. A comprehensive summary of the related literature is in В§A.

2     M ODELS AND P RELIMINARIES
2.1   M ARKOV G AMES

For clarity, certain mathematical notations are provided in Appendix В§B.
General-Sum Markov Games In this work, we consider general-sum Markov Games (MGs) in
                                                                (i)
the episodic setting, which is denoted by a tuple (S, H, A, {rh }iвҲҲ[n],hвҲҲ[H] , {Ph }hвҲҲ[H] , ПҒ), where
n is the number of agents, H is the length of one episode, S is the state set, and A = вҠ—ni=1 Ai
                                                                                (i)
is the joint action set. Here, Ai is the action set of the agent i. Moreover, rh : S Г— A 7вҶ’ R is
                            1
the known reward function of the agent i at step h, Ph : S Г— A вҶ’ вҲҶ(S) is the transition kernel
at the h-th step, and ПҒ вҲҲ вҲҶ(S) is the distribution of the initial state s1 . We assume the n agents
   1
     Our results can be extended to the unknown stochastic reward case (Agarwal & Zhang, 2022; Zhong et al.,
2022). Note that learning the transition kernel is more difficult than learning the reward.


                                                     3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


observe the same state at each step and each agent i chooses an action within its own action set Ai
simultaneously. In each episode, starting from s1 вҲј p0 , for each h вҲҲ [H], the agents choose their
                                                (1)         (n)
joint action ah вҲҲ A in state sh , where ah = (ah , . . . , ah ). Then, each agent i receives its own
          (i)
reward rh (sh , ah ), and the game move to the next state sh+1 вҲј Ph (sh+1 | sh , ah ). Moreover, we
         PH     (i)
assume h=1 rh (sh , ah ) вҲҲ [0, R] for any possible state-action sequences for some 1 вүӨ R вүӨ H.
In MGs, the agentsвҖҷ policy can be stochastic and correlated. To capture such a property, we introduce
the notion of pure policy and joint policy as follows. For each agent i, its local (Markov) policy
maps a state s to a distribution over the local action space Ai . We let О pur      h,i вҠҶ {ПҖ : S 7вҶ’ вҲҶ(Ai )}
denote a subset of the agent iвҖҷs local policies for step h вҲҲ [H], which is called the set of Markov
pure policies. We then define О pur    i    = вҲӘhвҲҲ[H] О pur  h,i . We assume the agent iвҖҷs policy is a random
variable taking values in О pur i  .  Specifically,   let Пү    вҲҲ в„Ұ be the random seed. The random policy
           (i)                                                      (i)                         (i)
ПҖ (i) = {ПҖh }hвҲҲ[H] for the agent i contains H mappings ПҖh : в„Ұ 7вҶ’ О pur           h,i such that ПҖh (Пү) вҲҲ О h,i
                                                                                                            pur

is a pure policy. To execute ПҖ (i) , the agent i first samples a random seed Пү вҲҲ в„Ұ, and then follows
              (i)
the policy ПҖh (Пү) for all h вҲҲ [H]. The joint policy ПҖ of the n agents is a set of policies {ПҖ (i) }ni=1
                                                                        (i)
where Пү = (Пү1 , В· В· В· , Пүn ) are joint variables. In other words, {ПҖh (Пү)}iвҲҲ[n] вҲҲ вҠ—ni=1 О pur   h,i are random
policies of the n agents whose randomness is correlated by the random seed Пү. Equivalently, we
can regard ПҖ as a random variable over вҠ—ni=1 О pur     h,i . Furthermore, a special class of the joint policy is
the product policy, where each agent executes their own policies independently. In other words, we
have Пү = (Пү1 , . . . , Пүn ), where Пү1 , . . . , Пүn are independent, and each ПҖ (i) depends on Пүi only. We
let ПҖh (a | s) denote the probability of taking action a in the state s at step h. As a result, we have
               Qn      (i)
ПҖh (a | s) = i=1 ПҖh (a(i) | s) for any product policy ПҖ.
Furthermore, using the notion of pure policy and joint policy, we can equivalently view the MG as a
normal form game over О pur = вҠ—ni=1 О pur   i . That is, each pure policy can be viewed as a pure strategy
of the normal form game, and each joint policy can be viewed as a mixed strategy. Such a view
is without loss of generality, because we can choose О pur    i to be the set of all possible deterministic
policies of the agent i. Meanwhile, using a general О pur i   , we can also incorporate parametric policies
as the pure policies, e.g., log-linear policies (Xie et al., 2021; Yuan et al., 2022; Cayci et al., 2021).
                       (i),ПҖ
The value function Vh     is the expected cumulative rewards received by the agent i from step h to
step H, when all the agents follow a joint policy ПҖ, which is defined as
                                                       H
                                                      hX                             i
                                   (i),ПҖ                       (i)
                               Vh          (s) = EПҖ           rhвҖІ (shвҖІ , ahвҖІ ) sh = s .
                                                      hвҖІ =h
                             (i),ПҖ
We let V (i),ПҖ (ПҒ) = EsвҲјПҒ [V1      (s)] denote the agent iвҖҷs expected cumulative rewards within the
whole episode. Besides, the corresponding Q-function (action-value function) can be written as
                                                 H
                                                hX                                      i
                          (i),ПҖ                           (i)
                        Qh        (s, a) = EПҖ            rhвҖІ (shвҖІ , ahвҖІ ) sh = s, ah = a .               (2.1)
                                                 hвҖІ =h


For a joint policy ПҖ and any agent i, we let ПҖ (вҲ’i) denote the joint policy excluding the agent i. Given
                                                                                                 (вҲ’i)
ПҖ (вҲ’i) , the best response of the agent i is defined as ПҖ (i),вҖ  = arg maxОҪвҲҲвҲҶ(О pur   i )
                                                                                        V (i),ОҪГ—ПҖ (ПҒ),
which is random policy of the agent i that maximizes its expected rewards when other agents follow
ПҖ (вҲ’i) . Besides, we denote Вө(i),ПҖ = (ПҖ (i),вҖ  , ПҖ (вҲ’i) ).

Online Learning and Solution Concepts We focus on three common equilibrium notions in the
game theory: Nash Equilibrium (NE), Coarse Correlated Equilibrium (CCE) and Correlated Equi-
librium (CE).
First, a NE of a game is a product policy that no individual player can improve its expected cumula-
tive rewards by unilaterally deviating its local policy.
Definition 2.1 (Оө-Nash Equilibrium). A product policy ПҖ is an Оө-Nash Equilibrium if
       (i),ПҖ
V (i),Вө      (ПҒ) вүӨ V (i),ПҖ (ПҒ) + Оө for all i вҲҲ [n], where Вө(i),ПҖ = (ПҖ (i),вҖ  , ПҖ (вҲ’i) ) and ПҖ (i),вҖ  is the
best response policy with respect to ПҖ (вҲ’i) .


                                                              4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


In other words, a product policy ПҖ is an Оө-Nash Equilibrium if and only if
                             n                   (вҲ’i)
                                                                    o
                        max      maxpur V (i),ОҪГ—ПҖ (ПҒ) вҲ’ V (i),ПҖ (ПҒ) вүӨ Оө.
                                iвҲҲ[n]   ОҪвҲҲвҲҶ(О i )


In this work, we design algorithms for the online and self-play setting. That is, we control the
joint policy all agents, interact with the environment over K episodes, and aim to learn the desired
equilibrium notion from bandit feedbacks. To this end, let ПҖ k denote the joint policy that the agents
execute in the k-th episode, k вҲҲ [K]. We define the Nash-regret as the cumulative suboptimality
across all agents with respect to NE.
Definition 2.2 (Nash-Regret). For all k вҲҲ [K], let ПҖ k denote the product policy deployed in the k-th
episode, then the Nash-regret is defined as
                                               K X
                                                 n
                                               X                    (i),ПҖ k                k
                                                            V (i),Вө           (ПҒ) вҲ’ V (i),ПҖ (ПҒ) .

                              RegNE (K) =
                                               k=1 i=1


By replacing the concept of NE to CCE and CE, we can define CCE-regret and CE-regret in a similar
way. The detailed definitions are provided in В§C.
We note that the definitions of NE, CCE, and CE align with those defined on the normal form
game defined on the space of pure policies. That is, each agent iвҖҷs вҖңpure strategyвҖқ is a pure policy
ПҖ (i) вҲҲ О pur
         i , and the вҖңpayoffвҖқ of the agent i when the вҖңmixed strategyвҖқ is ПҖ is given by V
                                                                                          (i),ПҖ
                                                                                                (ПҒ).

2.2     F UNCTION A PPROXIMATION

To handle the large state space in MARL, we assume the access to a hypothesis class F, which
captures the Q function in the model-free setting and the transition kernel in the model-based setting.

Model-Based Function Approximation In the model-based setting, the hypothesis class F contains
the model (transition kernel) of MGs. Specifically, we let Pf = {P1,f В· В· В· , PH,f } denote the transi-
tion kernel parameterized by f вҲҲ F. When the model parameters are f and the joint policy is ПҖ, we
                                                                              (i),ПҖ         (i),ПҖ
denote the value function and Q-function of the agent i at the h-th step as Vh,f (s) and Qh,f (s, a)
                                                            (i),ПҖ                   (i)                            (i),ПҖ
respectively. We have the Bellman equation Qh,f (s, a) = rh (s, a) + EsвҖІ вҲјPh,f (В·|s,a) [Vh+1,f (sвҖІ )].

Model-Free Function Approximation In the model-free setting, we let F = вҠ—ni=1 F (i) =
                (i)                                                     (i)     (i)
вҠ—ni=1 (вҠ—H h=1 Fh ) be a class of Q-functions of the n agents, where Fh = {fh : S Г— A 7вҶ’ R} is a
                                                                                 (i)          (i)
class of Q-functions of the agent i at the h-th step. For any f вҲҲ F, we denote Qh,f (s, a) = fh (s, a)
for all i вҲҲ [n] and h вҲҲ [H]. Meanwhile, for any joint policy ПҖ and any f вҲҲ F, we define
                              (i),ПҖ                   (i)                     (i)
                           Vh,f (s) = EaвҲјПҖ(s) [fh (s, a)] = вҹЁfh (s, В·), ПҖh (В· | s)вҹ©A .
                                                                                                    (i),ПҖ
For any joint policy ПҖ, agent i, and step h, we define the Bellman operator Th                              by letting
      (i),ПҖ                       (i)
 (Th          (fh+1 ))(s, a) = rh (s, a) + EsвҖІ вҲјPh (sвҖІ |s,a) вҹЁfh+1 (sвҖІ , В·), ПҖh+1 (В· | sвҖІ )вҹ©A ,             вҲҖf вҲҲ F (i) . (2.2)
Note that the Bellman operator depends on the index i of the agent because the reward functions of
the agents are different. Such a definition is an extension of the Bellman evaluation operator in the
                                                                                    (i),ПҖ
single-agent setting (Puterman, 2014) to the multi-agent MGs. By definition, {Qh } defined in
                              (i),ПҖ      (i),ПҖ     (i),ПҖ  (i),ПҖ
(2.1) is the fixed point of Th , i.e., Qh = Th (Qh+1 ) for all h вҲҲ [H].
For both the model-based and the model-free settings, we impose the realizability assumption, which
requires that the hypothesis space F is sufficiently expressive such that it contains the true transi-
tion model or the true Q-functions. Besides, for the model-free setting, we also require that the
hypothesis classes be closed with respect to the Bellman operator.
Assumption 2.3 (Realizability and Completeness). For the model-based setting, we assume the true
transition model f вҲ— lies in the hypothesis class F. Besides, for the model-free setting, for any pure
                                                                (i),ПҖ (i)      (i)
policy ПҖ and any i вҲҲ [n], we assume that Q(i),ПҖ вҲҲ F (i) and Th Fh+1 вҠҶ Fh for all h вҲҲ [H].


                                                               5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Covering Number and Bracketing Number. When a function class F is infinite, the Оҙ-covering
number NF (Оҙ) and the Оҙ-bracketing number BF (Оҙ) serve as surrogates of the cardinality of F. We
put the definitions in В§C.2.

Multi-Agent Decoupling Coefficient Now we introduce a key complexity measure вҖ” multi-agent
decoupling coefficient (MADC) вҖ” which captures the hardness of exploration in MARL. Such a
notion is an extension of the decoupling coefficient (Dann et al., 2021) to general-sum MGs.
Definition 2.4 (Multi-Agent Decoupling Coefficient). The Multi-Agent Decoupling Coefficient of
a MG is defined as the smallest constant dMADC вүҘ 1 such that for any i вҲҲ [n], Вө > 0, {f k }kвҲҲ[K] вҠҶ
F (i) , and {ПҖ k }kвҲҲ[K] вҠҶ О pur the following inequality holds:
    K                                       K kвҲ’1
    X     (i),ПҖ k         (i),ПҖ k        1 X X (i),s k k
       (Vf k      (ПҒ) вҲ’ V         (ПҒ)) вүӨ           в„“ (f , ПҖ ) + Вө В· dMADC + 6dMADC H ,                 (2.3)
                                         Вө                      |         {z        }
    k=1                                    k=1 s=1                       gap
    |              {z               }       |          {z          }
            prediction error                     training error
                     (i),ПҖ k                (i),ПҖ k
where we define Vf k      (ПҒ) = Es1 вҲјПҒ [V1,f k (s1 )], and в„“(i),s (f k , ПҖ k ) is a discrepancy function that
measures the inconsistency between f k and ПҖ k , on the historical data. The specific definitions of
{в„“(i),s }iвҲҲ[n],sвҲҲ[KвҲ’1] under the model-free and model-based settings are given in (2.4) and (2.5).

Model-Free RL In the model-free setting, for {ПҖ k }kвҲҲ[K] вҠҶ О pur in (2.3), the discrepancy function
в„“(i),s (f, ПҖ) for ПҖ вҲҲ О pur is defined as
                       H
                                                 (i),ПҖ
                       X
       в„“(i),s (f, ПҖ) =   E(sh ,ah )вҲјПҖhs ((fh вҲ’ Th (fh+1 ))(sh , ah ))2 , вҲҖf вҲҲ F (i) , вҲҖs вҲҲ [K]. (2.4)
                     h=1
           (i),s
That is, в„“     (f, ПҖ) measures agent iвҖҷs mean-squared Bellman error for evaluating ПҖ, when the
trajectory is sampled by letting all agents follow policy О¶ s .
Model-Based RL We choose the discrepancy function в„“(i),s in Assumption 2.5 as
                                H
                                X
          в„“(i),s (f k , ПҖ k ) =                   2

                                  E(sh ,ah )вҲјПҖhs DH Ph,f k (В· | sh , ah )вҲҘPh,f вҲ— (В· | sh , ah ) ,      (2.5)
                                h=1
where DH denotes the Hellinger distance and E(sh ,ah )вҲјПҖhs means that the expectation is taken with
respect to the randomness of the trajectory induced by ПҖ s on the true model f вҲ— . Intuitively, it
represents the expected in-sample distance of model f k and true model f вҲ— .
Note that the discrepancy between f k , ПҖ k in (2.3) is summed over s вҲҲ [k вҲ’ 1]. Thus, in both the
model-free and model-based settings, the training error can be viewed as the in-sample error of f k
on the historical data collected before the k-th episode. Thus, for an MG with a finite MADC, the
prediction error is small whenever the training error is small. Specifically, when the training error is
O(K ОұвҲҡ) for some Оұ вҲҲ (0, 2), then by choosing a proper Вө, we know that the prediction error grows
as O( K Оұ В· dMADC ) = o(K). In other words, as K increases, the average prediction error decays
to zero. In single-agent RL, when we adopt an optimistic algorithm, the prediction error serves as
an upper bound of the regret (Dann et al., 2021; Zhong et al., 2022; Jin et al., 2021a). Therefore,
by quantifying how the prediction error is related to the training error, the MADC can be used to
characterize the hardness of exploration in MARL.
Compared to the decoupling coefficient and its variants for the single-agent MDP or the two-player
zero-sum MG Dann et al. (2021); Agarwal & Zhang (2022); Zhong et al. (2022); Xiong et al. (2022),
MADC selects the policy ПҖ k in a different way. In the single-agent setting, the policy ПҖ k is always
                                                 ПҖk
selected as the greedy policy of f k , hence V1,f   k (ПҒ) is equivalent to the optimal value function. In

the zero-sum MG, the policy pair ПҖ k is always selected as the Nash policy and the best response
(Xiong et al., 2022). On the contrary, in our definition, the policy ПҖ k is not necessarily the greedy
policy of f k . In fact, {ПҖ k }kвҲҲ[K] can be any pure policy sequence that is unrelated to {f k }kвҲҲ[K] .
Assumption 2.5 (Finite MADC). We assume that the MADC of the general-sum MG of interest
is finite, denoted by dMADC . As we will show in Section D, the class of MGs with low MADCs
include a rich class of MG instances, including multi-agent counterparts of models with low Bellman
eluder dimensions (Jin et al., 2021a; 2022; Huang et al., 2021), bilinear classes (Du et al., 2021),
and models with low witness ranks (Sun et al., 2019; Huang et al., 2021).


                                                      6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


3       A LGORITHM AND R ESULTS
In this section, we first introduce a unified algorithmic framework called Multi-Agent Maximize-to-
EXplore (MAMEX). Then, we present the regret and sample complexity upper bounds of MAMEX,
showing that both the model-free and model-based versions of MAMEX are sample-efficient for
learning NE/CCE/CE under the general function approximation.

3.1       A LGORITHM

Algorithm 1 Multi-Agent Maximize-to-EXplore (MAMEX)
 1: Input: Hypothesis class F, parameter О· > 0, and an equilibrium solving oracle EQ.
 2: for k = 1, 2, В· В· В· , K do
                    k
 3:    Compute V i (ПҖ) defined in (3.1) for all ПҖ вҲҲ О pur and all i вҲҲ [n].
 4:    Compute the NE/CCE/CE of the normal-form game defined on О pur with payoff functions
          k                          k    k        k
       {V i (ПҖ)}n         k
                i=1 : ПҖ вҶҗ EQ(V 1 , V 2 , В· В· В· , V n ).
 5:    Sample a pure joint policy О¶ вҲј ПҖ , and collect a trajectory {skh , akh }hвҲҲ[H] following О¶ k .
                                     k      k

 6:    Update {L(i),k }n  i=1 according to (3.2) (model-free) or (3.3) (model-based).
 7: end for


In this subsection, we provide the MAMEX algorithm for multi-agent RL under the general function
approximation, which extends the MEX algorithm (Liu et al., 2023) to general-sum MGs. Recall
that the definitions of NE/CCE/CE of general-sum MGs coincide with those defined in the normal-
form game with pure strategies being the pure policies in О pur . Thus, when we know the payoffs
{V (i),ПҖ (ПҒ)}iвҲҲ[n] for all ПҖ вҲҲ О pur , we can directly compute the desired NE/CCE/CE given an equi-
librium solving oracle for the normal-form game. However, each V (i),ПҖ (ПҒ) is unknown and has to
be estimated from data via online learning. Thus, in a nutshell, MAMEX is an iterative algorithm
that consists of the following two steps:
                                                                              k
(a) Policy evaluation: For each k вҲҲ [K], construct an estimator V i (ПҖ) of V (i),ПҖ (ПҒ) for each pure
policy ПҖ вҲҲ О pur and the agent i вҲҲ [n] in each episode based on the historical data collected in the
previous kвҲ’1 episodes. Here, the policy evaluation subproblem can be solved in both the model-free
and model-based fashion.
(b) Equilibrium finding: Compute an equilibrium (NE/CCE/CE) for the normal-form game over the
                                                                 k
space of pure policies with the estimated payoff functions {V i (ПҖ)}ni=1 . The joint policy returned
by the equilibrium finding step is then executed in the next episode to generate a new trajectory.
By the algorithmic design, to strike a balance between exploration and exploitation, it is crucial to
             k
construct {V i (ПҖ)}ni=1 in such a way that promotes exploration. To this end, we solve a regularized
                                                                 k
optimization problem over the hypothesis class F (i) to obtain V i (ПҖ), where the objective function
balances exploration with exploitation. We introduce the details of MAMEX as follows.
Policy Evaluation. For each k вҲҲ [K], before the k-th episode, we have collected k вҲ’ 1 trajectories
П„ 1:kвҲ’1 = вҲӘkвҲ’1       t  t    t            t    t    t
             t=1 {s1 , a1 , r1 , В· В· В· , sH , aH , rH }. For any i вҲҲ [n], ПҖ вҲҲ О 
                                                                                    pur
                                                                                        and f вҲҲ F (i)2 , we can
define a data-dependent discrepancy function L(i),kвҲ’1 (f, ПҖ, П„ 1:kвҲ’1 ). Such a function measures the
in-sample error of the hypothesis f with respect a policy ПҖ, evaluated on the historical data П„ 1:kвҲ’1 .
The specific form of such a function differs under the model-free and model-based settings. In par-
ticular, as we will show in (3.2) and (3.3) below, under the model-free setting, L(i),kвҲ’1 (f, ПҖ, П„ 1:kвҲ’1 )
                                                                                                            (i),ПҖ
is constructed based on the mean-squared Bellman error with respect to the Bellman operator Th
in (2.2), while under the model-based setting, L(i),kвҲ’1 (f, ПҖ, П„ 1:kвҲ’1 ) is constructed based on the
                                                                                             k
negative log-likelihood loss. Then, for each ПҖ вҲҲ О pur and i вҲҲ [n], we define V i (ПҖ) as
                k
                                    n                                                             o
                                                          (i),ПҖ
              V i (ПҖ) = sup Vb (i),ПҖ,k (f ) := Vf               (ПҒ) вҲ’О· В· L(i),kвҲ’1 (f, ПҖ, П„ 1:kвҲ’1 ) .       (3.1)
                          f вҲҲF (i)                       | {z } |               {z              }
                                                            (a)                 (b)
    2
        For ease of notation, under the model-based setting, we denote F (i) = F for all agent i вҲҲ [n].


                                                          7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Equilibrium Finding. Afterwards, the algorithm utilizes the equilibrium oracle EQ (Line 4 of
Algorithm 1) to compute an equilibrium (NE/CCE/CE) for the normal-form game over О pur with
                      k
payoff functions {V i (ПҖ)}ni=1 . The solution to the equilibrium oracle is a mixed strategy ПҖ k , i.e., a
probability distribution over О pur .
Finally, we sample a random pure policy О¶ k from ПҖ k and execute О¶ k in the k-th episode to generate
a new trajectory. See Algorithm 1 for the details of MAMEX. Here, we implicitly assume that
О pur is finite for ease of presentation. For example, О pur is the set of all deterministic policies.
When О pur is infinite, we can replace О pur by a 1/K-cover of О pur with respect to the distance
d(i) (ПҖ (i) , ПҖ
              e(i) ) = maxsвҲҲS вҲҘПҖ (i) (В· | s) вҲ’ ПҖ
                                               e(i) (В· | s)вҲҘ1 .
Furthermore, the objective Vb (i),ПҖ,k (f ) in (3.1) is constructed by a sum of (a) the value function
  (i),ПҖ
Vf      (ПҒ) of ПҖ under the hypothesis f and (b) a regularized term вҲ’О· В· L(i),kвҲ’1 (f, ПҖ, П„ 1:kвҲ’1 ), and
                         k
the payoff function V i (ПҖ) is obtained by solving a maximization problem over F (i) . The two
terms (a) and (b) represent the вҖқexplorationвҖқ and вҖқexploitationвҖқ objectives, respectively, and the
parameter О· > 0 controls the trade-off between them. To see this, consider the case where we
only have the term (b) in the objective function. In the model-based setting, (3.1) reduces to the
maximum likelihood estimation (MLE) of the model f given the historical data П„ 1:kвҲ’1 . Then ПҖ k
returned by Line 4 is the equilibrium policy computed from the MLE model. Thus, without term
(a) in Vb (i),ПҖ,k (f ), the algorithm only performs exploitation. In addition to fitting the model, the
term (a) also encourages the algorithm to find a model with a large value function under the given
policy ПҖ, which promotes exploration. Under the model-free setting, only having term (b) reduces
to least-squares policy evaluation (LSPE) (Sutton & Barto, 2018), and thus term (b) also performs
exploitation only.

Comparison with Single-Agent MEX (Liu et al., 2023). When reduced to the single-agent MDP,
MAMEX can be further simplified to the single-agent MEX algorithm (Liu et al., 2023). In par-
ticular, when n = 1, equilibrium finding is reduced to maximizing the function defined in (3.1)
over single-agent policies, i.e., maxПҖ maxf вҲҲF Vb ПҖ,k (f ). By exchanging the order of the two max-
imizations, we obtain an optimization problem over the hypothesis class F, which recovers the
single-agent MEX (Liu et al., 2023). In contrast, in general-sum MGs, the equilibrium policy can
no longer be obtained by a single-objective optimization problem. Hence, it is unviable to directly
extend MEX to optimize over hypothesis space in MARL. Instead, MAMEX solves an optimization
over F in the style of MEX for each pure policy ПҖ вҲҲ О pur , and then computes the NE/CCE/CE of
the normal-form game over the space of pure policies.

Comparison with Existing MARL Algorithms with Function Approximation Previous RL al-
gorithms for MGs with the general function approximation usually require solving minimax opti-
mization (Chen et al., 2022b; Zhan et al., 2022a; Foster et al., 2023) or constrained optimization
subproblems within data-dependent constraints (Wang et al., 2023). In comparison, the optimiza-
tion subproblems of MEX are single-objective and do not have data-dependent constraints, and thus
seem easier to implement. For example, in practice, the inner problem can be solved by a regularized
version of TD learning (Liu et al., 2023), and the outer equilibrium finding can be realized by any
fast method to calculate equilibrium (Hart & Mas-Colell, 2000; Anagnostides et al., 2022).
In the following, we instantiate the empirical discrepancy function L(i),kвҲ’1 for both the model-free
setting and the model-based setting.
Model-Free Algorithm Under the model-free setting, we define the empirical discrepancy function
L as follows. For any h вҲҲ [H] and k вҲҲ [K], let Оҫhk = {skh , akh , skh+1 }. For any i вҲҲ [n], ПҖ вҲҲ О pur and
f вҲҲ F (i) , we define

                                   H kвҲ’1
                                     Xh
                                   X          (i)               2                   (i)                     2 i
     L(i),kвҲ’1 (f, ПҖ, П„ 1:kвҲ’1 ) =             lh (Оҫhj , f, f, ПҖ) вҲ’      inf         lh (Оҫhj , f вҖІ , f, ПҖ)          ,   (3.2)
                                                                             (i)
                                   h=1 j=1                          fhвҖІ вҲҲFh


        (i)                                    (i)
where lh (Оҫhj , f, g, ПҖ) = (fh (sjh , ajh ) вҲ’ rh (sjh , ajh ) вҲ’ вҹЁgh+1 (sjh+1 , В·), ПҖh+1 (В· | sjh+1 )вҹ©A )2 is the
mean-squared Bellman error involving fh and gh+1 .


                                                       8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                                                                                   PkвҲ’1
In Lemma E.1, we can show that L(i),kвҲ’1 (f, ПҖ, П„ 1:kвҲ’1 ) is an upper bound of s=1 в„“(i),s (f, ПҖ),
where в„“(i),s is defined in (2.4). Thus, the function L(i),kвҲ’1 can be used to control the training error
in the definition of MADC.
Model-Based Algorithm For the model-based setting, we define L(i),kвҲ’1 as the negative log-
likelihood:
                                                  H kвҲ’1
                                                  X X
                    L(i),kвҲ’1 (f, ПҖ, П„ 1:kвҲ’1 ) =             вҲ’ log Ph,f (sjh+1 | sjh , ajh ).      (3.3)
                                                  h=1 j=1

As we will show in Lemma E.3, the function L(i),kвҲ’1 can be used to control the training error in
(2.3), where в„“(i),s is defined in (2.5).

3.2   T HEORETICAL R ESULTS

In this subsection, we present our main theoretical results and show that MAMEX (Algorithm 1) is
sample-efficient for learning NE/CCE/CE in the context of general function approximation.
Theorem 3.1. Let the discrepancy function в„“(i),s in (2.3) be defined in (2.4) and (2.5) for model-free
and model-based
          вҲҡ     settings, respectively. Suppose Assumptions 2.3 and 2.5 hold. By setting K вүҘ 16
and О· = 4/ K вүӨ 1, with probability at least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ, the regret of Algorithm 1 after K episodes is
upper bounded by
                                           вҲҡ                      вҲҡ
            RegNE,CCE,CE (K) вүӨ O    e nH KОҘF ,Оҙ + ndMADC K + ndMADC H ,

where O(В·)
        e     hides absolute constants and polylogarithmic terms in H and K, and ОҘF ,Оҙ is a
term that quantifies the complexity of the hypothesis class F. In particular, we have ОҘF ,Оҙ =
R2 log(maxiвҲҲ[n] NF (i) (1/K) В· |О pur |/Оҙ) in the model-free setting and ОҘF ,Оҙ = log (BF (1/K)/Оҙ)
in the model-based setting.
                                                                вҲҡ
Theorem 3.1 shows that our MAMEX achieves a sublinear K-regret for learning NE/CCE/CE,
where the multiplicative factor depends polynomially on the number of agents n and horizon H.
Thus, MAMEX is sample-efficient in the context of the general function approximation. More-
over, the regret depends on the complexity of the hypothesis class via two quantifies вҖ“ the MADC
dMADC , which captures the inherent challenge of exploring the dynamics of the MG, and the quan-
tity ОҘF ,Оҙ , which characterizes the complexity of estimating the true hypothesis f вҲ— based on data.
To be more specific, in the model-free setting, since we need to evaluate each pure policy, ОҘF ,Оҙ con-
tains log |О pur | due to uniform concentration. When reduced to the tabular setting, we can choose
О pur to be the set of deterministic policies, and both ОҘF ,Оҙ and dMADC are polynomials of |S| and
|A|. Furthermore, when specialized to tractable special cases with function approximation and some
special pure policy class such as log-linear policy class Cayci et al. (2021), we show in В§D that The-
orem D.8 yields regret upper bounds comparable to existing works. Moreover, using the standard
online-to-batch techniques, we can transform the regret bound into a sample complexity result. We
defer the details to В§E.3.

4     C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we study multi-player general-sum MGs under the general function approximation.
We propose a unified algorithmic framework MAMEX for both model-free and model-based RL
problems with the general function approximation. Compared with previous works that either solve
constrained optimization subproblems within data-dependent sub-level sets (Wang et al., 2023), or
complex multi-objective minimax optimization subproblems (Chen et al., 2022b; Foster et al., 2023),
the implementation of MAMEX requires only an oracle for solving a single-objective unconstrained
optimization problem with an equilibrium oracle of a normal-form game, thus being more amenable
to empirical implementation. Moreover, we introduce a complexity measure MADC to capture the
exploration-exploitation tradeoff for general-sum MGs. We prove that MAMEX is provably sample-
efficient in learning NE/CCE/CE on RL problems with small MADCs, which covers a rich class of
MG models. When specialized to the special examples with small MADCs, the regret of MAMEX
is comparable to existing algorithms that are designed for specific MG subclasses.


                                                     9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Zhaoran Wang acknowledges National Science Foundation (Awards 2048075, 2008827, 2015568,
1934931), Simons Institute (Theory of Reinforcement Learning), Amazon, J.P. Morgan, and Two
Sigma for their supports. Zhuoran Yang acknowledges Simons Institute (Theory of Reinforcement
Learning) for its support.

R EFERENCES
Yasin Abbasi-Yadkori, DaМҒvid PaМҒl, and Csaba SzepesvaМҒri. Improved algorithms for linear stochastic
  bandits. Advances in neural information processing systems, 24, 2011.
Alekh Agarwal and Tong Zhang. Model-based rl with optimistic posterior sampling: Structural
  conditions and sample complexity. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022.
Alekh Agarwal, Daniel Hsu, Satyen Kale, John Langford, Lihong Li, and Robert Schapire. Taming
  the monster: A fast and simple algorithm for contextual bandits. In International Conference on
  Machine Learning, pp. 1638вҖ“1646. PMLR, 2014.
Ioannis Anagnostides, Gabriele Farina, Christian Kroer, Andrea Celli, and Tuomas Sandholm.
  Faster no-regret learning dynamics for extensive-form correlated and coarse correlated equilib-
  ria. arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.05446, 2022.
Yu Bai and Chi Jin. Provable self-play algorithms for competitive reinforcement learning. In Inter-
  national conference on machine learning, pp. 551вҖ“560. PMLR, 2020.
Yu Bai, Chi Jin, and Tiancheng Yu. Near-optimal reinforcement learning with self-play. Advances
  in neural information processing systems, 33:2159вҖ“2170, 2020.
Yu Bai, Chi Jin, Huan Wang, and Caiming Xiong. Sample-efficient learning of stackelberg equilibria
  in general-sum games. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:25799вҖ“25811,
  2021.
Noam Brown and Tuomas Sandholm. Superhuman ai for heads-up no-limit poker: Libratus beats
  top professionals. Science, 359(6374):418вҖ“424, 2018.
Semih Cayci, Niao He, and Rayadurgam Srikant. Linear convergence of entropy-regularized natural
  policy gradient with linear function approximation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.04096, 2021.
Fan Chen, Yu Bai, and Song Mei. Partially observable rl with b-stability: Unified structural condition
  and sharp sample-efficient algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.14990, 2022a.
Fan Chen, Song Mei, and Yu Bai. Unified algorithms for rl with decision-estimation coefficients:
  No-regret, pac, and reward-free learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.11745, 2022b.
Zixiang Chen, Chris Junchi Li, Angela Yuan, Quanquan Gu, and Michael I Jordan. A general
  framework for sample-efficient function approximation in reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2209.15634, 2022c.
Zixiang Chen, Dongruo Zhou, and Quanquan Gu. Almost optimal algorithms for two-player zero-
  sum linear mixture markov games. In International Conference on Algorithmic Learning Theory,
  pp. 227вҖ“261. PMLR, 2022d.
Qiwen Cui, Kaiqing Zhang, and Simon S Du. Breaking the curse of multiagents in a large state
  space: Rl in markov games with independent linear function approximation. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2302.03673, 2023.
Varsha Dani, Thomas P Hayes, and Sham M Kakade. Stochastic linear optimization under bandit
  feedback. 2008.
Christoph Dann, Mehryar Mohri, Tong Zhang, and Julian Zimmert. A provably efficient model-free
  posterior sampling method for episodic reinforcement learning. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 34:12040вҖ“12051, 2021.


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Constantinos Daskalakis, Noah Golowich, and Kaiqing Zhang. The complexity of markov equilib-
  rium in stochastic games. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.03991, 2022.

Simon Du, Sham Kakade, Jason Lee, Shachar Lovett, Gaurav Mahajan, Wen Sun, and Ruosong
  Wang. Bilinear classes: A structural framework for provable generalization in rl. In International
  Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 2826вҖ“2836. PMLR, 2021.

Dylan J Foster, Sham M Kakade, Jian Qian, and Alexander Rakhlin. The statistical complexity of
  interactive decision making. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.13487, 2021.

Dylan J Foster, Dean P Foster, Noah Golowich, and Alexander Rakhlin. On the complexity of
  multi-agent decision making: From learning in games to partial monitoring. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2305.00684, 2023.

Sergiu Hart and Andreu Mas-Colell. A simple adaptive procedure leading to correlated equilibrium.
  Econometrica, 68(5):1127вҖ“1150, 2000.

Baihe Huang, Jason D Lee, Zhaoran Wang, and Zhuoran Yang. Towards general function approx-
  imation in zero-sum markov games. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2021.

Nan Jiang, Akshay Krishnamurthy, Alekh Agarwal, John Langford, and Robert E Schapire. Con-
  textual decision processes with low bellman rank are pac-learnable. In International Conference
  on Machine Learning, pp. 1704вҖ“1713. PMLR, 2017.

Chi Jin, Sham Kakade, Akshay Krishnamurthy, and Qinghua Liu. Sample-efficient reinforcement
  learning of undercomplete pomdps. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:
  18530вҖ“18539, 2020a.

Chi Jin, Zhuoran Yang, Zhaoran Wang, and Michael I Jordan. Provably efficient reinforcement
  learning with linear function approximation. In Conference on Learning Theory, pp. 2137вҖ“2143.
  PMLR, 2020b.

Chi Jin, Qinghua Liu, and Sobhan Miryoosefi. Bellman eluder dimension: New rich classes of rl
  problems, and sample-efficient algorithms. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  34, 2021a.

Chi Jin, Qinghua Liu, Yuanhao Wang, and Tiancheng Yu. V-learningвҖ“a simple, efficient, decentral-
  ized algorithm for multiagent rl. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.14555, 2021b.

Chi Jin, Qinghua Liu, and Tiancheng Yu. The power of exploiter: Provable multi-agent rl in large
  state spaces. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 10251вҖ“10279. PMLR, 2022.

Avetik Karagulyan. Sampling with the Langevin Monte-Carlo. PhD thesis, Institut polytechnique
  de Paris, 2021.

Marc Lanctot, Vinicius Zambaldi, Audrunas Gruslys, Angeliki Lazaridou, Karl Tuyls, Julien
 PeМҒrolat, David Silver, and Thore Graepel. A unified game-theoretic approach to multiagent rein-
 forcement learning. Advances in neural information processing systems, 30, 2017.

Michael L Littman. Markov games as a framework for multi-agent reinforcement learning. In
 Machine learning proceedings 1994, pp. 157вҖ“163. Elsevier, 1994.

Qinghua Liu, Tiancheng Yu, Yu Bai, and Chi Jin. A sharp analysis of model-based reinforce-
  ment learning with self-play. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 7001вҖ“7010.
  PMLR, 2021.

Qinghua Liu, Alan Chung, Csaba SzepesvaМҒri, and Chi Jin. When is partially observable reinforce-
  ment learning not scary? arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.08967, 2022a.

Qinghua Liu, Csaba SzepesvaМҒri, and Chi Jin. Sample-efficient reinforcement learning of partially
  observable markov games. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.01315, 2022b.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Zhihan Liu, Miao Lu, Wei Xiong, Han Zhong, Hao Hu, Shenao Zhang, Sirui Zheng, Zhuoran Yang,
  and Zhaoran Wang. One objective to rule them all: A maximization objective fusing estimation
  and planning for exploration. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.18258, 2023.
Luke Marris, Paul Muller, Marc Lanctot, Karl Tuyls, and Thore Graepel. Multi-agent training be-
  yond zero-sum with correlated equilibrium meta-solvers. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning, pp. 7480вҖ“7491. PMLR, 2021.
Chengzhuo Ni, Yuda Song, Xuezhou Zhang, Chi Jin, and Mengdi Wang. Representation learning
  for general-sum low-rank markov games. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.16976, 2022.
Martin L Puterman. Markov decision processes: discrete stochastic dynamic programming. John
 Wiley & Sons, 2014.
Daniel Russo and Benjamin Van Roy. Eluder dimension and the sample complexity of optimistic
  exploration. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 26, 2013.
David Silver, Aja Huang, Chris J Maddison, Arthur Guez, Laurent Sifre, George Van Den Driessche,
  Julian Schrittwieser, Ioannis Antonoglou, Veda Panneershelvam, Marc Lanctot, et al. Mastering
  the game of go with deep neural networks and tree search. nature, 529(7587):484вҖ“489, 2016.
Ziang Song, Song Mei, and Yu Bai. When can we learn general-sum markov games with a large
  number of players sample-efficiently? arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.04184, 2021.
Wen Sun, Nan Jiang, Akshay Krishnamurthy, Alekh Agarwal, and John Langford. Model-based
 rl in contextual decision processes: Pac bounds and exponential improvements over model-free
 approaches. In Conference on learning theory, pp. 2898вҖ“2933. PMLR, 2019.
Richard S Sutton and Andrew G Barto. Reinforcement learning: An introduction. MIT press, 2018.
Yi Tian, Yuanhao Wang, Tiancheng Yu, and Suvrit Sra. Online learning in unknown markov games.
  In International conference on machine learning, pp. 10279вҖ“10288. PMLR, 2021.
Oriol Vinyals, Igor Babuschkin, Wojciech M Czarnecki, MichaeМҲl Mathieu, Andrew Dudzik, Juny-
  oung Chung, David H Choi, Richard Powell, Timo Ewalds, Petko Georgiev, et al. Grandmaster
  level in starcraft ii using multi-agent reinforcement learning. Nature, 575(7782):350вҖ“354, 2019.
Ruosong Wang, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, and Lin F Yang. Provably efficient reinforcement learning
  with general value function approximation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.10804, 2020a.
Ruosong Wang, Russ R Salakhutdinov, and Lin Yang. Reinforcement learning with general value
  function approximation: Provably efficient approach via bounded eluder dimension. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:6123вҖ“6135, 2020b.
Yining Wang, Ruosong Wang, Simon S Du, and Akshay Krishnamurthy. Optimism in reinforcement
  learning with generalized linear function approximation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.04136, 2019.
Yuanhao Wang, Qinghua Liu, Yu Bai, and Chi Jin. Breaking the curse of multiagency: Provably effi-
  cient decentralized multi-agent rl with function approximation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.06606,
  2023.
Chen-Yu Wei, Yi-Te Hong, and Chi-Jen Lu. Online reinforcement learning in stochastic games.
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 30, 2017.
Michael P Wellman. Methods for empirical game-theoretic analysis. In AAAI, volume 980, pp.
 1552вҖ“1556, 2006.
Qiaomin Xie, Yudong Chen, Zhaoran Wang, and Zhuoran Yang. Learning zero-sum simultaneous-
  move markov games using function approximation and correlated equilibrium. In Conference on
  learning theory, pp. 3674вҖ“3682. PMLR, 2020.
Tengyang Xie, Ching-An Cheng, Nan Jiang, Paul Mineiro, and Alekh Agarwal. Bellman-consistent
  pessimism for offline reinforcement learning. Advances in neural information processing systems,
  34:6683вҖ“6694, 2021.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Wei Xiong, Han Zhong, Chengshuai Shi, Cong Shen, and Tong Zhang. A self-play posterior sam-
 pling algorithm for zero-sum markov games. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
 pp. 24496вҖ“24523. PMLR, 2022.
Rui Yuan, Simon S Du, Robert M Gower, Alessandro Lazaric, and Lin Xiao. Linear convergence of
  natural policy gradient methods with log-linear policies. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.01400, 2022.
Andrea Zanette, Alessandro Lazaric, Mykel Kochenderfer, and Emma Brunskill. Learning near op-
  timal policies with low inherent bellman error. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
  pp. 10978вҖ“10989. PMLR, 2020.
Andrea Zanette, Martin J Wainwright, and Emma Brunskill. Provable benefits of actor-critic meth-
  ods for offline reinforcement learning. Advances in neural information processing systems, 34:
  13626вҖ“13640, 2021.
Wenhao Zhan, Jason D Lee, and Zhuoran Yang. Decentralized optimistic hyperpolicy mirror de-
 scent: Provably no-regret learning in markov games. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.01588, 2022a.
Wenhao Zhan, Masatoshi Uehara, Wen Sun, and Jason D Lee. Pac reinforcement learning for
 predictive state representations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.05738, 2022b.
Kaiqing Zhang, Sham Kakade, Tamer Basar, and Lin Yang. Model-based multi-agent rl in zero-sum
  markov games with near-optimal sample complexity. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 33:1166вҖ“1178, 2020.
Yulai Zhao, Yuandong Tian, Jason D Lee, and Simon S Du. Provably efficient policy optimization
  for two-player zero-sum markov games. arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.08903, 2021.
Han Zhong, Wei Xiong, Sirui Zheng, Liwei Wang, Zhaoran Wang, Zhuoran Yang, and Tong
  Zhang. A posterior sampling framework for interactive decision making. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2211.01962, 2022.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                Supplementary Material

C ONTENTS

1   Introduction                                                                                     1

2   Models and Preliminaries                                                                         3
    2.1   Markov Games . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       3
    2.2   Function Approximation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       5

3   Algorithm and Results                                                                            7
    3.1   Algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    7
    3.2   Theoretical Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    9

4   Conclusion                                                                                       9

A Related Work                                                                                      16

B Notation                                                                                          17

C Additional Definitions                                                                            17
    C.1 NE/CCE/CE-Regret . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        17
    C.2 Covering Number and Bracketing Number . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .           18

D Relationships between MADC and Tractable RL Problems                                              18
    D.1 Model-Free MARL Problems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          18
    D.2 Model-Based RL Problems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         22

E Proof of Main Results                                                                             23
    E.1 Proof of Model-Free Version of Theorem 3.1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          23
    E.2 Proof of Model-Based Version of Theorem 3.1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         27
    E.3 Sample Complexity Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       30

F Proof of Theorems and Lemmas                                                                      30
    F.1   Proof of Theorem D.4 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    30
    F.2   Proof of Theorem D.5 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    32
    F.3   Proof of Theorem D.8 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    33
    F.4   Proof of Theorem D.12 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     35
    F.5   Proof of Theorem D.14 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     38
    F.6   Proof of Lemma E.1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      39
    F.7   Proof of Lemma E.2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      41
    F.8   Proof of Lemma E.3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      41
    F.9   Proof of Corollary E.4 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    42


                                                  14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


G Technical Tools                                   43

H Computational Efficiency                          43


                                               15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                            Appendix

A    R ELATED W ORK

Markov Games Markov Game (MG) (Littman, 1994) is a popular model of multi-agent reinforce-
ment learning, which generalizes the Markov decision process to multiple agents. A series of recent
works design the sample-efficient algorithm for two-agent zero-sum games (Wei et al., 2017; Zhang
et al., 2020; Xie et al., 2020; Bai et al., 2020; Bai & Jin, 2020; Bai et al., 2021; Zhao et al., 2021;
Huang et al., 2021; Jin et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2022b;d). For instance, Bai & Jin (2020) provide a
sample-efficient algorithm in an episodic MG based on optimistic value iteration. Xie et al. (2020);
Chen et al. (2022d) mainly focus on zero-sum MGs with a linear structure. Huang et al. (2021);
Jin et al. (2022); Chen et al. (2022b) further consider the two-player zero-sum MGs under general
function approximation, and provide algorithms with a sublinear regret. Another line of research
focuses on general-sum MGs with multiple players (Jin et al., 2020a; Liu et al., 2021; Tian et al.,
2021; Jin et al., 2021b; Song et al., 2021; Liu et al., 2022b; Daskalakis et al., 2022; Zhan et al.,
2022a; Cui et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2023). Some of previous works (Liu et al., 2021; Tian et al.,
2021; Liu et al., 2022b) consider learning all three equilibrium notions вҖ” NE, CCE, and CE вҖ”
and their regret or sample complexity results are exponential in the number of agents. To break this
exponential curse, some existing works propose decentralized algorithms for learning CCE or CE
rather than NE (Jin et al., 2021b; Daskalakis et al., 2022; Zhan et al., 2022a; Cui et al., 2023; Wang
et al., 2023).
Moreover, there are also some works to study how to learn the equilibrium from a practical per-
spective. The EGTA (Wellman, 2006) uses a graph to represent the deviation for all profiles and
identify the Nash equilibrium and whether a profile is relatively stable. Note if we want to evaluate
all profiles and construct the whole graph, we need many samples to estimate the payoff functions
for each profile, and then identify all the deviations and construct the graph. The author also men-
tions that one may apply machine learning techniques to fit a payoff function over the entire profile
space given the available data. In fact, we use the function approximation technique to derive an
estimate of all the profiles without estimating all the profiles. Thus, our approach can be considered
as a learning approach to evaluate all the profiles.
Some previous works (Lanctot et al., 2017; Marris et al., 2021) propose a practical algorithm PSRO
to compute the equilibrium in Markov Games, which also needs an equilibrium-solving oracle to
learn the equilibrium. To be more specific, the PSRO learns the equilibrium in the following way:
At first, every player chooses a uniform policy as their strategy. The algorithm then calculates the
equilibrium by a meta-solver and trains an oracle that outputs the best response ПҖi of the equilibrium
for player i. After that, the algorithm adds ПҖi into the strategy space of the player i. Last, the
algorithm simulates all the new joint policy and construct a new normal-form game for the next
iteration. However, in each iteration, it should simulate all the new joint policies and estimate
the return. Consequently, the sample complexity increases exponentially as the iteration rounds
increase. Different from PSRO, MAMEX utilizes the function approximation technique to the value
function. The precise characterization of the structure of the value function can help us to evaluate
the policy without actually simulating the environment with more samples. To be more specific,
at each round, instead of simulating the environment and getting a Monte-Carlo return of each
joint policy, MAMEX only needs to solve a regularized optimization problem over the function
space of the value function. The solution of the optimization problem is used to be a payoff for
the normal-form game. Since solving this optimization subproblem does not need to additional
samples, MAMEX bypasses the requirement for exponential samples to simulate the environment
and estimate the value for each joint policy ПҖ. This characteristic enhances its sample efficiency in
comparison to PSRO.

MARL with Function Approximation There are many papers working on multi-player general-
sum MGs with the function approximation (Zhan et al., 2022a; Ni et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2022b;
Wang et al., 2023; Cui et al., 2023; Foster et al., 2023) that build upon previous works for function
approximation in the single-agent setting (Jiang et al., 2017; Sun et al., 2019; Jin et al., 2020b;
Wang et al., 2020b; Dann et al., 2021; Du et al., 2021; Jin et al., 2021a; Foster et al., 2021; Chen
et al., 2022c; Agarwal & Zhang, 2022; Zhong et al., 2022; Liu et al., 2023). In recent years, Xiong


                                                  16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


et al. (2022) consider the multi-agent decoupling coefficient in the two-player zero-sum MGs, and
provide the posterior sampling algorithm. However, unlike a zero-sum MG, a general-sum MG
can have various equilibrium concepts, each of which aligns with a specific set of policies. Hence,
their definition of the multi-agent decoupling coefficient cannot be extended to the general-sum
setting. Chen et al. (2022b) and Foster et al. (2023) generalize the complexity measure Decision-
Estimation Coefficient (DEC), and learn the equilibria in model-based general-sum MGs. Ni et al.
(2022) provide both a model-based algorithm and a model-free algorithm for the low-rank MGs.
Some previous works (Zhan et al., 2022a; Wang et al., 2023; Cui et al., 2023) provide model-free
algorithms that learn CCE and CE with polynomial sample complexity. Compared to their works,
this paper provides a unified algorithmic framework for both model-free and model-based MARL
problems, which learns NE/CCE/CE efficiently under general function approximation and provides
comparable regret to existing works. In particular, our work provides the first model-free algorithm
for learning NE/CCE/CE of general-sum MGs in the context of the general function approximation.

B     N OTATION
For n sets F1 , В· В· В· , Fn , we let вҠ—ni=1 Fi denote F1 Г— В· В· В· Г— Fn . For a set A, we denotePвҲҶ(A) as
                                                                                              n
a set of probability
           pPn          distributions over A. For a vector x вҲҲ Rn , we denote вҲҘxвҲҘ1 =          i=1 |xi |,
                         2                      n
вҲҘxвҲҘ2 =           i=1 i x   and  вҲҘxвҲҘ вҲһ   =   max i=1 |x i |. For a function f  : X   вҶ’
                                                                                    7   Y,  we  denote
вҲҘf вҲҘвҲһ = supxвҲҲX |f (x)| as the infinity norm. For two functions f, g : A 7вҶ’ R, we denote
вҹЁf, gвҹ©A = EaвҲҲA [f (x)g(x)] as the inner product with respect to the set A. For a Hilbert space
V and f, g вҲҲ V, we denote вҹЁf, gвҹ©V as the inner product defined in the Hilbert space V, and вҲҘf вҲҘV
is the norm defined in Hilbert space V. For   ptwo distributions over P, Q вҲҲ вҲҶ(X ), the Hellinger dis-
tance is defined as DH2 (P вҲҘQ) = 12 ExвҲјP [( dP (x)/dQ(x) вҲ’  1)2 ]. For a vector x вҲҲ Rd , the softmax
mapping is denoted by Softmax(x) вҲҲ Rd with Softmax(x) i = exi / iвҲҲ[d] exi .
                                                                           P


C     A DDITIONAL D EFINITIONS
C.1   NE/CCE/CE-R EGRET

In the following, we provide the definitions of Coarse Correlated Equilibrium (CCE), Correlated
Equilibrium (CE), and the corresponding regret CCE-regret and CE-regret. A Coarse Correlated
Equilibrium is a joint policy ПҖ such that no agent can achieve higher rewards by only changing its
local policy. Compared with a NE, a CCE allows different agents to be correlated, while NE only
considers product policies.
Definition C.1 (Оө-Coarse Correlated Equilibrium). A joint policy ПҖ is a Оө-Coarse Correlated Equi-
                  (i),ПҖ
librium if V (i),Вө      (ПҒ) вүӨ V (i),ПҖ (ПҒ) + Оө for all i вҲҲ [n].
Here, the definition of Оө-CCE is similar to that of an Оө-NE. But here ПҖ is a joint policy, i.e., the
randomness of the local policies of the n agents can be coupled together. As a result, CCE is a more
general equilibrium notion than NE. Similarly, we can define the CCE-regret, which represents the
cumulative suboptimality across all agents with respect to CCE.
Definition C.2 (CCE-Regret). For all k вҲҲ [K], let ПҖ k denote the joint policy that is deployed in the
k-th episode, then the CCE-regret is defined as
                                        K X
                                          n
                                        X               (i),ПҖ k                k
                                                  V (i),Вө         (ПҒ) вҲ’ V (i),ПҖ (ПҒ) .

                       RegCCE (K) =
                                        k=1 i=1

Last, the Correlated Equilibrium has been extensively studied in previous works for MARL (Jin
et al., 2020a; Chen et al., 2022b; Cui et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2023). To introduce the concept of
CE, we need first to introduce the strategy modification. A strategy modification for the i-th agent
is a mapping П•i : О pur         pur
                      i вҶ’ О i . Given any random policy ПҖ, the best strategy modification for i-th
                                            (i)   (вҲ’i)
agent is defined as arg maxП•i EП…вҲјПҖ [V П•i (П… )Г—П… (ПҒ)]. A CE is a joint policy ПҖ such that no agent
can achieve higher rewards by only changing its local policy through strategic modification.
Definition C.3 (Оө-Correlated Equilibrium). A joint policy ПҖ is a Оө-Correlated Equilibrium if
                     (i)   (вҲ’i)
maxП•i EП…вҲјПҖ [V П•i (П… )Г—П… (ПҒ)] вүӨ V ПҖ (ПҒ) + Оө for any agent i вҲҲ [n].


                                                   17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


We can similarly define CE-regret as the sum of suboptimality terms with respect to CE.
Definition C.4 (CE-Regret). For any k вҲҲ [K], let ПҖ k denote the joint policy that is deployed in the
k-th episode, the CE-regret is defined as
                           K X
                             n
                           X                         (i) (вҲ’i)          k
           RegCE (K) =          max EП…вҲјПҖk V (i),П•i (П… )Г—П… (ПҒ) вҲ’ V (i),ПҖ (ПҒ) .
                                       П•i
                           k=1 i=1


Compared to the NE/CCE regret, the strategy modification of one agent in CE can be correlated to
the policies of other agents. Instead, the best response is independent of the other agents.

C.2   C OVERING N UMBER AND B RACKETING N UMBER

When a function class F is infinite, the Оҙ-covering number and the Оҙ-bracketing number serve as
surrogates of the cardinality of F. Intuitively, the Оҙ-covering number is the minimum number of
balls of radius Оҙ required to cover a set.
Definition C.5 (Оҙ-Covering Number). The Оҙ-covering number of a function class F with respect to
distance metric d, denoted as NF (Оҙ, d), is the minimum integer q satisfying the following property:
there exists a subset F вҖІ вҠҶ F with |F вҖІ | = q such that for any f1 вҲҲ F we can find f2 вҲҲ F вҖІ with
d(f1 , f2 ) вүӨ Оҙ. To simplify the notation, we write NF (Оҙ, вҲҘ В· вҲҘвҲһ ) as NF (Оҙ).
Definition C.6 (Оҙ-Bracketing Number). A Оҙ-bracket of size N is a bracket {g1i , g2i }N                 i
                                                                                          i=1 , where g1
and g2i are functions mapping any policy ПҖ and trajectory П„ to R, such that for all i вҲҲ [N ], ПҖ вҲҲ О 
we have вҲҘg1i (ПҖ, В·) вҲ’ g2i (ПҖ, В·)вҲҘ вүӨ Оҙ. Also, for any f вҲҲ F, there must exist an i вҲҲ [N ] such that
g1i (ПҖ, П„H ) вүӨ PПҖf (П„H ) вүӨ g2i (ПҖ, П„H ) for all possible П„H and ПҖ. The Оҙ-bracketing number of F, denoted
by BF (Оҙ), is the minimum size of a Оҙ-bracket.

D     R ELATIONSHIPS BETWEEN MADC AND T RACTABLE RL P ROBLEMS

In this section, we show that the class of MGs with finite MADCs contains a rich class of models.
Thus, when applied to these concrete MARL models, Theorem 3.1 shows that MAMEX learns
NE/CCE/CE with provable sample efficiency.
In the sequel, we instantiate the discrepancy function в„“(i),s for both model-free and model-based
MARL, and introduce some concrete general-sum MG models that satisfy Assumption 2.5.

D.1    M ODEL -F REE MARL P ROBLEMS

Now we provide function classes with small MADCs including multi-agent counterparts of models
with low Bellman eluder dimensions (Jin et al., 2021a; Huang et al., 2021) and Bilinear Classes (Du
et al., 2021). Then, we introduce some concrete examples in these members and show that the regret
upper bound of MAMEX in Theorem 3.1, when specialized to these special cases, are comparable
to existing works.

Multi-Agent Bellman Eluder Dimension Recently, Jin et al. (2021a) introduce a model-free
complexity measure called Bellman Eluder dimension (BE dimension)and show that function
classes with low BE dimensions contain a wide range of RL problems such as linear MDP (Jin
et al., 2020b), kernel MDP (Jin et al., 2021a) and function classes with low eluder dimension (Wang
et al., 2020a). In this subsection, we extend the notion of BE dimension to MARL. First, we intro-
duce the definition of Оө-independence between distributions and the concept of distribution eluder
dimension.
Definition D.1 (Оө-Independent Distributions). Let G be a function class on X , and П…, Вө1 , В· В· В· , Вөn
are probability distributions over X . We pcalled П… is Оө-independent of {Вө1 В· В· В· Вөn } with respect to G
                                             Pn              2
if there exists a function g вҲҲ G such that      i=1 (EВөi [g]) вүӨ Оө and |EП… [g]| > Оө.
                                                                                       pPn
By this definition, if ОҪ is Оө-dependent of {Вө1 , В· В· В· , Вөn }, then whenever we have                  2
                                                                                         i=1 (EВөi [g]) вүӨ
Оө for some g вҲҲ G, we also have |EП… [g]| вүӨ Оө.


                                                    18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Definition D.2 (Distribution Eluder Dimension). Let G be a function class on X and D be a family
of probability measures over X . The distributional eluder dimension dimDE (G, D, Оө) is the length
of the longest sequence ПҒ1 , В· В· В· , ПҒn вҠҶ D such that there exists ОөвҖІ вүҘ Оө where ПҒi is ОөвҖІ -independent of
{ПҒ1 , В· В· В· , ПҒiвҲ’1 } for all i вҲҲ [n].

In other words, distributional eluder dimension dimDE (G, D, Оө) is the length of the longest se-
quences of distributions in D such that each element is ОөвҖІ -independent of its predicessors with
respect to G, from some ОөвҖІ вүҘ Пө. Such a notion generalizes the standard eluder dimension Russo
& Van Roy (2013) to the distributional setting. When we set D to be the set of Dirac measures
{Оҙx (В·)}xвҲҲX , the distributional eluder dimension dimDE (G вҲ’ G, D, Оө) reduces to the standard eluder
dimension introduced in Russo & Van Roy (2013). Here, G вҲ’ G = {g1 вҲ’ g2 : g1 , g2 вҲҲ G}.
For any agent i and any pure policy ПҖ вҲҲ О pur , we denote the function class of the Bellman residual
     (i),ПҖ
as Fh      = {fh вҲ’ T (i),ПҖ fh+1 | f вҲҲ F (i) }. Now we introduce the definition of the multi-agent BE
dimension with respect to a class of distributions.
Definition D.3 (Multi-Agent Bellman Eluder Dimension). Let D = {Dh }hвҲҲ[H] be a set of H
classes of distributions over S Г— A, one for each step of an episode. The multi-agent Bellman eluder
(BE) dimension with respect to D is defined as
                                                    n          [                   o
                                                                       (i),ПҖ
                 dimMABE (F, D, Оө) = max max dimDE                    Fh , Dh , Оө .            (D.1)
                                        hвҲҲ[H] iвҲҲ[n]
                                                                ПҖвҲҲО pur

In other words, the multi-agent BE dimension is defined as the maximum of the distribution eluder
                                                                                        S            (i),ПҖ
dimensions with respect to Dh , based on the agent-specific Bellman residue classes ПҖвҲҲО pur Fh .
Compared with the BE dimension for single-agent RL (Jin et al., 2021a), the multi-agent version
takes the maximum over the agent index i вҲҲ [n], and the function class involves the union of the
                  (i),ПҖ
function class Fh       for all ПҖ вҲҲ О pur . In comparison, leveraging the facts that the optimal policy is
the greedy policy of the optimal value function, and that the optimal value function is the fixed point
of the Bellman optimality operator, it suffices to only consider residues of the Bellman optimality
operator in the definition of single-agent BE dimension. In contrast, for general-sum MGs, finding
the desired equilibrium policies is not a single-objective policy optimization problem, and the notion
of the Bellman optimality operator is not well-defined. As a result, to extend the concept of Bellman
                                                                                             (i),ПҖ
eluder dimension to general-sum MGs, in the function class, we take into account Fh                for all
        pur
ПҖ вҲҲ О  , which correspond to evaluating the performance of all the pure policies. Besides, in
(D.1), we also take the maximum over all agents i вҲҲ [n] and all steps h вҲҲ [H], which aligns with
the definition of single-agent BE dimension.
Furthermore, in the definition of multi-agent BE dimension, we need to specify a set of distributions
D = {Dh }hвҲҲ[H] over S Г— A. We consider two classes. First, let DвҲҶ = {DвҲҶ,h }hвҲҲ[H] denote a class
of probability measures over S Г— A with DвҲҶ,h = {Оҙ(s,a) (В·) | (s, a) вҲҲ S Г— A}, which contains all
the Dirac measures that put mass one to a state-action pair at step h. Second, given the set of pure
policies О pur , we let DО  = {DО ,h }hвҲҲ[H] denote a class of probability measures induced О pur as
follows. For any ПҖ вҲҲ О pur , when all the agents follow ПҖ on the true MG model, they generate a
Markov chain {sh , ah }hвҲҲ[H] whose joint distribution is determined by ПҖ, denoted by PПҖ . Then, for
any h вҲҲ [H], we define DО ,h = {ПҒ вҲҲ вҲҶ(S Г— A) | ПҒ(В·) = PПҖ ((sh , ah ) = В·), ПҖ вҲҲ О pur }, i.e., DО ,h
denotes the collection of all marginal distributions of (sh , ah ) induced by pure policies.
In the following, to simplify the notation, we denote

              dimMABE (F, Оө) = min dimMABE (F, DвҲҶ , Оө), dimMABE (F, DО  , Оө) .                       (D.2)
The following theorem shows that, when F satisfies realizability and completeness (Assumption
2.3), for a general-sum MG with a finite multi-agent BE dimension given by (D.2), its multi-agent
decoupling coefficient (Definition 2.4) is also bounded. In other words, Assumption 2.5 holds any
general-sum MG model with a low multi-agent BE dimension. As a result, the class of MGs with fi-
nite multi-agent BE dimensions is a subclass of MGs with finite multi-agent decoupling coefficients.
Theorem D.4 (Low Multi-Agent BE Dimension вҠҶ Low MADC). Let K any integer and let F be a
hypothesis class under the model-free setting, i.e., a class of Q-functions. Assume that F satisfy the
realizability and completeness condition specified in Assumption 2.3. Suppose that F has a finite
multi-agent BE dimension d = dimMABE (F, 1/K), then with the discrepancy function в„“(i),s given


                                                   19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


in (2.4), the multi-agent decoupling coefficient of F satisfies dMADC = O(dH log K), where O(В·)
omits absolute constants.

Proof. See В§F.1 for a detailed proof.

Combining
        вҲҡ Theorem       3.1 andвҲҡ Theorem D.4, we obtain that MAMEX achieves a sublinear
O(ndH
 e        K + ndH 2 + nHR2 K log ОҘF ,Оҙ ) regret for function classes with a finite multi-agent BE
dimension d. It remains to see that that function classes with low multi-agent BE dimensions contain
a wide range of RL problems. To this end, we prove that if the eluder dimension (Russo & Van Roy,
                               (i)                                                               (i)
2013) of the function class Fh is small for all h вҲҲ [H] and i вҲҲ [n], then F = вҠ—ni=1 (вҠ—H    h=1 Fh )
has a low multi-agent BE dimension. Function classes with finite eluder dimension contains linear,
generalized linear, and kernel functions (Russo & Van Roy, 2013), and thus contains a wide rage of
MG models. On these MG problems, the model-free version of MAMEX achieve sample efficiency
provably.
                                                                                                             (i)
Theorem D.5. Suppose F satisfies Assumption 2.3. For any i вҲҲ [n] and h вҲҲ [H], let dimE (Fh , Оө)
                                  (i)
denote the eluder dimension of Fh , which is a special case of the distributional eluder dimension
                                               (i)                        (i)    (i)
introduced in Definition D.2. That is, dimE (Fh , Оө) is equal to dimDE (Fh вҲ’ Fh , DвҲҶ , Оө), where
  (i)    (i)                                  (i)
Fh вҲ’ Fh = {g : g = f1 вҲ’ f2 , f1 , f2 вҲҲ Fh } and DвҲҶ contains the class of dirac measures on
S Г— A. Then, the multi-agent BE dimension defined in (D.2) satisfy
                                                                                        (i)
                              dimMABE (F, Оө) вүӨ max max dimE (Fh , Оө).
                                                          hвҲҲ[H] iвҲҲ[n]


Proof. See В§F.2 for a detailed proof.

Multi-Agent Bilinear Classes Bilinear Classes (Du et al., 2021) consists of MDP models where
the Bellman error admits a bilienar structure. On these models, Du et al. (2021) propose online RL
algorithms that are provably sample-efficient. Thus, Bilinear Classes is a family of tractable MDP
models with general function approximation. In the sequel, we extend Bilinear Classes to general-
sum MGs and show that such an extension covers some notable special cases studied in the existing
works. Then, we prove that multi-agent Bilinear Classes have a small MADC, thus satisfying the
Assumption 2.5. Therefore, when applied to these problems, MAMEX provably achieves sample
efficiency.
Definition D.6 (Multi-Agent Bilinear Classes). Let V be a Hilbert space and let вҹЁВ·, В·вҹ©V and вҲҘ В· вҲҘV
denote the inner product and norm on V. Given a multi-agent general-sum MG with a hypothesis
class F satisfying Assumption 2.3, it belongs to multi-agent Bilinear Classes if there exist H func-
           (i)
tions {Wh : F (i) Г— О pur 7вҶ’ V}H       h=1 for each agent i вҲҲ [n] and {Xh : О 
                                                                                         pur
                                                                                             7вҶ’ V}H  h=1 such that
                                                                      (i)
the Bellman error of each agent i can be factorized using Wh and Xh . That is, for each i вҲҲ [n],
f вҲҲ F (i) , h вҲҲ [H], ПҖ, ПҖ вҖІ вҲҲ О pur , we have
                                      (i)
       E(sh ,ah )вҲјПҖвҖІ fh (sh , ah ) вҲ’ rh (sh , ah ) вҲ’ EsвҖІ вҲјPh (sвҖІ |sh ,ah ) вҹЁfh+1 (sвҖІ , В·), ПҖh+1 (В· | sвҖІ )вҹ©A


                               (i)                 (i)         (i),ПҖ
                        =   Wh (f, ПҖ) вҲ’ Wh (f (i),Вө                    , Вө(i),ПҖ ), Xh (ПҖ вҖІ ) V ,             (D.3)

where Вө(i),ПҖ = (ПҖ (i),вҖ  , ПҖ (вҲ’i) ) is the best response for i-th agent given that the other agents all follow
                              (i),ПҖ                                (i),ПҖ
ПҖ. Here, the function f (i),Вө        is the fixed point of T (i),Вө       , i.e.,
                                            (i),Вө(i),ПҖ               (i),ПҖ    Вө(i),ПҖ
                                           fh            = T (i),Вө           fh+1 .                          (D.4)
                                     (i)
Moreover, we require that {Wh , Xh }hвҲҲ[H] satisfy a regularity condition
                                                                                          (i)
           sup         вҲҘXh (ПҖ)вҲҘV вүӨ 1,                         sup                      вҲҘWh (f, ПҖ)вҲҘV вүӨ BW ,   (D.5)
       ПҖвҲҲО pur ,hвҲҲ[H]                             iвҲҲ[n],f вҲҲF (i) ,ПҖвҲҲО pur ,hвҲҲ[H]

where BW is a constant.


                                                            20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


In this definition, for any ПҖ вҲҲ О pur and f вҲҲ F (i) ,
                                   (i)
                  fh (sh , ah ) вҲ’ rh (sh , ah ) вҲ’ EsвҖІ вҲјPh (sвҖІ |sh ,ah ) вҹЁfh+1 (sвҖІ , В·), ПҖh+1 (В· | sвҖІ )вҹ©A
is the Bellman error of f at (sh , ah ) for evaluating policy ПҖ on behalf of agent i. On the left-hand side
of (D.3), we evaluate such a Bellman error with respect to the distribution induced by another policy
                                                                                                     (i)
ПҖ вҖІ . Equation (D.3) shows that this error can be factorized into the inner product between Wh and
    (i)               (i)                                (i)
Xh , where both Wh only involves (f, ПҖ) while Xh only involves ПҖ вҖІ . Thus, multi-agent Bilinear
Classes specifies a family of Markov games whose Bellman error satisfies a factorization property.
                                                                          ОҪ,ПҖ (вҲ’i)
Furthermore, recall that the best response ПҖ (i),вҖ  = maxОҪвҲҲвҲҶ(О pur    i )V           is attained at some pure
                                                                                                      (i),ПҖ
policy, thus we have Вө(i),ПҖ вҲҲ О pur . Under Assumption 2.3, the fixed point f (i),Вө          in (D.4) is
guaranteed to exist and belongs to F.
                                                             SH
We define Xh = {Xh (ПҖ) : f вҲҲ F, ПҖ вҲҲ О pur } and X = h=1 Xh . The complexity of the multi-
agent bilinear class essentially is determined by the complexity of the Hilbert space V. To allow V be
infinite-dimensional, we introduce the notion of information gain, which characterizes the intrinsic
complexity of V in terms of exploration.
Definition D.7 (Information Gain). Suppose V is a Hilbert space and X вҠҶ V. For Оө > 0 and integer
K > 0, the information gain ОіK (Оө, X ) is defined by
                                                               K
                                                                        !
                                                            1X
                      ОіK (Оө, X ) =      max log det I +           xk xвҠӨ
                                                                      k   .
                                   x1 ,В·В·В· ,xK вҲҲX           Оө
                                                                               k=1


The following theorem shows that multi-agent Bilinear Classes with small information gain have
low MADCs.
Theorem D.8 (Multi-Agent Bilinear Classes вҠҶ Low MADC). For a general-sum MG in the multi-
                                                                PH
agent bilinear class with a hypothesis class F, let ОіK (Оө, X ) = h=1 ОіK (Оө, Xh ) be the information
gain. Then, Assumption 2.5 holds with the discrepancy function в„“(i),s given in (2.4). In particular,
we have
                           dMADC вүӨ max 1, 8R2 В· ОіK (1/(KBW       2

                                                                   ), X ) ,
                                                                   PH
where BW is given in (D.5) and R вҲҲ (0, H] is an upper bound on h rh .

Proof. See В§F.3 for a detailed proof.

Now we introduce some concrete members of multi-agent Bilinear Classes, which are general-sum
MGs with linear function approximation. In single-agent RL, linear Bellman complete MDPs (Wang
et al., 2019) assume that the MDP model satisfies the Bellman completeness condition with respect
to linear Q-functions. We can extend such a model to general-sum MGs.
Example D.9 (Linear Bellman Complete MGs). We say a Markov Game is a linear Bellman com-
plete MG of dimension d, if for any step h вҲҲ [H] there exists a known feature П•h : S Г— A 7вҶ’ Rd
with вҲҘП•h (s, a)вҲҘ вүӨ 1 for all (s, a) вҲҲ S Г— A such that Assumption 2.3 holds for linear functions of
                                                                    (i)     вҠӨ           d
вҲҡh . In other words, the Markov game satisfies Assumption 2.3 with Fh вҠҶ {П•h Оё | Оё вҲҲ R , вҲҘОёвҲҘ2 вүӨ
П•
  dОё }for all i вҲҲ [n] and h вҲҲ [H], where dОё > 0 is a parameter.

It is easy to see that Linear Bellman complete MGs belong to multi-agent Bilinear Classes by choos-
ing
                                                        (i)                   (i)
                     Xh (ПҖ) = EПҖ [П•(sh , ah )] вҲҲ Rd , Wh (f, ПҖ) = Оёf,h вҲ’ wf,h ,
                                          вҠӨ                              (i)
where Оёf,h satisfies that f (sh , ah ) = Оёf,h П•h (sh , ah ), and wf,h satisfies that3
                 (i)                     (i)
             (wf,h )вҠӨ П•h (sh , ah ) = rh (sh , ah ) + EsвҖІ вҲјPh (В·|sh ,ah ) вҹЁfh+1 (sвҖІ , В·), ПҖh+1 (В· | sвҖІ )вҹ©A
                                                              (i)
                                     = T (i),ПҖ (fh+1 ) вҲҲ Fh .
   3
       If there are multiple Оё satisfying the requirement, we can break the tie arbitrarily.


                                                           21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                                                                        вҲҡ
Then, we have Xh вҠҶ V = {П• вҲҲ Rd : вҲҘП•вҲҘ2 вүӨ 1} for all h вҲҲ [H] and BW = 2 d. It can be shown
that the logarithm of 1/K-covering number of F is log(NF (1/K)) = O(d),
                                                                   e     and the information
gain can bounded by
                             XH                      XH
                   2                    2
           ОіK (1/BW K, X ) =     ОіK (1/BW K, Xh ) вүӨ     ОіK (1/4dK, Xh ) = O(Hd),
                                                                           e
                                   h=1                              h=1

where O e omits absolute constants and logarithmic factors (Du et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2020b).
                                                           вҲҡ             вҲҡ
                                                         2
Thus, by Theorem 3.1, MAMEX achieves a O(ndHR   e            K + nHR2 KвҲҡlog |О pur | + ndH 2 ) re-
gret. For the single-agent setting, comparing to the state-of-the-art O(dH
                                                                       e      K) regret when R = 1
(Zanette et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2022c), our result matches their results in terms of d, H and K
with an extra factor |О pur | in the logarithmic term. Note that when the pure policy set of i-th agent
is selected as some particular policy classes such as log-linear policy
         О pur                               вҠӨ                                        dПҖ
          h,i = {ПҖП‘ : ПҖП‘ (В· | s) = Softmax(П‘ ПҲ(s, В·)), вҲҘП‘вҲҘ2 вүӨ 1, вҲҘПҲ(В·, В·)вҲҘ вүӨ 1, П‘ вҲҲ R },
we can select a cover by
                            b = {П‘b : П‘bi = вҢҠП‘i /ОөвҢӢ Г— Оө, вҲҘП‘вҲҘ2 вүӨ 1, П‘ вҲҲ RdПҖ }.
                            Оҳ
                                                                                              b H
                                                                      2      2 2
                                                                                 вҲҡ {ПҖП‘ : П‘2 вҲҲ Оҳ}
Zanette et al. (2021) prove that the logarithm of cardinality of the induced covering
is bounded by O(nHdПҖ ), and then MAMEX provides a O((nd + n dПҖ )H R K + ndH ) regret.
                 e                                         e
In particular, as one of the examples of Linear Bellman Complete MGs, Xie et al. (2020) consider a
similar linear structure for two-player zero-sum games.
Example D.10 (Zero-Sum Linear MGs (Xie et al., 2020)). In a zero-sum linear MG, for each
(s, a, b) вҲҲ S Г— A Г— B and h вҲҲ [H], we have reward rh (s, a, b) вҲҲ [0, 1], and there is a known
feature map П• : S Г— A Г— B вҶ’ Rd , H known vectors Оёh вҲҲ RdвҲҡand a vector of dвҲҡ    unknown measures
Вөh = {Вөh,dвҖІ }dвҖІ вҲҲ[d] on S such that вҲҘП•(В·, В·, В·)вҲҘ2 вүӨ 1, вҲҘОёh вҲҘ2 вүӨ d, вҲҘВөh (S)вҲҘ2 вүӨ d and
                    rh (s, a, b) = П•(s, a, b)вҠӨ Оёh , Ph (В· | s, a, b) = П•(s, a, b)вҠӨ Вөh (В·).
Zero-sum
    вҲҡ      linear MGs is a special case of linear
                                             3
                                                       вҲҡ complete MG with two players and dОё =
                                               вҲҡ Bellman
2H d, and our algorithm provides a O(dH e       K +H 3 K log(|О pur |)) regret by choosing R = H
                         (i)                                                        вҲҡ
and the fact that log NF (1/K) = O(d).e                                    e 3/2 H 2 K) sublinear
                                            The previous work provides a O(d
                                         вҲҡ
regret (Xie et al., 2020) and a в„Ұ(dH 3/2 K) information-theoretic lower bound (Chen et al., 2022d)
for zero-sum linear MGs. Thus, our regret matches the lower bound in terms of d, has a higher order
in H compared to Xie et al. (2020) and an extra factor log |О pur |. Again, we can adopt the class of
                                                            pur
                     вҲҡ a policy cover, which leads to log |О  | = O(dПҖ ). Thus, MAMEX yields a
log-linear policies with                                             e
        3          4
O((dH
 e        + dПҖ H ) K) regret.

D.2     M ODEL -BASED RL P ROBLEMS

Sun et al. (2019) provide a complexity measure вҖ” witness rank вҖ” to characterize the exploration
hardness of the model-based RL problems. In the following, we extend the notion of the witness
rank to MARL.
Example D.11 (Multi-Agent Witness Rank). Let V = {Vh : S Г— A Г— S 7вҶ’ [0, 1]}hвҲҲ[H] denote
a class of discriminators and let F be a hypothesis class such that the true model, denoted by f вҲ— ,
belongs to F. We say a multi-agent witness rank of a general-sum MG is at most d, if for any model
f вҲҲ F and any policy ПҖ вҲҲ О pur there exist mappings {Xh : О pur вҶ’ Rd }H        h=1 and {Wh : F вҶ’
Rd }H
    h=1
                                                                                         (i)
 max E(sh ,ah )вҲјПҖ [(EsвҖІ вҲјPh,f (В·|sh ,ah ) вҲ’ EsвҖІ вҲјPh,f вҲ— (В·|sh ,ah ) )v(sh , ah , sвҖІ )] вүҘ вҹЁWh (f ), Xh (ПҖ)вҹ©,
 vвҲҲVh
                                                                                                              (D.6)
                                                                          (i),ПҖ            (i)
  Оәwit В· E(sh ,ah )вҲјПҖ [(EsвҖІ вҲјPh,f (В·|sh ,ah ) вҲ’ EsвҖІ вҲјPh,f вҲ— (В·|sh ,ah ) )Vh+1,f (sвҖІ )] вүӨ вҹЁWh (f ), Xh (ПҖ)вҹ©    (D.7)
                                                            (i),ПҖ
for all h вҲҲ [H], where Оәwit is a parameter. Here, Vh+1,f is the value function of ПҖ associated with
agent i under model f . Moreover, these mappings satisfy the following regularity condition:
                                                                              (i)
                      sup       вҲҘXh (ПҖ)вҲҘ вүӨ 1,                  sup         вҲҘWh (f )вҲҘ вүӨ BW .
                 hвҲҲ[H],ПҖвҲҲО pur                          hвҲҲ[H],f вҲҲF ,iвҲҲ[n]


                                                       22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Compared with the single-agent witness rank (Sun et al., 2019), the policy ПҖ in the mapping Xh (ПҖ)
and the expectation E(sh ,ah )вҲјПҖ in (D.6) and (D.7) can be an arbitrary pure policy instead of the opti-
mal policy ПҖf of the model f . This stricter assumption is essential for general-sum MGs because we
are interested in various equilibrium notions and each equilibrium can be non-unique. The following
theorem shows that model classes with small multi-agent witness ranks have small MADCs.
Theorem D.12 (Multi-Agent Witness Rank вҠҶ Low MADC). Let F be a class of general-sum MGs
whose multi-agent witness rank is no more than d. Then, for any f вҲ— вҲҲ F, we have dMADC =
O(Hd/Оә
e      2
          ), where dMADC is the multi-agent decoupling coefficient of f вҲ— .
         wit


Proof. See В§F.4 for detailed proof.

This theorem shows that the multi-agent decoupling coefficient is upper bounded by the multi-agent
witness rank, which shows that the class of MG models with a finite multi-agent decoupling coef-
ficient contains models with a finite multi-agent witness rank. Hence, many concrete MG models
such as the multi-agent version of factor MDP and linear kernel MDP all have finite multi-agent
decoupling coefficients. Therefore, applying Theorem 3.1 to models withвҲҡ a finite   Multi-Agent
                                                                                         вҲҡ       wit-
ness rank, the model-based version of MAMEX achieves a O(nHd     e       K/Оә2wit + nH K) regret
with witness rank d. Note that for the model-based RL problems, our regret does not have the term
log(|О pur |), because the discrepancy function в„“(i),s in 2.5 is independent with ПҖ k . When applying
our results to the single-agent setting, Theorem D.12 provides a similar regret result as in previous
works (Sun et al., 2019; Zhong et al., 2022).
Another example of model-based RL problems is the linear mixture MG (Chen et al., 2022d),
which assumes that the transition kernel P(sвҖІ | s, a) is a linear combination of d feature mappings
                                           Pd
{П•i (sвҖІ , s, a)}iвҲҲ[d] , i.e. P(sвҖІ | s, a) = i=1 Оёi П•i (sвҖІ , s, a), where a is a joint action.
Example D.13 (Multi-Agent Linear Mixture MGs). We call one general-sum MG is a linear mixture
MG with dimension d, if there exist h vectors {Оёh вҲҲ Rd }hвҲҲ[H] and a known feature П•(sвҖІ | s, a) вҲҲ Rd
                  вҲҡ
such that вҲҘОёh вҲҘ2 вүӨ d and Ph (sвҖІ | s, a) = вҹЁОёh , П•(sвҖІ | s, a)вҹ© for any state-action pair (sвҖІ , s, a) вҲҲ
S Г— S Г— A.

The following theorem shows that a linear mixture general-sum MG has a finite multi-agent decou-
pling coefficient. Thus, MAMEX can be readily applied to these models with sample efficiency.
Theorem D.14 (Multi-Agent Linear Mixture MGs вҠӮ Low MADC). For a linear mixture MG with
                                     4
                                                                      PH
dimension d, we have dMADC = O(dHR
                              e        ), where R is an upper bound on h=1 rh .

Proof. See В§F.5 for a detailed proof.
                                                         вҲҡ
Chen et al. (2022d) provides a minimax-optimal O(dH
                                                  e        K) regret for two-player zero-sum MGs
for rh вҲҲ [0, 1]. Now choose Fh = {Оёh вҲҲ Rd }. Combining with Theorem D.14 and Theorem         вҲҡ 3.1,
                                                                                           5
and the fact that log(BF (1/K)) = O(Hd)
                                  e       (Liu et al., 2022a), MAMEX achieves a O(ndH
                                                                                    e          K+
ndH 4 ) regret, where we set R = H. Compared with their regret upper bound, when applying      вҲҡour
                                                                                             5
result to two-player zero-sum MGs by choosing n = 2, the leading term of our regret O(dH
                                                                                      e         K)
matches the minimax-optimal result in terms of d and K but with an extra multiplicative factor H 2 .

E     P ROOF OF M AIN R ESULTS

E.1   P ROOF OF M ODEL -F REE V ERSION OF T HEOREM 3.1

Proof. We first consider learning Nash equilibrium and coarse correlated equilibrium.

NE/CCE First, by Assumption 2.3, for any pure joint policy П…, there exists a function f (i),П… вҲҲ F (i)
satisfies that it has no Bellman error with Bellman operator T (i),П… for any pure joint policy П…, i.e.
                                          (i),П… (i),П…  (i),П…
                                        Th     fh+1 = fh .                                        (E.1)


                                                  23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


           (i),П…
Hence, {fh         }hвҲҲ[H] is the Q-function of the agent i when all agents follow the policy П…. Thus, we
have
       (i),П…                                  (i),П…                                         (i),П…
     Vf (i),П… (ПҒ) = Es1 вҲјПҒ,aвҲјП…(s1 ) [f1               (s, a)] = Es1 вҲјПҒ,aвҲјП…(s1 ) [Q1                 (s, a)] = V (i),П… (ПҒ).   (E.2)

Also, denote fb(i),П… = arg supf вҲҲF (i) VbiП… (f ) as the optimal function with respect to the regularized
value Vb (i),ПҖ (f ) for the pure joint policy ПҖ and agent i. Now we have
                     h                                            i       h                  i
                         (i),П…
            EП…вҲјПҖk V b(i),П… (ПҒ) вҲ’ О·L(i),kвҲ’1 (fb(i),П… , П…, П„ 1:kвҲ’1 ) = EП…вҲјПҖk sup Vb (i),П… (f )
                         f
                                                                                                      f вҲҲF (i)
                                                          h                            i
                    вүҘ     max EП…вҲјП…(i) Г—ПҖ(вҲ’i),k                 sup V     b (i),П…   (f ) .                                    (E.3)
                        П… (i) вҲҲО pur                           f вҲҲF (i)

The inequality holds because of the property of Nash Equilibrium or Coarse Correlated Equilibrium.
Then, since the best response ПҖ (i),k,вҖ  is a pure policy, we have
                                    h                  i
           max EП…вҲјП…(i) Г—ПҖ(вҲ’i),k sup Vb (i),П… (f )
          П… (i) вҲҲО pur                          f вҲҲF (i)
                                          h                      i                      h                   i
               вүҘ EП…вҲјПҖ(i),k,вҖ  Г—ПҖ(вҲ’i),k           sup Vb (i),П… (f ) = EП…вҲјПҖ(i),k,вҖ  Г—ПҖ(вҲ’i),k Vb (i),П… (f (i),П… )
                                              f вҲҲF (i)
                                  h                                         i
                              (i),П…
               вүҘ EП…вҲјВө(i),ПҖk Vf (i),П… (ПҒ) вҲ’ О·L(i),kвҲ’1 (f (i),П… , П…, П„ 1:kвҲ’1 ) ,                                               (E.4)
                              k
where П… вҲҲ О puri , Вө
                     (i),ПҖ
                              = (ПҖ (i),k,вҖ  , ПҖ (вҲ’i),k ) and ПҖ (i),k,вҖ  is the best response given the action of
               (вҲ’i),k
other agents ПҖ        . Thus, combining (E.3) and (E.4), we can derive
              h             i           h              i
                 (i),П…                         (i),П…
   EП…вҲјВө(i),ПҖk Vf (i),П… (ПҒ) вҲ’ EП…вҲјПҖk V b(i),П… (ПҒ)
                                              f
                        h                                 i              h                          i
                           (i),kвҲ’1 (i),П…
      вүӨ О·EП…вҲјВө(i),ПҖk L             (f        , П…, П„ 1:kвҲ’1 ) вҲ’ О·EП…вҲјПҖk L(i),kвҲ’1 (fb(i),П… , П…, П„ 1:kвҲ’1 ) . (E.5)

Now we provide the concentration lemma, which shows that the empirical discrepancy function
                                                                     PkвҲ’1
L(i),k (f, ПҖ, П„ 1:k ) is an estimate of the true discrepancy function s=0 в„“(i),s (f, ПҖ).
Lemma E.1 (Concentration Lemma). For any k вҲҲ [K] pure joint policy ПҖ, and {О¶ s }kвҲ’1      s=1 вҲҲ О  that
be executed in Algorithm 1 in the first k вҲ’ 1 episodes, with probability at least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ,
                                                   kвҲ’1
                                                                  !
                      (i),kвҲ’1          1:kвҲ’1    1 X (i),s
                    L         (f, ПҖ, П„       )вҲ’        в„“    (f, ПҖ) вүҘ вҲ’Оөconc ,
                                                4 s=0

where Оөconc = max{O(HR2 log(HK maxiвҲҲ[n] NF (i) (1/K)|О pur |/Оҙ)), H} and
                                          H                   h                            i
                                                                        (i),ПҖ
                                          X
                        в„“(i),s (f, ПҖ) =         E(sh ,ah )вҲјО¶hs ((fh вҲ’ Th fh+1 )(sh , ah ))2 .
                                          h=1


Proof. See В§F.6 for a detailed proof.

In other words, if we define the event as
          (                          kвҲ’1
                                                  !                                  )
             (i),k         1:k   1 X (i),s                         (i)     pur
    E1 = L         (f, ПҖ, П„ ) вҲ’           в„“ (f, ПҖ) вүҘ Оөconc , вҲҖf вҲҲ F , ПҖ вҲҲ О  , k вҲҲ [K] ,
                                 4 s=0

we have Pr{E1 } вүҘ 1 вҲ’ Оҙ. Note that the Оөconc contains log(|О pur |/Оҙ) in the logarithmic term, which
arises from our policy-search style algorithm.
Lemma E.2 (Optimal Concentration Lemma). For all index i вҲҲ [n], all ПҖ вҲҲ О pur and function
f (i),ПҖ вҲҲ F (i) such that T (i),ПҖ f (i),ПҖ = f (i),ПҖ , with probability at least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ, we have
                                           L(i),k (f (i),ПҖ , ПҖ, П„ 1:k ) вүӨ Оөconc .


                                                                  24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Proof. See В§F.7 for a detailed proof.

In other words, if we define the event as
                       E2 = {вҲҖ i вҲҲ [n], ПҖ вҲҲ О pur , L(i),k (f (i),ПҖ , ПҖ, П„ 1:k ) вүӨ Оөconc },
we have Pr{E2 } вүҘ 1 вҲ’ Оҙ. Lemma E.2 shows that the empirical discrepancy function
L(i),k (f, ПҖ, П„ 1:k ) is small if the function f and the policy ПҖ are consistent, i.e. f = f (i),ПҖ . Now by
(E.5) and Lemma E.2, for any i вҲҲ [n], under the event E2 ,
                h            i           h          i
  EП…вҲјВө(i),ПҖk V (i),П… (ПҒ) вҲ’ EП…вҲјПҖk V (i),П… (ПҒ)
                        h           i          h         i
                           (i),П…
       = EП…вҲјВө(i),ПҖk Vf (i),П… (ПҒ) вҲ’ EП…вҲјПҖk V (i),П… (ПҒ)
                        h           i          h          i         h          i           h           i
                           (i),П…                  (i),П…                 (i),П…
       = EП…вҲјВө(i),ПҖk Vf (i),П… (ПҒ) вҲ’ EП…вҲјПҖk V b(i),П… (ПҒ) +EП…вҲјПҖk V b(i),П… (ПҒ) вҲ’ EП…вҲјПҖk V (i),П… (ПҒ) .
                                                 f                     f
         |                          {z                    }
                                   (a)
By (E.5) and Lemma E.2, under event E2 , (a) can be bounded by
                    h                                i        h                                i
   (a) вүӨ О·EП…вҲјВө(i),ПҖk L(i),kвҲ’1 (f (i),П… , П…, П„ 1:kвҲ’1 ) вҲ’ О·EП…вҲјПҖk L(i),kвҲ’1 (fb(i),П… , П…, П„ 1:kвҲ’1 )                (E.6)
                          h                              i
       вүӨ О·Оөconc вҲ’ О·EП…вҲјПҖk L(i),kвҲ’1 (fb(i),П… , П…, П„ 1:kвҲ’1 ) .                                                    (E.7)
Now by Assumption 2.5, on the events E1 and E2 we have
                                K X
                                  n
                                                  (i),ПҖ k
                                X                                        k

                  Reg(K) =                 V (i),Вө          (ПҒ) вҲ’ V (i),ПҖ (ПҒ)
                                k=1 i=1
                                K X
                                X n                  h           i       h           i
                            =              EП…вҲјВө(i),ПҖk V (i),П… (ПҒ) вҲ’ EП…вҲјПҖk V (i),П… (ПҒ)
                                k=1 i=1
                                K X
                                X n                       h                                i
                            вүӨ              О·Оөconc вҲ’ О·EП…вҲјПҖk L(i),kвҲ’1 (fb(i),П… , П…, П„ 1:kвҲ’1 )
                                k=1 i=1
                                           h          i         h        i
                                                (i),П…
                                 + EП…вҲјПҖk V b(i),П… (ПҒ) вҲ’ EП…вҲјПҖk V (i),П… (ПҒ) .               (E.8)
                                               f
                                      h                                  i
                                         (i),П…
Now since fb(i),П… = arg maxf вҲҲF (i) Vf (ПҒ) вҲ’ О·L(i),kвҲ’1 (f, П…, П„ 1:kвҲ’1 ) is the optimal function
with respect to the regularized value, under the event E2 we have
          (i),П…                                                  (i),П…
        V b(i),П… (ПҒ) вҲ’ О·L(i),kвҲ’1 (fb(i),П… , П…, П„ 1:kвҲ’1 ) вүҘ Vf (i),П… (ПҒ) вҲ’ О·L(i),kвҲ’1 (f (i),П… , П…, П„ 1:kвҲ’1 ),
         f

then we have О·L(i),kвҲ’1 (fb(i),П… , П…, П„ 1:kвҲ’1 ) вүҘ 0 and by О· вүӨ 1,
                                               (i),П…             (i),П…
        О·L(i),kвҲ’1 (fb(i),П… , П…, П„ 1:kвҲ’1 ) вүӨ V b(i),П… (ПҒ) вҲ’ Vf (i),П… (ПҒ) + О·L(i),kвҲ’1 (f (i),П… , П…, П„ 1:kвҲ’1 )
                                              f
                                          вүӨ R + О·Оөconc вүӨ 2Оөconc ,
where the last inequality follows the Lemma E.2. If we define
 (i),kвҲ’1
L2Оөconc (fb(i),П… , П…, П„ 1:kвҲ’1 ) = L(i),kвҲ’1 (fb(i),П… , П…, П„ 1:kвҲ’1 ) В· I{О·L(i),kвҲ’1 (fb(i),П… , П…, П„ 1:kвҲ’1 ) вүӨ 2Оөconc }
and the event as
            n                                                                                      o
                                  (i),kвҲ’1
      E3 = вҲҖ i вҲҲ [n], П… вҲҲ О pur , L2Оөconc (fb(i),П… , П…, П„ 1:kвҲ’1 ) = L(i),kвҲ’1 (fb(i),П… , П…, П„ 1:kвҲ’1 ) ,

we will have E3 вҠҶ E2 . Since the policy О¶ k that algorithm executes is sampled from ПҖ k , then the
sequence {Yk }K
              k=1 that is defined by
                          h                                                            i
                              (i),П…                      (i),kвҲ’1
             Yk = EП…вҲјПҖk V b(i),П… (ПҒ) вҲ’ V (i),П… (ПҒ) вҲ’ О·L2Оөconc (fb(i),П… , П…, П„ 1:kвҲ’1 )
                             f
                               (i),О¶ k
                                                                         k

                                                           (i),kвҲ’1
                        вҲ’ V b(i),О¶k (ПҒ) вҲ’ V (i),П… (ПҒ) вҲ’ О·L2Оөconc (fb(i),О¶ , О¶ k , П„ 1:kвҲ’1 )
                                  f



                                                            25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


is a martingale difference sequence. Now by Azuma-HoeffdingвҖҷs inequality and Yk вүӨ R + 2Оөconc вүӨ
3Оөconc , with probability at least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ we have
       K h        h                                                             i
                     (i),П…                        (i),kвҲ’1
       X
             EП…вҲјПҖk V b(i),П… (ПҒ) вҲ’ V (i),П… (ПҒ) вҲ’ О·L2Оөconc (fb(i),П… , П…, П„ 1:kвҲ’1 )
                         f
       k=1

                 (i),О¶ k                       (i),kвҲ’1        k
                                                                                  i          вҲҡ
             вҲ’ V b(i),О¶k (ПҒ) вҲ’ V (i),П… (ПҒ) вҲ’ О·L2Оөconc (fb(i),О¶ , О¶ k , П„ 1:kвҲ’1 )    вүӨ O(Оөconc K). (E.9)
                   f


Define the event E4 as the (E.9) holds. Now by choosing О·4 = Вө1 = вҲҡ1K and taking the union bound
over the event E1 , E2 , E3 and E4 , with probability at least 1 вҲ’ 4Оҙ, we can get
Reg(K)
       n X
       X K                      h                                i       h            i       h            i
                                                                            (i),П…
   вүӨ             О·Оөconc вҲ’ О·EП…вҲјПҖk L(i),kвҲ’1 (fb(i),П… , П…, П„ 1:kвҲ’1 ) + EП…вҲјПҖk Vfb(i),П… (ПҒ) вҲ’ EП…вҲјПҖk V (i),П… (ПҒ)
       i=1 k=1
     n X
     X K                 h                               i       h            i       h            i
                           (i),kвҲ’1                                  (i),П…
   =      О·Оөconc вҲ’ О·EП…вҲјПҖk L2Оөconc (fb(i),П… , П…, П„ 1:kвҲ’1 ) + EП…вҲјПҖk Vfb(i),П… (ПҒ) вҲ’ EП…вҲјПҖk V (i),П… (ПҒ)
       i=1 k=1
     n X
       K
     X                               k                      (i),О¶ k              k
                                                                                               вҲҡ
   вүӨ      О·Оөconc вҲ’ О·L(i),kвҲ’1 (fb(i),О¶ , О¶ k , П„ 1:kвҲ’1 ) + V b(i),О¶k (ПҒ) вҲ’ V (i),О¶ (ПҒ) +O(nОө
                                                                                       e   conc K).
                                                                   f
       i=1 k=1
       |                                          {z                                      }
                                                 (b)
                                                                                                        (E.10)
The first inequality holds because of Eq (E.8). The equality in the second line holds under Lemma
E.2 (event E3 вҠҶ E2 ). The second inequality is derived from Azuma-HoeffdingвҖҷs inequality (event
E4 ). Now using Lemma E.1 and MADC assumption, we can get
           n X K        kвҲ’1
                                        !!      n X K
          X         О· X (i),s         k
                                               X          (i),О¶ k              k
                                                                                        вҲҡ
(b) вүӨ вҲ’                     в„“    (f, О¶ )    +           V b(i),О¶k (ПҒ) вҲ’ V (i),О¶ (ПҒ) + 4n K В· О·Оөconc
          i=1 k=1
                    4 s=0                      i=1 k=1
                                                         f
                                        вҲҡ
     вүӨ nВө В· dMADC + 6dMADC H + 4n KОөconc .
The second inequality uses Assumption 2.5. Now the regret can be bounded by
                         вҲҡ                               вҲҡ                  вҲҡ
           Reg(K) вүӨ n K В· dMADC + 6dMADC H + 4n KОөconc + O(nОөconc K)
                                вҲҡ                             вҲҡ
                    = O(nОөconc K + ndMADC H + ndMADC K).
                                                         2
Hence, we complete the proof by noting that Оөconc = O(HR
                                                    e      log ОҘF ,Оҙ ).

CE By changing the best response to the strategy modification, we can derive a proof for Cor-
related Equilibrium (CE). We simplify the notation of strategy modification as П•i (П… (i) ) Г— П… (вҲ’i) as
П•i (П…). Now we have
                              h                                               i
                                 (i),П…
                        EП…вҲјПҖk V b(i),П… (ПҒ) вҲ’ О·L(i),kвҲ’1 (fb(i),П… , П…, П„ 1:kвҲ’1 )
                                f
                                     h                 i
                           = EП…вҲјПҖk sup Vb (i),П… (f )
                                                f вҲҲF (i)
                                                    h                      (i) (вҲ’i)
                                                                                    i
                                   = max EП…вҲјПҖk             sup Vb (i),П•i (П… )Г—П… (f ) .                  (E.11)
                                        П•i              f вҲҲF (i)

The second equality holds because of the property of Correlated Equilibrium. Now we have
                         h                (i)   (вҲ’i)
                                                       i
             max EП…вҲјПҖk sup Vb (i),П•i (П… )Г—П… (f )
                  П•i               f вҲҲF (i)
                                  h                                                                 i
                                     (i),П• (П…)
                       вүҘ max EП…вҲјПҖk Vf (i),П•ii (П…) (ПҒ) вҲ’ О·L(i),kвҲ’1 (f (i),П•i (П…) , П•i (П…), П„ 1:kвҲ’1 )
                          П•i
                                  h                             i
                                     (i),П• (П…)
                       вүҘ max EП…вҲјПҖk Vf (i),П•ii (П…) (ПҒ) вҲ’ О·Оөconc ) .                                      (E.12)
                             П•i



                                                             26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


The first equality holds by f (i),П•i (П…) вҲҲ F (i) in (E.1), and the last inequality is derived from
Lemma E.2 and П•i (П…) is a pure joint policy. Then, by combining (E.11) and (E.12), we can get
                                     h              i        h           i
                                        (i),П• (П…)               (i),П…
                       max EП…вҲјПҖk Vf (i),П•ii (П…) (ПҒ) вҲ’ EП…вҲјПҖk V b(i),П… (ПҒ)
                        П•i                                     f
                                                  h                         i
                          вүӨ О·Оөconc вҲ’ О·EП…вҲјПҖk L(i),kвҲ’1 (fb(i),П… , П…, П„ 1:kвҲ’1 ) .

Hence, we can upper bound the regret of the agent i at k-th episode as
           h          (i)   (вҲ’i)
                                   i            h         i
max EП…вҲјПҖk V (i),П•i (П… )Г—П… (ПҒ) вҲ’ EП…вҲјПҖk V (i),П… (ПҒ)
 П•i
                h                i          h          i
                    (i),П• (П…)
  = max EП…вҲјПҖk Vf (i),П•ii (П…) (ПҒ) вҲ’ EП…вҲјПҖk V (i),П… (ПҒ)
       П•i
                h                i          h           i          h         i         h        i
                    (i),П• (П…)                   (i),П…                  (i),П…
  = max EП…вҲјПҖk Vf (i),П•ii (П…) (ПҒ) вҲ’ EП…вҲјПҖk V b(i),П… (ПҒ) + EП…вҲјПҖk V b(i),П… (ПҒ) вҲ’ EП…вҲјПҖk V (i),П… (ПҒ)
       П•i                                      f                      f
                                                            h             i      h           i
                                                                (i),П…
  вүӨ О·Оөconc вҲ’ О·EП…вҲјПҖk L(i),kвҲ’1 (fb(i),П… , П…, П„ 1:kвҲ’1 ) + EП…вҲјПҖk V b(i),П… (ПҒ) вҲ’ EП…вҲјПҖk V (i),П… (ПҒ) .
                                                                      f

The rest of the proof is the same as in NE/CCE after (E.7).

E.2   P ROOF OF M ODEL -BASED V ERSION OF T HEOREM 3.1

Proof. We first consider NE/CCE.

NE/CCE Denote fb(i),ПҖ = arg supf вҲҲF VbiПҖ (f ) as the optimal model with respect to the regularized
value Vb (i),ПҖ (f ). Since for model-based RL problems, the empirical discrepancy function L(f, ПҖ, П„ )
and в„“(i),s (f, ПҖ) is independent with policy ПҖ, we simplify it as L(f, П„ ) and в„“(i),s (f ). Then, from the
definition of regularized value function Vb (i),ПҖ (f ), we have
                   h                                         i
                       (i),П…
          EП…вҲјПҖk V b(i),П… (ПҒ) вҲ’ О·L(i),kвҲ’1 (fb(i),П… , П„ 1:kвҲ’1 )
                      f
                           h            i                            h                   i
              = EП…вҲјПҖk sup Vb (i),П… (f ) вүҘ max EП…вҲјП…(i) Г—ПҖ(вҲ’i),k sup Vb (i),П… (f ) .                  (E.13)
                        f вҲҲF                   П… (i) вҲҲО pur                    f вҲҲF

The inequality holds by the fact that ПҖ k is the NE/CCE of the regularized value function Vb (i),ПҖ (f ).
Now since the best response ПҖ (i),k,вҖ  is a pure policy, we have
                                                 h              i
                       max EП…вҲјП…(i) Г—ПҖ(вҲ’i),k sup Vb (i),П… (f )
                       П… (i) вҲҲО pur                     f вҲҲF
                                                     h                  i
                               вүҘ EП…вҲјПҖ(i),k,вҖ  Г—ПҖ(вҲ’i),k sup Vb (i),П… (f )
                                                         f вҲҲF
                                           h                                     i
                                              (i),П…
                               вүҘ EП…вҲјВө(i),ПҖk Vf вҲ— (ПҒ) вҲ’ О·L(i),kвҲ’1 (f вҲ— , П„ 1:kвҲ’1 ) .                   (E.14)

Thus, by combining E.13 and E.14, we have
                          h           i      h         i
                              (i),П…             (i),П…
               EП…вҲјВө(i),ПҖk Vf вҲ— (ПҒ) вҲ’ EП…вҲјПҖk V b(i),П… (ПҒ)
                                               f
                                                     h                          i
                        (i),kвҲ’1 вҲ— 1:kвҲ’1
                  вүӨ О·L          (f , П„  ) вҲ’ О·EП…вҲјПҖk L(i),kвҲ’1 (fb(i),П… , П„ 1:kвҲ’1 ) .                    (E.15)

Now we provide our concentration lemma for model-based RL problems.
Lemma E.3 (Concentration Lemma for Model-Based RL Problems). With probability at least 1вҲ’Оҙ,
for any k вҲҲ [K], f вҲҲ F, for the executed policy {О¶ s }kвҲ’1
                                                      s=1 in Algorithm 1, we have
                                                                        kвҲ’1
                                                                        X
               L(i),kвҲ’1 (f вҲ— , П„ 1:kвҲ’1 ) вҲ’ L(i),kвҲ’1 (f, П„ 1:kвҲ’1 ) вүӨ вҲ’         в„“(i),s (f ) + Оәconc ,   (E.16)
                                                                        s=1

where Оәconc = max{2H log HBF Оҙ(1/K) , H}, where BF (1/K) is the 1/K-bracketing number of the
model class F. We also define the event E5 as the situation when (E.16) holds.


                                                       27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Proof. See В§F.8 for detailed proof.

By Lemma E.3, for any i вҲҲ [n],
            h            i       h           i
  EП…вҲјВө(i),ПҖk V (i),П… (ПҒ) вҲ’ EП…вҲјПҖk V (i),П… (ПҒ)
                   h         i         h         i   h            i       h           i
                       (i),П…               (i),П…        (i),П…
    = EП…вҲјВө(i),ПҖk Vf вҲ— (ПҒ) вҲ’ EП…вҲјПҖk Vfb(i),П… (ПҒ) +EП…вҲјПҖk Vfb(i),П… (ПҒ) вҲ’ EП…вҲјПҖk V (i),П… (ПҒ) . (E.17)
      |                      {z                  }
                             (a)

Now substitute into equation (E.15),
                                                              h                              i
                     (a) вүӨ О·L(i),kвҲ’1 (f вҲ— , П„ 1:kвҲ’1 ) вҲ’ О·EП…вҲјПҖk L(i),kвҲ’1 (fb(i),П… , П„ 1:kвҲ’1 )
                                  h                                                         i
                         = EП…вҲјПҖk О·L(i),kвҲ’1 (f вҲ— , П„ 1:kвҲ’1 ) вҲ’ О·L(i),kвҲ’1 (fb(i),П… , П„ 1:kвҲ’1 ) .                   (E.18)

Hence, combining with (E.17) and (E.18), we can get
             h            i           h        i
   EП…вҲјВө(i),ПҖk V (i),П… (ПҒ) вҲ’ EП…вҲјПҖk V (i),П… (ПҒ)
                       h            i        h           i
                           (i),П…
      вүӨ (a) + EП…вҲјПҖk V b(i),П… (ПҒ) вҲ’ EП…вҲјПҖk V (i),П… (ПҒ)
                          f
               h                                                                                      i
                     (i),kвҲ’1 вҲ— 1:kвҲ’1                                           (i),П…
      вүӨ EП…вҲјПҖk О·L             (f , П„     ) вҲ’ О·L(i),kвҲ’1 (fb(i),П… , П„ 1:kвҲ’1 ) + V       (ПҒ) вҲ’ V (i),П… (ПҒ) .
                                                                                         fb(i),П…
                                                                                                                 (E.19)

By summing over k вҲҲ [K] and I вҲҲ [n], the regret can be obtained by
   Reg(K)
           n X
           X K            h                                                                                        i
                     EП…вҲјПҖk О·L(i),kвҲ’1 (f вҲ— , П„ 1:kвҲ’1 ) вҲ’ О·L(i),kвҲ’1 (fb(i),П… , П„ 1:kвҲ’1 ) + Vfb(i),П… (ПҒ) вҲ’ V (i),П… (ПҒ) .
                                                                                           (i),П…
       вүӨ
           i=1 k=1
                                                                                                                  (E.20)

 Now we want to use Azuma-HoeffdingвҖҷs inequality to transform П… вҲј ПҖ k to executed policy О¶ k . To
achieve this goal, note that by Lemma E.3, under event E5 , we have

                             L(i),kвҲ’1 (f вҲ— , П„ 1:kвҲ’1 ) вҲ’ L(i),kвҲ’1 (fb(i),П… , П„ 1:kвҲ’1 ) вүӨ Оәconc .                 (E.21)

Moreover, since fb(i),П… achieves the maximum value of the regularized value function Vb (i),ПҖ (f ) =
  (i),П…
Vf (ПҒ) вҲ’ L(i),kвҲ’1 (f вҲ— , П„ 1:kвҲ’1 ), we have
                                                                        h        i       h            i
                                                                           (i),П…            (i),П…
  L(i),kвҲ’1 (f вҲ— , П„ 1:kвҲ’1 ) вҲ’ L(i),kвҲ’1 (fb(i),П… , П„ 1:kвҲ’1 ) вүҘ EП…вҲјВө(i),ПҖk Vf вҲ— (ПҒ) вҲ’ EП…вҲјПҖk Vf (i),П… (ПҒ)
                                                                вүҘ вҲ’R вүҘ вҲ’Оәconc .
Thus, if we define

   L(i),П…
     Оө    = L(i),kвҲ’1 (f вҲ— , П„ 1:kвҲ’1 ) вҲ’ L(i),kвҲ’1 (fb(i),П… , П„ 1:kвҲ’1 )
                                        n                                                               o
                                     В· I |L(i),kвҲ’1 (f вҲ— , П„ 1:kвҲ’1 ) вҲ’ L(i),kвҲ’1 (fb(i),П… , П„ 1:kвҲ’1 )| вүӨ Оө ,

                     (i),П…
we can have |LОәconc | вүӨ Оәconc is bounded under event E5 . Then, with probability at least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ,
  (i),П…
LОәconc = L(i),kвҲ’1 (f вҲ— , П„ 1:kвҲ’1 ) вҲ’ L(i),kвҲ’1 (fb(i),П… , П„ 1:kвҲ’1 ). Then, we can apply Azuma-HoeffdingвҖҷs
inequality to transform the expectation to the executed policy О¶ k .
                              K                  K          h         i
                              X           k      X
                                    LОә(i),О¶
                                        conc
                                             вҲ’         EП…вҲјПҖk LОә(i),П…
                                                                 conc
                                                                        = O(Оәconc В· log K).                      (E.22)
                              k=1                k=1



                                                              28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Now by taking the union bound of Azuma-HoeffdingвҖҷs inequality and event E5 , with probability at
least 1 вҲ’ 2Оҙ,
               n X
               X K            h                                                                                         i
                         EП…вҲјПҖk О·L(i),kвҲ’1 (f вҲ— , П„ 1:kвҲ’1 ) вҲ’ О·L(i),kвҲ’1 (fb(i),П… , П„ 1:kвҲ’1 ) + Vfb(i),П… (ПҒ) вҲ’ V (i),П… (ПҒ)
                                                                                               (i),П…
 Reg(K) вүӨ
               i=1 k=1
               n X
               X K            h                                      i
                                            (i),П…
           =             EП…вҲјПҖk О·LП…Оәconc + Vfb(i),П… (ПҒ) вҲ’ V (i),П… (ПҒ)
               i=1 k=1
               n X
                 K
                                       (i),О¶ k
               X              k                             k

           вүӨ              О·LО¶Оәconc + V b(i),О¶k (ПҒ) вҲ’ V (i),О¶ (ПҒ) +O(nОә
                                                                  e   conc ),
                                             f
               i=1 k=1
               |                             {z                           }
                                             (b)
 where the first inequality holds by (E.20), the equality holds under event E5 , and the last inequality
holds by (E.22). Then, by Lemma E.3, under event E5 , we have
         n X  K
        X                                                         k                (i),П…                k
  (b) =            О·L(i),kвҲ’1 (f вҲ— , П„ 1:kвҲ’1 ) вҲ’ О·L(i),kвҲ’1 (fb(i),О¶ , П„ 1:kвҲ’1 ) + V b(i),О¶k (ПҒ) вҲ’ V (i),О¶ (ПҒ)
                                                                                                f
          i=1 k=1
          n X
            K                 kвҲ’1
                                                                                                    !
          X                   X                        k           (i),П…                k
      вүӨ                вҲ’О·           в„“(i),s (fb(i),О¶ ) + О·Оәconc + V b(i),О¶k (ПҒ) вҲ’ V (i),О¶ (ПҒ)            .
                                                                  f
          i=1 k=1             s=1
Then, by Assumption 2.5, (b) can be further upper bounded by
                         K
                       n X                  kвҲ’1
                                                                                                                !
                                                              (i),О¶ k                (i),П…           (i),О¶ k
                       X                    X
                                                   (i),s
               (b) вүӨ                 вҲ’О·            в„“       (f
                                                            b         ) + О·Оәconc + V b(i),О¶k (ПҒ) вҲ’ V         (ПҒ)
                                                                                       f
                       i=1 k=1              s=1
                               n
                   вүӨ nО·KОәconc + dMADC + 6ndMADC H
                               О·
                             вҲҡ          вҲҡ
                   = O(nОәconc K + ndMADC K + ndMADC H).
                     e
                                                                          вҲҡ
The first inequality holds by Lemma E.3. The last equality holds by О· = 4/ K. Finally, the regret
can be bounded by
                                                   вҲҡ                вҲҡ
           Reg(K) вүӨ (b) + O(nОә
                             e   conc ) = O(nОәconc K + ndMADC K + ndMADC H).
                                          e
Thus, we complete the proof by noting that Оәconc = O(H)

Correlated Equilibrium Similar to model-free problems, we only need to replace the best re-
sponse with strategy modification.
                                h                                           i
                                    (i),П…
                         EП…вҲјПҖk V b(i),П… (ПҒ) вҲ’ О·L(i),kвҲ’1 (fb(i),П… , П„ 1:kвҲ’1 )
                                   f
                                        h             i
                             = EП…вҲјПҖk sup Vb (i),П… (f )
                                                           f вҲҲF
                                                     h                      i
                                          = max EП…вҲјПҖk sup Vb (i),П•i (П…) (f ) .
                                              П•i                  f вҲҲF

The last equality uses the property that ПҖ k is a CE with respect to the payoff function
supf вҲҲF Vb (i),П… (f ). Then, since f вҲ— вҲҲ F, we can further derive
                              h                                            i
                                   (i),П…
                        EП…вҲјПҖk V b(i),П… (ПҒ) вҲ’ О·L(i),kвҲ’1 (fb(i),П… , П„ 1:kвҲ’1 )
                                  f
                                          h               i
                          вүҘ max EП…вҲјПҖk Vb (i),П•i (П…) (f вҲ— )
                               П•i
                                          h                                  i
                                             (i),П• (П…)
                          = max EП…вҲјПҖk Vf вҲ— i (ПҒ) вҲ’ О·L(i),kвҲ’1 (f вҲ— , П„ 1:kвҲ’1 ) .   (E.23)
                                     П•i

The second equality holds by the property of CE. Thus, we have
                                             (i),П•i (П…)                        (i),П…
                       max EП…вҲјПҖk [Vf вҲ—                     (ПҒ)] вҲ’ EП…вҲјПҖk [V b(i),П… (ПҒ)]
                         П•i                                                   f

                          вүӨ О·L(i),kвҲ’1 (f вҲ— , П„ 1:kвҲ’1 ) вҲ’ О·EП…вҲјПҖk L(i),kвҲ’1 (fb(i),П… , П„ 1:kвҲ’1 ).                      (E.24)


                                                                     29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Hence, combining with (E.23) and (E.24), we can upper bound the regret of the agent i at k-th
episode as
           h           (i)   (вҲ’i)
                                    i            h         i
 max EП…вҲјПҖk V (i),П•i (П… )Г—П… (ПҒ) вҲ’ EП…вҲјПҖk V (i),П… (ПҒ)
  П•i
                h                 i          h          i
                     (i),П• (П…)
   = max EП…вҲјПҖk Vf (i),П•ii (П…) (ПҒ) вҲ’ EП…вҲјПҖk V (i),П… (ПҒ)
       П•i
                h                 i          h           i         h          i         h        i
                     (i),П• (П…)                   (i),П…                  (i),П…
   = max EП…вҲјПҖk Vf (i),П•ii (П…) (ПҒ) вҲ’ EП…вҲјПҖk V b(i),П… (ПҒ) + EП…вҲјПҖk V b(i),П… (ПҒ) вҲ’ EП…вҲјПҖk V (i),П… (ПҒ)
       П•i                                       f                      f
                                                             h             i      h           i
                                                                (i),П…
   вүӨ О·Оөconc вҲ’ О·EП…вҲјПҖk L(i),kвҲ’1 (fb(i),П… , П…, П„ 1:kвҲ’1 ) + EП…вҲјПҖk V b(i),П… (ПҒ) вҲ’ EП…вҲјПҖk V (i),П… (ПҒ) .
                                                                  f

The rest of the proof is the same as NE/CCE after (E.15).

E.3   S AMPLE C OMPLEXITY R ESULTS

we can utilize the standard online-to-batch techniques to transform the regret result in Theorem 3.1
into the sample complexity result.
Corollary
           E.4. Under the same  setting   as in Theorem 3.1, with probability at least 1вҲ’Оҙ, when K вүҘ
 e n2 H 2 + n2 d2          2         вҲ’2
O                        ОҘ
                   MADC F ,Оҙ     В· Оө     , if we output the mixture policy ПҖout = Unif({ПҖ k }kвҲҲ[K] ),
the output policy ПҖout is a Оө-{NE, CCE, CE}.

Proof. See В§F.9 for the proof.

Corollary E.4 shows that MAMEX is sample-efficient for learning all three equilibria of general-sum
MGs under general function approximation.

F     P ROOF OF T HEOREMS AND L EMMAS
F.1   P ROOF OF T HEOREM D.4

Proof. The proof follows Proposition 3 in Dann et al. (2021). First, we provide the following lemma
in Dann et al. (2021).
Lemma F.1. For any positive real number sequence x1 , В· В· В· , xn , we have
                                    Pn
                                           xi      p
                                   pPi=1n       вүӨ 1 + log n.
                                              2
                                        i=1 ixi

Now denote EОө = dimMABE (F, Оө). We fix i вҲҲ [n], and ignore both h and i for simplicity. Also
                                                                                   (i),ПҖ k       (i)
denote ebs,k
          h  = EПҖs [П•t ] and es,k  h  = ebs,k   es,k
                                          h В· I{bh    > Оө}, where П•t = (I вҲ’ Th        )fh вҲҲ Fh . We
initialize K buckets Bh0 , В· В· В· , Bh , and we want to add element ek,k
                                     KвҲ’1
                                                                     h  for k  вҲҲ [K] into these buckets
                                                              k,k
one by one. The rule for adding elements is as follows: If eh = 0, we do not add it to any buckets.
Otherwise we go through all buckets from Bh0 to BhKвҲ’1 , and add ek,k          i
                                                                     h to Bh whenever
                                            X
                                                  (es,k 2     k,k 2
                                                     h ) < (eh ) .
                                              i
                                     sвүӨtвҲ’1,sвҲҲBh

Now assume we add ek,k                   k                          k                k,k 2
                      h into the bucket bh . Then, for all 1 вүӨ i вүӨ bh вҲ’ 1, we have (eh ) вүӨ
P               s,k 2
  sвүӨkвҲ’1,sвҲҲB i (eh ) . Thus,
              h

                  K X
                  X k            K
                                 X         X            X                K
                                                                         X
                      (es,k
                        h   )2
                               вүҘ                              (es,k 2
                                                                h ) вүҘ          bkh (ek,k 2
                                                                                     h ) .             (F.1)
                  k=1 s=1          k=1 0вүӨiвүӨbk
                                            h вҲ’1
                                                          i
                                                 sвүӨtвҲ’1,sвҲҲBh              k=1

Now note that by the definition of Оө-independent sequence, for the measures in Bhi {ПҖ k1 , В· В· В· , ПҖ kj },
ПҖ k is a ОөвҖІ -independent from all predecessors ПҖ k1 , В· В· В· , ПҖ kjвҲ’1 such that ОөвҖІ > Оө. (We can choose


                                                   30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                                              qP
ОөвҖІ = ek,k
      h     вҲ’ c for enough  small c such that      sвүӨtвҲ’1,sвҲҲBh
                                                                  s,k 2
                                                             i (eh )    вүӨ ОөвҖІ and ОөвҖІ > Оө by ek,k
                                                                                             h    > Оө.)
Thus, from the definition of BE dimension, the size of each bucket cannot exceed EОө . Now by
JensenвҖҷs inequality, we can get
                                                        пЈ«            пЈ¶2             пЈ«            пЈ¶2
   K                 KвҲ’1                   KвҲ’1                   s,s      KвҲ’1                s,s
   X                 X       X              X             X    e           X          X    e
      bkh (ek,k 2
            h ) =        iВ·      (es,s 2
                                    h ) вүҘ       i|Bhi | пЈӯ        h пЈё
                                                                  i|
                                                                        вүҘ      iEОө пЈӯ         h пЈё
                                                                                                    ,
                     i=1       i            i=1            i
                                                              |B  h        i=1           i
                                                                                           E  Оө
  k=1                         sвҲҲBh                               sвҲҲBh                                sвҲҲBh
                                                                                                                  (F.2)
                                                                                       s,s
where the last inequality uses the fact that |Bhi | вүӨ EОө . Let xi =
                                                                             P
                                                                                   i (eh ). By Lemma F.1, we
                                                                                sвҲҲBh
have
             пЈ«             пЈ¶2        пЈ«       пЈ¶2                 пЈ«                                              пЈ¶2
   KвҲ’1            X es,s       KвҲ’1
   X                        1  X       X s,s            1                                           X
          iEОө пЈӯ       h пЈё
                          =        iВ·пЈӯ    eh пЈё вүҘ                пЈӯ                                           es,s
                                                                                                             h
                                                                                                                 пЈё .
    i=1             i
                      EОө    EОө i=1      i
                                                 EОө (1 + log K)                                         0
               sвҲҲBh                               sвҲҲBh                                           sвҲҲ[K]\Bh
                                                                                                                  (F.3)
Hence, combining (F.1), (F.2) and (F.3), we can get
                                                                  K
                                                                                      !1/2
                           X                                      X
                                     es,s
                                      h вүӨ    EОө (1 + log K)             bkh (ek,k
                                                                              h )
                                                                                  2

                               0
                        sвҲҲ[K]\Bh                                  k=1

                                                            K X
                                                              k
                                                                                      !1/2
                                                            X
                                        вүӨ    EОө (1 + log K)     (es,k
                                                                  h )
                                                                      2
                                                                                             .
                                                                  k=1 s=1

Now by the definition es,k
                       h =ebs,k   es,k
                            h В· I{b
                                                              0
                                   h > Оө} and the fact that |Bh | вүӨ EОө , we can have
                    H X
                    X K               H X
                                      X K
                        ebk,k
                          h   вүӨ HKОө +     ek,k
                                           h
                    h=1 k=1                     h=1 k=1
                                                                           H
                                                                           X          X
                                   вүӨ HKОө + min{HEОө , HK} +                                   es,s
                                                                                              h .
                                                                                      0
                                                                           h=1 sвҲҲ[K]\Bh

Then, by (F.3), we can further bounded it by
  H X
    K                                H                 K kвҲ’1
                                                                                                     !1/2
  X                                  X                 X X s,k
      ebk,k
        h   вүӨ HKОө + min{HE Оө , HK} +   E Оө (1 + log K)       (eh )2
  h=1 k=1                                             h=1                         k=1 s=1
                                                                         H X
                                                                           K kвҲ’1
                                                                                                        !1/2
                                                                         X   X s,k
                  вүӨ HKОө + min{HEОө , HK} +                EОө H(1 + log K)        (eh )2                         . (F.4)
                                                                                h=1 k=1 s=1
The last inequality uses the JensenвҖҷs inequality Now we can use a similar technique in Xie et al.
(2021). Define (rhвҖІ )(i) (s, a) = fhk (s, a) вҲ’ EsвҖІ вҲјPh (В·|s,a) вҹЁfh+1
                                                                 k
                                                                     (sвҖІ , В·), ПҖh+1
                                                                                k
                                                                                    (В· | sвҖІ )вҹ©. Then, we have
                                    "H                                                             #
         k                            X
                  k                          k        k            k              k

 Es1 вҲјПҒ f1 (s1 , ПҖ1 (s1 )) = EПҖk            fh (sh , ПҖh (sh )) вҲ’ fh+1 (sh+1 , ПҖh+1 (sh+1 ))
                                      h=1
                                     "H                                                                                 #
                                      X
                                            fhk (sh , ПҖhk (sh )) вҲ’ EsвҖІ вҲјPh (В·|s,a) вҹЁfh+1
                                                                                     k
                                                                                         (sвҖІ , В·), ПҖh+1
                                                                                                    k
                                                                                                        (В· | sвҖІ )вҹ©

                           = EПҖk
                                      h=1
                                     "H                  #
                                      X
                           = EПҖk         (rhвҖІ )(i) (s, a)    .
                                      h=1
Hence, we can rewrite the regret of the k-th episode as
                                                         "H                               #
           h                               k
                                                  i
                                                                                 (i)
                                                          X
     Es1 вҲјПҒ (f1k (s1 , ПҖ1k (s1 )) вҲ’ V (i),ПҖ (s1 )) = EПҖk    ((rhвҖІ )(i) (s, a) вҲ’ rh (s, a)) .                      (F.5)
                                                                  h=1



                                                       31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


The last inequality uses the fact that Then, substitute into the definition of (rhвҖІ )(i) , we can get
                h                               k
                                                        i
          Es1 вҲјПҒ (f1k (s1 , ПҖ1k (s1 )) вҲ’ V (i),ПҖ (s1 ))
                    "H                                                                             #
                                                                                         (i)
                      X
                              k                           k     вҖІ       k         вҖІ
             = EПҖk         (fh (s, a) вҲ’ EsвҖІ вҲјPh (В·|s,a) вҹЁfh+1 (s , В·), ПҖh+1 (В· | s )вҹ© вҲ’ rh (s, a))
                       h=1
                     "H                               #     H
                                    (i),ПҖ k
                      X                                     X
             = EПҖk           (I вҲ’ Th        )(fhk )       =   ebk,k
                                                                h ,
                       h=1                                    h=1

where the first equality holds by the definition of Mk , the second equality holds by decomposing
the value function to the expected cumulative sum of the reward function, and the last equality is
derived by the definition of ebk,k
                               h . Now we can get
                 K X
                 X H
      Reg(K) вүӨ       ebk,k
                       h
                 k=1 h=1
                                                                               H X
                                                                                 K kвҲ’1
                                                                                               !1/2
                                                                               X   X s,k
              вүӨ HKОө + min{HEОө , HK} +                         (EОө H В· 2 log K)        (eh )2             .    (F.6)
                                                                               h=1 k=1 s=1

                                                        s,k   s,k                              (i),ПҖ k
                     вҲҡ by (F.4). Now by the definition eh вүӨ ebh = EПҖ [(I вҲ’ Th
The last inequality holds                                                                                )(fh )] and
                                                                    s

the basic inequality ab вүӨ Вөa + b/Вө for Вө > 0, we can derive
Reg(K)
                                                     H K kвҲ’1                              i 2
                                                  1 XXX             h
                                                                            (i),ПҖ k
   вүӨ HKОө + min{HEОө , HK} + Вө В· (EОө H В· 2 log K) +                EПҖs (I вҲ’ Th        )(fh )
                                                  Вө
                                                    h=1 k=1 s=1
                                                     H K kвҲ’1                              2
                                                  1 XXX                    (i),ПҖ k
   вүӨ HKОө + min{HEОө , HK} + Вө В· (EОө H В· 2 log K) +               EПҖs I вҲ’ Th         )(fh )     .
                                                  Вө         s=1         h=1 k=1
                                         2                2
The last inequality holds by (E[X]) вүӨ E[X ]. Thus, by choosing Оө = 1/K, we can derive
                                                      H K kвҲ’1                                      2
                                                   1 XXX                           (i),ПҖ k
  Reg(K) вүӨ H + HE1/K + Вө(E1/K H В· 2 log K) +                      EПҖ s     I вҲ’ Th          )(fh )
                                                   Вө
                                                     h=1 k=1 s=1
                                         H K kвҲ’1                                2
                                      1 XXX                      (i),ПҖ k
           вүӨ 6dMADC H + ВөdMADC +                    EПҖs I вҲ’ Th           )(fh )     ,
                                      Вө        s=1h=1 k=1

where dMADC = max{2E1/K H log K, 1} = O(2dimMABE (F, 1/K)H log K). The last inequality
uses the fact that log K вүҘ 1 and H вүҘ 1.

F.2   P ROOF OF T HEOREM D.5

Proof. For any policy ПҖ and i вҲҲ [n], assume Оҙz1 , В· В· В· , Оҙzm is an Оө-independent sequence with
                       (i),ПҖ
                              = ПҖвҲҲО pur (I вҲ’ T (i),ПҖ )F, where Оҙz1 , Оҙz2 , В· В· В· , Оҙzm вҲҲ DвҲҶ , i.e. Оҙzi
             S                    S
respect to ПҖвҲҲО pur Fh
is a Dirichlet probability measure over S Г— A that Оҙzi = Оҙ(s,a) (В·). Then, for each j вҲҲ [m],
                        j        (i)            j                              (i),ПҖ j
qP exist function f вҲҲ F and policy ПҖ вҲҲ О  such that |(I вҲ’ T
there                                                                                  )fj (zj )| > Оө and
      jвҲ’1     p             p                       j           j j
                        p
                   (i),ПҖ f            2                   (i),ПҖ
      p=1 |(fh вҲ’ T         h+1 )(zp )| вүӨ Оө. Define gh = T        fh+1 , by Assumption 2.3, we have
                                                      qP
         (i)                                              j
ghj вҲҲ Fh вҠҶ Fh . Thus, |(fhj вҲ’ ghj )(zj )| > Оө and                  p       p       2
                                                          p=1 |(fh вҲ’ gh )(zp )| < Оө. Thus, by the
definition of eluder dimension, we have m вүӨ dimE (Fh , Оө). Hence, for all i and policy ПҖ,
                                                                                      !
                                                                     (i),ПҖ
                                                            [
                 dimE (Fh , Оө) вүҘ m вүҘ max max dimDE                Fh , Dh,вҲҶ , Оө ,
                                             hвҲҲ[H] iвҲҲ[n]
                                                                      ПҖвҲҲО pur

which concludes the proof.


                                                              32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


F.3   P ROOF OF T HEOREM D.8

Proof. First, by the elliptical potential lemma introduced in Lemma G.3, if we define Оӣk,h = ОөI +
PkвҲ’1         T                     K
  s=1 xk,h xk,h , for any {xk,h }k=1 вҲҲ Xh we have
      K X H                               H                   K
                                                                         !
    X              n
                               2
                                     o X                   1X         T
              min 1, вҲҘxk,h вҲҘОӣвҲ’1 вүӨ            2 log det I +      xk,h xk,h = 2ОіK (Оө, X ).     (F.7)
                                 k,h                       Оө
      k=1 h=1                                          h=1                                           k=1
                                       PkвҲ’1
Now denote ОЈk,h = ОөI + s=1 Xh (ПҖ s )Xh (ПҖ s )T . Similar to Section F.1, define (rhвҖІ )(i) (s, a) =
fhk (s, a) вҲ’ EsвҖІ вҲјPh (В·|s,a) вҹЁfh+1
                                k
                                   (sвҖІ , В·), ПҖh+1
                                              k
                                                    (В· | sвҖІ )вҹ© вҲҲ [вҲ’1, 1], then we can have
                                                                    "H                              #
                  h                                       i
                                             (i),ПҖ k                                       (i)
                                                                      X
                     k         k                                             вҖІ (i)
           Es1 вҲјПҒ f1 (s1 , ПҖ1 (s1 )) вҲ’ V             (s1 ) = EПҖk          ((rh ) (s, a) вҲ’ rh (s, a)) .
                                                                                             h=1

Then, we can substitute the definition of (rhвҖІ )(i) and derive
                h                              k
                                                     i
          Es1 вҲјПҒ f1k (s1 , ПҖ1k (s1 )) вҲ’ V (i),ПҖ (s1 )
                    "H                                                                             #
                                                                                         (i)
                      X
                               k                          k     вҖІ       k         вҖІ
             = EПҖk         (fh (s, a) вҲ’ EsвҖІ вҲјPh (В·|s,a) вҹЁfh+1 (s , В·), ПҖh+1 (В· | s )вҹ© вҲ’ rh (s, a))
                         h=1
                  H                                                                          k

                                                                (i),ПҖ
                                        (i)               (i)                                         (i),ПҖ k
                  X
              =         min           вҹЁWh (f k , ПҖ k ) вҲ’ Wh (f Вө                                 ,Вө                              k
                                                                                                                    ), Xh (ПҖ )вҹ©V , 2R .
                  h=1

Then, by min{x, 2R} вүӨ 2R min{x, 1}, we have
                        K           h                                      i
                        X                                           k
         Reg(K) =             Es1 вҲјПҒ (f1k (s1 , ПҖ1k (s1 )) вҲ’ V (i),ПҖ (s1 ))
                        k=1
                             K X
                               H
                             X                              (i)                          (i)              (i),ПҖ k            k
                   вүӨ 2R                     min       вҹЁWh (f k , ПҖ k ) вҲ’ Wh (f Вө                                    , Вө(i),ПҖ ), Xh (ПҖ k )вҹ©V , 1
                             k=1 h=1
                             K X
                               H
                             X                              (i)                          (i)              (i),ПҖ k            k
                   = 2R                     min       вҹЁWh (f k , ПҖ k ) вҲ’ Wh (f Вө                                    , Вө(i),ПҖ ), Xh (ПҖ k )вҹ©V , 1
                             k=1 h=1
                                   (                                 )             (                                         )!
                                                  k                                                   k
                         В·     I           Xh (ПҖ )            вүӨ1         +I             Xh (ПҖ )                         >1           .                                (F.8)
                                                      ОЈвҲ’1
                                                       k,h
                                                                                                             ОЈвҲ’1
                                                                                                              k,h


 The last inequality is because 1 = I{E} + I{В¬E} for any event. Now we decompose the (F.8) into
two terms A + B, where
         K X
           H                                                                                                                               (                                  )
                                                       (i),ПҖ                   k
                                                                                        (i),ПҖ k
         X                     (i)               (i)
A = 2R             min       вҹЁWh (f k , ПҖ k ) вҲ’ Wh (f Вө                            ,Вө                               k
                                                                                                     ), Xh (ПҖ )вҹ©V , 1 В· I                      Xh (ПҖ )k
                                                                                                                                                                      вүӨ1 ,
                                                                                                                                                               ОЈвҲ’1
                                                                                                                                                                k,h
         k=1 h=1
                                                                                                                                                                      (F.9)
         K X
           H                                                                                                                               (                                  )
         X                           (i)                     (i)       (i),ПҖ k                   k
B = 2R             min       вҹЁWh (f k , ПҖ k ) вҲ’ Wh (f Вө                            , Вө(i),ПҖ ), Xh (ПҖ k )вҹ©V , 1 В· I                             Xh (ПҖ k )        вҲ’1
                                                                                                                                                                   >1 .
                                                                                                                                                               ОЈk,h
         k=1 h=1
                                                                                                                                                                 (F.10)
Now we bound A and B respectively. For A, we can use CauchyвҖҷs inequality and get
         K X
           H
                                                                   (i),ПҖ k               k
                                                                                                                                                n                                 o
                         (i)                          (i)
         X
A вүӨ 2R               Wh (f k , ПҖ k ) вҲ’ Wh (f Вө                               , Вө(i),ПҖ )                      В· Xh (ПҖ k ) ОЈвҲ’1 В· I                     Xh (ПҖ k ) ОЈвҲ’1 вүӨ 1
                                                                                                                                         k,h                            k,h
         k=1 h=1                                                                                     ОЈk,h
             K X
               H
                                                                      (i),ПҖ k                    k
                                                                                                                             n                        o
                               (i)                          (i)
             X
      вүӨ 2R               Wh (f k , ПҖ k ) вҲ’ Wh (f Вө                              , Вө(i),ПҖ )                          В· min            Xh (ПҖ k ) ОЈвҲ’1 , 1 .
                                                                                                                                                     k,h
             k=1 h=1                                                                                      ОЈk,h
                                                                                                                                                                 (F.11)
The first inequality holds by CauchyвҖҷs inequality that |вҹЁX, Y вҹ©| вүӨ вҲҘXвҲҘОЈ вҲҘY вҲҘОЈвҲ’1 .


                                                                         33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                                                                PkвҲ’1         s      s T                       (i) k   k
Now by the definition ОЈk,h = ОөI +                                   s=1 Xh (ПҖ )Xh (ПҖ ) , we expand the term вҲҘWh (f , ПҖ ) вҲ’
  (i)         (i),ПҖ k           k
Wh (f Вө                 , Вө(i),ПҖ )вҲҘОЈk,h as
    (i)                        (i)       (i),ПҖ k                k
 Wh (f k , ПҖ k ) вҲ’ Wh (f Вө                         , Вө(i),ПҖ )
                                                                        ОЈk,h
        "                                                                                     kвҲ’1
                                                                                                                                                                                                 #1/2
                    (i)                         (i)        (i),ПҖ k              k    2        X              (i)                            (i)           (i),ПҖ k          k                 2
   = Оө В· Wh (f k , ПҖ k ) вҲ’ Wh (f Вө                                   , Вө(i),ПҖ )          +              вҹЁWh (f k , ПҖ k ) вҲ’ Wh (f Вө                                  , Вө(i),ПҖ ), Xh (ПҖ s )вҹ©
                                                                                     2
                                                                                              s=1
                          "kвҲ’1                                                                                                       #1/2
      вҲҡ                    X           (i)               (i)   (i),ПҖ                     k
                                                                                                  (i),ПҖ k
                                                                                                                                 2
   вүӨ 2 ОөBW +                         вҹЁWh (f k , ПҖ k ) вҲ’ Wh (f Вө                              ,Вө             ), Xh (ПҖ )вҹ©  s
                                                                                                                                            .
                           s=1
                                                вҲҡ                       вҲҡ        вҲҡ
The last inequality holds by                          a+bвүӨ
                                               b. Then, we can get          a+
   K X
     H
                                 (i),ПҖ k         k
                                                             n                  o
         (i)               (i)
   X
       вҲҘWh (f k , ПҖ k ) вҲ’ Wh (f Вө        , Вө(i),ПҖ )вҲҘОЈk,h min вҲҘXh (ПҖ k )вҲҘОЈвҲ’1 , 1
                                                                                                                                                k,h
   k=1 h=1
              K X
                H
                           пЈ«        "kвҲ’1                                                             #1/2 пЈ¶
              X              вҲҡ       X      (i)               (i)   (i),ПҖ k         k
          вүӨ                пЈӯ2 ОөBW +      |вҹЁWh (f k , ПҖ k ) вҲ’ Wh (f Вө        , Вө(i),ПҖ ), Xh (ПҖ s )вҹ©|2      пЈё
              k=1 h=1                                     s=1
                      n                  o
                 В· min вҲҘXh (ПҖ k )вҲҘОЈвҲ’1 , 1 вүӨ A1 + A2 .                                                                                                                       (F.12)
                                                   k,h

where A1 and A2 are defined as follows:
                                K X
                                  H
                                                           !1/2              K X
                                                                               H
                                                                                                                                       !1/2
                                X                                            X              n                   o
                                                2
                    A1 =                     4ОөBW                       В·                min вҲҘXh (ПҖ k )вҲҘ2ОЈвҲ’1 , 1
                                                                                                                          k,h
                                k=1 h=1                                      k=1 h=1

                                  H kвҲ’1
                                K X
                                                                                                                                                          !1/2
                                                                                 (i),ПҖ                        k
                                                                                                                       (i),ПҖ k
                                X   X                    (i)               (i)
                    A2 =                              |вҹЁWh (f k , ПҖ k ) вҲ’ Wh (f Вө                                 ,Вө             ), Xh (ПҖ )вҹ©|   s     2

                                k=1 h=1 s=1

                                                                            K X
                                                                              H
                                                                                                                                     !1/2
                                                                            X                                 k
                                                                    В·                 min{вҲҘXh (ПҖ                  )вҲҘ2ОЈвҲ’1 , 1}                   ,
                                                                                                                      k,h
                                                                            k=1 h=1

Now we bound A1 and A2 respectively. First, for A1 , using (F.7), we have
                                   q
                            A1 вүӨ 4ОөKHBW         2 В· 2Оі (Оө, X ).
                                                        K

Then, for A2 , we have
                  K X
                    H kвҲ’1
                                                                                                                                                !1/2
                                                                  (i),ПҖ                            k               k
                                          (i)               (i)
                  X   X                                                                                                                                   p
   A2 =                                |вҹЁWh (f k , ПҖ k ) вҲ’ Wh (f Вө                                     , Вө(i),ПҖ ), Xh (ПҖ s )вҹ©|2                               2ОіK (Оө, X )
                  k=1 h=1 s=1
                  K kвҲ’1
                                                          !1/2
                  X X                                                p
                                 (i),s      k         k
            =                  в„“         (f , ПҖ )                           2ОіK (Оө, X ).
                  k=1 s=1

The equality holds by the definition of в„“(i),s and the definition of multi-agent bilinear class (D.3).
            вҲҡ
Then, since ab вүӨ aВө + b/Вө for any Вө > 0, we can further derive
                                                                                                    K kвҲ’1
                                                                                       1 X X (i),s k k
                                     A2 вүӨ 2RВө В· 2ОіK (Оө, X ) +                                  в„“  (f , ПҖ ).
                                                                                      2RВө  s=1     k=1

Now by adding A1 and A2 and combining with (F.11) and (F.12), we can finally get
                                                                          K kвҲ’1
                              2 В· 8RОі (Оө, X ) + Вө В· 8R2 Оі (Оө, X ) + 1
                    q                                                    X   X
A вүӨ 2R(A1 + A2 ) вүӨ 4ОөKHBW             K                   K                      в„“(i),s (f k , ПҖ k )
                                                                       Вө     s=1                                                                k=1
                                                                                                                                         K kвҲ’1
                                      2                                                                                                1 XX
                                вүӨ 32RBW ОөHK + ОіK (Оө, X ) + Вө В· 8R2 ОіK (Оө, X ) +                                                                              в„“(i),s (f k , ПҖ k ).
                                                                                                                                       Вө
                                                                                                                                            k=1 s=1



                                                                                    34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Now we have complete the bound of A. For B, by (F.7), since I{x > 1} вүӨ min{1, x2 }, we know
that
       K X
       X H  n                  o XK X
                                    H    n              o
           I вҲҘXh (ПҖ k )вҲҘОЈвҲ’1 > 1 вүӨ     min 1, вҲҘxk,h вҲҘ2ОЈвҲ’1 вүӨ 2ОіK (Оө, X ).                                           (F.13)
                                   k,h                                             k,h
       k=1 h=1                                   k=1 h=1

Thus, by the definition of B in (F.10), we can derive
                                   K X
                                   X H  n                  o
                             BвүӨ2       I вҲҘXh (ПҖ k )вҲҘОЈвҲ’1 > 1 вүӨ 2ОіK (Оө, X ).
                                                              k,h
                                   k=1 h=1

                                                          2
Now note that Reg(K) вүӨ A + B, then by choosing Оө = 1/32RKBW and dMADC =
         2
max{1, 8R ОіK (Оө, X )} we can derive
      Reg(K) вүӨ A + B
                                                                                           K kвҲ’1
                       2                                                                 1 X X (i),s k k
                 вүӨ 32RBW ОөHK + 3ОіK (Оө, X ) + Вө В· 8R2 ОіK (Оө, X ) +                                в„“  (f , ПҖ )
                                                                                         Вө   s=1
                                                                                          k=1
                                                                        K kвҲ’1
                                                                      1 XX
                 = H + 3ОіK (Оө, X ) + Вө В· 8R2 ОіK (Оө, X ) +                           в„“(i),s (f k , ПҖ k )
                                                                     Вө
                                                                         k=1 s=1
                                                      K kвҲ’1
                                                    1 XX
                 вүӨ 6dMADC H + ВөdMADC +                            в„“(i),s (f k , ПҖ k ).
                                                    Вө
                                                        k=1 s=1

The last inequality uses the fact that dMADC вүҘ 1, H вүҘ 1. Hence, we complete the proof.



F.4   P ROOF OF T HEOREM D.12

Proof. In this subsection, we give a detailed proof of Theorem D.12. First, similar to the perfor-
mance difference lemma in Jiang et al. (2017), we have
                   (i),ПҖ k       (i),ПҖ k
                h                              i
         Es1 вҲјПҒ V1,f (s1 ) вҲ’ V1          (s1 )
                                                 "H               #
                        (i),ПҖ k
                    h               i             X (i)
            = EПҖk Q1,f (s1 , a1 ) вҲ’ EПҖk             rh (sh , ah )
                                                     h=1
                       "H                                                                                 #
                                (i),ПҖ k                           (i),ПҖ k
                        X                         (i)

             = EПҖk             Qh,f (sh , ah ) вҲ’ rh (sh , ah ) вҲ’ Qh+1,f (sh+1 , ah+1 )                        .   (F.14)
                        h=1

The last equality holds by splitting the term. Now, since
        (i),ПҖ k                          (i),ПҖ k                                (i),ПҖ k
    h                      i         h              i     h                   h              ii
EПҖk Qh+1,f (sh+1 , ah+1 ) = EПҖk Vh+1,f (sh+1 ) = EПҖk Esh+1 вҲјPh,f вҲ— (В·|sh ,ah ) Vh+1,f (sh+1 ) ,
                                                                                                                  (F.15)
we can rewrite (F.14) as
               (i),ПҖ k       (i),ПҖ k
           h                              i
     Es1 вҲјПҒ V1,f (s1 ) вҲ’ V1          (s1 )
            "H                                                                                    #
              X   (i),ПҖk                   (i)                                     (i),ПҖ k

     = EПҖk            Qh,f (sh , ah ) вҲ’ rh (sh , ah ) вҲ’ Esh+1 вҲјPh,f вҲ— (В·|sh ,ah ) Vh+1,f (sh+1 )
                 h=1
          K
                      "H                                                                             #
                                                                                     (i),ПҖ k
          X            X                                                           h                i
      =         EПҖk        (Esh+1 вҲјPh,f k (В·|sh ,ah ) вҲ’ Esh+1 вҲјPh,f вҲ— (В·|sh ,ah ) ) Vh+1,f k (sh+1 ) .            (F.16)
          k=1          h=1



                                                         35
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Then, combining (F.16) and the definition of multi-agent witness rank (D.7), we can derive
K
               (i),ПҖ k        (i),ПҖ k
X           h                              i
      Es1 вҲјПҒ V1,f k (s1 ) вҲ’ V1        (s1 )
k=1
       K X
         H
       X             1
   вүӨ         min R,      |вҹЁWh (f k ), Xh (ПҖ k )вҹ©|
                    Оәwit
     k=1 h=1
      K X H                                          n
     X               1                                                  o   n                  o
   вүӨ         min R,      |вҹЁWh (f k ), Xh (ПҖ k )вҹ©|   I вҲҘXh (ПҖ k )вҲҘОЈвҲ’1 вүӨ 1 + I вҲҘXh (ПҖ k )вҲҘОЈвҲ’1 вүҘ 1 .
                    Оәwit                                          k,h                    k,h
       k=1 h=1
                                                                                                        (F.17)
Now note that
                        K
                        X        n                    o         Оө+K
                              min 1, вҲҘXh (ПҖ k )вҲҘ2ОЈвҲ’1 вүӨ 2d log         вүң D(Оө).
                                                  k,h            Оө
                        k=1
and I{x > 1} вүӨ min{1, x2 }, we can derive
                          XK X H
                                  I{вҲҘXh (ПҖ k )вҲҘОЈвҲ’1 > 1} вүӨ D(Оө)H.                                        (F.18)
                                                         k,h
                                  k=1 h=1
Then, combining (F.17) and (F.18), we can get
K
               (i),ПҖ k        (i),ПҖ k
X           h                              i
      Es1 вҲјПҒ V1,f k (s1 ) вҲ’ V1        (s1 )
k=1
         K X
           H
         X              1
   вүӨR         min 1,        |вҹЁWh (f k ), Xh (ПҖ k )вҹ©| В· I{вҲҘXh (ПҖ k )вҲҘОЈвҲ’1 вүӨ 1} + I{вҲҘXh (ПҖ k )вҲҘОЈвҲ’1 > 1}
                     Оәwit                                            k,h                     k,h
      k=1 h=1
       K X H
      X                 1
   вүӨR         min 1,        |вҹЁWh (f k ), Xh (ПҖ k )вҹ©| В· I{вҲҘXh (ПҖ k )вҲҘОЈвҲ’1 вүӨ 1} + D(Оө)HR
                     Оәwit                                            k,h
      k=1 h=1
       K X H
      X        1
   вүӨR              вҲҘWh (f k )вҲҘОЈk,h min 1, вҲҘXh (ПҖ k )вҲҘ2ОЈвҲ’1 +D(Оө)HR.                               (F.19)
              Оәwit                                       k,h
      k=1 h=1
      |                         {z                           }
                               (A)
 The last inequality uses the CauchyвҖҷs inequality вҹЁX, Y вҹ© вүӨ вҲҘXвҲҘA вҲҘY вҲҘAвҲ’1 and the fact that xВ·I{x вүӨ
1} вүӨ min{1, x2 }. Further, by the definition of ОЈk,h , we decompose the first term as
                K H
                        "                    k
                                                                          #1/2
            1 XX                    k 2
                                            X
                                                         k          s   2
                                                                                  n                    o
  (A) вүӨ                   Оө В· вҲҘWh (f )вҲҘ2 +      |вҹЁWh (f ), Xh (ПҖ )вҹ©|           min 1, вҲҘXh (ПҖ k )вҲҘОЈвҲ’1
          Оәwit                              s=1
                                                                                                   k,h
               k=1 h=1
                K H
                        пЈ«            " k                            #1/2 пЈ¶
            1 X X пЈӯвҲҡ                  X
                                                  k          s    2
                                                                                n
                                                                         пЈё min 1, вҲҘXh (ПҖ k )вҲҘ вҲ’1 .
                                                                                                   o
      вүӨ                       ОөBW +       |вҹЁWh (f ), Xh (ПҖ )вҹ©|                                ОЈk,h
          Оәwit                        s=1
               k=1 h=1
                                                                               вҲҡ        вҲҡ      вҲҡ
The second inequality is derived by the inequality вҲҘWh (f k )вҲҘ вүӨ BW and a + b вүӨ a + b. Now
sum over k вҲҲ [K] and h вҲҲ [H], we can get
             K XH
                          пЈ«           " k                             #1/2 пЈ¶
            X         1 пЈӯвҲҡ             X                                         n                   o
   (A) вүӨ                       ОөBW +        |вҹЁWh (f k ), Xh (ПҖ s )вҹ©|2      пЈё min 1, вҲҘXh (ПҖ k )вҲҘ вҲ’1
                                                                                                ОЈk,h
                    Оәwit               s=1
             k=1 h=1
                 K H
               1 XXвҲҡ                  n                  o
         вүӨ                     ОөBW min 1, вҲҘXh (ПҖ k )вҲҘОЈвҲ’1
             Оәwit                                              k,h
                  k=1 h=1
             |                        {z                             }
                                     (X)
                      K H
                          " k                                        #1/2
                    1 XX X                      k          s     2
                                                                               n                 o
               +                         |вҹЁWh (f ), Xh (ПҖ )вҹ©|               min 1, вҲҘXh (ПҖ k )вҲҘОЈвҲ’1 .     (F.20)
                   Оәwit            s=1
                                                                                              k,h
                        k=1 h=1
                   |                                   {z                                           }
                                                      (Y )


                                                      36
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


First, we try to give an upper bound for (X). By CauchyвҖҷs inequality and (F.18), we can derive
                                          !1/2 K H
                                                                                  o 1/2
                              K X H
                                                                                   !
                        1    X
                                        2
                                                   XX            n
                                                                          k 2
              (X) вүӨ                  ОөBW                    min 1, вҲҘXh (ПҖ )вҲҘОЈвҲ’1
                      Оәwit                                                    k,h
                             k=1 h=1               k=1 h=1
                                                              2
                        1            2 В· D(Оө)H вүӨ HKОөBW + D(Оө)H.
                           q
                   вүӨ         HKОөBW                       2                                    (F.21)
                      Оәwit                              Оәwit
                                                                                      P вҲҡ
On the other hand, for (Y), we can bound it using CauchyвҖҷs inequality that
pP                                                                                       a,b ab вүӨ
              P
  ( a a) В· ( b b),
                     K X  H X k
                                                        ! K H                               !!1/2
            1       X
                                        k        s    2
                                                             XX         n
                                                                                  k 2
                                                                                          o
  (Y ) вүӨ                        |вҹЁWh (f ), Xh (ПҖ )вҹ©|                 min 1, вҲҘXh (ПҖ )вҲҘОЈвҲ’1
          Оәwit                                                                        k,h
                    k=1 h=1 s=1                              k=1 h=1
                v                                                !
                u            K X H X  k
            1 u             X
       вүӨ        tD(Оө)H                  |вҹЁWh (f k ), Xh (ПҖ s )вҹ©|2 .
          Оәwit                      s=1
                             k=1 h=1

The last inequality holds by the definition of D(Оө) in F.18. Now by the definition of multi-agent
witness rank D.6, we note that
    |вҹЁWh (f k ), Xh (ПҖ s )вҹ©|2
                                                                                                       2
       вүӨ max E(sh ,ah )вҲјПҖ [(Esh+1 вҲјPh,f k (В·|sh ,ah ) вҲ’ Esh+1 вҲјPh,f вҲ— (В·|sh ,ah ) )v(sh , ah , sh+1 )]
            vвҲҲVh
                                                                                                        2
       вүӨ max E(sh ,ah )вҲјПҖs (Esh+1 вҲјPh,f k (В·|sh ,ah ) вҲ’ Esh+1 вҲјPh,f вҲ— (В·|sh ,ah ) )v(sh , ah , sh+1 )
          vвҲҲVh
                                                                                                        2
       вүӨ E(sh ,ah )вҲјПҖs max (Esh+1 вҲјPh,f k (В·|sh ,ah ) вҲ’ Esh+1 вҲјPh,f вҲ— (В·|sh ,ah ) )v(sh , ah , sh+1 )
                          vвҲҲVh

The last two inequalities use JensenвҖҷs inequality. Hence, by the definition of total variation distance,
we can get
                                                                                             2
                |вҹЁWh (f k ), Xh (ПҖ s )вҹ©|2 вүӨ TV Ph,f k (В· | sh , ah ), Ph,f вҲ— (В· | sh , ah )       (F.22)
                                              2

                                          вүӨ 2DH Ph,f k (В· | sh , ah ), Ph,f вҲ— (В· | sh , ah ) ,    (F.23)
where the TV(В·, В·) denotes the total variation distance and DH denotes the Hellinger divergence.
The inequality (F.22) holds by the fact that v(sh , ah , sh+1 ) вҲҲ [0, 1], and the (F.23) holds by the
relationship between TV distance and Hellinger distance. Then, we can substitute the inequality
(F.23) and get
              v                                                                                       !
              u           K X   H Xk
          1 u            X
                                                         2

 (Y ) вүӨ       t D(Оө)H                 E(sh ,ah )вҲјПҖs 2DH Ph,f k (В· | sh , ah ), Ph,f вҲ— (В· | sh , ah )
         Оәwit
                         k=1 h=1 s=1
                                  K X H X k
                                                                                                              !
               2D(Оө)H      1     X
                                                             2

      вүӨ ВөR В·           +                      E(sh ,ah )вҲјПҖs DH Ph,f k (В· | sh , ah ), Ph,f вҲ— (В· | sh , ah )
                Оә2wit    ВөR
                                 k=1 h=1 s=1
                                                                                                        (F.24)
Hence, combining (F.19), (F.20), (F.21) and (F.24), we can get
              K
                         (i),ПҖ k         (i),ПҖ k
            X         h                                i
Reg(K) =        Es1 вҲјПҒ V1,f k (s1 ) вҲ’ V1         (s1 )
            k=1
         вүӨ R В· A + D(Оө)HR
         вүӨ R(X + Y ) + D(Оө)HR
                2
         вүӨ HKRОөBW /Оә2wit + D(Оө)HR
                                              K X
                                                H X
                                                  k
                                                                                                                                !
                          2D(Оө)H   1          X
                  + ВөR2 В·                                                  2

                                 +                          E(sh ,ah )вҲјПҖs DH Ph,f k (В· | sh , ah ), Ph,f вҲ— (В· | sh , ah )           .
                           Оә2wit   Вө
                                              k=1 h=1 s=1
                                                                                                          (F.25)


                                                      37
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Now by the definition of в„“(i),s of the model-based problem in (2.5), choosing Оө = Оә2wit /HKBW
                                                                                            2
              2R2 D(Оө)H
and dMADC =      Оә2
                        , we can get
                           wit

                                                                          K kвҲ’1
                                                                       1 X X (i),s k k
                       Reg(K) вүӨ 6dMADC H + Вө В· dMADC +                         в„“  (f , ПҖ )
                                                                       Вө   s=1
                                                                         k=1


complete the proof by D(Оә2wit /HKBW
                                  2
                                    ) = O(d).
                                        e

F.5       P ROOF OF T HEOREM D.14

Proof. First, we fix an index i вҲҲ [n]. Similar to Section F.4, we can get
 K
                (i),ПҖ k        (i),ПҖ k
 X           h                              i
       Es1 вҲјПҒ V1,f k (s1 ) вҲ’ V1        (s1 )
 k=1
          K
                      "H                                                                                         #
                           (i),ПҖ k             (i)                                       (i),ПҖ k
          X            X
      =         EПҖk      (Qh,f k (sh , ah ) вҲ’ rh (sh , ah ) вҲ’ Esh+1 вҲјPh,f вҲ— (В·|sh ,ah ) Vh+1,f k (sh+1 , ah+1 ))
          k=1         h=1
          K
                      "H                                                                          #
                                                                                   (i),ПҖ k
          X            X
      =         EПҖk      (Esh+1 вҲјPh,f k (В·|sh ,ah ) вҲ’ Esh+1 вҲјPh,f вҲ— (В·|sh ,ah ) )[Vh+1,f k (sh+1 )]
          k=1         h=1
          K X
            H                               Z
                                                                (i),ПҖ k
          X
      =        (Оёh,f k вҲ’ ОёhвҲ— )T EПҖk                 вҖІ
                                                П•h (s   | s, a)Vh+1,f k (sвҖІ )ds    ,
        k=1 h=1                             S

where the last equality is because of the property of the linear mixture MG.
Now we denote
                                   Wh (f ) = R(Оёh,f вҲ’ ОёhвҲ— )                                                (F.26)
                                                         (i),ПҖ
                                      "R                               #
                                           П• (sвҖІ | s, a)Vh+1,f (sвҖІ )ds
                                         S h
                       Xh (f, ПҖ) = EПҖ                                    .                                 (F.27)
                                                      R
                           вҲҡ
Then, we have вҲҘWh (f )вҲҘ вүӨ 2 d, вҲҘXh (f, ПҖ)вҲҘ вүӨ 1 and
           K                                               H
                                                         K X
                          (i),ПҖ k        (i),ПҖ k
           X           h                              i X
                 Es1 вҲјПҒ V1,f k (s1 ) вҲ’ V1        (s1 ) вүӨ     min{вҹЁWh (f k ), Xh (f k , ПҖ k )вҹ©, R}.
           k=1                                                 k=1 h=1
                                                         kk  k
 вҲҡ similar to Section F.4, if we replace Xh (ПҖ ) to Xh (f , ПҖ ), from (F.21) and (F.24) with BW =
Now
2 dR we can get
K
               (i),ПҖ k        (i),ПҖ k
X           h                               i
      Es1 вҲјПҒ V1,f k (s1 ) вҲ’ V1        (s1 )
k=1
                                                                          K X
                                                                            H X
                                                                              k
                                                                                                                !
                       2               1        4
                                                                          X
   вүӨ HKRОө4dR + D(Оө)HR + ВөR В· 2D(Оө)H +                                           вҹЁWh (f k ), Xh (f s , ПҖ s )вҹ©2       ,
                                      ВөR2
                                                                         k=1 h=1 s=1
                                                                                                           (F.28)
                                 Оө+K

where D(Оө) = 2d log              . Moreover, by (F.26) and (F.27), note that
                                  Оө
                                                       Z
                                                                          (i),ПҖ s
  вҹЁWh (f k ), Xh (f s , ПҖ s )вҹ© = (Оёh,f k вҲ’ ОёhвҲ— )T EПҖs      П•h (sвҖІ | s, a)Vh+1,f s (sвҖІ )ds
                                                        S
                                                                                              (i),ПҖ s
                                      h                                                                      i
                               = EПҖs (Esh+1 вҲјPh,f k (В·|sh ,ah ) вҲ’ Esh+1 вҲјPh,f вҲ— (В·|sh ,ah )[Vh+1,f s (sh+1 )]
                                            (i),ПҖ s
                                      h                                                                   i
                               вүӨ EПҖs 2вҲҘVh+1,f s (В·)вҲҘвҲһ В· dTV (Ph,f k (В· | sh , ah )вҲҘPh,f вҲ— (В· | sh , ah ))
                                      h вҲҡ                                                    i
                               вүӨ EПҖs 2 2RDH (Ph,f k (В· | sh , ah )вҲҘPh,f вҲ— (В· | sh , ah )) .


                                                              38
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Hence, from (F.28) and JensenвҖҷs inequality that (E[X])2 вүӨ E[X 2 ], we can have
            K
                         (i),ПҖ k       (i),ПҖ k
           X          h                             i
Reg(K) вүӨ       Es1 вҲјПҒ V1,f k (s1 ) вҲ’ V1        (s1 )
              k=1
           вүӨ HKRОө4dR2 + D(Оө)HR + ВөR4 В· 2D(Оө)H
                               K X
                                 H X
                                   k
                                                                                                                  !
                    1          X
                                              E(sh ,ah )вҲјПҖs 8R2 DH
                                                                 2

                 +                                                 Ph,f k (В· | sh , ah ), Ph,f вҲ— (В· | sh , ah )     .
                   ВөR2
                               k=1 h=1 s=1

By the definition of discrepancy function в„“(i),s in (2.5), and choosing Оө = 1/HKd, dMADC =
HR4 D(1/HKd) = O(HdR e       4
                               ), we can derive
                                                                                         K kвҲ’1
                                                                                     1 X X (i),s k k
              Reg(K) вүӨ 4R3 + D(1/HKd)HR + ВөdMADC +                                           в„“  (f , ПҖ )
                                                                                     Вө   s=1
                                                                                        k=1
                                                                        K kвҲ’1
                                                                  1     X X
                         вүӨ 6dMADC H + ВөdMADC +                                    в„“(i),s (f k , ПҖ k ).
                                                                  Вө
                                                                        k=1 s=1
Hence, we complete the proof.

F.6    P ROOF OF L EMMA E.1

Proof. The proof is modified from Zhong et al. (2022). Define Wj,h be the filtration induced by
              (i),k                     (i),k
{sk1 , ak1 , r1 , В· В· В· , skH , akH , rH }jвҲ’1  k=1 . First, for h вҲҲ [H], i вҲҲ [n], f вҲҲ F
                                                                                                (i)
                                                                                                    and ПҖ вҲҲ О , we define
the random variable
                                                                                                        2
       (i)                                        (i)
    Yj (h, f, О¶ k ) = fh (sjh , ajh ) вҲ’ rh (sjh , ajh ) вҲ’ вҹЁfh+1 (sjh+1 В·), О¶h+1       k
                                                                                          (В· | sjh+1 )вҹ©
                                                                                                                       2
                                      (i),О¶ k

                                                                  (i)
                             вҲ’ Th             (f )(sjh , ajh ) вҲ’ rh (sjh , ajh ) вҲ’ вҹЁfh+1 (sjh+1 В·), О¶h+1
                                                                                                     k
                                                                                                         (В· | sjh+1 )вҹ© .

By taking conditional expectation of Yj with respect to ajh , sjh , we can get
                         (i)                                                         (i),О¶ k
                    E[Yj (h, f, О¶ k ) | Wj,h ] = Esh ,ah вҲјО¶ j [(fh вҲ’ Th                        (f ))(sh , ah )]2
and
                               (i)                                           (i)
                       E[(Yj (h, f, О¶ k ))2 | Wj,h ] вүӨ 2R2 E[Yj (h, f, О¶ k ) | Wj,h ],
                                      (i)
where 3R вүҘ |fh (sjh , ajh ) вҲ’ rh (sjh , ajh ) вҲ’ вҹЁfh+1 (sjh+1 В·), О¶h+1
                                                                  k
                                                                      (В· | sjh+1 )вҹ©)| is the constant upper
                                (i)                               (i)
bound. Denote Zj = Yj (h, f, О¶ k ) вҲ’ Esh+1 [Yj (h, f, О¶ k ) | Wj,h ] with |Zj | вүӨ 4R2 . By the
                                      1
Freedman inequality, for any 0 < О· < 4R  , with probability at least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ,
                             пЈ«                                                пЈ¶
                 k                k
               X                 X          (i)                      log(1/Оҙ)
                    Zj = O пЈӯО·        Var[Yj (h, f, О¶ k ) | Wj,h ] +           пЈё
               j=1               j=1
                                                                         О·
                             пЈ«                                                 пЈ¶
                                  k
                                 X         (i)                        log(1/Оҙ)
                        вүӨ O пЈӯО·       E[(Yj (h, f, О¶ k ))2 | Wj,h ] +           пЈё
                                 j=1
                                                                           О·
                             пЈ«                                                  пЈ¶
                                  k
                                 X              (i)                    log(1/Оҙ)
                        вүӨ O пЈӯО·       2R2 E[Yj (h, f, О¶ k ) | Wj,h ] +           пЈё.
                                 j=1
                                                                            О·
                      (               вҲҡ                     )
                                1                  log(1/Оҙ)
By choosing О· = min            4R , вҲҡ
                                             qP
                                              k       (i)
                                                                                  , we will have
                                        2R                   k
                                              j=1 E[Yj (h,f,О¶ )|Wj,h ]
                           пЈ« v                                                    пЈ¶
              k              u k
                                     (i)
              X              uX
                    Zj = O пЈӯRt   E[Yj (h, f, О¶ k ) | Wj,h ] log(1/Оҙ) + R2 log(1/Оҙ)пЈё .
              j=1                       j=1



                                                           39
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                                                         Pk
Similarly, if we apply the FreedmanвҖҷs inequality with вҲ’ j=1 Zj , with probability at least 1 вҲ’ 2Оҙ,
                          пЈ« v                                                        пЈ¶
              k               u k
                                        (i)
             X                uX
                 Zj = O пЈӯ R t       E[Yj (h, f, О¶ k ) | Wj,h ] log(1/Оҙ) + R2 log(1/Оҙ)пЈё .
             j=1                                j=1

Denote the ПҒ-covering set of F as CF (i) (ПҒ), then for any f вҲҲ F (i) , О¶ вҲҲ О pur
                                                (i)
                                                                                       i , there exists a pair
fe вҲҲ CF (i) (ПҒ) such that

                        (i)
         fh (sh , ah )вҲ’rh (sh , ah ) вҲ’ вҹЁfh+1 (sh+1 , В·), О¶h+1 (В· | sh+1 )вҹ©

                                            (i)
                        вҲ’ feh (sh , ah ) вҲ’ rh (sh , ah ) вҲ’ вҹЁfeh+1 (sh+1 , В·), О¶h+1 (В· | sh+1 )вҹ© вүӨ 3ПҒ
for all (sh , ah , sh+1 ) вҲҲ S Г— A Г— S. Now by taking a union bound over CF (i) (ПҒ), we have that with
probability at least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ, for all fe вҲҲ CF (i) (ПҒ),
                                        k                               k
                                                   (i)                            (i)
                                        X                               X
                                                Yej (h, fe, О¶) вҲ’              E[Yej (h, fe, О¶) | Wj,h ]
                                        j=1                             j=1
                                        пЈ« v                                     пЈ¶
                                           u k
                                                    (i)
                                           uX
                                    = O пЈӯR t   E[Yej (h, fe, О¶) | Wj,h ]О№ + R2 О№пЈё ,                                        (F.29)
                                                        j=1

where О№ = 2 log(HK|CF (i) (ПҒ)|/Оҙ) вүӨ 2 log(HKNF (i) (ПҒ)).
Now note that for all f вҲҲ F (i) , О¶ вҲҲ О pur
                                       i , we have
     H kвҲ’1
                  (i)
     X X
               Yj (h, f, О¶)
     h=1 j=0
            H kвҲ’1
                                                      (i)
            X X
        =               (fh (sjh , ajh ) вҲ’ rh (sjh , ajh ) вҲ’ вҹЁfh+1 (sjh+1 , В·), О¶h+1 (В· | sjh+1 )вҹ©)2
            h=1 j=0
                        (i),О¶                               (i)
              вҲ’ (Th             (f )(sjh , ajh ) вҲ’ rh (sjh , ajh ) вҲ’ вҹЁfh+1 (sjh+1 , В·), О¶h+1 (В· | sjh+1 )вҹ©)2
            H kвҲ’1
                                                      (i)
            X X
        вүӨ               (fh (sjh , ajh ) вҲ’ rh (sjh , ajh ) вҲ’ вҹЁfh+1 (sjh+1 , В·), О¶h+1 (В· | sjh+1 )вҹ©)2
            h=1 j=0
                                     (i),О¶ k                            (i)
              вҲ’     inf (Th                    (f вҖІ )(sjh , ajh ) вҲ’ rh (sjh , ajh ) вҲ’ вҹЁfh+1 (sjh+1 , В·), О¶h+1 (В· | sjh+1 )вҹ©)2
                        (i)
                  fhвҖІ вҲҲFh

       = L(i),kвҲ’1 (f, О¶, П„ 1:kвҲ’1 ).
Then, by (F.29) we can get
               H kвҲ’1
                                     (i)
               X X
                              E[Yej (h, fe, О¶) | Wj,h ] вүӨ 4L(i),kвҲ’1 (fe, О¶, П„ 1:kвҲ’1 ) + O(HR2 О№).
               h=1 j=0


Now similar to (Jin et al., 2021a), by the definition of ПҒ-covering number, for any k вҲҲ [K], f вҲҲ F (i)
and О¶ вҲҲ О pur
         i ,
         H kвҲ’1
                              (i)
         X X
                    E[Yj (h, f, О¶) | Wj,h ] вүӨ 4L(i),kвҲ’1 (f, О¶, П„ 1:kвҲ’1 ) + O(HR2 О№ + HRkПҒ).
         h=1 j=0

Now since sjh , ajh вҲј О¶ j , we can have
                   kвҲ’1                                kвҲ’1
                                                                  (i)
                   X                                  X
                           j,(i)           k
                          в„“         (f, О¶ ) =                E[Yj (h, f, О¶ k ) | Wj,h ]
                   j=0                                 j=0

                                                 вүӨ 4L(i),kвҲ’1 (f, О¶ k , П„ 1:kвҲ’1 ) + O(HR2 О№ + HRkПҒ).
We complete the proof by choosing ПҒ = 1/K and choose Оөconc = O(HR2 О№+HRkПҒ) = O(HR2 О№).



                                                                         40
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


F.7     P ROOF OF L EMMA E.2

Proof. First, for any f вҲҲ F (i) and ПҖ вҲҲ О pur we define the random variable
          (i)                                          (i)
        Qj (h, f, ПҖ) = (fh (sjh , ajh ) вҲ’ rh (sjh , ajh ) вҲ’ вҹЁfh+1
                                                              вҲ—
                                                                  (sjh+1 , В·), ПҖh+1 (В· | sjh+1 )вҹ©)2
                                                                (i)
                                   вҲ’ (fhвҲ— (sjh , ajh ) вҲ’ rh (sjh , ajh ) вҲ’ вҹЁfh+1
                                                                             вҲ—
                                                                                 (sjh+1 , В·), ПҖh+1 (В· | sjh+1 )вҹ©)2 .
Then, by similar derivations in Lemma E.1, we can get
                      (i)
                 E[Qj (h, f, ПҖ) | Wj,h ] = Esh ,ah вҲјО¶ j [(fh вҲ’ T (i),ПҖ (f вҲ— ))(sh , ah )]2 вүҘ 0,
                                             (i)                                             (i)
                                      E[(Qj (h, f, ПҖ))2 | Wj,h ] вүӨ 2R2 E[Qj (h, f, ПҖ) | Wj,h ].

Then, by FreedmanвҖҷs inequality, with probability at least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ, for all elements in fe вҲҲ CF (i) (ПҒ), we
have
                                   kвҲ’1                           kвҲ’1
                                         e (i) (h, fe, ПҖ) вҲ’                 (i)
                                   X                             X
                                         Q                                e (h, fe, ПҖ) | Wj,h ]
                                                                        E[Q
                                           j                               j
                                   j=0                            j=0
                                 пЈ« v                                             пЈ¶
                                    ukвҲ’1
                                                e (i) (h, fe, ПҖ) | Wj,h ]О№ + R2 О№пЈё ,
                                    uX
                             = O пЈӯR t    Esh+1 [Q j
                                                 j=0

then we can have
                                                 kвҲ’1
                                                       e (i) (h, fe, ПҖ) вүҘ вҲ’O(R2 О№).
                                                 X
                                                       Q j
                                                 j=0

Thus, by the definition of CF (i) (ПҒ), for all f вҲҲ F (i) and ПҖ вҲҲ О pur
                                                                  i , we have

                                             kвҲ’1
                                                       (i)
                                             X
                                         вҲ’          Qj (h, f, ПҖ) вүӨ O(R2 О№ + RkПҒ).
                                             j=0

Thus,
                                  пЈ«                                        пЈ¶
                            H                       kвҲ’1
                                                              (i)
                            X                       X
        L(i),k (f, ПҖ) =           пЈӯвҲ’ inf                     Qj (h, f, ПҖ)пЈё вүӨ O(HR2 О№ + HRkПҒ) = O(HR2 О№).
                                         f вҲҲF (i)
                            h=1                     j=0

Thus, we complete the proof.

F.8     P ROOF OF L EMMA E.3

Proof. For simplicity, we first assume F is a finite class. Given a model f вҲҲ F and h вҲҲ [H], we
                                 j
        j             P      вҲ— (s       |sj ,aj )
define Xh,f = log Ph,f (sjh+1|sjh,ajh) . Thus,
                          h,f     h+1    h   h


                                                                                      H X
                                                                                      X k
                                                                                                    j
                                L(i),k (f вҲ— , П„ 1:k ) вҲ’ L(i),k (f, П„ 1:k ) = вҲ’                     Xh,f .              (F.30)
                                                                                     h=1 j=1

Now we define the filtration Gj as

                                                 Gj = Пғ({s1h , a1h , В· В· В· , sjh , ajh }).
Then, by Lemma G.1 for all f вҲҲ F, with probability at least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ, we have
                k            k
                                     "                          #
               X     j
                            X                  1 j
             вҲ’     Xh,fВҜ вүӨ      log E exp вҲ’ Xh,fВҜ GjвҲ’1 + log(H|F|/Оҙ).
               j=1          j=1
                                               2


                                                                      41
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Now we decompose the first term at the right side as
            "                            #
                      1 j
          E exp вҲ’ Xh,fВҜ GjвҲ’1
                      2
                 пЈ®v                                        пЈ№
                   u log Ph,f (sjh+1 | sjh , ajh )
                   u
             = E пЈ°t                                   GjвҲ’1 пЈ»
                         Ph,f вҲ— (sjh+1 | sjh , ajh )
                                                       пЈ®v                                    пЈ№
                                                         u Ph,f (sjh+1 | sjh , ajh )
                                                         u
             = E(sj ,aj )вҲјПҖj Esh+1 вҲјPh,f вҲ— (В·|sj ,aj ) пЈ°t                               GjвҲ’1 пЈ»
                  h h                             h h
                                                           Ph,f вҲ— (sjh+1 | sjh , ajh )
                               Z q
                                               j       j  j           j         j     j
             = E(sj ,aj )вҲјПҖj          Ph,f (sh+1 | sh , ah )Ph,f вҲ— (sh+1 | sh , ah )dsj
                           h   h                                                                   h+1

                        1                2
                   = 1 вҲ’ E(sj ,aj )вҲјПҖj [DH (Ph,f (sjh+1 | sjh , ajh )вҲҘPh,f вҲ— (sjh+1 | sjh , ajh ))].
                        2 h h
Now by the inequality log x вүӨ x вҲ’ 1, we have
          k              k
          X      j
                         X         1                2         j      j    j            j      j    j
      вҲ’         Xh,f вүӨ          1 вҲ’ E(sj ,aj )вҲјПҖj [DH (Ph,f (sh+1 | sh , ah )вҲҘPh,f вҲ— (sh+1 | sh , ah ))]
          j=1            j=1
                                   2 h h
                          вҲ’ 1 + log(H|F|/Оҙ)
                        k
                       X   1              h                                                           i
                    вүӨвҲ’                      2
                             E(sj ,aj )вҲјПҖj DH (Ph,f (sjh+1 | sjh , ajh )вҲҘPh,f вҲ— (sjh+1 | sjh , ajh ))
                       j=1
                           2 h h
                               + log(H|F|/Оҙ).
Sum over h вҲҲ [H] with (F.30), we can complete the proof by
                                        H X
                                        X k                   k
                                                              X
                                                   j
                                    вҲ’             Xh,f вүӨвҲ’           в„“(i),j (f ) + Оәconc ,
                                        h=1 j=1               j=1

where Оәconc = H log(H|F|/Оҙ). For infinite model classes F, we can use 1/K-bracketing number
BF (1/K) to replace the cardinality |F| (Liu et al., 2022a; Zhong et al., 2022; Zhan et al., 2022b).


F.9   P ROOF OF C OROLLARY E.4

Proof. We provide the proof for NE. The proof for CCE/CE are the same by replacing the NE-
regret to the CCE/CE-regret. By taking the minimum of the index of agents rather than adding them
together, we can modify the proof of Theorem 3.1 and derive, with probability at least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ,
            K
                                                        !
      1 X            (i),Вө(i),ПҖ
                                k
                                           (i),ПҖ k             e HОҘ          d           dMADC H
                                                                    вҲҡ F ,Оҙ + MADC

               max V              (ПҒ) вҲ’ V          (ПҒ)     вүӨO                  вҲҡ       +             .
     K         iвҲҲ[n]                                                   K          K          K
           k=1

                           e (H 2 ОҘ2 + d2                      вҲ’2                вҲ’1
Hence, by choosing K = O               F ,Оҙ       MADC   ) В· Оө    + d MADC H В· Оө      with Оө < 1, we have
                                            (i),ПҖout
                               max V (i),Вө             (ПҒ) вҲ’ V (i),ПҖout (ПҒ)

                               iвҲҲ[n]
                                           K
                                                                                               !
                                     1     X                    (i),ПҖ k               k
                                                  max V (i),Вө             (ПҒ) вҲ’ V (i),ПҖ (ПҒ)

                                   =
                                     K            iвҲҲ[n]
                                           k=1
                                   вүӨ Оө,

where the second inequality holds from ПҖout = Unif({ПҖ k }kвҲҲ[K] ). Hence, ПҖout is a Оө-NE.


                                                             42
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


G    T ECHNICAL T OOLS
We provide the following lemma to complete the proof of model-based RL problems. The detailed
proof can be found in (Foster et al., 2021).
Lemma G.1. For any real-valued random variable sequence {Xk }kвҲҲ[K] adapted to a filtration
{Gk }kвҲҲ[K] , with probability at least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ, for any k вҲҲ [K], we can have
                            k
                            X            k
                                         X
                        вҲ’         Xk вүӨ         log E[exp(вҲ’Xs ) | FsвҲ’1 ] + log(1/Оҙ).
                            s=1          s=1


In the next lemma, we introduce the FreedmanвҖҷs inequality, which has been commonly used in
previous RL algorithms. (Jin et al., 2021b; Chen et al., 2022c; Zhong et al., 2022)
Lemma G.2 (FreedmanвҖҷs Inequality (Agarwal et al., 2014)). Let {Zk }kвҲҲ[K] be a martingale differ-
ence sequence that adapted to filtration {Fk }kвҲҲ[K] . If |Zk | вүӨ R for all k вҲҲ [K], then for О· вҲҲ (0, R1 ),
with probability at least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ, we can have
                           K               K
                                                                            !
                          X                X
                                                   2              log(1/Оҙ)
                              Xk = O О·         E[Xk | FkвҲ’1 ] +                .
                                                                      О·
                            k=1                 k=1


The next elliptical potential lemma is first introduced in the linear bandit literature (Dani et al., 2008;
Abbasi-Yadkori et al., 2011) and then applied to the RL problems with Bilinear Classes (Du et al.,
2021) and the general function approximation (Chen et al., 2022a; Zhong et al., 2022).
Lemma G.3 (Elliptical Potential Lemma). Let {xk }K  k=1Pbe a sequence of real-valued vector, i.e.
                                                         K
xk вҲҲ Rd for any k вҲҲ [K]. Then, if we define Оӣi = ОөI + k=1 xk xTk , we can get that
         K                                                                 K
                                                                                     !
        X       n
                         2
                             o           det(ОӣK+1 )                     1X         T
            min 1, вҲҘxi вҲҘОӣвҲ’1 вүӨ 2 log                    вүӨ 2 log det I +        xk xk .
                           i               det(Оӣ1 )                     Оө
         k=1                                                                          k=1


Proof. The proof is provided in Lemma 11 of (Abbasi-Yadkori et al., 2011).

H    C OMPUTATIONAL E FFICIENCY
Since the normal-form game is defined over the pure policy space, the size of this game can be
exponentially large, which makes the algorithm not computationally efficient. Actually, the compu-
tational complexity of this oracle depends on the type of equilibrium.
For CCE, the oracle can be approximately implemented by mirror descent (Wang et al., 2023),
where the time of calculating V (ПҖ) depends on the number of iterations. Hence, the computa-
tional complexity of this oracle depends only on the number of iterations rather than the pure policy
                                                                                   (t),ПҖ
space |О |pur . To be more specific, by replacing the optimistic value function V i       in Algorithm
4 (DOPMD) of [1] by the regularized payoff function in 3.1, one can get an approximated CCE
by mirror descent using FTRL analysis. The sampling procedure in Line 3 of DOPMD can be im-
plemented by Langevin dynamics (Karagulyan, 2021) as long as we can obtain the gradient of the
regularized payoff function.
However, for Nash Equilibrium, calculating the equilibrium is PPAD-complete. So MAMEX is
computationally inefficient for learning NE.


                                                       43
