Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


L EVERAGING O PTIMIZATION FOR A DAPTIVE
ATTACKS ON I MAGE WATERMARKS
 Nils Lukas, Abdulrahman Diaa∗ , Lucas Fenaux∗ , Florian Kerschbaum
 University of Waterloo, Canada
 {nlukas,abdulrahman.diaa,lucas.fenaux,
 florian.kerschbaum}@uwaterloo.ca



                                                A BSTRACT

             Untrustworthy users can misuse image generators to synthesize high-quality deep-
             fakes and engage in unethical activities. Watermarking deters misuse by marking
             generated content with a hidden message, enabling its detection using a secret wa-
             termarking key. A core security property of watermarking is robustness, which
             states that an attacker can only evade detection by substantially degrading im-
             age quality. Assessing robustness requires designing an adaptive attack for the
             specific watermarking algorithm. When evaluating watermarking algorithms and
             their (adaptive) attacks, it is challenging to determine whether an adaptive attack is
             optimal, i.e., the best possible attack. We solve this problem by defining an objec-
             tive function and then approach adaptive attacks as an optimization problem. The
             core idea of our adaptive attacks is to replicate secret watermarking keys locally
             by creating surrogate keys that are differentiable and can be used to optimize the
             attack’s parameters. We demonstrate for Stable Diffusion models that such an at-
             tacker can break all five surveyed watermarking methods at no visible degradation
             in image quality. Optimizing our attacks is efficient and requires less than 1 GPU
             hour to reduce the detection accuracy to 6.3% or less. Our findings emphasize the
             need for more rigorous robustness testing against adaptive, learnable attackers.


1       I NTRODUCTION

Deepfakes are images synthesized using deep image generators that can be difficult to distinguish
from real images. While deepfakes can serve many beneficial purposes if used ethically, for example,
in medical imaging (Akrout et al., 2023) or education (Peres et al., 2023), they also have the potential
to be misused and erode trust in digital media. Deepfakes have already been used in disinformation
campaigns (Boneh et al., 2019; Barrett et al., 2023) and social engineering attacks (Mirsky & Lee,
2021), highlighting the need for methods that control the misuse of deep image generators.
Watermarking offers a solution to controlling misuse by embedding hidden messages into all gener-
ated images that are later detectable using a secret watermarking key. Images detected as deepfakes
can be flagged by social media platforms or news agencies, which can mitigate potential harm (Grin-
baum & Adomaitis, 2022). Providers of large image generators such as Google have announced the
deployment of their own watermarking methods (Gowal & Kohli, 2023) to enable the detection of
deepfakes and promote the ethical use of their models, which was also declared as one of the main
goals in the US government’s “AI Executive Order” (Federal Register, 2023).
A core security property of watermarking is robustness, which states that an attacker can evade de-
tection only by substantially degrading the image’s quality. While several watermarking methods
have been proposed for image generators (Wen et al., 2023; Zhao et al., 2023; Fernandez et al.,
2023), none of them are certifiably robust (Bansal et al., 2022) and instead, robustness is tested em-
pirically using a limited set of known attacks. Claimed security properties of previous watermarking
methods have been broken by novel attacks (Lukas et al., 2022), and no comprehensive method
exists to validate robustness, which causes difficulty in trusting the deployment of watermarking in
practice. We propose testing the robustness of watermarking by defining robustness using objective
    *
        Equal Contribution


                                                       1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    1.) KeyGen      2.) Iteratively Optimize Attack Parameters             3.) KeyGen      4.) Embed      5.) Generate

                                                                                                    “A teddy bear
                                                           Verify Loss
                            ℰ      𝒟
                                                                                                   in Washington”
    Surrogate                                                                Secret       Embedded
                                                       Quality Loss
      Key τ′                                                                 Key τ         Message
                                                               ∇θ𝒜
                                                                                                     Generator
Attack Preparation θ𝒜                                                     Generation
      8.) Compute p-value       7.) Extract Message               6.) Evasion with Optimized Parameters



                                                                                      𝒟        ℰ
                                Extracted   Extract from
                                                                                          θ𝒜
 Verification                   Message        Image                                                                Evasion

Figure 1: An overview of our adaptive attack pipeline. The attacker prepares their attack by gener-
ating a surrogate key and leveraging optimization to find optimal attack parameters θA (illustrated
here as an encoder E and decoder D) for any message. Then, the attacker generates watermarked
images and applies a modification using their optimized attack to evade detection. The attack is
successful if the verification procedure cannot detect the watermark in high-quality images.


function and approaching adaptive attacks as an optimization problem. Adaptive attacks are specific
to the watermarking algorithm used by the defender but have no access to the secret watermarking
key. Knowledge of the watermarking algorithm enables the attacker to consider a range of surrogate
keys similar to the defender’s key. This also presents a challenge for optimization since the attacker
only has imperfect information about the optimization problem. Adaptive attackers had previously
been shown to break the robustness of watermarking for image classifiers (Lukas et al., 2022), but
attacks had to be handcrafted against each watermarking method. Finding attack parameters through
an optimization process can be challenging when the watermarking method is not easily optimiz-
able, for instance, when it is not differentiable. Our attacks leverage optimization by approximating
watermark verification through a differentiable process. Figure 1 shows that our adaptive attacker
can prepare their attacks before the provider deploys their watermark. We show that adaptive, learn-
able attackers, whose parameters can be optimized efficiently, can evade watermark detection for 1
billion parameter Stable Diffusion models at a negligible degradation in image quality.


2     BACKGROUND

Latent Diffusion Models (LDMs) are state-of-the-art generative models for image synthesis (Rom-
bach et al., 2022). Compared to Diffusion Models (Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015), LDMs operate in
a latent space using fixed, pre-trained autoencoder consisting of an image encoder E and a decoder
D. LDMs use a forward and reverse diffusion process across T steps. In the forward pass, real data
point x0 is encoded into a latent point z0 = E(x0 ) and is progressively corrupted into noise via
Gaussian perturbations. Specifically,
                                    p
                q(zt |zt−1 ) = N zt ; 1 − βt zt−1 , βt I , t ∈ {0, 1, . . . , T − 1},          (1)

where βt is the scheduled variance. In the reverse process, a neural network fθ guides the denoising,
taking zt and time-step t as inputs to predict zt−1 as fθ (xt , t). The model is trained to minimize the
mean squared error between the predicted and actual zt−1 . The outcome is a latent ẑ0 resembling z0
that can be decoded into x̂0 = D(z0 ). Synthesis in LDMs can be conditioned with textual prompts.

2.1     WATERMARKING

Watermarking embeds a hidden signal into a medium, such as images, using a secret watermarking
key that is later extractable using the same secret key. Watermarking can be characterized by the
medium used by the defender to verify the presence of the hidden signal. White-box and black-


                                                              2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


box watermarking methods assume access to the model’s parameters or query access via an API,
respectively, and have been used primarily for Intellectual Property protection (Uchida et al., 2017)1 .
No-box watermarking (Lukas & Kerschbaum, 2023) assumes a more restrictive setting where the
defender only knows the generated content but does not know the query used to generate the image.
This type of watermarking has been used to control misuse by having the ability to detect any image
generated by the provided image generator (Gowal & Kohli, 2023). Given a generator’s parameters
θG , a no-box watermarking method defines the following three procedures.

          • τ ← K EY G EN(θG ): A randomized function to generate a watermarking key τ .
             ∗
          • θG  ← E MBED(θG , τ, m): For a generator θG , a watermarking key τ and a message m,
                               ∗
            return parameters θG of a watermarked generator2 that only generates watermarked images.
          • p ← V ERIFY(x, τ, m): This function (i) extracts a message m′ from x using τ and (ii)
            returns the p-value to reject the null hypothesis that m and m′ match by random chance.

A watermarking method is a set of algorithms that specify (K EY G EN, E MBED, V ERIFY). A wa-
termark is a hidden signal in an image that can be mapped to a message m using a secret key τ .
The key refers to secret random bits of information used in the randomized verification algorithm to
detect a message. Adaptive attackers know the watermarking method but not the key message pair.
Carlini & Wagner (2017) first studied adaptive attacks in the context of adversarial attacks.
In this paper, we denote the similarity between two messages by their L1 -norm difference. We use
more meaningful similarity measures when M allows it, such as the Bit-Error-Rate (BER) when the
messages consist of bits. A watermark is retained in an image if the verification procedure returns
p < 0.01, following Wen et al. (2023). Adi et al. (2018) specify the requirements for trustworthy
watermarking, and we focus on two properties: Effectiveness and robustness. Effectiveness states
that a watermarked generator has a high image quality while retaining the watermark, and robustness
means that a watermark is retained in an image unless the image’s quality is substantially degraded.
We refer to Lukas & Kerschbaum (2023) for security games encoding effectiveness and robustness.

2.2      WATERMARKING FOR I MAGE G ENERATORS

Several works propose no-box watermarking methods to prevent misuse for two types of image gen-
erators: Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) (Goodfellow et al., 2020) and Latent Diffusion
Models (LDMs) (Rombach et al., 2022). We distinguish between post-hoc watermarking meth-
ods that apply an imperceptible modification to an image and semantic watermarks that modify the
output distribution of an image generator and are truly “invisible” (Wen et al., 2023).
For post-hoc watermarking, traditional methods hide messages using the Discrete Wavelet
Transform (DWT) and Discrete Wavelet Transform with Singular Value Decomposition (DWT-
SVD) (Cox et al., 2007) and are currently used for Stable Diffusion. RivaGAN (Zhang et al., 2019)
watermarks by training a deep neural network adversarially to stamp a pattern on an image. Yu
et al. (2020; 2021) propose two methods that modify the generator’s training procedure but require
expensive re-training from scratch. Lukas & Kerschbaum (2023) propose a watermarking method
for GANs that can be embedded into a pre-trained generator. Zhao et al. (2023) propose a general
method to watermark diffusion models (WDM) that uses a method similar to Yu et al. (2020), which
trains an autoencoder to stamp a watermark on all training data before also re-training the generator
from scratch. Fernandez et al. (2023) pre-train an autoencoder to encode hidden messages into the
training data and embed the watermark by fine-tuning the decoder D component of the LDM.
Wen et al. (2023) are the first to propose a semantic watermarking method for LDMs they call Tree-
Rings Watermarks (TRW). The idea is to mark the initial noise xT with a detectable, tree-ring-like
pattern m in the frequency domain before generating an image. During detection, they leverage the
property of LDM’s that the diffusion process is invertible, which allows mapping an image back to
its original noise. The verification extracts a message m′ by spectral analysis and tests whether the
same tree-ring patterns m are retained in the frequency domain of the reconstructed noise.

   1
       Uchida et al. (2017) study watermarking image classifiers. Our categorization is independent of the task.
   2
       Embedding can alter the entire generation process, including adding pre- and post-processors.


                                                         3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Surveyed Watermarking Methods. In this paper, we evaluate the robustness of five watermarking
methods: TRW, WDM, DWT, DWT-SVD, and RivaGAN. DWT, DWT-SVD, and RivaGAN are
default choices when using StabilityAI’s Stable Diffusion repository and WDM and TRW are two
recently proposed methods for Stable Diffusion models. However, WDM requires re-training a
Stable Diffusion model from scratch, which can require 150-1000 GPU days (Dhariwal & Nichol,
2021) and is not replicable with limited resources. For this reason, instead of using the autoencoder
on the input data, we apply their autoencoder as a post-processor after generating images.

3   T HREAT M ODEL

We consider a provider capable of training large image generators who make their generators acces-
sible to many users via a black-box API, such as OpenAI with DALL·E. Users can query the gener-
ator by including a textual prompt that controls the content of the generated image. We consider an
attack by an untrustworthy user who wants to misuse the provided generator without detection.
Provider’s Capabilities and Goals (Model Capabilities) The provider fully controls image gener-
ation, including the ability to post-process generated images. (Watermark Verification) In a no-box
setting, the defender must verify their watermark using a single generated image. The defender
aims for an effective watermark that preserves generator quality while preventing the attacker from
evading detection without significant image quality degradation.
Attacker’s Capabilities. (Model Capabilities) The user has black-box query access to the provider’s
watermarked model and also has white-box access to less capable, open-source surrogate generators,
such as Stable Diffusion on Huggingface. We assume the surrogate model’s image quality is inferior
to the provided model; otherwise, there would be no need to use the watermarked model. Our at-
tacker does not require access to image generators from other providers, but, of course, such access
may imply access to surrogate models as our attack does require. (Data Access) The attacker has un-
restricted access to real-world image and caption data available online, such as LAION-5B (Schuh-
mann et al., 2022). (Resources) Computational resources are limited, preventing the attacker from
training their own image generator from scratch. (Queries) The provider charges the attacker per
image query, limiting the number of queries they can make. The attacker can generate images either
unconditionally or with textual prompts. (Adaptive) The attacker knows the watermarking method
but lacks access to the secret watermarking key τ and chosen message m.
Attacker’s Goal. The attacker wants to use the provided, watermarked generator to synthesize im-
ages (i) without a watermark that (ii) have a high quality. We measure quality using a perceptual
similarity function Q : X × X → R between the generated, watermarked image and a perturbed im-
age after the attacker evades watermark detection. We require that the defender verifies the presence
of a watermark correctly with a p-value of at least p < 0.01, same as Wen et al. (2023).

4   C ONCEPTUAL A PPROACH

As described in Section 2, a watermarking method defines three procedures (KeyGen, Embed,
Verify). The provider generates a secret watermarking key τ ← K EY G EN(θG ) that allows them
to watermark their generator so that all its generated images retain the watermark. To embed a
watermark, the provider chooses a message (we sample a message m ∼ M uniformly at random)
                                             ∗                                                      ∗
and modifies their generator’s parameters θG    ← E MBED(θG , τ, m). Any image generated by θG
                                                           ∗
should retain the watermark. For any x ← G ENERATE(θG ) we call a watermark effective if (i) the
watermark is retained, i.e., V ERIFY(x, τ, m) < 0.01 and (ii) the watermarked images have a high
                                                                        ∗
perceptual quality. The attacker generates images x ← G ENERATE(θG        ) and applies an image-to-
image transformation, A : X → X with parameters θA to evade watermark detection by perturbing
x̂ ← A(x). Finally, the defender verifies the presence of their watermark in x̂, as shown in Figure 1.
Let W (θG , τ ′ , m) = E MBED(θG , τ ′ , m) be the watermarked generator after embedding with key τ ′
and message m and GW = G ENERATE(W (θG , τ ′ , m)) denotes the generation of an image using
the watermarked generator parameters. For any high-quality GW , the attacker’s objective becomes:
                max ′       E         [V ERIFY(A(GW ), τ ′ , m) + Q(A(GW ), GW )]                  (2)
                 θA τ ←K EYGEN(θG )
                       m∈M



                                                  4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


This objective seeks to maximize (i) the expectation of successful watermark evasion over all po-
tential watermarking keys τ ′ and messages m (since the attacker does not know which key-message
pair was chosen) and (ii) the perceptual similarity of the images before and after the attack. Note
that in this paper, we define image quality as the perceptual similarity to the watermarked image
before the attack. There are two obstacles for an attacker to optimize this objective: (1) The attacker
has imperfect information about the optimization problem and must substitute the defender’s image
generator with a less capable, open-source surrogate generator. When K EY G EN depends on θG , then
the distribution of keys differs, and the attack’s effectiveness must transfer to keys generated using
θG . (2) The optimization problem might be hard to approximate, even when perfect information is
available, e.g., when the watermark verification procedure is not differentiable.

4.1   M AKING WATERMARKING K EYS D IFFERENTIABLE

We overcome the two aforementioned limitations by (1) giving the attacker access to a similar (but
less capable) surrogate generator θ̂G , enabling them to generate surrogate watermarking keys, and
(2) by creating a method GK EY G EN(θ̂G ) that creates a surrogate watermarking key θK through
which we can backpropagate gradients. A simple but computationally expensive method of creating
differentiable keys θD is using Algorithm 1 to train a watermark extraction neural network with
parameters θD to predict the message m from an image.

Algorithm 1 GK EY G EN: A Simple Method to Generate Differentiable Keys
Require: Surrogate generator θ̂G , Watermarking method (KeyGen, Embed, Verify), N steps
 1: τ ← K EYGEN(θ̂G )                                                       ▷ The surrogate key
 2: for j ← 1 to N do
 3:     m∼M                                                        ▷ Sample a random message
 4:     θˆG
          ∗ ← E MBED (θ̂ , τ, m)
                        G                                                ▷ Embed the watermark
 5:     x ← G ENERATE(θG )ˆ
                          ∗

 6:     m′ ← E XTRACT(x; θD )
 7:     gθD ← ∇θD ||m − m′ ||1             ▷ Compute gradients using distance between messages
 8:     θD ← θD − Adam(θD , gθD )
 9: return θD                                                               ▷ The surrogate key

Algorithm 1 generates a surrogate key (line 1) to embed a watermark into the surrogate generator
and use it to generate watermarked images (lines 3-5). The attacker extracts the message (line 6) and
updates the parameters of the (differentiable) watermark decoder using an Adam optimizer (Kingma
& Ba, 2014). The attacker subsequently uses the decoder’s parameters θD as inputs to V ERIFY. Our
adaptive attacker must invoke Algorithm 1 only for the non-differentiable watermarks DCT and
DCT-SVD (Cox et al., 2007). The remaining three watermarking methods TRW (Wen et al., 2023),
WDM (Zhao et al., 2023) and RivaGAN (Zhang et al., 2019) do not require invoking GK EY G EN.
In our work, we tune the parameters θD of a ResNet-50 decoder (see Appendix A.3 for details).

4.2   L EVERAGING O PTIMIZATION AGAINST WATERMARKS

Equation (2) requires finding attack parameters θA against any watermarking key τ ′ ←
K EY G EN(θG ), which can be computationally expensive if the attacker has to invocate GK EY G EN
many times. We find empirically that generating many keys is unnecessary, and the attacker can find
effective attacks using only a single surrogate watermarking key θD ← GK EY G EN(θ̂G ).
We propose two learnable attacks A1 , A2 whose parameters θA1 , θA2 can be optimized efficiently.
The first attack, called Adversarial Noising, finds adversarial examples given an image x using the
surrogate key as a reward model. The second attack called Adversarial Compression, first fine-tunes
the parameters of a pre-trained autoencoder in a preparation stage and uses the optimized parameters
during an attack. The availability of a pre-trained autoencoder is a realistic assumption if the attacker
has access to a surrogate Stable Diffusion generator, as the autoencoder is a detachable component
of any Stable Diffusion generator. Access to a surrogate generator implies the availability of a
pre-trained autoencoder at no additional cost in computational resources for the attacker.


                                                   5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 2 Adversarial Noising                       Algorithm 3 Adversarial Compression
Require: surrogate θ̂G , budget ϵ, image x       Require: surrogate θ̂G , strength α, image x
 1: θA ← 0            ▷ adversarial perturbation 1: θA ← [θE , θD ]    ▷ Compressor parameters
 2: θD ← GK EY G EN(θ̂G )                         2: θD ← GK EY G EN(θ̂G )         ▷ surrogate key
 3: m ← E XTRACT(x; θD )                          3: for j ← 1 to N do
 4: for j ← 1 to N do                             4:     m∼M
 5:     m′ ← E XTRACT(x + θA , θD )               5:       ∗
                                                         θ̂G ← E MBED(θ̂G , θD , m)
                               ′
 6:     gθA ← −∇θA ||m − m ||1                    6:     x ← G ENERATE(θˆG   ∗)
 7:     θA ← Pϵ (θA − Adam(θA , gθA ))            7:     x′ ← D(E(x; θA ))          ▷ compression
    return x + θA                                 8:     m′ ← E XTRACT(x′ , θD )
                                                  9:     gθA ← ∇δ (LLPIPS (x′ , x)−α||m−m′ ||1 )
                                                 10:     θA ← θA − Adam(θA , gθA )
                                                     return D(E(x; θA ))


Adversarial Noising. Algorithm 2 shows the pseudocode of our adversarial noising attack. Given
a surrogate generator θ̂G , a budget ϵ ∈ R+ for the maximum allowed noise perturbation, and a
watermarked image x generated using the provider’s watermarked model, the attacker wants to
compute a perturbation within an ϵ-ball of the L∞ norm that evades watermark detection. The
attacker generates a local surrogate watermarking key (line 2) and extracts a message m from x
(line 3). Then, the attacker computes the adversarial perturbation by maximizing the distance to the
initially extracted message m while clipping the perturbation into an ϵ-ball using Pϵ (line 7).
Adversarial Compression. Algorithm 3 shows the pseudocode of our adversarial compression
attack. After generating a surrogate watermarking key (line 2), the attacker generates images con-
taining a random message (lines 4-6) and uses their encoder-decoder pair to compress the images
(line 7). The attacker iteratively updates their model’s parameters by (i) minimizing a quality loss,
which we set to the LPIPS metric (Zhang et al., 2018), and (ii) maximizing the distance between the
extracted and embedded messages (line 9). The output θA of the optimization loop between lines 3
and 10 only needs to be run once, and the weights θA can be re-used in subsequent attacks.
We highlight that the attacker optimizes an approximation of Equation (2) since they only have
access to a surrogate generator θ̂G , but not the provider’s generator θG . This may lead to a general-
ization gap of the attack at inference time. Even if an attacker can find optimal attack parameters θA
that optimizes Equation (2) using θ̂G , the attacker cannot test whether their attack remains effective
when the defender uses a different model θG to generate watermarking keys.


5       E XPERIMENTS

Image Generators. We experiment with Stable Diffusion, an open-source, state-of-the-art latent
diffusion model. The defender deploys a Stable Diffusion-v2.0 model3 trained for 1.4m steps in
total on a subset of LAION-5B (Schuhmann et al., 2022). The attacker uses a less capable Sta-
ble Diffusion-v1.14 checkpoint, trained for 431k steps in total on LAION-2B and LAION-HD. All
experiments were conducted on NVIDIA A100 GPUs.
Images are generated using a DPM solver (Lu et al., 2022) with 20 inference steps and a default
guidance scale of 7.5. We create three different watermarked generators for each surveyed water-
marking method by randomly sampling a watermarking key τ ← K EY G EN(θG ) and a message
m ∼ M, used to embed a watermark. Appendix A.1 contains descriptions of the watermarking
keys. All reported values represent the mean value over three independently generated secret keys.
Quantitative Analysis. Similar to Wen et al. (2023), we report the True Positive Rate when the
False Positive Rate is fixed to 1%, called the TPR@1%FPR. Appendix A.2 describes statistical tests
used in the verification procedure of each watermarking method to derive p-values. We report the
    3
        https://huggingface.co/stabilityai/stable-diffusion-2-base
    4
        https://huggingface.co/CompVis/stable-diffusion-v1-1


                                                  6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                Watermark Accuracy versus Perceptual Distance           No Watermark
                         1.0
                                                                                                        Adaptive Attacks

  Accuracy (TPR@1%FPR)
                         0.8                                                                            Non-Adaptive
                                                                                                        No Attack
                         0.6                                                                            WDM
                         0.4                                                                            TRW
                                                                                                        RivaGAN
                         0.2                                                                            DWT
                                                                                                        DWT-SVD
                         0.0
                               0.0        0.1        0.2             0.3            0.4        0.5           0.6
                                                           Perceptual Distance (LPIPS)

Figure 2: The effectiveness of our attacks against all watermarks. We highlight the Pareto front for
each watermarking method by dashed lines and indicate adaptive/non-adaptive attacks by colors.


Fréchet Inception Distance (FID) (Heusel et al., 2017), which measures the similarity between real
and generated images. Additionally, we report the CLIP score (Radford et al., 2021) that measures
the similarity of a prompt to an image. We generate 1k images to evaluate TPR@1%FPR and 5k
images to evaluate FID and CLIP score on the training dataset of MS-COCO-2017 (Lin et al., 2014).

5.1                      E VALUATING ROBUSTNESS

Figure 2 shows a scatter plot of the effectiveness of our attacks against all surveyed watermarking
methods. We evaluate adaptive and non-adaptive attacks. Similar to Wen et al. (2023), for the non-
adaptive attacks, we use Blurring, JPEG Compression, Cropping, Gaussian noise, Jittering, Quan-
tization, and Rotation but find these attacks to be ineffective at removing the watermark. Figure 2
highlights Pareto optimal attacks for pairs of (i) watermark detection accuracies and (ii) perceptual
distances. We find that only adaptive attacks evade watermark detection and preserve image quality.
Table 1 summarizes the best attacks from Figure 2 when we set the lowest acceptable detection
accuracy to 10%. When multiple attacks achieve a detection accuracy lower than 10%, we pick
the attack with the lowest perceptual distance to the watermarked image. We observe that adver-
sarial compression is an effective attack against all watermarking methods. TRW is also evaded by
adversarial compression, but adversarial noising at ϵ = 2/255 preserves a higher image quality.

                                        TRW            WDM                  DWT           DWT-SVD           RivaGAN
       Best Attack                   Adv. Noising   Compression          Compression      Compression     Compression
       Parameters                     ϵ = 2/255       r=1                  r=1              r=1             r=1
       LPIPS ⇓                          3.2e-2        5.6e-2               7.7e-2           7.5e-2          7.3e-2
       Accuracy ⇓                       5.2%           2.0%                 0.8%             1.9%            6.3%

Table 1: A summary of Pareto optimal attacks with detection accuracies less than 10%. We list
the attack’s name and parameters, the perceptual distance before and after evasion, and the accuracy
(TPR@1%FPR). ϵ is the maximal perturbation in the L∞ norm and r is the number of compressions.


5.2                      I MAGE Q UALITY AFTER AN ATTACK

Figure 3 shows the perceptual quality after using our adaptive attacks. We show a cutout of the
top left image patch with high contrasts on the bottom right to visualize noise artifacts potentially
introduced by our attacks. We observe that, unlike adversarial noising, the compression attack
introduces no new visible artifacts (see also Appendix A.4 for more visualizations).
The FID and CLIP scores of the watermarked images and the images after using adversarial noising
and adversarial compression remain unchanged (see Table 2 in the Appendix). We calculate the
quality using the best attack configuration from Figure 2 when the detection accuracy is less than
10%. Adversarial Noising is ineffective at removing WDM and RivaGAN for ϵ ≤ 10/255.


                                                                     7
       Published as a conference 125
                                 paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                    TRW                   WDM                                          DWT               DWT-SVD                     RivaGAN
                                        Adversarial
                                          Noise
                        No Watermark


                                                              ϵ = 2/255, p = 0.09    ϵ = 8/255, p = 0.13                         ϵ = 6/255, p = 0.18   ϵ = 4/255, p = 0.29      ϵ = 8/255, p = 0.05


                                        Adversarial
                                       Compression
                                                                r = 1, p = 0.69        r = 1, p = 0.79                            r = 1, p = 0.30        r = 1, p = 1.00             r = 3, p = 0.89


       Figure 3: A visual analysis of two adaptive attacks. The left image shows the unwatermarked output,
       including a high-contrast cutout of the top left corner of the image to visualize noise artifacts. On the
       right are images after evasion with adversarial noising (top) and adversarial compression (bottom).

                                        Ablation over the Epsilon Budget for Adversarial Noising                                        Ablation over the Repetitions for Adversarial Compression
                       100                                                                 TRW                                  100                                                               TRW
                                                                                           WDM                                                                                                    WDM
Accuracy (TPR@1%FPR)


                       80                                                                  DWT           Accuracy (TPR@1%FPR)   80                                                                DWT
                                                                                           DWT-SVD                                                                                                DWT-SVD
                       60                                                                  RivaGAN                              60                                                                RivaGAN
                       40                                                                                                       40
                       20                                                                                                       20
                        0                                                                                                        0
                                  1/255 2/255                        6/255                     10/255                           No Optimization                     1                                  3
                                                           Epsilon Budget (L )                                                                            Number of Repetitions(r)

       Figure 4: Ablation studies over (left) the maximum perturbation budget ϵ in L∞ for adversarial
       noising and (right) the number of adversarial compressions against each watermarking method. “No
       Optimizations” means we did not optimize the parameters θA of the attack.


        5.3                            A BLATION S TUDY

       Figure 4 shows ablation studies for our adaptive attacks over the (i) maximum perturbation budget
       and (ii) the number of compressions applied during the attack. TRW and DWT-SVD are highly
       vulnerable to adversarial noising, whereas RivaGAN and WDM are substantially more robust to
       these types of attacks. We believe this is because keys generated by RivaGAN and WDM are suf-
       ficiently randomized, which makes our attack (that uses only a single surrogate key) less effective
       unless the surrogate key uses similar channels as the secret key to hide the watermark. Adversarial
       compression without optimization of the parameters θA is ineffective at evading watermark detec-
       tion against all methods except DWT. After optimization, adversarial compression evades detection
       from all watermarking methods with only a single compression.


        6                        D ISCUSSION & R ELATED W ORK

       Attack Scalability. The presented findings clearly indicate that even with a less capable surrogate
       generator, an adaptive attacker can remove all surveyed watermarks with minimal quality degra-
       dation. Our attackers generate a single surrogate key and are able to evade watermark verification,
       which indicates a design flaw since the key seems to have little impact. If K EY G EN were sufficiently
       randomized, breaking robustness should not be possible using a single key, even if the provided and
       surrogate generators are the same. An interesting question emerging from our study relates to the
       maximum difference between the watermarked and surrogate generators for the attacks to remain
       effective. We used a best-effort approach, by using two public checkpoints with the largest reported
       quality differences: Stable Diffusion v1.1 and v2. More research is needed to study the impact on
       the effectiveness of our attacks (i) using different models (ii) or limiting the attacker’s knowledge of
       the method’s public parameters. Our attacks evaluate the best parameters suggested by the authors.


                                                                                                         8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Types of Learnable Attacks. Measuring the robustness against different types of learnable attacks
is crucial in assessing the trustworthiness of watermarking. We explored (i) Adversarial Exam-
ples, which rely solely on the surrogate key, and (ii) Adversarial Compression, which additionally
requires the availability of a pre-trained autoencoder. We believe this requirement is satisfied in
practice, given that (i) training autoencoders is computationally less demanding than training Stable
Diffusion, and many pre-trained autoencoders have already been made publicly available (Podell
et al., 2023). Although autoencoders enhance an attacker’s ability to modify images, our study did
not extend to other learnable attacks such as inpainting (Rombach et al., 2022) or more potent image
editing methods (Brooks et al., 2023) which could further enhance an attack’s effectiveness.
Enhancing Robustness using Adaptive and Learnable Attacks. Relying on non-adaptive attacks
for evaluating a watermark’s robustness is inadequate as it underestimates the attacker’s capabili-
ties. To claim robustness, the defender could (i) provide a certification of robustness (Bansal et al.,
2022), or (ii) showcase empirically that their watermark withstands strong attacks. The issue is that
we lack strong attackers. Although Lukas et al. (2022) demonstrated that adaptive attackers can
break watermarks for image classifiers, their attacks were handcrafted and did not scale. Instead,
we propose a better method of empirically testing robustness by proposing adaptive learnable at-
tackers that require only the specification of a type of learnable attack, followed by an optimization
procedure to find parameters that minimize an objective function. We believe that any watermarking
method proposed in the future should evaluate robustness using our attacks and expect that future
watermarking methods can enhance their robustness by incorporating our attacks.
Limitations. Our attacks are based on the availability of the watermarking algorithm and an open-
source surrogate generator to replicate keys. While providers like Stable Diffusion openly share their
models, and replicas of OpenAI’s DALL·E models are publicly available (Dayma et al., 2021), not
all providers release information about their models. To the best of our knowledge, Google has not
released their generators (Saharia et al., 2022), but efforts to replicate are ongoing5 . Providers like
Midjourney, who keep their image generation algorithms undisclosed, prevent adaptive attackers
altogether but may be vulnerable to these attacks by anyone to whom this information is released.
Outlook. An adaptive attacker can instantiate more effective versions of their attacks with knowl-
edge of the watermarking method’s algorithmic descriptions (K EY G EN, E MBED, V ERIFY). Our
attacks require no interaction with the provider. Robustness against adaptive attacks extends to
robustness against non-adaptive attacks, which makes studying the former interesting. Adaptive
attacks will remain a useful tool for studying a watermarking method’s robustness, even if the wa-
termarking method is kept secret. Previous works did not consider such attacks, and we show that
future watermarking methods must consider them if they claim robustness empirically.

6.1      R ELATED W ORK

Jiang et al. (2023) propose attacks that use (indirect) access to the secret watermarking key via
access to the provider’s V ERIFY method. Our attacks require no access to the provider’s secret wa-
termarking key, as our attacks optimize over any key message pair (see Equation (2)). These threats
are related since both undermine robustness but are orthogonal due to different threat models. Peng
et al. (2023); Cui et al. (2023) propose black-box watermarking methods that protect the Intellectual
Property of Diffusion Models. We focus on no-box verifiable watermarking methods that control
misuse. Lukas & Kerschbaum (2023); Yu et al. (2020; 2021) propose watermarking methods but
only evaluate GANs. We focus on watermarking methods for pre-trained Stable Diffusion models
with much higher output diversity and image quality (Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021).

7       C ONCLUSION
We propose testing the robustness of watermarking through adaptive, learnable attacks. Our empiri-
cal analysis shows that such attackers can evade watermark detection against all five surveyed image
watermarks. Adversarial noising evades TRW (Wen et al., 2023) with ϵ = 2/255 but needs to add
visible noise to evade the remaining four watermarking methods. Adversarial compression evades
all five watermarking methods using only a single compression. We encourage using these adaptive
attacks to test the robustness of watermarking methods in the future more comprehensively.
    5
        https://github.com/lucidrains/imagen-pytorch


                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


8   E THICS S TATEMENT
The attacks we provide target academic systems, and the engineering efforts to attack real systems
are substantial. We make it harder by not releasing our code publicly. We will, however, release
our code, including pre-trained checkpoints, upon carefully considering each request. Currently,
there are no known security impacts of our attacks since users cannot yet rely on the provider’s use
of watermarking. The use of watermarking is experimental and occurs at the provider’s own risk,
and our research aims to improve the trustworthiness of image watermarking by evaluating it more
comprehensively.

R EFERENCES
Yossi Adi, Carsten Baum, Moustapha Cisse, Benny Pinkas, and Joseph Keshet. Turning your weak-
  ness into a strength: Watermarking deep neural networks by backdooring. In 27th USENIX Secu-
  rity Symposium (USENIX Security 18), pp. 1615–1631, 2018.
Mohamed Akrout, Bálint Gyepesi, Péter Holló, Adrienn Poór, Blága Kincső, Stephen Solis, Katrina
 Cirone, Jeremy Kawahara, Dekker Slade, Latif Abid, et al. Diffusion-based data augmentation
 for skin disease classification: Impact across original medical datasets to fully synthetic images.
 arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.04802, 2023.
Arpit Bansal, Ping-yeh Chiang, Michael J Curry, Rajiv Jain, Curtis Wigington, Varun Manjunatha,
  John P Dickerson, and Tom Goldstein. Certified neural network watermarks with randomized
  smoothing. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 1450–1465. PMLR, 2022.
Clark Barrett, Brad Boyd, Ellie Burzstein, Nicholas Carlini, Brad Chen, Jihye Choi, Amrita Roy
  Chowdhury, Mihai Christodorescu, Anupam Datta, Soheil Feizi, et al. Identifying and mitigating
  the security risks of generative ai. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.14840, 2023.
Dan Boneh, Andrew J Grotto, Patrick McDaniel, and Nicolas Papernot. How relevant is the turing
  test in the age of sophisbots? IEEE Security & Privacy, 17(6):64–71, 2019.
Tim Brooks, Aleksander Holynski, and Alexei A Efros. Instructpix2pix: Learning to follow image
  editing instructions. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition, pp. 18392–18402, 2023.
Nicholas Carlini and David Wagner. Adversarial examples are not easily detected: Bypassing ten de-
  tection methods. In Proceedings of the 10th ACM workshop on artificial intelligence and security,
  pp. 3–14, 2017.
Ingemar Cox, Matthew Miller, Jeffrey Bloom, Jessica Fridrich, and Ton Kalker. Digital watermark-
  ing and steganography. Morgan kaufmann, 2007.
Yingqian Cui, Jie Ren, Han Xu, Pengfei He, Hui Liu, Lichao Sun, and Jiliang Tang. Diffusion-
  shield: A watermark for copyright protection against generative diffusion models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2306.04642, 2023.
Boris Dayma, Suraj Patil, Pedro Cuenca, Khalid Saifullah, Tanishq Abraham, Phúc Le Khac,
  Luke Melas, and Ritobrata Ghosh. Dall e mini, 7 2021. URL https://github.com/
  borisdayma/dalle-mini.
Prafulla Dhariwal and Alexander Nichol. Diffusion models beat gans on image synthesis. Advances
  in neural information processing systems, 34:8780–8794, 2021.
Federal Register. Safe, secure, and trustworthy development and use of artificial intelligence.
  https://www.federalregister.gov/documents/2023/11/01/2023-24283/
  safe-secure-and-trustworthy-development-and-use-of-artificial-
  intelligence, 2023. Accessed 4 Nov. 2023.
Pierre Fernandez, Guillaume Couairon, Hervé Jégou, Matthijs Douze, and Teddy Furon. The stable
  signature: Rooting watermarks in latent diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.15435,
  2023.


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Ian Goodfellow, Jean Pouget-Abadie, Mehdi Mirza, Bing Xu, David Warde-Farley, Sherjil Ozair,
  Aaron Courville, and Yoshua Bengio. Generative adversarial networks. Communications of the
  ACM, 63(11):139–144, 2020.
Sven Gowal and Pushmeet Kohli. Identifying ai-generated images with synthid, 2023. URL
  https://www.deepmind.com/blog/identifying-ai-generated-images-
  with-synthid. Accessed: 2023-09-23.
Alexei Grinbaum and Laurynas Adomaitis. The ethical need for watermarks in machine-generated
  language. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.03118, 2022.
Martin Heusel, Hubert Ramsauer, Thomas Unterthiner, Bernhard Nessler, and Sepp Hochreiter.
 Gans trained by a two time-scale update rule converge to a local nash equilibrium. Advances in
 neural information processing systems, 30, 2017.
Zhengyuan Jiang, Jinghuai Zhang, and Neil Zhenqiang Gong. Evading watermark based detection
  of ai-generated content. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.03807, 2023.
Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1412.6980, 2014.
Tsung-Yi Lin, Michael Maire, Serge Belongie, James Hays, Pietro Perona, Deva Ramanan, Piotr
  Dollár, and C Lawrence Zitnick. Microsoft coco: Common objects in context. In Computer
  Vision–ECCV 2014: 13th European Conference, Zurich, Switzerland, September 6-12, 2014,
  Proceedings, Part V 13, pp. 740–755. Springer, 2014.
Cheng Lu, Yuhao Zhou, Fan Bao, Jianfei Chen, Chongxuan Li, and Jun Zhu. Dpm-solver++: Fast
  solver for guided sampling of diffusion probabilistic models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.01095,
  2022.
Nils Lukas and Florian Kerschbaum. Ptw: Pivotal tuning watermarking for pre-trained image gen-
  erators. 32nd USENIX Security Symposium, 2023.
Nils Lukas, Edward Jiang, Xinda Li, and Florian Kerschbaum. Sok: How robust is image classifi-
  cation deep neural network watermarking? In 2022 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy
  (SP), pp. 787–804. IEEE, 2022.
Yisroel Mirsky and Wenke Lee. The creation and detection of deepfakes: A survey. ACM Computing
  Surveys (CSUR), 54(1):1–41, 2021.
Sen Peng, Yufei Chen, Cong Wang, and Xiaohua Jia. Protecting the intellectual property of diffusion
  models by the watermark diffusion process. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.03436, 2023.
Renana Peres, Martin Schreier, David Schweidel, and Alina Sorescu. On chatgpt and beyond: How
  generative artificial intelligence may affect research, teaching, and practice. International Journal
  of Research in Marketing, 2023.
Dustin Podell, Zion English, Kyle Lacey, Andreas Blattmann, Tim Dockhorn, Jonas Müller, Joe
  Penna, and Robin Rombach. Sdxl: improving latent diffusion models for high-resolution image
  synthesis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.01952, 2023.
Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual
  models from natural language supervision. In International conference on machine learning, pp.
  8748–8763. PMLR, 2021.
Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer. High-
  resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF confer-
  ence on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 10684–10695, 2022.
Chitwan Saharia, William Chan, Saurabh Saxena, Lala Li, Jay Whang, Emily L Denton, Kamyar
  Ghasemipour, Raphael Gontijo Lopes, Burcu Karagol Ayan, Tim Salimans, et al. Photorealistic
  text-to-image diffusion models with deep language understanding. Advances in Neural Informa-
  tion Processing Systems, 35:36479–36494, 2022.


                                                  11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Christoph Schuhmann, Romain Beaumont, Richard Vencu, Cade Gordon, Ross Wightman, Mehdi
  Cherti, Theo Coombes, Aarush Katta, Clayton Mullis, Mitchell Wortsman, et al. Laion-5b: An
  open large-scale dataset for training next generation image-text models. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 35:25278–25294, 2022.
Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Eric Weiss, Niru Maheswaranathan, and Surya Ganguli. Deep unsupervised
  learning using nonequilibrium thermodynamics. In International conference on machine learn-
  ing, pp. 2256–2265. PMLR, 2015.
Yusuke Uchida, Yuki Nagai, Shigeyuki Sakazawa, and Shin’ichi Satoh. Embedding watermarks
  into deep neural networks. In Proceedings of the 2017 ACM on international conference on
  multimedia retrieval, pp. 269–277, 2017.
Yuxin Wen, John Kirchenbauer, Jonas Geiping, and Tom Goldstein. Tree-ring watermarks: Fin-
  gerprints for diffusion images that are invisible and robust. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.20030,
  2023.
Ning Yu, Vladislav Skripniuk, Dingfan Chen, Larry Davis, and Mario Fritz. Responsible disclosure
  of generative models using scalable fingerprinting. arXiv preprint arXiv:2012.08726, 2020.
Ning Yu, Vladislav Skripniuk, Sahar Abdelnabi, and Mario Fritz. Artificial fingerprinting for gen-
  erative models: Rooting deepfake attribution in training data. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
  International conference on computer vision, pp. 14448–14457, 2021.
Kevin Alex Zhang, Lei Xu, Alfredo Cuesta-Infante, and Kalyan Veeramachaneni. Robust invisible
  video watermarking with attention. arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.01285, 2019.
Richard Zhang, Phillip Isola, Alexei A Efros, Eli Shechtman, and Oliver Wang. The unreasonable
  effectiveness of deep features as a perceptual metric. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on
  computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 586–595, 2018.
Yunqing Zhao, Tianyu Pang, Chao Du, Xiao Yang, Ngai-Man Cheung, and Min Lin. A recipe for
  watermarking diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.10137, 2023.


A        A PPENDIX

A.1      PARAMETERS FOR WATERMARKING M ETHODS

Tree Ring Watermark (TRW) (Wen et al., 2023): We evaluate the Tree-RingRings method, which
the authors state “delivers the best average performance while offering the model owner the flexibil-
ity of multiple different random keys”. Using the author’s implementation6 , we generate and verify
watermarks using 20 inference steps, where we use no knowledge of the prompt during verification
and keep the remaining default parameters chosen by the authors.
Watermark Diffusion Model (WDM) (Zhao et al., 2023): As stated in the paper, instead of stamp-
ing the model’s training data to embed a watermark, we apply the pre-trained encoder to a generated
image as a post-processing step. We choose messages with n = 40 bits and use the encoder archi-
tecture proposed by (Yu et al., 2021), followed by a ResNet-50 decoder. Each call to K EY G EN(θ̂G ),
where θ̂G is the surrogate generator, trains a new autoencoder from scratch.
DWT, DWT-SVD (Cox et al., 2007) and RivaGAN (Zhang et al., 2019). We use 32-bit messages
and keep the default parameters set in the implementation used by the Stable Diffusion models7 .

A.2      S TATISTICAL T ESTS

Matching Bits. WDM (Zhao et al., 2023), DWT, DWT-SVD (Cox et al., 2007) and Riva-
GAN (Zhang et al., 2019) encode messages m ∈ M by bits and our goal is to verify whether
    6
        https://github.com/YuxinWenRick/tree-ring-watermark
    7
        https://github.com/ShieldMnt/invisible-watermark


                                                 12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


message m ∈ M is present in x ∈ X using key τ . We extract m′ from x and want to reject the
following null hypothesis.
                             H0 : m and m′ match by random chance.
For a given pair of bit-strings of length n, if we denote the number of matching bits as k, the
expected number of matches by random chance follows a binomial distribution with parameters n
and expected value 0.5. The p-value for observing at least k matches is given by:
                                    p = 1 − CDF(k − 1; n, 0.5)                                     (3)
Where CDF represents the cumulative distribution function of the binomial distribution.
Matching Latents. TRW (Wen et al., 2023) leverages the forward diffusion process of the diffusion
model to reverse an image x to its initial noise representation xT . This transformation is represented
by m′ = F(xT ), where F denotes a Fourier transform. The authors find that reversed real images
and their representations in the Fourier domain are expected to follow a Gaussian distribution. The
watermark verification process aims to reject the following null hypothesis:
                                                                           2
                     H0 : y originates from a Gaussian distribution N (0, σIC )

Here, y is a subset of m′ based on a watermarking mask chosen by the provider, which determines
the relevant coefficients. The test statistic, η, denotes the normalized sum-of-squares difference
between the original embedded message m and the extracted message m′ , which can be complex-
valued due to the Fourier transform. Specifically,
                                             1 X
                                      η= 2          |mi − m′i |2                               (4)
                                            σ i

And,

                               p = Pr χ2|M |,λ ≤ η | H0 = Φχ2 (η)                                  (5)

Where Φχ2 represents the cumulative distribution function of the noncentral χ2 distribution. We
refer to Wen et al. (2023) for more detailed descriptions of these statistical tests.

A.3    D ETAILS ON GK EY G EN

This section provides more details on Algorithm 1. V ERIFY consists of a sub-procedure E XTRACT,
which maps an image to a message using the secret key, as stated in Section 2.1. The space of
messages is specific to the watermarking method. We consider two message spaces M: multi-
bit messages and messages in the Fourier space. All surveyed methods except TRW are multi-bit
watermarks, for which we use the categorical cross-entropy to measure similarity, and for TRW, we
use the mean absolute error as a similarity measure between messages (line 7 of Algorithm 1).
As stated in the main paper, we instantiate GK EY G EN only for the DWT and DWT-SVD watermark-
ing methods. We train a ResNet-50 decoder θD in Algorithm 1 to predict a bit vector of the same
length as the message and calculate gradients during training using the cross-entropy loss. Attack-
ing TRW, WDM, and RivaGAN only requires invoking K EY G EN, as the keys are the parameters of
(differentiable) decoders. We train these keys from scratch for WDM and RivaGAN. For TRW, the
key generation does not require any training, as the key only specifies elements in the Fourier space
that encode the message. The forward diffusion process used in V ERIFY is already differentiable.

A.4    Q UALITATIVE A NALYSIS OF WATERMARKING T ECHNIQUES

We refer to Figure 5 for examples of non-watermarked, watermarked, and attacked images using the
attacks summarized in Table 1. We show three images for each of the five surveyed watermarking
methods: an image without a watermark, one with a watermark, and the watermarked image after
an evasion attack. We show the prompt that was used to generate these images and label each
image with the p-value with which the expected message was detected in the image using the secret
watermarking key and the V ERIFY procedure.


                                                  13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.5   Q UALITY E VALUATION

Table 2 shows the FID and CLIPScore of all five surveyed watermarking methods without a water-
mark (first row), with a watermark (second row), after our adaptive noising attack (third row) and
after our adversarial compression attack (fourth row). All results are reported as the mean value
over three independent runs using three different secret watermarking keys. We observe that the
degradation in FID and CLIPScores is statistically insignificant, as seen in Figure 5.

                  TRW              WDM                DWT           DWT-SVD           RivaGAN
              FID      CLIP     FID     CLIP      FID     CLIP     FID     CLIP      FID     CLIP
  No WM       23.32   31.76    23.48    31.77    23.48   31.77    23.48    31.77    23.48    31.77
  WM          24.19   31.78    23.43    31.72    23.16   32.11    23.10    32.15    22.96    31.84
  A-Noise     23.67   32.15     N/A      N/A     23.55   32.46    22.89    32.50     N/A      N/A
  A-Comp      24.36   31.87    23.27    32.01    23.16   32.17    23.06    31.92    23.25    31.86

Table 2: Quality metrics before and after watermark evasion. FID⇓ represents the Fréchet Inception
Distance, and CLIP⇑ represents the CLIP score, computed on 5k images from MS-COCO-2017.
N/A means the attack could not evade watermark detection, and we do not report quality measures.


A.6   ATTACK E FFICIENCY

From a computational perspective, generating a surrogate watermarking key with methods such as
RivaGAN or WDM is the most expensive operation, as it requires training a watermark encoder-
decoder pair from scratch. Generating a key for these two methods takes around 4 GPU hours
each on a single A100 GPU, which is still negligible considering the total training time of the
diffusion model, which takes approximately 150-1000 GPU days (Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021). The
optimization of Adversarial noising takes less than 1 second per sample, and tuning the adversarial
compressor’s parameters takes less than 10 minutes on a single A100 GPU.

A.7   D OUBLE -TAIL D ETECTION

Jiang et al. (2023) propose a more robust statistical test that uses two-tailed detection for multi-
bit messages. The idea is to test for the presence of a watermark with message m or message
1 − m (all bits flipped). We implemented the double-tail detection described by Jiang et al. (2023)
and adjusted the statistical test in V ERIFY to use double-tail detection on the same images used in
Figure 4. Table 3 summarizes the resulting TPR@1%FPR with single or double-tail detection. Since
TRW (Wen et al., 2023) is not a multi-bit watermarking method, we omit its results.

Attack Method                 WDM               DWT               DWT-SVD           RivaGAN
Adv. Noising (ε = 1/255)      100% / 100%       78.8% / 75.9%     100% / 100%       100% / 100%
Adv. Noising (ε = 2/255)      99.9% / 99.0%     79.1% / 75.0%     99.5% / 99.0%     99.9% / 99.9%
Adv. Noising (ε = 6/255)      68.0% / 68.7%     50.2% / 49.5%     0.0% / 23.3%      96.3% / 96.6%
Adv. Noising (ε = 10/255)     29.9% / 36.9%     0.0% / 57.3%      0.0% / 11.8%      67.0% / 63.3%
Adv. Compression              2.0% / 1.8%       0.8% / 0.5%       1.9% / 2.5%       6.3% / 5.7%

Table 3: Summary of TPR@1%FPR using single-tail (left) and double-tail detection (right). We
mark attacks bold if their TPR@1%FPR is less than 10%.

Table 3 shows that double-tail detection increases the robustness of DWT and DWT-SVD against
adversarial noising, which is the same effect that Jiang et al. (2023) find in their paper. We find
that Adversarial Compression remains effective against all attacks in the presence of double-tail
detection. Figure 4 shows that adversarial noising is highly effective against TRW but is ineffective
against the remaining methods because an attacker has to add visible noise (see Figure 3). An
attacker would always use the Adversarial Compression attack in a real-world attack.


                                                 14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                       No Watermark                    Watermarked                      Attacked

                                TRW: “Cars are parked on the street near an old building”


                       P-value = 0.28               P-value = 1.77e-09                P-value = 0.52

                                        WDM: “A bench at the beach next to the sea”


                       P-value = 0.13                P-value = 3.73-11                P-value = 0.08

                           DWT: “A blue train on some train tracks about to go under a bridge”


                       P-value = 0.30                P-value = 2.33-10                P-value = 0.57

                                DWT-SVD: “A white horse standing on top of a dirt field.”


                       P-value = 0.30                P-value = 2.33-10                P-value = 0.05

                  RivaGAN: “Donuts with frosting and glazed toppings sit on table next to coﬀee maker”


                       P-value = 0.30                P-value = 2.33-10                P-value = 0.43


Figure 5: Qualitative showcase of three kinds of images: non-watermarked, watermarked with men-
tioned technique, and attacked images with the strongest attack from Table 1. The p-values and text
prompts are also provided.


                                                          15
