Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


e
G EN S IM : G ENERATING ROBOTIC S IMULATION TASKS
VIA L ARGE L ANGUAGE M ODELS

    Lirui Wang1 , Yiyang Ling2,3* , Zhecheng Yuan4* , Mohit Shridhar5 , Chen Bao6 , Yuzhe Qin2 ,
    Bailin Wang1 , Huazhe Xu4 , Xiaolong Wang2
    1
      MIT CSAIL, 2 UC San Diego, 3 Shanghai Jiao Tong University,
    4
      Tsinghua University, 5 University of Washington, 6 CMU
    https://liruiw.github.io/gensim



                                              A BSTRACT

           Collecting large amounts of real-world interaction data to train general robotic
           policies is often prohibitively expensive, thus motivating the use of simulation data.
           However, existing methods for data generation have generally focused on scene-
           level diversity (e.g., object instances and poses) rather than task-level diversity,
           due to the human effort required to come up with and verify novel tasks. This
           has made it challenging for policies trained on simulation data to demonstrate
           significant task-level generalization. In this paper, we propose to automatically
           generate rich simulation environments and expert demonstrations by exploiting
           a large language models’ (LLM) grounding and coding ability. Our approach,
           dubbed G EN S IM, has two modes: goal-directed generation, wherein a target task is
           given to the LLM and the LLM proposes a task curriculum to solve the target task,
           and exploratory generation, wherein the LLM bootstraps from previous tasks and
           iteratively proposes novel tasks that would be helpful in solving more complex tasks.
           We use GPT4 to expand the existing benchmark by ten times to over 100 tasks,
           on which we conduct supervised finetuning and evaluate several LLMs including
           finetuned GPTs and Code Llama on code generation for robotic simulation tasks.
           Furthermore, we observe that LLMs-generated simulation programs can enhance
           task-level generalization significantly when used for multitask policy training.
           We further find that with minimal sim-to-real adaptation, the multitask policies
           pretrained on GPT4-generated simulation tasks exhibit stronger transfer to unseen
           long-horizon tasks in the real world and outperform baselines by 25%. 1

1      I NTRODUCTION
Achieving general-purpose robotic policies necessitates significant amounts of data, which is labor-
intensive to collect in the real world. Although simulation provides an economical solution for
generating diverse amounts of data at the scene level and instance level (Akkaya et al., 2019; Kauf-
mann et al., 2023; Fang et al., 2022; Deitke et al., 2022), increasing task-level diversity in simulation
remains challenging due to the significant human effort required, especially for complex tasks. For
example, creating new tasks involves specifying new asset relationships and task progression, as
well as ensuring achievability and transferability to other contexts such as the real world. Due to the
challenges, typical human-curated simulation benchmarks usually have only tens to hundreds of tasks
(Zeng et al., 2021; Yu et al., 2020; James et al., 2020).
Recent years have witnessed significant progress in Large Language Models (LLMs) (OpenAI,
2023; Bubeck et al., 2023; Anil et al., 2023) in natural language processing and further in code
generation (Chen et al., 2021; Rozière et al., 2023) for various tasks. In robotics, LLMs have been
applied in multiple aspects, ranging from user interface (Ahn et al., 2022; Shridhar et al., 2022;
Lynch et al., 2023; Driess et al., 2023), to task and motion planning (Lin et al., 2023; Huang et al.,
2022), summarizing robot logs (Liu et al., 2023), and cost and reward designs (Yu et al., 2023b; Ha
et al., 2023), revealing impressive capabilities on physical grounding and code generation. In this
work, we take a step further to investigate whether LLMs can be used to create diverse simulation
tasks, tapping further into these capabilities. Our LLM-based framework, GenSim, provides an


                                                     1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 1: Task gallery of over 100 tasks generated by GPT4. GenSim leverages a LLM code
generation pipeline to scale up simulation tasks for policy training and task-level generalization.

automatic mechanism to design and validate task asset arrangement and task progression. More
importantly, the generated tasks exhibit great diversity, fostering task-level generalization of robotic
policies. Conceptually in GenSim, the reasoning and coding capabilities of LLMs are distilled into
lingo-visuo-action policies via the intermediately synthesized simulation data.
The framework is structured around three components: (1) prompting mechanisms that propose new
tasks in natural language instruction and their corresponding implementations in code; this provides
an automatic mechanism to design and validate task asset arrangement and task progression. (2) a
task library that caches previously generated high-quality instruction code for validation and language
model finetuning, returned as a comprehensive task dataset. (3) a language-conditioned multi-task
policy training procedure that leverages the generated data to enhance task-level generalization. The
framework operates in two distinct modes. In the goal-directed setting, where the user has a specific
task or desires to design a task curriculum, the framework adopts a “top-down” approach. It takes the
desired task as input and iteratively generates related tasks to attain the targeted objective. Conversely,
in the exploratory setting, where no prior knowledge of the target task is available, the framework
gradually explores beyond existing tasks and aims to establish a task-agnostic foundational policy.
By initializing the task library with 10 human-curated tasks (Shridhar et al., 2022) , we use GenSim to
scale it up and generate over 100 tasks (Figure 1). We propose several tailored metrics to progressively
measure the quality of generated simulation tasks, and evaluate several LLMs in both goal-directed
and exploratory settings. Based on the generated task library from GPT4, we conduct supervised
finetuning on, including GPT3.5 and Code-Llama to further improve task generation performance of
LLMs. Additionally, we quantitatively measure task achievability by policy training, and present task
statistics across different properties, and code comparisons among different models.
Importantly, we have trained multitask robotic policies that generalize well on the generated tasks
altogether and improve zero-shot generalization performance compared to models that train on only
human-curated tasks. Furthermore, we also show that training jointly with GPT4-generated tasks
can improve the generalization performance by 50% and have around 40% zero-shot transfer to new
tasks in simulation. Finally, we consider sim-to-real transfer and show that pretraining on diverse
simulation tasks achieves better real-world generalization capabilities by 25%. Overall, policies that
trained on diverse LLM-generated tasks have better task-level generalization to new tasks, which
indicates the potential of training foundational policies by scaling simulation tasks with LLM. The
contributions of this work can be summarized as follows:

       • We propose a novel simulation task generation pipeline through LLMs to generate over 100
         tasks. We observe that LLMs are capable of generating high-quality, achievable, and diverse
         tasks by bootstrapping from existing human-curated tasks.
       • We benchmark state-of-the-art LLM models such as GPTs and Code-Llama on simulated
         manipulation task creations. We find that prompting and finetuning based on the task library
         can significantly improve the capability of LLMs generating higher quality tasks.

   1
     See our project website (https://liruiw.github.io/gensim), demo (https://huggingface.co/spaces/Gen-Sim/Gen-
Sim), and code (https://github.com/liruiw/GenSim) for more details.


                                                       2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                       Distillation / Retrieval                                           Reflection

Can you generate                                                                                           Task Library
the task “build-car”?                      …



                                                   …                                            construct-       color-ordered-
                                                                                                                                  Task-Level Generalization
                                                                                               corner-blocks        insertion
                                                                                  Simulation
                                                                                                         …
                                       Program
                                       Synthesis                                    Engine
                        Task Creator

Can you generate a new task that is                                                            ball-on-box-in-    pyramid-on-
different from the existing ones?                                                                container           pallet

                                                                                                                                   Sim-to-Real Adaptation


Figure 2: GenSim is an LLM framework to scale up simulation task diversity for robotic policy
training. We investigate goal-directed mode (top prompt) and exploratory mode (bottom prompt) that
generates robotic simulation task codes. The generated task codes are cached in a task library which
can be used for policy training to achieve better task-level generalization and sim-to-real adaptations.


         • We illustrate the effectiveness of the GPT4-generated tasks for language-conditioned visuo-
           motor policies by improving in-domain generalization by over 50% as well as zero-shot
           generalization to unseen tasks and instructions in both simulation and the real world.


2     AUTOMATED TASK G ENERATION FOR P OLICY L EARNING
We present GenSim (Figure 2), an LLM framework to generate simulation environments, tasks, and
demonstrations through program synthesis. The GenSim pipeline starts with a task creator (Sec.
2.1) with a prompt chain operating in two modes, namely goal-directed mode and exploratory mode,
depending on the knowledge of the target task. As a memory component, the task library (Sec. 2.2)
is used to store previously generated high-quality tasks. Finally, the stored tasks from the library can
be used for multitask policy training (Sec. 2.3) or finetuning LLMs for better task generation.

2.1     TASK C REATOR

The goal of the task creator is to propose novel task descriptions and corresponding code implementa-
tions, which can be further broken down into scene generations and demonstration generations. In
particular, we use the Ravens benchmark (Zeng et al., 2021; Shridhar et al., 2022) which focuses on
motion primitives such as pushing and pick-and-place that can be parameterized by two end-effector
poses at each timestep. From the example in Figure 3, the reset function in the simulation environment
code, efficiently initializes the assets and their attributes and poses, as well as the spatial and language
goals that parameterize the action in each step2 . In the exploratory task generation setting, the
pipeline is prompted to generate a novel task that is sufficiently different from the existing tasks. In
the goal-directed setting, the pipeline aims to fill in the task descriptions and implementations of a
specified task name. The exploratory approach requires creativity and reasoning capability to come
up with new tasks while goal-directed approach focuses on simulation coding as a specific task.
In both settings (Figure 3), the language chain first generates a task description and associated
implementations afterward. The task description includes the task name, assets, and task summary.
We adopt few-shot prompting for code generation in the pipeline. LLM is prompted to retrieve
reference tasks and codes from existing tasks in the task library introduced in the next section. This
process is critical for LLM to know exactly how to implement a task class (such as the procedure of
sampling asset URDFs and building scene first, and then adding a spatial goal and language goals). In
contrast to other LLM coding tasks, there are various feedback forms in robotic simulations including
the execution pipeline, simulators, policy training, and humans. See Appendix §D for more details
on the prompts and generated example code.

2.2     TASK L IBRARY

In the GenSim framework, we leverage an external memory, dubbed task library, to retrieve the
generated tasks by the task creator to come up with better new tasks and to train multitask policies.
   2
     Note that in this work, a task is defined by its code (and the associated language template) rather than a
specific scene configuration, object relations, or demonstration trajectory.


                                                                       3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024

       Task Generation                       Code Example                                                                    Code Feedback
                                                                                                   Syntax
   Task Description                                                                                                       Code does not compile
                                                                                                   Runtime                  No such urdf named
                                                                        Initialize task                                   ‘platform/platform.urdf’
                                                                                                   Environment        Timeout exceeds. Environment
                                                                                                                      success rates is lower than 50%

       Task Library                                                                             Reflection
                                                                                                                     The task already exists in the task
                                                                Sample asset, pose, color          Self-Reflection
                                                                                                                     memory / Task implementation is
                                                                                                                       not aligned with descriptions


                                                                                                Validation
        Task Code                                                                                  Policy Training   Single-task policy training success
                                                                    Goals and instructions                                 rates is lower than 5%

                                                                                                 Human Inspection
                                                                                                                      The task looks not matching the
                                                                                                                           language instructions

      Code Execution                                                                                                                       Data


Figure 3: Our automatic simulation task generation pipeline (top left) generates a task code that can
be used to generate scenes, simulations, and expert demonstrations for imitation learning. In addition
to common execution-based feedback in LLM program synthesis tasks, the LLM critic and the task
library provide task quality feedback. Finally, humans and single-policy training can provide the final
on the expert and learner rollouts without any extensive coding experience (Appendix D.6).
                                                composition                                                      extrapolation


  stack-block-pyramid    palletizing-boxes      pyramid-on-pallet                                                     build-bridge                      build-car
                                                                                      construct-corner-block


   place-block-in-bowl   block-insertion      color-ordered-insertion               ball-on-box-in-container           build-two-circles             four-corner-pyramid



Figure 4: GenSim demonstrates interesting task-level composition and extrapolation behaviors in
code generation for simulation tasks, which are distilled to policy learning through demonstrations.

The task library is initialized from the tasks in the human-curated benchmark. It provides the task
creator with a list of past task descriptions to condition on in the description generation stage and a
list of past codes in the code generation stage. Then, the task creator is prompted to retrieve reference
tasks from the task library as examples for coding new tasks, i.e. retrieval augmented generation
(RAG). After the task implementation is finished and can successfully generate demonstrations,
we then prompt the LLM to reflect on the new task and the task library and form an ensembled
decision for whether the newly generated task should be added to the library. In Figure 4, we observe
interesting composition and extrapolation behaviors in the tasks generated by GenSim. These saved
task codes can be used offline to generate demonstration trajectory data for multitask policy training.
The task library, generated in exploratory mode, can be used as bootstrapping data for iteratively
training task creators to generate better simulation tasks in goal-directed mode. This is important to
scale up task generations and incorporate human feedback as finetuned models are more economical
to use as task creators. In the next section, we discuss how to distill the task-level generalizations in
LLM code generation into policy learning, by expanding the corpus of the training tasks.

2.3      LLM S UPERVISED M ULTITASK P OLICY

Once the tasks are generated, we can use these task implementations to generate demonstration data
and train manipulation policies. We use a similar two-stream transporter network architecture as in
Shridhar et al. (2022) to parametrize the policy with affordance predictions. The code generation to
language-conditioned behavior cloning process can be viewed as the distilling process from LLMs
into the low-level control and affordance of robot policies. Treating the program as an efficient
representation of the task and associated demonstration data (Figure 5), we can define the embedding
space among tasks, whose distance metric is more robust to varying factors from perception such as
object poses and shapes and yet more informative than the language instructions.


                                                                    4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                            GPT Task Embedding



    Policy Improvement
    on Related Tasks


                         Sim-to-Real         Policy Generalization to
                         Policy Adaptation   Novel Tasks


Figure 5: The task library can be used for retrieval and finetuning in GenSim Pipeline. Moreover,
task code embedding can be used to create an embedding space in the task library (visualized as a
T-SNE plot), which can be used for clustering tasks and policy training. For example, the purple
represents the tasks involving rope, and blue denotes tasks that involve building structures.

3     E XPERIMENTS
In this section, we aim to use experiments to validate our framework, through the following specific
questions: (1) How well can LLM design and implement simulation tasks? Can we improve the
performance of LLMs on task generation? (2) Does training on LLM-generated tasks improve policy
generalizations? Does policy training benefit more if more generated tasks are given? (3) Can
pretraining on LLM-generated simulation tasks benefit real-world robot policy deployment?

3.1     E VALUATING LLM ROBOTIC S IMULATION TASK G ENERATION

In this section, we ablated the design of the exploratory LLM pipeline with a simulation task-driven
metric. Specifically, we measure a sequence of pass rates on “syntax-correct” which measures
basic coding syntax issues as well as answer formatting problems, “runtime-verified“ which tests
asset hallucinations and code reasoning capability, and finally “task completed” which measures the
designs of task demonstrations (the success in pick-place motions). These metrics are shown in the
x-axis of Figure 6. Our metric has an incremental structure from syntax to runtime to successfully
generate demonstrations where failing the former metrics implies failing on the latter metrics. Note
that some problems such as misaligned language instruction and task behavior will not be captured by
these metrics. To distill these task generation capabilities into more economic and scalable language
models and to potentially conduct self-improvement, we use the 100 GPT4-generated tasks in the
task library as a dataset for finetuning. We use OpenAI API to finetune GPT models and achieve
better performance through this finetuning process. Moreover, we also finetune open-sourced LLMs
such as Code-Llama (Rozière et al., 2023) with LoRA (Hu et al., 2021). We use the task names with
a short prompt as input tokens and the task code as output tokens for autoregressive training.
Exploratory task generation. In total, the pipeline generates 120 diverse tasks that can be used
for task demonstrations. We compare our task description and code separation prompt with a single
prompt that requests both together as well as zero-shot prompt that does not provide as many reference
codes. Figure 6 shows that a two-stage prompt chain with few-shot examples and task library can
effectively improve the code generation success rates. The exploratory task generation requires the
LLM to have language reasoning capabilities to understand the prompts and creativity for new tasks.
Goal-directed task generation. We also experiment with the goal-directed procedure to measure the
coding capabilities of different language models. Specifically, we pick 10 held-out tasks and prompt
each model to generate three trials (multiple implementations of the same task) for evaluating the
metric. We observe that GPT4 is still outperforming other models in the specific robot simulation
coding tasks. More specifically, strong closed-source models such as GPT-3.5 and GPT4 with
in-context learning (prompting) can generate creative tasks and yet are still prone to hallucinations
in code. We observe that the finetuned open-source models can achieve closer performance as
state-of-the-art LLMs. The finetuned open-source models can generate the correct code flow and
syntax but they occasionally exhibit misalignment between high-level objectives and implementation,


                                                                        5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



      Exploratory Task Generation                                 Goal-Directed Task Generation


Figure 6: Left) The prompt chain with few-shot examples and the task library are helpful for LLM
simulation task generation. Right) Finetuning on GPT4’s generated tasks can improve simulation
coding capabilities, for both closed-source GPT3.5 and open-source Code-LLama-Instruct-13B.
       Few-shot Improvement by Adding   Zero-shot Generalization by Pretraining   Few-shot Improvement by Adding tasks
                  GPT Tasks                         on GPT Tasks                           on Different Sources


               Added Tasks                          Task Number                              Task Source

Figure 7: Joint training with augmented data generated from the GenSim tasks can improve policy
performance, in both single-task and multi-task settings. Left) the x-axis denotes single CLIPort task
+ N GPT tasks where N=0,2,4 and multiple CLIPort tasks + N GPT tasks where N=0,4,8. Middle)
We also showed that when training on more and more tasks, the policy exhibits stronger and stronger
zero-shot generalization capabilities. Right) The performance of few-shot joint training varies for
different sources of task generation including open-source LLMs.

due to the complexities of long simulation code. This motivates increasing better language models in
simulation task creations such as self-instruct (Wang et al., 2022) as well as distillation from more
capable models. See Appendix §A, §D for more experiment details and examples.

3.2    TASK -L EVEL G ENERALIZATION

In this section, we study how the generated tasks from LLM can help with tabletop language-
conditioned visuomotor policy learning for generalizations and adaptation. We adopt the 0 (fail) to
100 (success) scores proposed in the Ravens benchmark (Zeng et al., 2021) which considers partial
credits for completing tasks. The simulation robot setup is a Universal Robot UR5e with a suction
gripper. The policy input is a top-down RGB-D reconstruction, and the output is an affordance
map that is then transformed to pick and place actions. We use the CLIPort (Shridhar et al., 2022)
architecture but the framework is independent of which policy parametrization we use. The set of
testing tasks is not particularly selected. We have released a language-conditioned benchmark ( with
model weights and task lists) generated by GPT, ranging from 10 tasks to 100 tasks, to study scaling
policy learning with affordance prediction.
Few-shot policy generalization to related tasks. In particular, from Fig. 7 left, we show that
jointly training LLM-generated tasks can improve the policy performance on the original CLIPort
(Shridhar et al., 2022) tasks by over 50%, especially under low data regime such as 5 demos. The
result is averaged over two different task splits. This is expected as adding related tasks reduces
the overfitting problem on a few demos. On the right, we also experimented with pretraining with
different task sources of the human written tasks, closed-source LLM, and open-source finetuned
LLM, and observed similar improved performance.
Zero-shot policy generalization to unseen tasks. From Fig. 7 middle, by pretraining on more tasks
generated by LLM, our model can generalize better to tasks in the original Ravens benchmark. The
task-level generalization is surprising to us considering that the task and language instructions have


                                                         6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


       (a)         Label                  No Adaptation                No Pretrain              CLIPort                  Ours


                                    Pair-Blocks-On-Line: “put the other blue block next to the second red block on the line”


                                                  Stack-Block: “stack the blue block on the yellow block”
       (b)            t=0                                                                                                  t=T


                                                  Organize-Kits: “pack pens and spoons into the box”


                                 Build-Wheel: “place the purple and green blocks around the white cylinder, to form a wheel shape”


Figure 8: (a) The labels and the affordance heatmap of different real-world policies (green denotes
placing and red denotes picking). (b) Executions of long-horizon tasks by GPT4-pretrained models.
                                                       No Adaptation    No Pretrain   CLIPort   GenSim (50 Tasks)    GenSim (70 Tasks)
               Task
                                   Episodes(Sample)       Success        Success      Success       Success              Success
         put-block-in-bowl              20(20)              0/10             5/10      5/10             8/10                8/10
             stack-block                25(25)              0/10             2/10      6/10             9/10               10/10
       block-tower-on-corner            20(80)              0/10             0/10      2/10             3/10                4/10
       block-in-bowl-in-zone            10(20)              0/10            10/10      7/10            10/10               10/10
      put-block-at-zone-corner          10(40)              0/10             0/10     10/10             9/10               10/10
         pair-blocks-on-line            20(80)              0/10             0/10      0/10             2/10                4/10
        align-block-in-zone             20(60)              0/10             0/10      2/10             3/10                6/10
             build-wheel                10(80)              0/10             0/10      0/10             0/10                3/10
            pack-spheres                20(80)              0/10             6/10      7/10             4/10                7/10
            organize-kits               15(60)              0/10             5/10      5/10             3/10                6/10
            sort-garbage                20(60)              0/10             3/10      1/10             4/10                4/10
             place-bread                15(60)              0/10             2/10      2/10             1/10                3/10
               average                 205(665)             0%              27.5%     39.2%            46.7%               62.5%


Table 1: Success rates (%) of multi-task policies that are finetuned on the base models from simulation.
The test performance is measured across different scenes and tasks.

not been seen in the training datasets. Note that these tasks are selected using the distance metric on
the task embedding (Figure 5). One intuition is that LLM code generation expands the task data, and
thus training on these related tasks leads to more robust generalizable representations.
Specifically, as shown in Fig. 4, the color-ordered-insertion can be thought of as a compositional
task between block-insertion and place-block-in-bowl from CLIPort original task tasks. The former
task involves placing a block into some colored bowl, while the goal of the latter task is to insert a
specific block into fixtures. In the left of Figure 7, our experiment suggests that learning jointly with
related and more complex task color-ordered-insertion has the potential to contribute to enhanced
generalization capabilities of put-block-in-bowl. On the other hand, when we try to learn a base policy
for novel task generalization and even across domains, it is more beneficial to learn from as diverse
tasks as possible, corresponding to exploratory task generation. See Appendix §B for more details.

3.3   A DAPTING P RETRAINED M ODEL TO THE R EAL WORLD

In this section, we conduct experiments to transfer the policy trained in simulation to the real
environment. We hypothesize that by expanding the diversity of training tasks generated by LLM
in the simulation, the trained policy would exhibit enhanced adaptability in real-world scenarios.
To further enhance the sim-to-real transition, we incorporate an adaptation process for the real
world. This process includes collecting a small set of real-world data for each task, followed by
data augmentations and the fine-tuning of the simulation-pretrained model over 50 epochs. We
perform our real-world experiments using an XArm-7 robot equipped with a suction gripper. A
bird’s-eye-view camera is installed facing downward to capture RGB-D observations. In Table 1, the
model pretrained on 70 GPT4-generated tasks achieves an average success rate of 62.5% over 10
trials of 12 tasks, an over 20% increase compared to baselines that only pretrained on CLIPort tasks


                                                                        7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024

(a)


(b)        Code-Llama (Finetuned)                                      GPT-4


Figure 9: (a) Task statistics across different properties in the generated benchmark. (b) Example
failure modes of the Code LLama after finetuning, and GPT4 through prompting.
and 15% improvement on models that pretrained on only 50 tasks. Qualitatively, baseline models
without sufficient pretraining often pick or place the wrong objects, and baselines without adaptations
have diffused affordance prediction. We hypothesize that GPT4-generated task pretraining exposes
policy with broad language instructions and task compositions, which allows it to generalize better to
a diverse set of tasks after sim-to-real adaptation. Moreover, we qualitatively observe that pretraining
on diverse simulation tasks improves robustness on long-horizon complex tasks (Figure 8). For
example, the GPT4-pretrained model has a more robust performance on build-wheel task in the real
world. Additionally, we show that the simulation pretrained weights can also be useful for tasks such
as place-bread and sort-garbage. These are distinct from the simulation tasks with different assets
and semantic information. We defer the task, training, and evaluation details to the Appendix §C.

3.4   A DDITIONAL A NALYSIS

Simulation Training Success Rates. On Table 2, we showed single-task and multi-task policy
training success rates on a subset of our generated tasks with 200 demos. The average task success
rate for policy training on GPT4-generated tasks is 75.8% for single-task and 74.1% for multi-task,
which is similar to 76.6% for a single task and 76.1% for multi-task from human-curated tasks in
CLIPort (Shridhar et al., 2022). See Appendix §B for more training details.
Generated Task Statistics. In Figure 9 (a), we showed task statistics on different features of the 120
generated tasks by LLM. We observe an interesting balance of colors, assets, actions, and the number
of instances generated by the LLM models. For instance, the generated code contains many scenes
with over 7 object instances and many primitive actions of pick-and-place and assets such as blocks.
Code Generation Comparison. In Figure 9 (b), we qualitatively evaluate failure cases in the
top-down experiments for both the Code Llama and GPT4. The coding objective is to implement
the multi-step logic of placing a cylinder on a pallet first and then placing the block on the pallet.
Based on the add goal step, we observed that Code LLama has ignored the pallet completely, and
GPT4 got the order of placement wrong, while being a bit noisy in text descriptions. Other common
LLM modes include misaligned language descriptions and task objectives as well as imbalanced task
distribution when scaling the LLM generation pipeline. More details can be found in §A.5.
Human Effort Evaluation. In Section §D.6, we discuss and evaluate the human verification time
spent and pass rates on the LLM-generated tasks. The average human time is around 10 seconds (if
each task is checked) and the success rates are above 50%.

4     R ELATED W ORK
Reasoning and Coding via LLMs. There have been impressive emerging abilities of LLMs,
including zero-shot prompting and intricate reasoning (Wei et al., 2022; Chowdhery et al., 2022)
in the past few years. For example, Park et al. (2023); Zhang et al. (2023) use language models in


                                                   8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024

             Task           Single-Task Multi-Task              Task            Single-Task Multi-Task
            build-car          84.1        85.4          insert-blocks-lineup      84.1        80.0
       color-coordinated-                                 move-piles-along-
        sphere-insertion       99.2        93.0                   line             27.7        32.7
         cylinder-ring-                                   manipulating-two-
              stack            82.0        81.0                  ropes             30.8        40.2
       multi-level-block-                                   color-ordered-
          construction         67.8        49.0                insertion           93.0        94.0
         stack-blocks-                                     align-cylinders-
          in-container         99.0        98.8                in-zones            91.2        87.8

        Table 2: Success rates (%) of the trained policy on example GPT4-generated tasks.


explorations of new tasks. Our work, which uses separate LLM critics to evaluate the generated
programs and a memory for storing and reflecting previous outputs, is also related to the rich line
of work on parameterizing agents with LLMs (Li et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2023). On the other
hand, program synthesis has a long line of research in NLP (Manna & Waldinger, 1971; 1980; Chen
et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2019; Chen et al., 2018). LLM models, such as Codex (Chen et al., 2021)
make program synthesis accessible by only requiring a specification of docstring or incomplete code.
Execution-based code generation (Ellis et al., 2019; Chen et al., 2018) uses execution outcomes at
the code compiler level to iterate code generation. Skreta et al. (2023) uses a rule-based verifier
to improve program generation and Wang et al. (2023) incorporates environment feedback and
self-verification in Minecraft into the pipeline. Our work benchmarks simulation task creation with
both open-source and closed-source LLM code models. In addition, our method also leverages
multiple verification methods as feedback for simulation task scripts in robotic simulations.
Task and Scene Generation for Simulation. In robotic simulations, recent works have explored
domain randomizations (Tobin et al., 2017; Fang et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2023; Ramos et al., 2019)
and procedural asset generations (Deitke et al., 2022; Makatura et al., 2023) and text to 3D (Jun &
Nichol, 2023; Nichol et al., 2022; Poole et al., 2022; Yu et al., 2023a). In this work, we treat each
task as the code implementation and expand the original 10 tasks in the Ravens benchmark (Zeng
et al., 2021; Shridhar et al., 2022) to over 100 novel tasks and associated expert demonstrations
through LLM. Consequently, different from previous works that study compositional generalization
(Jiang et al., 2022) or object-level (Shridhar et al., 2022) generalization, we study the task-level
generalization of policy learning.
Language Models in Robotics. In robotics, large language models have been applied to policy
learning (Driess et al., 2023), task and motion planning(Lin et al., 2023; Huang et al., 2022),
summarizing logs (Liu et al., 2023), as well as synthesizing policy programs (Liang et al., 2022) and
optimization programs (Yu et al., 2023b). Past work has also explored LLM’s physical grounded
capability (Liu et al., 2022) and concurrent work explores using LLM together with task and motion
planners to create expert demonstrations (Ha et al., 2023). Ahn et al. (2022); Lynch et al. (2023)
attempted to collect huge-scale real-world interactions but are only focused on specific task families.
Instead of interacting in expensive real-world settings, we explored how to create increasingly
complex simulation tasks and demonstrations jointly with LLM, and study the scaling law on policy
generalizations through training on GPT-generated tasks.

5   C ONCLUSION AND F UTURE W ORKS

In this work, we present GenSim, a scalable LLM framework to augment diverse simulation tasks
for robotic policy, which aims to distill LLM grounding and coding capabilities into low-level
policies. We investigate LLM prompting, retrieval-augmented generation, and finetuning in both
goal-directed and exploratory approaches to generate new simulation task codes. We leverage the
generated tasks for training multitask policies that show generalization capabilities both to new tasks
in simulation and the real world. We have seen some limitations in enabling LLM to design tasks and
demonstrations in robotic simulation. The generated code still contains basic syntax errors and suffers
from hallucinations and a lack of grounding in physical and geometric details. Another problem is
that the code generation evaluation metric is imperfect (such as misaligned language description) and
therefore the generated tasks can require some manual filtering before policy training. Finally, we
have only explored table-top pick-and-place task generation, and generating dexterous and complex
robotic tasks could be more challenging. We hope these limitations shed some light on future attempts
at simulation code generations with LLMs.


                                                     9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


6   ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
We thank MIT Supercloud for providing computing resources. The authors would like to thank many
helpful discussions from Yoon Kim and Russ Tedrake at MIT. This work is supported in part by
the Amazon Greater Boston Tech Initiative and Amazon PO No. 2D-06310236. This project was
supported, in part, by the Amazon Research Award, the Qualcomm Innovation Fellowship, the Intel
Rising Star Faculty Award, and the CISCO Faculty Award.

R EFERENCES
Michael Ahn, Anthony Brohan, Noah Brown, Yevgen Chebotar, Omar Cortes, Byron David, Chelsea
 Finn, Chuyuan Fu, Keerthana Gopalakrishnan, Karol Hausman, et al. Do as i can, not as i say:
 Grounding language in robotic affordances. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.01691, 2022.
Ilge Akkaya, Marcin Andrychowicz, Maciek Chociej, Mateusz Litwin, Bob McGrew, Arthur Petron,
   Alex Paino, Matthias Plappert, Glenn Powell, Raphael Ribas, et al. Solving rubik’s cube with a
   robot hand. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.07113, 2019.
Rohan Anil, Andrew M Dai, Orhan Firat, Melvin Johnson, Dmitry Lepikhin, Alexandre Passos,
  Siamak Shakeri, Emanuel Taropa, Paige Bailey, Zhifeng Chen, et al. Palm 2 technical report. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2305.10403, 2023.
Sébastien Bubeck, Varun Chandrasekaran, Ronen Eldan, Johannes Gehrke, Eric Horvitz, Ece Kamar,
   Peter Lee, Yin Tat Lee, Yuanzhi Li, Scott Lundberg, et al. Sparks of artificial general intelligence:
   Early experiments with gpt-4. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.12712, 2023.
Mark Chen, Jerry Tworek, Heewoo Jun, Qiming Yuan, Henrique Ponde de Oliveira Pinto, Jared
 Kaplan, Harri Edwards, Yuri Burda, Nicholas Joseph, Greg Brockman, et al. Evaluating large
 language models trained on code. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.03374, 2021.
Xinyun Chen, Chang Liu, and Dawn Song. Execution-guided neural program synthesis. In Interna-
  tional Conference on Learning Representations, 2018.
Zoey Chen, Sho Kiami, Abhishek Gupta, and Vikash Kumar. Genaug: Retargeting behaviors to
  unseen situations via generative augmentation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.06671, 2023.
Aakanksha Chowdhery, Sharan Narang, Jacob Devlin, Maarten Bosma, Gaurav Mishra, Adam
  Roberts, Paul Barham, Hyung Won Chung, Charles Sutton, Sebastian Gehrmann, et al. Palm:
  Scaling language modeling with pathways. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.02311, 2022.
Matt Deitke, Eli VanderBilt, Alvaro Herrasti, Luca Weihs, Kiana Ehsani, Jordi Salvador, Winson Han,
 Eric Kolve, Aniruddha Kembhavi, and Roozbeh Mottaghi. Procthor: Large-scale embodied ai
 using procedural generation. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:5982–5994,
 2022.
Danny Driess, Fei Xia, Mehdi SM Sajjadi, Corey Lynch, Aakanksha Chowdhery, Brian Ichter, Ayzaan
  Wahid, Jonathan Tompson, Quan Vuong, Tianhe Yu, et al. Palm-e: An embodied multimodal
  language model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.03378, 2023.
Kevin Ellis, Maxwell Nye, Yewen Pu, Felix Sosa, Josh Tenenbaum, and Armando Solar-Lezama.
  Write, execute, assess: Program synthesis with a repl. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 32, 2019.
Kuan Fang, Toki Migimatsu, Ajay Mandlekar, Li Fei-Fei, and Jeannette Bohg. Active task random-
  ization: Learning visuomotor skills for sequential manipulation by proposing feasible and novel
  tasks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.06134, 2022.
Huy Ha, Pete Florence, and Shuran Song. Scaling up and distilling down: Language-guided robot
  skill acquisition. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.14535, 2023.
Edward J Hu, Yelong Shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang,
  and Weizhu Chen. Lora: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2106.09685, 2021.


                                                  10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Wenlong Huang, Fei Xia, Ted Xiao, Harris Chan, Jacky Liang, Pete Florence, Andy Zeng, Jonathan
 Tompson, Igor Mordatch, Yevgen Chebotar, et al. Inner monologue: Embodied reasoning through
 planning with language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.05608, 2022.
Stephen James, Zicong Ma, David Rovick Arrojo, and Andrew J Davison. Rlbench: The robot
  learning benchmark & learning environment. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, 5(2):3019–
  3026, 2020.
Yunfan Jiang, Agrim Gupta, Zichen Zhang, Guanzhi Wang, Yongqiang Dou, Yanjun Chen, Li Fei-Fei,
  Anima Anandkumar, Yuke Zhu, and Linxi Fan. Vima: General robot manipulation with multimodal
  prompts. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.03094, 2022.
Heewoo Jun and Alex Nichol. Shap-e: Generating conditional 3d implicit functions. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2305.02463, 2023.
Elia Kaufmann, Leonard Bauersfeld, Antonio Loquercio, Matthias Müller, Vladlen Koltun, and
  Davide Scaramuzza. Champion-level drone racing using deep reinforcement learning. Nature, 620
  (7976):982–987, 2023.
Belinda Z Li, William Chen, Pratyusha Sharma, and Jacob Andreas. Lampp: Language models as
  probabilistic priors for perception and action. arXiv e-prints, pp. arXiv–2302, 2023.
Jacky Liang, Wenlong Huang, Fei Xia, Peng Xu, Karol Hausman, Brian Ichter, Pete Florence, and
  Andy Zeng. Code as policies: Language model programs for embodied control. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2209.07753, 2022.
Kevin Lin, Christopher Agia, Toki Migimatsu, Marco Pavone, and Jeannette Bohg. Text2motion:
  From natural language instructions to feasible plans. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.12153, 2023.
Ruibo Liu, Jason Wei, Shixiang Shane Gu, Te-Yen Wu, Soroush Vosoughi, Claire Cui, Denny Zhou,
  and Andrew M Dai. Mind’s eye: Grounded language model reasoning through simulation. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2210.05359, 2022.
Zeyi Liu, Arpit Bahety, and Shuran Song. Reflect: Summarizing robot experiences for failure
  explanation and correction. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.15724, 2023.
Corey Lynch, Ayzaan Wahid, Jonathan Tompson, Tianli Ding, James Betker, Robert Baruch, Travis
  Armstrong, and Pete Florence. Interactive language: Talking to robots in real time. IEEE Robotics
  and Automation Letters, 2023.
Liane Makatura, Michael Foshey, Bohan Wang, Felix HähnLein, Pingchuan Ma, Bolei Deng, Megan
  Tjandrasuwita, Andrew Spielberg, Crystal Elaine Owens, Peter Yichen Chen, et al. How can large
  language models help humans in design and manufacturing? arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.14377,
  2023.
Zohar Manna and Richard Waldinger. A deductive approach to program synthesis. ACM Transactions
  on Programming Languages and Systems (TOPLAS), 2(1):90–121, 1980.
Zohar Manna and Richard J Waldinger. Toward automatic program synthesis. Communications of
  the ACM, 14(3):151–165, 1971.
Alex Nichol, Heewoo Jun, Prafulla Dhariwal, Pamela Mishkin, and Mark Chen. Point-e: A system
  for generating 3d point clouds from complex prompts. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.08751, 2022.
OpenAI. Gpt-4 technical report, 2023.
Joon Sung Park, Joseph C O’Brien, Carrie J Cai, Meredith Ringel Morris, Percy Liang, and
  Michael S Bernstein. Generative agents: Interactive simulacra of human behavior. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2304.03442, 2023.
Ben Poole, Ajay Jain, Jonathan T Barron, and Ben Mildenhall. Dreamfusion: Text-to-3d using 2d
  diffusion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.14988, 2022.
Fabio Ramos, Rafael Carvalhaes Possas, and Dieter Fox. Bayessim: adaptive domain randomization
  via probabilistic inference for robotics simulators. arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.01728, 2019.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Baptiste Rozière, Jonas Gehring, Fabian Gloeckle, Sten Sootla, Itai Gat, Xiaoqing Ellen Tan, Yossi
  Adi, Jingyu Liu, Tal Remez, Jérémy Rapin, et al. Code llama: Open foundation models for code.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.12950, 2023.
Mohit Shridhar, Lucas Manuelli, and Dieter Fox. Cliport: What and where pathways for robotic
 manipulation. In Conference on Robot Learning, pp. 894–906. PMLR, 2022.
Marta Skreta, Naruki Yoshikawa, Sebastian Arellano-Rubach, Zhi Ji, Lasse Bjørn Kristensen, Kourosh
 Darvish, Alán Aspuru-Guzik, Florian Shkurti, and Animesh Garg. Errors are useful prompts:
 Instruction guided task programming with verifier-assisted iterative prompting. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2303.14100, 2023.
Josh Tobin, Rachel Fong, Alex Ray, Jonas Schneider, Wojciech Zaremba, and Pieter Abbeel. Domain
  randomization for transferring deep neural networks from simulation to the real world. In 2017
  IEEE/RSJ international conference on intelligent robots and systems (IROS), pp. 23–30. IEEE,
  2017.
Guanzhi Wang, Yuqi Xie, Yunfan Jiang, Ajay Mandlekar, Chaowei Xiao, Yuke Zhu, Linxi Fan, and
 Anima Anandkumar. Voyager: An open-ended embodied agent with large language models. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2305.16291, 2023.
Rui Wang, Joel Lehman, Jeff Clune, and Kenneth O Stanley. Paired open-ended trailblazer (poet):
  Endlessly generating increasingly complex and diverse learning environments and their solutions.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:1901.01753, 2019.
Yizhong Wang, Yeganeh Kordi, Swaroop Mishra, Alisa Liu, Noah A Smith, Daniel Khashabi, and
  Hannaneh Hajishirzi. Self-instruct: Aligning language model with self generated instructions.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.10560, 2022.
Jason Wei, Yi Tay, Rishi Bommasani, Colin Raffel, Barret Zoph, Sebastian Borgeaud, Dani Yogatama,
  Maarten Bosma, Denny Zhou, Donald Metzler, et al. Emergent abilities of large language models.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.07682, 2022.
Tianhe Yu, Deirdre Quillen, Zhanpeng He, Ryan Julian, Karol Hausman, Chelsea Finn, and Sergey
  Levine. Meta-world: A benchmark and evaluation for multi-task and meta reinforcement learning.
  In Conference on robot learning, pp. 1094–1100. PMLR, 2020.
Tianhe Yu, Ted Xiao, Austin Stone, Jonathan Tompson, Anthony Brohan, Su Wang, Jaspiar Singh,
  Clayton Tan, Jodilyn Peralta, Brian Ichter, et al. Scaling robot learning with semantically imagined
  experience. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.11550, 2023a.
Wenhao Yu, Nimrod Gileadi, Chuyuan Fu, Sean Kirmani, Kuang-Huei Lee, Montse Gonzalez Arenas,
 Hao-Tien Lewis Chiang, Tom Erez, Leonard Hasenclever, Jan Humplik, et al. Language to rewards
 for robotic skill synthesis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.08647, 2023b.
Andy Zeng, Pete Florence, Jonathan Tompson, Stefan Welker, Jonathan Chien, Maria Attarian, Travis
  Armstrong, Ivan Krasin, Dan Duong, Vikas Sindhwani, et al. Transporter networks: Rearranging
  the visual world for robotic manipulation. In Conference on Robot Learning, pp. 726–747. PMLR,
  2021.
Jenny Zhang, Joel Lehman, Kenneth Stanley, and Jeff Clune. Omni: Open-endedness via models of
  human notions of interestingness. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.01711, 2023.


                                                 12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C ONTENTS

1   Introduction                                                                                      1

2 Automated Task Generation for Policy Learning                                                      3
    2.1   Task Creator . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    3
    2.2   Task Library . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    3
    2.3   LLM Supervised Multitask Policy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         4

3   Experiments                                                                                       5
    3.1   Evaluating LLM Robotic Simulation Task Generation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .           5
    3.2   Task-Level Generalization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       6
    3.3   Adapting Pretrained Model to the Real world . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         7
    3.4   Additional Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     8

4   Related Work                                                                                      8

5   Conclusion and Future Works                                                                       9

6 Acknowledgement                                                                                    10

A LLM Experiment Details                                                                             14
    A.1 Simulation Task Generation Details . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         14
    A.2 Embedding Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         14
    A.3 Task Statistics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    14
    A.4 Training Details . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     14
    A.5 Task Creation Limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      15

B Simulation Training Experiment                                                                     15

C Real World Experiment                                                                              16

D Language Qualitative Results                                                                       18
    D.1 Task Description Example . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         18
    D.2 Prompt Details . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       19
          D.2.1 Task Proposal Prompt Details . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         19
          D.2.2 Task Memory Prompt Details . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .           20
    D.3 Example Task Library Conversations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         21
    D.4 Example Implementation Errors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          22
    D.5 GenSim Feedbacks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         23
    D.6 Human Verification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       23
    D.7 Framework Scalability Discussions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        24


                                                  13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    D.8 Task Code Example . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       24
    D.9 Top-Down Evaluation Example . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         27

A     LLM E XPERIMENT D ETAILS
A.1    S IMULATION TASK G ENERATION D ETAILS

The held-out simulation task list used to compare and evaluate LLM models is “align-rainbow-along-
line”, “cylinder-in-colorful-container”, “splitting-piles”, “stack-cylinder-pyramid”, “build-pyramid-in-
zone”, “block-on-“cylinder-on-pallet”, “align-cylinder-in-zone”, “construct-symmetric-block-wall”,
“insert-blue-on-red-cylinder”, “rainbow-pyramid”. We will prompt different LLMs with these task
names and run targeted task generation evaluation experiments on code generation three times.
We have also experimented with a longer LLM pipeline with components such as API reviews
and common error reviews. In these two stages, we provide the base task definition of the Ravens
benchmark and summarize several syntax errors that GPT tends to make when designing and
implementing tasks. We empirically observed these to generate more stable codes for challenging
tasks, but require more budgets.

A.2    E MBEDDING A NALYSIS

In Figure 5, we visualize the GPT embedding of the generated task codes using PCA to project to 50
dimensions and then use TSNE for visualization on 2D. We then apply KNN clustering to discover 6
clusters of the generated tasks. As shown in the plot, different colors of clusters represent different
groups of tasks such as specific objects or specific types of motions. For instance, the purple color
represents mostly the tasks involving rope, and the blue color represents mostly the tasks that involve
building some structures using primitive shapes. Inspecting, expanding, and cleaning this task library
is also straightforward because of the nature of the code. This embedding space is useful both for
retrieving tasks as retrieval augmented generation (RAG) and finding related tasks for joint policy
training.

A.3    TASK S TATISTICS

Although we focus on the task-level diversity and generalization of simulation in LLM, in this section,
we investigate some task statistics of the 120 generated tasks by LLM. Shown in Figure 9 (a), we
observe an interesting balance of colors, assets, actions, and number of instances generated by the
LLM models. For example, common colors such as “red, blue, yellow, green” show up in many tasks.
Due to our prompt, overall GPT generates multiple objects in the scene. In Figure 13, we also showed
a gallery of the generated tasks. We can easily generate and scale more of the simulation tasks if the
budget permits. See project website for animated rendering of the tasks.

A.4    T RAINING D ETAILS

In addition to the prompting pipeline, we explored different training and finetuning schemes on
LLMs. Different from designing a full prompting techniques to improve GPT4 base model, finetuning
focuses on domain-specific tasks such as given the task name, and output its implementation. It
has several benefits such as cheaper costs and faster inference speed. We use the 112 tasks as the
dataset for finetuning experiments. We use the task names with a short prompt as input tokens and
the task code as output tokens for autoregressive training. For closed-source LLM models such
as GPT-3 (davinci), GPT-3.5, we use OpenAI’s finetuning API for training and inferencing. For
Code-LLama experiments (Rozière et al., 2023), we use the open-source Code-LLaMA-Instruct 7B
and Code-LLaMA-Instruct 13B models. We use Huggingface transformers for LoRA (Hu et al.,
2021) finetuning with quantization and parameter-efficient finetuning for 10 epochs on 2 V-100
GPUs. The training on GPT4 generated dataset with batch size=1 takes around 4 hours to finish 3000
iterations. Generated examples for these open-sourced models can be found in §D.
In evaluating the open-sourced code-llama model, we were not able to get sensible results with
just prompting. Specifically, it generates the example code in the prompt for all prompts in the
few-shot case or random answers in the zero-shot case. With finetuning, the model writes much
more structured code and can achieve similar performance as GPT-3.5. Overall we see improved


                                                  14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


code generation with the finetuning models and leave self-bootstrapping and training on more code
examples for future work.

A.5   TASK C REATION L IMITATIONS

There are several common failure modes in the task description and implementations generated by
LLM that need to be aware of. These raise attention for inspections before potential downstream
applications and also hopefully shed light on future directions. We recommend users to play with
to get a sense of the generation process and limitations. Here, we provide detailed descriptions and
examples below.

      1. Repeated Tasks: GPT can generate tasks that have different names (and even different im-
         plementations) but represent the same tasks, such as “color-sequenced-block-insertion”, “put-
         block-in-bowl” and “color-coordinated-ball-insertion-in-bowls”, which all aim to instruct
         the robot to put some colored blocks into colored bowls. Similarly, “color-linked-ball-bowl-
         ordering”, “color-coordinated-sphere-and-bowl-match” and “colored-bowl-ball-sorting” are
         also same tasks.
      2. Mismatched Language Instructions: GPT can generate mismatched language descriptions
         for tasks. For instance, for task “color-coordinated-cylinder-stand-in-line”, the language
         instructions try to set goals for each step to put the corresponding colored cylinder on the
         stand, such as “place the red cylinder on the red stand”. However, the task implementation
         tries to stack as many cylinders as possible onto the same block. This problem is also not
         captured by the metric used in the benchmark.
      3. Ungrounded Motion Sequence:. For instance, the task “color-coordinated-bowl-stacking”
         has the description “put each block in the bowl of the same color and stack the bowls from
         largest to smallest in the sequence of red, blue, green, and yellow”, and yet the action to
         stack bowls, is neither implemented nor achievable in the benchmark. Similarly in task
         “ball-in-container” with language instruction “Use the spatula to lift a ball over a wall of
         boxes and drop it into a container”, the action of using a spatula to lift an object is not
         grounded well. Finally in “push-block-into-container”, the motion of pushing a block into
         some other objects are unlikely to succeed.
      4. Noisy Descriptions:. There are usually some noises in the task names, task descriptions,
         and language instructions. For instance “ball-in-bowl-obstacle-course” has “obstacle-course”
         which is not capturing the task goal. The task descriptions also contain sentences such
         as “The task requires the robot to pick up four balls of different colors (red, blue, green,
         yellow) and place each of them into the corresponding colored bowls strategically positioned
         at different corners of the maze, without knocking over any blocks, demanding careful
         navigation and color coordination”, which is not in its most concise form. Similarly,
         “rearrange, sort, insert, place” are usually used interchangeably by LLM.
      5. Imbalanced Tasks:. Due to the bootstrapping process, LLMs has a certain bias towards the
         majority of the tasks in the task library, especially if the LLM reflection/filtering is turned
         off. For instance, we usually see “color-coordinated” and pick-place motions in the task
         generation whereas tasks involving rope and piles are more rarely. For improved success
         rates, we also do not consider tasks that are overly complicated such as palletizing boxes
         and tower of haoni. Moreover, the definition of a task is still subjective in robotics. Different
         tasks such as ”arrange,insertion,put” end up using the pick and place motions, and the hope
         is LLM can help distinguish among different tasks. We limit the benchmark to 100 tasks for
         a balance of diversity and control of quality.
      6. Task Complexity: Overall this work only explores top-down pick and place tasks where the
         demonstration action can be parametrized by pick and place actions. More dexterous tasks
         in robotics (higher degrees of freedom, more contact-rich motions etc) and reward designs
         for automatically figuring out how to solve these tasks will be interesting future works.

B     S IMULATION T RAINING E XPERIMENT
We follow the original CLIPort(Shridhar et al., 2022) setup for training. All simulated experiments
are performed using a Universal Robot UR5e equipped with a suction gripper. This setup offers a


                                                   15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


          Repeated Tasks                    Mismatched Languages                  Ungrounded Actions


          Put-block-in-bowl                     Color-coordinated-                  Push-block-into-container
                                                cylinder-stand-in-line


                              Figure 10: Visualization of common failure cases.



systematic and replicable environment for evaluation, particularly for benchmarking the capacity
to ground semantic concepts like colors and object categories. The input observation is derived
from top-down RGB-D images captured via a RealSense camera. We downscale the original image
dimensions from 640 × 480 to 320 × 160 for policy input. To enhance the transition from simulation
to reality, we incorporate data augmentation techniques such as color jittering.
Note that our implementation supports multiple samples in a batch (the original version only supports
batch size 1) which speeds up training. We train on 4/8 GPUs for 2 days for the multitask setup and
train for 10000 iterations for the single-task setup. For larger-scale pretraining experiments, 100 tasks
can take up to 5 days with 8 GPUs.
When training language-conditioned multitask policies, the relations among tasks need to be con-
sidered in the joint dataset. For instance, the tasks “put-block-in-bowl” and “place-red-in-green”
both involve putting colored blocks into colored bowls with similar language instructions. This
could potentially lead to conflicting data points that instruct placing the red block into the green
bowl or into bowls of other colors. Surprisingly, we find the policies pretrained on all 10 CLIPort
tasks only achieve lower than 5% success rate in GPT tasks. Conversely, there could be many tasks
that involve the term “pyramid” in instructions, but this could refer to varying layers of the block
pyramid. This ambiguity could pose a challenge when training a single policy for multiple tasks.
The question of whether training with certain tasks can help generalization can be best addressed
by the bias-variance trade-off fundamental in machine learning. Tasks that are semantically closed
have a higher likelihood of being beneficial, and vice versa. Therefore, we leverage the task code
embedding to pick related tasks for joint training, and find that to be robust in finding tasks. During
the evaluation of our GPT-generated tasks, we exclude specific tasks that fall outside of the task
generation domains, such as the tower of Hanoi and inserting kittings. In addition to the consideration
of compute budgets, these tasks also help us focus more on task-level generalization. The few-shot
generalization experiments have been evaluated with 1-shot generalization performance on tasks such
as “mixing-piles” and 5-shot generalization performance on “block-insertion”.

C    R EAL W ORLD E XPERIMENT

For our real-world experiments, we employ an XArm-7 robot equipped with a suction gripper. A
bird’s-eye-view camera, mounted overhead and oriented downwards, is used to capture RGB-D
observations. We leverage workspace boundaries and background subtraction to generate a mask on
the depth images. See Figure 11 for a detailed setup. In the real world, we observe the following
failure cases: (1) manipulate with the wrong color of objects. (2) imprecise picking and placing. To
tackle the challenge of scene-level generalization, we use data augmentation such as color jittering,
and also data relabeling where we increase the data multiple times and relabel the language prompt
based on the objects on the table. Our labeling tools on pick and place motion do not require a
real robot and can efficiently label up to 100 images within 2 minutes. Real-world training takes
50 epochs of the augmented data and usually takes less than 3 hours to complete. The tasks are
selected with a focus on long-horizon tasks and task-level generalization, i.e. how well the policy
generalizes to new tasks rather than different colors or object instances in a compositional sense. We
have experimented with providing both the per-step instruction or high-level goal of the tasks, and
did not find much performance difference in the single-task setting. We thus share similar limitations


                                                       16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                                                                     camera


                              RGB-D Input


                                                                          F/T sensor


Figure 11: Realworld Setup. We have an overhead camera for observing top-down rgb-d images
similar to the simulation setup.


             Start                                 End                               Start                              End


          “move the block to the corresponding zone”                           “place the purple and green blocks around the white
                                                                               cylinder, to form a wheel shape”


     “first place the blue bowl in the yellow zone, then place the
                                                                                  “put the blocks on the four corners of the zone”
     green block in the blue bowl”


             “place the blue block in the green bowl”                          “place the blue and red block along the green line side
                                                                               by side”


             “stack the red block on the blue block”                               “move the spheres from the zone to the bowl”


             “stack a block tower at the corner”                                       “pack pens and spoons into the box”


             “sort the garbage into different boxes”                          “place the pizza and bread from the plate to the bowl”


Figure 12: We show the start and goal of the 12 tasks in the real-world experiments. The set involve
long-horizon tasks and tasks with very distinct assets from the simulation.



on the policy side as in Shridhar et al. (2022). We note that the main limitation for this choice of
pick-and-place task is due to hardware (only suction cup) at the time of experiments.


                                                                     17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D     L ANGUAGE Q UALITATIVE R ESULTS



D.1   TASK D ESCRIPTION E XAMPLE


We attach a few generated task description examples from GPT-4.
    Task: Build-Car
          • task-name: build-car
          • task-description: Construct a simple car structure using blocks and cylinders.
          • assets-used: [ block/block.urdf, ball/ball-template.urdf ]

    Task: Color-Coordinated-Ball-Insertion-In-Boxes
          • task-name: color-coordinated-ball-insertion-in-boxes
          • task-description: Pick up four balls of different colors (red, blue, green, and yellow) and
            insert them into four separate boxes of matching colors. The boxes are located inside corners
            of a square structure and the task requires precise insertion, color coordination, and careful
            navigation around the square structure.
          • assets-used: [ ball/ball-template.urdf, box/box-template.urdf, square/square-template.urdf ]


    Task: Color-Coordinated-Zone-Arrangement

          • task-name: color-coordinated-zone-arrangement
          • task-description: On the tabletop, there are nine blocks of three different colors (three red, three
            blue, and three green) and three pallets of matching colors (one red, one blue, one green). The
            task is to pick up each block and place it on the pallet of the same color, arranging the blocks on
            each pallet in a line. However, there are a few small blocks randomly scattered on the tabletop,
            which the robot has to navigate around without knocking them over while transporting the
            blocks to the corresponding pallets. The challenge lies in the precise navigation, placement of
            the blocks, color matching, and maintaining the balance on the pallets.
          • assets-used: [ block/block.urdf, pallet/pallet.urdf, block/small.urdf ]


    Task: Place-Blue-On-Line-Ends
          • task-name: place-blue-on-line-ends
          • task-description: Pick up each blue box and accurately place it at the end of a green line.
          • assets-used: [ line/line-template.urdf, box/box-template.urdf ]


    Task: Move-Kit-From-Zone-To-Cylinder

          • task-name: move-kit-from-zone-to-cylinder
          • task-description: Place the specific kit from a zone to a cylinder.
          • assets-used: [ cylinder/cylinder-template.urdf, zone/zone.urdf, kitting/object-template.urdf ]


    Task: Put-Blues-Around-Red
          • task-name: put-blues-around-red
          • task-description: Place the blue blocks around the red block.
          • assets-used: [ block/block-for-anchors.urdf ]



                                                       18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   Task: Multicolor-Block-Bridge

           • task-name: multicolor-block-bridge
           • task-description: Build a bridge by stacking three red, three blue, and three green blocks on
             a pallet. Arrange in a sequence from left to right: red, blue, and green. Then, place three
             cylinders of corresponding colors on top of the stacked blocks, forming a bridge. The cylinders
             should roll from the top block to the pallet, creating a challenge of precision and control.
           • assets-used: [ block/block.urdf, pallet/pallet.urdf, cylinder/cylinder-template.urdf ]


D.2     P ROMPT D ETAILS
D.2.1    TASK P ROPOSAL P ROMPT D ETAILS
To reach this level of lengthy code generation, we break the prompt of the agent into several steps
to enforce its logical structure: task description generation, API and common mistake summary,
few-shot reference code selection, and code generation. The input prompt to GPT-4 task generation
stage consists of several components:
      (1) available assets that are in the codebase
      (2) samples of reference tasks from the task library to act as few-shot examples
      (3) past task names to make sure the agent does not provide overlapped tasks.
      (4) some examples of bad tasks and the reasons such as not physically feasible.
      (5) some additional rules (such as do not use unavailable assets ) and the output format.
This stage has temperature=1 to encourage diversity and the rest components would have tempera-
ture=0 to have some robustness. The simplified task description prompt can be found below.
   Bottom Up Task Creation Prompt
   You are an AI in robot simulation code and task design. I will provide you some example tasks,
   code implementation, and some guidelines for how to generate tasks and then you will help me
   generate a new task. My goal is to design diverse and feasible tasks for tabletop manipulation. I
   will first ask you to describe the task in natural languages and then will let you write the code for
   it.

   Here are all the assets. Use only these assets in the task and code design.
   ...

   Here are some examples of good tasks. Try to learn from these structures but avoid overlapping
   with them.
   ...

   Here are some tasks that you have come up with before. Try to learn from these structures but
   avoid overlapping with these tasks. For instance, ‘bowl-ball-placement‘ and ‘sort-balls-in-bowls‘
   are the same task. ‘pile-boxes-in-corner‘ and ‘stack-blocks-into-pallet‘ are similar tasks, ‘align-
   cylinder-in-corner‘ and ‘align-cylinder-corner‘ are similar.
   PAST-TASKNAME-TEMPLATE

   Here are some bad example task instances with explanations.
   ...
   reasons: not interesting because it overlaps with the current task ‘put-block-in-bowl‘.
   ...

   Now please describe the new task in natural languages and explain its novelty and challenges.
   Format the answer in a python dictionary with keys ”task-name” and value type string, ”task-
   description” (one specific sentence) and value type string, and ”assets-used” and value type list
   of strings. Note that
   - Do not use assets that are not in the list above.
   - Tasks that have more colors and shapes are interesting.
   - Be as specific as possible about the number, shape, and color of each asset in the descriptions.
   - The task need to obey physics and remain feasible.



                                                      19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   Top Down Task Creation Prompt
   You are an AI in robot simulation code and task design. I will provide you some example tasks,
   code implementation, and some guidelines for how to generate tasks and then you will help me
   generate a new task. My goal is to design creative and feasible simpler tasks to eventually
   help solve the task ‘TARGET-TASK-NAME‘. I will first ask you to describe the task in natural
   languages and then will let you write the code for it.

   Here are all the assets. Use only these assets in the task and code design.
   ...

   Here are some examples of good tasks. Try to learn from these structures but avoid overlapping
   with them.
   ...

   Here are some tasks that you have come up with before. Try to learn from these structures but
   avoid overlapping with these tasks. For instance, ‘bowl-ball-placement‘ and ‘sort-balls-in-bowls‘
   are the same task. ‘pile-boxes-in-corner‘ and ‘stack-blocks-into-pallet‘ are similar tasks, ‘align-
   cylinder-in-corner‘ and ‘align-cylinder-corner‘ are similar.
   PAST-TASKNAME-TEMPLATE

   Here are some bad example task instances with explanations.
   ...
   reasons: not interesting because it overlaps with the current task ‘put-block-in-bowl‘.
   ...

   The goal is to solve the task ‘TARGET-TASK-NAME‘ eventually. Due to its complexity, let’s
   think step-by-step about what simpler task can be useful to achieve this goal. Please describe
   the new task, which is not ‘TARGET-TASK-NAME‘ but can help training a policy to gener-
   alize torwards it, in natural languages in a clear and detailed way. Think step by step how
   this task can help contribute to the skills that are quired to solve TARGET-TASK-NAME.
   Then format the answer in a python dictionary with keys ”task-name” and value type string with
   lower-case and separated by hyphens, ”task-description” (one sentence and do not mention urdf
   paths) and value type string, and ”assets-used” and value type list of strings. Note that
   - Do not use assets that are not in the list above.
   - Tasks that have more colors and shapes are interesting.
   - Be as specific as possible about the number, shape, and color of each asset in the descriptions.
   - The task need to obey physics and remain feasible.

The simplified task code prompt can be found below.
   Task Implementation Prompt
   Now I will provide you some reference code and you can write the code for the task ”TASK-
   NAME-TEMPLATE”.

   ””” Code Ignored ”””

   Do not use libraries, functions, and assets that you don’t know. For each object, try to describe
   its color, size, category in the task first before you write the code. You do not need extra helper
   functions. Comment the code liberally to explain what each piece does and why it’s written that
   way.
   Now write the code for the task ”TASK-NAME-TEMPLATE” in python code block starting with
   “‘python. Reminder: TASK-STRING-TEMPLATE


D.2.2    TASK M EMORY P ROMPT D ETAILS
In addition to storing existing generated tasks in the memory, the task reflection stage prompt has the
following component:
     (1) the generated task description and code
     (2) the current tasks in the library


                                                    20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


      (3) some examples of accepting and rejecting new task

Then LLM is prompted to answer whether to accept this new task and this improvement will also be
in the context window in the next round of the agent task design. Note that to improve the robustness
of this stage, we prompt GPT three times in parallel to get diverse answers with temperature 0.5,
and only accept the task if there is an agreement. The simplified task reflection prompt can be found
below.


   Task Reflection Prompt
   Do you think your task is sufficiently interesting to be added as a new task for future tasks given
   that we already have the following task name and descriptions? Moreover, does the simulation
   code achieve the goal and the language descriptions in the task? Be as rigorous and high-standard
   as possible.

   Reminder: your task: TASK-STRING-TEMPLATE
   TASK-CODE-TEMPLATE
   current task list: CURRENT-TASK-NAME-TEMPLATE

   Reply explain your reasons and then say True or False, formatted in a python dictionary, do not
   miss commas or add extra spaces. Here are some examples.

   Please incorporate these feedbacks when you design new task!



The finetuned model usually only requires less tokens and complex prompt as input. Here is an
example of the prompt for the finetuned model.


   Finetuned Model Task Implementation Prompt
   Write the pybullet simulation task class [TASK NAME TEMPLATE]. Provide answers in a python
   code block starting with “‘python



D.3    E XAMPLE TASK L IBRARY C ONVERSATIONS

We have observed interesting reference task selection in the task memory to show how the memory
can benefit the task creation process.
   Task Reference Conversations for “Color-Coordinated-Arch-Construction”
    Question: Please pick 4 task python files that you would like to use as reference. Format them in a
    python list.

   Answer: Sure, based on the task description, the following tasks seem to be the most relevant:

    [ color-coordinated-block-tower.py, stack-color-coordinated-blocks.py, construct-colorful-arch.py, color-
    coordinated-insertion.py ]


We also have observed interesting task descriptions and code critics from the task memory. This shows
that the critic has looked into the code implementations and reaching an agreement indeed requires the
task to be sufficiently high-standard. In this example, the task “color-coordinated-insertion-rearrange”
is described as a new task that would rearrange the blocks into a different fixture, but the code and its
purpose is exactly the same as the “color-coordinated-insertion”. The first critic thinks that the task is
repeated with minor differences, while the second critic catches the coding error and refuses to add it
to the task library.


                                                      21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   Task Reflection Conversations for “Sphere-Insertion”

   Input:
            • task-name: color-coordinated-insertion-rearrange
            • task-description: There are four colored ell objects (red, blue, green, yellow) inserted in
              randomly ordered fixtures on the tabletop. The task is to remove each ell object from its
              current fixture and insert it into a new fixture in a specific color order: from left to right, insert
              red, blue, green, and finally yellow.
            • assets-used: [insertion/ell.urdf, insertion/fixture.urdf]

   Critic 0:
   Add to task library?: No
   Reasons: The task is very similar to “color-ordered-insertion” which also involves inserting colored ell
   objects into fixtures in a specific order. The only difference is that in the existing task, the ell objects are
   matched with fixtures of the same color, while in the proposed task, the ell objects are rearranged in
   fixtures of different colors. However, this difference is minor and does not add significant novelty or
   complexity to the task. Therefore, it may not be necessary to add the proposed task to the task list.

   Critic 1:
   Add to task library?: No
   Reasons: The task is similar to “color-ordered-insertion” but adds a new challenge of rearranging the
   ell objects. This task would require more complex manipulation skills and could be interesting for
   developing advanced robotic skills. However, the simulation code does not seem to ensure the color
   order from left to right as described in the task. It randomly places the fixtures and ell objects, and the
   goals are added in the order of the colors array, not according to their positions on the tabletop



D.4     E XAMPLE I MPLEMENTATION E RRORS

We include additional misaligned task and language instruction examples as well as error messages
in this section. Specifically, we have collected an “error book” to be used as a reflection on LLM’s
failures and also include into prompts to improve task generation success rates. Here we show a
selected list of concrete examples and our analysis.

       1. using assets (urdfs) that do not exist
       2. use ambiguous language descriptions as goals. For instance, ”place the colored blocks into
           the matching colored bowls” with one goal and sparse reward as the task instead of adding
           subgoal ”place blue block into blue bowl” and give continuous reward.
       3. ‘matches‘ in the goal has wrong dimensions. It should have the same dimensions as number
           of objects (N) multiplied by the number of goal poses (M). Usually it is N by M.
       4. have vector dimension problem such as ‘np.random.choice(box size)‘ or ‘box size / 2‘ where
          ‘box size‘ is a tuple and not an int
       5. make too large an object for stacking or make the task objects invisible for picking.
       6. accessing index out of bound ‘pallet pose[2]‘ for ‘pallet pose‘.                         ‘pal-
           let pose=get random pose‘ returns a tuple (translation, rotation). It does not have
           3rd component. Similarly accessing ‘container pose[2]‘ or ‘box pose[2]‘ would cause
           errors as well. Since it’s a tuple, try to modify it in-place will also trigger errors.
       7. forget to replace str using ‘fill template()‘ for urdfs with template such as ‘cylinder-
           template.urdf‘. ‘ball-template.urdf‘, ‘line-template.urf‘.
       8. use ‘self.ee = Spatula()‘ as a function when doing pushing tasks, which is incorrect. It
           should be ‘self.ee = Spatula‘.
       9. mistakenly use ‘random pose‘ for target pose. Design target poses based on task objectives.
      10. add only one or fewer language goals which cause language-motion inconsistency. Note
           that the language goals usually are the same number as the pick and place goals.

Some concrete syntax errors are listed:


                                                          22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   Syntax Errors

           - "environment.py, line 195", in reset
            self.task.reset(self)
          File "\<string\>, line 38",\\ in reset
        TypeError: can only concatenate str (not "list") to str

           - "environment.py, line 195",\\ in reset
          object\textunderscore shape =
              np.random.choice(object\textunderscore shapes)
          in numpy.random.mtrand.RandomState.choice
        ValueError: a must be 1-dimensional

         - "task.py, line 325",\\ in get\textunderscore
             random\textunderscore pose
            pos = (pos[0], pos[1], obj\textunderscore size[2] / 2)
        IndexError: tuple index out of range

           - "task.py", line 200, \\ in reward
            pts = obj\textunderscore pts[obj\textunderscore id]
        IndexError: arrays used as indices must be of integer (or
            boolean) type


           - "task.py", line 206, \\ in reward
               for zone\textunderscore idx, (zone\textunderscore pose,
                   zone\textunderscore size) in enumerate(zones):
        TypeError: ’NoneType’ object is not iterable

           - "task.py", line 252, \\ ball\textunderscore pose =
              self.get\textunderscore random\textunderscore pose(env,
              ball\textunderscore size)
        ball\textunderscore pose[0][2] += 0.02
        TypeError: ’tuple’ object does not support item assignment



D.5    G EN S IM F EEDBACKS

We detail the various feedback forms, which have a hierarchical structure, in GenSim in this section.
Specifically, once a simulation code is generated by GenSim, it will first be checked on syntax errors
by “evaluating” the code piece in python. Then we run through the code to generate demonstrations.
During this runtime, we check both the runtime errors (such as missing paths or run out of bound),
and if the code can successfully generate demonstrations. Successfully generating the demonstrations
requires having the actual robot execution to correctly achieve each subgoal and attain the full
reward. This test is unique to robotic simulation, and is critical to filter out bad tasks without any
real-world risks. The tasks saved at this stage could already be used for training, but as in other
ML pipelines, good training performance depends highly on quality. We note that there are three
caveats here: (1) a task code can successfully generate demonstrations but is also mundane or
repeated (2) it has misaligned instructions and actual demonstrations (3) it can be perfect but the
task is too hard to train a policy. Therefore, to ensure the high-quality tasks, our validation stage has
LLM critic that automatically reflects on whether the task is interesting. We have single-task policy
training to evaluate if a task is good for training. Finally, we have the human verification which only
requires a few seconds on average to look at the generated visualization videos without any technical
backgrounds, and can be large-scale deployed with mechanical turks. We detail the human efforts
required to scale up simulation tasks in the next section.

D.6    H UMAN V ERIFICATION

Despite the impressive performance that we have seen in the GenSim system, it still has gaps to
automatically generate infinite “meaningful and diverse” tasks to train robotic policies in simulation.
We note that as in other ML systems, data engineering efforts by humans are also inevitable, and


                                                   23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                                      User 1           User 2         User 3
                       Task       Time     Pass    Time    Pass    Time     Pass
                       Average    12.83     0.8    5.11    0.63     17.4    0.41

Table 3: Human verification time spent and pass rates on tasks generated. The average human time is
around 10 seconds (if each task is checked) and the success rates are above 50%.


currently general judicious LLM evaluation is still an open research question. Luckily, in the GenSim
pipeline, we have various feedbacks before a human has to come into inspection (for instance, in
order to even be considered to be saved as a task, the task needs to be able to successfully generate
demonstrations and be considered by other LLM critics as interesting). Moreover, even when a
human has to come to check if a task is meaningful and interesting, he/she usually only has to look
at the generated demo and give a binary answer, which is almost effortless and can be done very
efficiently. Actual code modification and manual human tasks are sometimes useful, but collaborative
coding with GenSim in the top-down mode will also be helpful in that case. Overall, we generated 30
tasks to benchmark human filtering, and we measured the amounts of human efforts for three different
users with varying experiences in robotic simulation and observed that the average time spent on each
task was less than 10 seconds. This usually means looking at the visualization videos and checking if
the robot actions match the language instructions, rather than actually checking the code. See Table
3 for more details. We note that the human time spent and the pass rates are likely subjective and
depend on each person’s familiarity with the contexts of robot simulations. One interesting future
direction is to comprehensively study how the quality of the generated tasks might affect the quality
of the trained policies. For instance, what levels of degrades can be attributed to misaligned language
instructions. For example, GPT-4 model sometimes hallucinates concepts such as “boundary” and
“ascending size” without actually implementing them in code. This language annotation problem will
not show up in single-task policy training, but it might affect multi-task policy training in some ways.



D.7    F RAMEWORK S CALABILITY D ISCUSSIONS



Although we have shown scaling the simulation task generation with foundation models, we discuss
how to improve the efficiency and scalability of such systems in the future. We first note that such a
system can support both automatic generation (exploratory) and co-pilot generation (goal-directed)
and it reduces the technical backgrounds required for making a new simulation task to train robot
policies. We usually can let the program run for an hour or a few hours and then check back on
the generated tasks. One issue we have observed is that codebase modifications to support cleaned
and documented code structures as well as adding fixes to tolerate some common hallucinations
is important to improve the success rates. Two things that we plan to explore in the future are
larger-scale retrieval augmented generation (RAG) and advanced sampling in task references. These
are important to provide contexts to LLM and guide toward generating more balanced tasks. Finally,
we note that such a system can already be deployed with Amazon Turk to scale up more tasks.



D.8    TASK C ODE E XAMPLE



We attach a few generated code examples from LLM (library imports ignored). The generated task
visualizations are also attached.


                                                  24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   Task: Color-Colored-Insertion

       class ColorOrderedInsertion(Task):
           """Insert differently-colored ell objects into the matching
               color fixture in a specific order."""

            def __init__(self):
                super().__init__()
                self.max_steps = 20
                self.lang_template = "put the {color} L shape block in
                    the L shape hole"
                self.task_completed_desc = "done with insertion."
                self.additional_reset()

            def reset(self, env):
                super().reset(env)

                 # Define colors and their order
                 colors = [’red’, ’blue’, ’green’, ’yellow’]
                 color_order = {color: i for i, color in
                     enumerate(colors)}

                 # Add fixtures.
                 fixture_size = (0.12, 0.12, 0.02)
                 fixture_urdf = ’insertion/fixture.urdf’
                 fixtures = []
                 for color in colors:
                     fixture_pose = self.get_random_pose(env,
                         fixture_size)
                     fixture_id = env.add_object(fixture_urdf,
                         fixture_pose, color=utils.COLORS[color],
                         category=’fixed’)
                     fixtures.append(fixture_id)

                 # Add ell objects.
                 ell_size = (0.04, 0.04, 0.04)
                 ell_urdf = ’insertion/ell.urdf’
                 ells = []
                 for color in colors:
                     ell_pose = self.get_random_pose(env, ell_size)
                     ell_id = env.add_object(ell_urdf, ell_pose,
                         color=utils.COLORS[color])
                     ells.append(ell_id)

                 # Goal: each ell is inserted into the matching color
                     fixture in the correct order.
                 for i, ell in enumerate(ells):
                     self.add_goal(objs=[ell], matches=np.ones((1, 1)),
                         targ_poses=[p.getBasePositionAndOrientation(
                       fixtures[i])], replace=False,
                     rotations=True, metric=’pose’, params=None,
                         step_max_reward=1 / len(ells),
                     language_goal=self.lang_template.format(
                     color=colors[i]))


                                               25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   Task: Four-Corner-Pyramid-Challenge

       class FourCornerPyramidChallenge(Task):
           """Construct a pyramid of blocks in each zone with a
               specific color sequence."""

            def __init__(self):
                super().__init__()
                self.max_steps = 20
                self.lang_template = "build a pyramid of blocks in each
                    zone with the sequence red, blue, green, and yellow
                    from bottom to top"
                self.task_completed_desc = "done building pyramids."
                self.additional_reset()

            def reset(self, env):
                super().reset(env)

                 # Add zones.
                 zone_size = (0.12, 0.12, 0)
                 zone_urdf = ’zone/zone.urdf’
                 zone_poses = []
                 for _ in range(4):
                     zone_pose = self.get_random_pose(env, zone_size)
                     env.add_object(zone_urdf, zone_pose, ’fixed’)
                     zone_poses.append(zone_pose)

                 # Block colors.
                 colors = [
                     utils.COLORS[’red’], utils.COLORS[’blue’],
                         utils.COLORS[’green’], utils.COLORS[’yellow’]
                 ]

                 # Add blocks.
                 block_size = (0.04, 0.04, 0.04)
                 block_urdf = ’block/block.urdf’
                 blocks = []
                 for i in range(4):
                     for _ in range(4):
                         block_pose = self.get_random_pose(env,
                             block_size)
                         block_id = env.add_object(block_urdf,
                             block_pose, color=colors[i])
                         blocks.append(block_id)

                 # Associate placement locations for goals.
                 place_pos = [(0, -0.05, 0.03), (0, 0, 0.03),
                              (0, 0.05, 0.03), (0, -0.025, 0.08),
                              (0, 0.025, 0.08), (0, 0, 0.13)]
                 targs = [(utils.apply(zone_pose, i), zone_pose[1]) for
                     i in place_pos for zone_pose in zone_poses]

                 # Goal: blocks are stacked in a pyramid in each zone.
                 for i in range(4):
                     self.add_goal(objs=blocks[i*4:(i+1)*4],
                         matches=np.ones((4, 4)),
                         targ_poses=targs[i*4:(i+1)*4], replace=False,
                             rotations=True, metric=’pose’, params=None,
                                 step_max_reward=1 / 4,
                                 symmetries=[np.pi/2]*4,
                                 language_goal=self.lang_template)


                                               26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D.9   T OP -D OWN E VALUATION E XAMPLE


In this section, we showcase different LLM’s output for an example task in the top-down evaluation.
   Task:cylinder-in-colorful-container (Zero-Shot Prompt Before Code-LLAMA-Instruct Fine-
   tuning)

        class CylinderInColorfulContainer(p.Task):
            def __init__(self, cylinder_radius, cylinder_height,
                container_size, container_color):
                self.cylinder_radius = cylinder_radius
                self.cylinder_height = cylinder_height
                self.container_size = container_size
                self.container_color = container_color

             def create_cylinder(self):
                 cylinder_id = p.create_cylinder(self.cylinder_radius,
                     self.cylinder_height)
                 return cylinder_id

             def create_container(self):
                 container_id = p.create_box(self.container_size,
                     self.container_color)
                 return container_id

             def add_cylinder_to_container(self, cylinder_id,
                 container_id):
                 p.add_object_to_container(cylinder_id, container_id)

             def run(self):
                 cylinder_id = self.create_cylinder()
                 container_id = self.create_container()
                 self.add_cylinder_to_container(cylinder_id,
                     container_id)
                 p.step_simulation()
                 return cylinder_id, container_id


                                                27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   Task:cylinder-in-colorful-container (Few-Shot Prompt Before Code-LLAMA-Instruct Fine-
   tuning)


       class CylinderInColorfulContainer(Task):
           def __init__(self):
               super().__init__()
               self.max_steps = 3
               self.lang_template = "put the cylinder in the colorful
                   container"
               self.task_completed_desc = "done with insertion."
               self.additional_reset()

            def get_random_pose(self, env, obj_size):
                pose = super().get_random_pose(env, obj_size)
                pos, rot = pose
                rot = utils.eulerXYZ_to_quatXYZW((0, 0, np.pi / 2))
                return pos, rot

            def reset(self, env):
                super().reset(env)

                 """Add cylinder."""
                 size = (0.1, 0.1, 0.04)
                 urdf = ’insertion/cylinder.urdf’
                 pose = self.get_random_pose(env, size)
                 cylinder_id = env.add_object(urdf, pose)

                 """Add colorful container to place cylinder."""
                 size = (0.1, 0.1, 0.04)
                 urdf = ’insertion/container.urdf’
                 targ_pose = self.get_random_pose(env, size)
                 env.add_object(urdf, targ_pose, ’fixed’)

                 self.add_goal(objs=[cylinder_id],
                     matches=np.int32([[1]]), targ_poses=[targ_pose],
                     replace=False,
                         rotations=False, metric=’pose’, params=None,
                             step_max_reward=1, symmetries=[2 * np.pi],
                         language_goal=self.lang_template)


                                               28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   Task: cylinder-in-colorful-container (After Code-LLAMA-Instruct Finetuning)

       import numpy as np
       from cliport.tasks import Primitive
       from cliport.tasks.task import Task
       from cliport.utils import utils

       class CylinderInColorfulContainer(Task):
           """Pick up each cylinder and place it into the container of
               the same color, in a specific color sequence."""

            def __init__(self):
                super().__init__()
                self.max_steps = 20
                self.lang_template = "place the {color} cylinder in the
                    {color} container"
                self.task_completed_desc = "done placing cylinders in
                    containers."
                self.additional_reset()

            def reset(self, env):
                super().reset(env)

                 # Define the color sequence
                 color_sequence = [’red’, ’blue’, ’green’, ’yellow’]

                 # Add containers.
                 container_size = (0.12, 0.12, 0.12)
                 container_urdf = ’container/container-template.urdf’
                 container_poses = []
                 for color in color_sequence:
                     container_pose = self.get_random_pose(env,
                         container_size)
                     env.add_object(container_urdf, container_pose,
                         ’fixed’, color=color)
                     container_poses.append(container_pose)

                 # Add cylinders.
                 cylinder_size = (0.04, 0.04, 0.04)
                 cylinder_urdf = ’cylinder/cylinder-template.urdf’
                 cylinders = []
                 for color in color_sequence:
                     cylinder_pose = self.get_random_pose(env,
                         cylinder_size)
                     cylinder_id = env.add_object(cylinder_urdf,
                         cylinder_pose, color=color)
                     cylinders.append(cylinder_id)

               # Goal: each cylinder is in the container of the same
                   color, in the specified color sequence.
               for i in range(len(cylinders)):
                   self.add_goal(objs=[cylinders[i]],
                       matches=np.ones((1, 1)),
                       targ_poses=[container_poses[i]], replace=False,
                           rotations=True, metric=’pose’, params=None,
                               step_max_reward=1/len(cylinders),
       language_goal=self.lang_template.format(color=color_sequence[i]))


                                               29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   Task: cylinder-in-colorful-container (GPT 3 (davinci) Finetuned)

       import numpy as np
       import os
       import pybullet as p
       import random
       from cliport.tasks import primitives
       from cliport.tasks.grippers import Spatula
       from cliport.tasks.task import Task
       from cliport.utils import utils
       import numpy as np
       from cliport.tasks import primitives
       from cliport.tasks.grippers import Spatula
       from cliport.tasks.task import Task
       from cliport.utils import utils


       class CylinderInColorfulContainer(Task):
           """Put a cylinder into a container of a specific color"""

            def __init__(self):
                super().__init__()
                self.max_steps = 10
                self.lang_template = "put the cylinder into the {color}
                    container"
                self.task_completed_desc = "done putting cylinder in
                    container."
                self.additional_reset()

            def reset(self, env):
                super().reset(env)

                  # Add cylinder.
                  cylinder_size = (0.02, 0.02, 0.05)
                  cylinder_urdf = ’cylinder/cylinder.urdf’
                  cylinder_pose = self.get_random_pose(env, cylinder_size)
                  cylinder_id = env.add_object(cylinder_urdf,
                      cylinder_pose)

                  # Add containers.
                  container_size = (0.1, 0.1, 0.1)
                  container_urdf = ’cylinder/container.urdf’

                  # Colors of containers.
                  # IMPORTANT: RETRIEVE THE ACTUAL COLOR VALUES
                  container_colors = [utils.COLORS[c] for c in
                      utils.COLORS if c != ’red’]

                  container_poses = []
                  container_ids = []
                  for i in range(3):
                      container_pose = self.get_random_pose(env,
                          container_size)
                      container_id = env.add_object(container_urdf,
                          container_pose, color=container_colors[i])
                      container_poses.append(container_pose)
                      container_ids.append(container_id)

                  # Goal: cylinder is in the red container.
                  self.add_goal(objs=[cylinder_id], matches=np.ones((1,
                      3)), targ_poses=container_poses, replace=True,
                          rotations=False, metric=’pose’, params=None,
                              step_max_reward=1)
                  self.lang_goals.append(self.lang_template.format(color="red"))


                                               30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   Task: cylinder-in-colorful-container (GPT3.5 Prompting)

       import numpy as np
       from cliport.tasks.task import Task
       from cliport.utils import utils


       class CylinderInColorfulContainer(Task):
           def __init__(self):
               super().__init__()
               self.max_steps = 10
               self.lang_template = "Place the {color} cylinder in the
                   {color} container"
               self.task_completed_desc = "Cylinders placed in
                   containers."
               self.additional_reset()

            def reset(self, env):
                super().reset(env)

                 # Define colors and corresponding containers
                 colors = [’red’, ’blue’, ’green’, ’yellow’]
                 containers = [’red’, ’blue’, ’green’, ’yellow’]

                 # Shuffle the colors and containers to avoid always
                     picking the same combination
                 np.random.shuffle(colors)
                 np.random.shuffle(containers)

                 # Add containers
                 container_size = (0.1, 0.1, 0.1)
                 container_template = ’container/container-template.urdf’
                 container_poses = []
                 for color in containers:
                     container_pose = self.get_random_pose(env,
                         container_size)
                     container_urdf =
                         container_template.replace(’COLOR’, color)
                     env.add_object(container_urdf, container_pose,
                         ’fixed’)
                     container_poses.append(container_pose)

                 # Add cylinders
                 cylinder_size = (0.05, 0.05, 0.1)
                 cylinder_template = ’cylinder/cylinder-template.urdf’
                 cylinders = []
                 for i, color in enumerate(colors):
                     cylinder_pose = self.get_random_pose(env,
                         cylinder_size)
                     cylinder_urdf = cylinder_template.replace(’COLOR’,
                         color)
                     cylinder_id = env.add_object(cylinder_urdf,
                         cylinder_pose)
                     cylinders.append(cylinder_id)

                 # Add goals
                 for i, color in enumerate(colors):
                     language_goal =
                         self.lang_template.format(color=color)
                     self.add_goal(objs=[cylinders[i]],
                         matches=np.ones((1, 1)),
                         targ_poses=[container_poses[i]], replace=False,
                                   rotations=True, metric=’pose’,
                                       params=None, step_max_reward=1,
                                       language_goal=language_goal)

                                               31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   Task: cylinder-in-colorful-container (GPT3.5 Finetuned)

       import numpy as np
       import os
       import pybullet as p
       import random
       from cliport.tasks import primitives
       from cliport.tasks.grippers import Spatula
       from cliport.tasks.task import Task
       from cliport.utils import utils

       class CylinderInColorfulContainer(Task):
           """Pick up a cylinder of a specific color and place it into
               a container of the same color."""

            def __init__(self):
                super().__init__()
                self.max_steps = 20
                self.lang_template = "put the {color} cylinder in the
                    {color} container"
                self.task_completed_desc = "done placing cylinders in
                    containers."
                self.additional_reset()

            def reset(self, env):
                super().reset(env)

                 # Define colors and their corresponding containers and
                     cylinders.
                 colors = [’red’, ’blue’, ’green’, ’yellow’]
                 containers = []
                 cylinders = []
                 for color in colors:
                     # Add container.
                     container_size = (0.12, 0.12, 0.12)
                     container_pose = self.get_random_pose(env,
                         container_size)
                     container_id =
                         env.add_object(’container/container-template.urdf’,
                         container_pose, color=utils.COLORS[color])
                     containers.append(container_id)

                       # Add cylinder.
                       cylinder_size = (0.04, 0.04, 0.04)
                       cylinder_pose = self.get_random_pose(env,
                           cylinder_size)
                       cylinder_id =
                           env.add_object(’cylinder/cylinder-template.urdf’,
                           cylinder_pose, color=utils.COLORS[color])
                       cylinders.append(cylinder_id)

                 # Goal: each cylinder is in a container of the same
                     color.
                 for i in range(len(colors)):
                     self.add_goal(objs=[cylinders[i]],
                         matches=np.ones((1, 1)), targ_poses
                         =[p.getBasePositionAndOrientation(
                     containers[i])], replace=False,
                             rotations=True, metric=’pose’, params=None,
                             step_max_reward=1/len(colors),
                 language_goal=self.lang_template.format(color=colors[i]))


                                               32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   Task: cylinder-in-colorful-container (GPT 4)

       import numpy as np
       import os
       import pybullet as p
       import random
       from cliport.tasks import primitives
       from cliport.tasks.grippers import Spatula
       from cliport.tasks.task import Task
       from cliport.utils import utils
       import numpy as np
       from cliport.tasks.task import Task
       from cliport.utils import utils

       class CylinderInColorfulContainer(Task):
           """Pick up four cylinders of distinct colors (red, blue,
               green, yellow) and place each of them into a container
               of the same color."""

            def __init__(self):
                super().__init__()
                self.max_steps = 4
                self.lang_template = "put the {} cylinder in the {}
                    container"
                self.task_completed_desc = "done placing cylinders in
                    containers."
                self.additional_reset()

            def reset(self, env):
                super().reset(env)

                  # Define colors
                  colors = [’red’, ’blue’, ’green’, ’yellow’]

                  # Add containers.
                  container_size = (0.12, 0.12, 0.12)
                  container_template = ’container/container-template.urdf’
                  container_poses = []
                  for color in colors:
                      container_pose = self.get_random_pose(env,
                          container_size)
                      env.add_object(container_template, container_pose,
                          category=’fixed’, color=utils.COLORS[color])
                      container_poses.append(container_pose)

                  # Add cylinders.
                  cylinder_size = (0.04, 0.04, 0.12)
                  cylinder_template = ’cylinder/cylinder-template.urdf’
                  cylinders = []
                  for color in colors:
                      cylinder_pose = self.get_random_pose(env,
                          cylinder_size)
                      cylinder_id = env.add_object(cylinder_template,
                          cylinder_pose, color=utils.COLORS[color])
                      cylinders.append(cylinder_id)

            # Goal: each cylinder is in a container of the same color.
                for i in range(len(cylinders)):
                    self.add_goal(objs=[cylinders[i]],
                        matches=np.ones((1, 1)),
                        targ_poses=[container_poses[i]], replace=False,
                                  rotations=True, metric=’pose’,
                                      params=None,
                                      step_max_reward=1/len(cylinders))
                    self.lang_goals.append(self.lang_template.format(
                    colors[i], colors[i]))
                                                  33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                               34
                        Figure 13: Gallery of generated tasks by GPT-4.
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


          “Put the {color} L shape block in the L        “Build a pyramid of blocks in each zone with
          shape hole”                                    the sequence red, blue, green, and yellow from
                                                         bottom to top”

Figure 14: The simulation task visualizations for “color-ordered-insertion” and “four-corner-pyramid-
challenge” correspond to the implementations below.


                                                    35
