Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


L EARNING TO S OLVE N EW SEQUENTIAL DECISION -
MAKING TASKS WITH I N -C ONTEXT L EARNING

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT

         Training autonomous agents that can generalize to new tasks from a small num-
         ber of demonstrations is a long-standing problem in machine learning. Recently,
         transformers have displayed impressive few-shot learning capabilities on a wide
         range of domains in language and vision. However, the sequential decision-
         making setting poses additional challenges and has a much lower tolerance for
         errors since the environment’s stochasticity or the agent’s wrong actions can lead
         to unseen (and sometimes unrecoverable) states. In this paper, we use an illus-
         trative example to show that a naive approach to using transformers in sequential
         decision-making problems does not lead to few-shot learning. We then demon-
         strate how training on sequences of trajectories with certain distributional prop-
         erties leads to few-shot learning in new sequential decision-making tasks. We
         investigate different design choices and find that larger model and dataset sizes,
         as well as more task diversity, environment stochasticity and trajectory burstiness,
         all result in better in-context learning of new out-of-distribution tasks. Our work
         demonstrates that by leveraging large offline pretraining datasets, our model is
         able to generalize to unseen MiniHack and Procgen tasks via in-context learning,
         from just a handful of expert demonstrations per task.


1   I NTRODUCTION
For many real-world application domains such as robotics or virtual assistants, collecting large
amounts of data for training an agent can be time consuming, expensive, or even dangerous.
Hence, the ability to learn new tasks from a handful of demonstrations is crucial for enabling a
wider range of use cases. However, current deep learning agents often struggle to learn new tasks
from a limited number of demonstrations. Prior work attempts to address this problem using meta-
learning (Schmidhuber, 1987; Duan et al., 2016; Finn et al., 2017a; Pong et al., 2022; Mitchell et al.,
2021; Beck et al., 2023) but these methods tend to be difficult to use in practice and require more
than a handful of demonstrations or extensive fine-tuning. In contrast, large transformers trained
on vast amounts of data can learn new tasks from only a few examples without any parameter up-
dates (Brown et al., 2020; Kaplan et al., 2020; Olsson et al., 2022a; Chan et al., 2022a). This
emergent phenomenon is called few-shot or in-context learning (ICL), and is achieved by simply
conditioning the model’s outputs on a context containing a few examples for solving the task (Brown
et al., 2020; Ganguli et al., 2022; Wei et al., 2022).
While in-context learning has been observed in multiple domains from language (Brown et al., 2020)
to vision (Chan et al., 2022a), it has not yet been extensively studied in sequential decision-making
settings. The sequential decision-making problem poses additional challenges that do not appear in
the supervised or self-supervised settings.
In this paper, we study the data distributional properties required to enable in-context learning of
sequential decision-making tasks. Our key finding is that in contrast to (self-)supervised learn-
ing where the context can simply contain a few different examples (or predictions), in sequential
decision-making it is crucial for the context to contain full trajectories (or sequences of predictions)
to cover the potentially wide range of states the agent may find itself in at deployment. Translating
this insight into a dataset construction pipeline, we demonstrate that we can enable few-shot learn-
ing of unseen tasks on both the MiniHack and Procgen benchmarks. We additionally perform an
extensive study of other design choices such as the model size, dataset size, trajectory burstiness,


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 1: Illustration of Train and Test Tasks. (Left) A collection of procedurally generated
Procgen levels from the Fruitbot task, demonstrating the complexity and diversity inherent in
the environment’s design. (Middle) Tasks for training. (Right) Tasks for testing. Note that the
test tasks are entirely distinct from the training tasks, and each of them is procedurally generated,
consisting of multiple levels.



environment stochasticity, and task diversity. Our experiments suggest that larger model and dataset
sizes, as well as more trajectory burstiness, environment stochasticity, and task diversity, all lead to
better in-context learning when using transformers for sequential decision-making tasks. Our work
is first to show that generalization to new Procgen and MiniHack tasks is possible from just
a handful of expert demonstrations and no weight updates using the transformer’s in-context
learning ability. This goes beyond the well-studied generalization to new levels which are merely
procedurally generated instances of the training task rather than fundamentally new tasks (Cobbe
et al., 2020; Igl et al., 2019; Laskin et al., 2020; Raileanu et al., 2020b; Raileanu & Fergus, 2021).



2    BACKGROUND


Markov Decision Processes: Sequential decision-making tasks can be modeled by Markov De-
cision Processes (MDPs) (Sutton & Barto, 2018) represented by a tuple M = S, A, R, P, γ, µ ,
where S is the state space, A is the action space, R : S × A → [Rmin , Rmax ] is the reward
function , P : S × A × S → R≥0 is the transition function, γ ∈ (0, 1] is the discount fac-
tor, and µ : S → R≥0 is the initial state distribution. We denote the trajectory of an episode
by τ = (s0 , a0 , r0 , . . . , sT , aT , rT , sT +1 ) where rt = R(st , at ) and T is the length of the trajec-
tory which can be infinite. If a trajectory is generated by a stochastic policy π : S × A → R≥0 ,
       PT
Rπ = t=0 γ t rt is a random variable that describes the discounted return the policy achieves. The
objective is to find a policy π ⋆ that maximizes the expected discounted return in the MDP.
Problem Setting. In this paper, we are interested in learning new tasks from a small number of
demonstrations after pretraining on a large dataset of offline trajectories from different tasks. For-
mally, we consider a set of tasks T split into disjoint sets Ttrain and Ttest . The train and test tasks
have the same action space, but different state spaces, initial state distributions, transition and reward
functions. Each task Ti ∈ T is procedurally generated, meaning that it includes L MDPs {Mli }L         l=1
sharing the same state spaces, transition and reward functions, but different initial state distributions.
We refer to these as “levels” in this paper as depicted in Figure 1: for MiniHack and Procgen, each
level corresponds to a different random seed used to generate the corresponding instance of the task.
For each MDP Mi in our set, we collect K expert demonstrations using reinforcement learning
(RL) agents which were pretrained on Mi , to create a dataset Di containing trajectories of the form
τi = (si0 , ai0 , . . . , siT , aiT ), where T is the maximum number of steps in the episode. For the test
MDPs K is small, meaning that we only collect a few expert demonstrations for each level of a test
task and use them to condition our transformer model.


                                                      2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 2: Experimental Setup: We create a dataset of expert trajectories by rolling out expert
policies on N tasks. Given these expert trajectories, we construct multi-trajectory sequences with
trajectory burstiness pb . A sequence is bursty when there are at least two trajectories in the sequence
from the same level. However, note that these trajectories are typically different due to the environ-
ment’s stochasticity. These multi-trajectory sequences then serve as input to the causal transformer,
which we train to predict actions. During evaluation, we condition the transformer on an expert
trajectory from an unseen task, then rollout the transformer policy until the episode terminates.


3     M ETHODOLOGY

3.1   T RAINING DATA

Tasks: In order to study ICL for sequential decision-making, we seek domains which are rich,
diverse, and of varying complexity. For this reason, we decided to use MiniHack (Samvelyan et al.,
2021) and Procgen (Cobbe et al., 2020). MiniHack is a procedurally generated, dungeon-world
sandbox based on the NetHack Learning Environment (Küttler et al., 2020) which provides a diverse
suite of tasks exhibiting challenges related to navigation, tool use, generalization, exploration and
planning. Procgen, similarly to MiniHack, provides 16 procedurally generated game-like tasks to
test the generalization abilities of the agent, and additionally features high-dimensional pixel-based
observations. In MiniHack and Procgen, each “level” corresponds to a different random seed used
to generate the task instance, including the layout, entities and visual aspects.
To generate our expert datasets, we used final checkpoints of E3B (Henaff et al., 2022) policies for
MiniHack and PPO (Cobbe et al., 2020) policies for Procgen. Details can be found in B.3.
Sequence Construction for Transformer Training: After collecting the expert data, we construct
the trajectory sequences for training the transformer. Rather than using single-trajectory sequences
as in the Decision Transformer model (Chen et al., 2021) and its successors (Janner et al., 2021a;
Lee et al., 2022), we use multi-trajectory sequences (Team et al., 2023a; Laskin et al., 2022). We
also remove the explicit conditioning on the episodic return and instead process the sequences in the
form of {(s0 , a0 , s1 , a1 , r1 , . . . sT , aT )} for each trajectory.
Moreoever, the multi-trajectory sequences adhere to certain distributional properties. First, we ex-
tend the concept of burstiness to the sequential decision-making setting. Burstiness was first intro-
duced in Chan et al. (2022a) to describe the quality of a dataset sample where the context contains
examples that are similar to the query (for example, from the same class). Here, we extend this
idea to trajectory burstiness, which we define as the probability of the context containing atleast two
trajectories from the same level . These trajectories can be viewed as the sequential decision-making
equivalent of few-shot examples in supervised learning. To construct a bursty trajectory sequence,
we sample E trajectories from a given set of L levels in such a way that, with probability pb , there are
at least two trajectories coming from the same level. Note that all the trajectories within a sequence
come from the same task.
In our main experiments (Section 5), we consider pb = 1.0, meaning that the context contains at
least one trajectory from the same level as the query. Lastly, we shuffle the trajectories (and notably
not the transitions within these trajectories) to construct a sequence of trajectories that will be used
to train the transformer. Figure 2 contains an illustration of our approach.


                                                   3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


3.2       M ODEL T RAINING AND E VALUATION

Model Architecture and Training Procedure: For both MiniHack and Procgen, we use standard
neural network architectures used in prior work (Samvelyan et al., 2021; Cobbe et al., 2020) to
process observations and use a separate embedding layer to process actions. In both cases, we then
pass these sequences to a causal transformer (Vaswani et al., 2017b). Finally, we use a cross-
entropy loss over all the action predictions in our sequence. Unless otherwise specified, we use a
100M parameter transformer model for MiniHack and a 210M parameter model for Procgen.
Evaluation: We evaluate all the pretrained models on unseen tasks that differ from those used during
training, as shown in Figure 1. For each pretrained model, we conduct two types of evaluations:
few-shot and zero-shot. For few-shot evaluations, we condition the model on a handful of expert
demonstration (ranging from 1 to 7) and roll out the transformer policy for five episodes. This is
repeated for L levels per task, and we aggregate the episodic return across all levels. The evaluation
protocol for zero-shot evaluations is identical, with the exception that we do not condition on the
expert demonstration. For all our results, we report mean and standard deviation across 3 seeds.


4       M OTIVATING E XPERIMENT

Existing state-of-the-art methods that use transformers for decision-making train them on sequences
consisting of single trajectories (Chen et al., 2021). In this section, we show that this setup fails to
promote in-context learning of new tasks. Instead, we will demonstrate that training transformers on
sequences of multiple trajectories can enable few-shot learning of unseen tasks. To illustrate this, we
compare the performance of a single-trajectory transformer trained on single-trajectory sequences,
and a multi-trajectory transformer trained on multi-trajectory sequences in a simple setting.
The single-trajectory transformer’s context consists of all past transitions from the current episode
ct = {(s0 , a0 , s1 , a1 , . . . , st−1 , at−1 )}, and the transformer has to predict the action given the cur-
rent state and the context p(at |st , ct ) for each time-step t. Hence, given a new task different from the
training ones (meaning that we cannot expect much in-weights (Chen et al., 2022) or zero-shot gen-
eralization), the agent can only leverage information from past transitions within the same episode.
However, agents typically face different decisions within an episode (i.e., they rarely see the same
state twice), making the problem very challenging.
In contrast, a multi-trajectory transformer’s context consists of one or more full trajectories from the
same task, as well as all past transitions from the current episode. We will consider the one-shot case
in this example where ct = {(s00 , a00 , . . . , s0T , a0T ), (s10 , a10 , . . . , s1t−1 , a1t−1 , )}. The transformer has
to predict the action for the current state p(a1t |s1t , ct ) for all t. Hence, when faced with a new task
(even if very different from from the training ones), the agent can now leverage information from
full trajectories on this task. Note that due to the stochasticity inherent in many environments, the
agent will often be faced with new scenarios that don’t appear in its context, so simple memorization
is not enough and generalization is required. However, since the agent has access to full trajectories,
it is less likely that it will encounter states that are too different from the ones in its context so it
should perform better.
To verify our hypothesis that in sequential decision-making, multi-trajectory transformers enable
better in-context learning than single-trajectory transformers, we perform the following experi-
ment. We collect expert demonstrations from 100K levels from the MiniHack-MultiRoom-N6
task. Using the above protocols, we construct training sequences for the single-trajectory and multi-
trajectory transformers and train them using the same hyperparameters1 . We then evaluate them
on the MiniHack-Labyrinth task. To ensure a fair comparison, we condition both trans-
former variants on a single expert demonstration from the test task. The multi-trajectory trans-
former with episodic return of 0.780 ± 0.07 outperforms the single-trajectory transformer
with −0.323 ± 0.05 by a large margin, indicating the importance of training transformers
on sequences of trajectories in order to obtain in-context learning of new sequential decision-
making tasks (from only a handful of demonstrations and without any weight updates). For the
rest of the results in the paper, we use multi-trajectory transformer as our base model for analysis.

    1
        We set trajectory burstiness pb = 1 for this experiment.


                                                            4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 3: Performance on New MiniHack Tasks comparing (1) our multi-trajectory transformer
conditioned on different number of demonstrations from the same level, (2) Hashmap baseline con-
ditioned on the same demonstrations, and (3) BC baseline conditioned on zero and one demonstra-
tion due to context length constraints. Our model outperforms both baselines when provided with at
least one demonstration and its performance improves with the number of demonstration.

5       E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS
We next illustrate the in-context learning abilities of the multi-trajectory transformer on unseen
MiniHack and Procgen tasks, and compare against single-trajectory and hashmap-based baselines.
While many previous works have studied generalization to new levels, to our knowledge we are the
first to study generalization to completely different tasks, and we demonstrate promising results.
Baselines: We compare against two baselines. Hashmap (HM): employs a hashmap over states in
order to take the action corresponding to the same state from context (i.e., the expert action). It’s
important to note that in deterministic environments, this baseline acts as an oracle. However, in
stochastic environments, it struggles to generalize to states that are not present in the demonstration.
Behavioural Cloning (BC): trains a transformer with single trajectory sequences. BC learns a
policy to predict the action the expert would take given the history of transitions so far in the current
trajectory. During evaluation time, we condition BC on zero (BC-0) and one (BC-1) demonstration.
Because of the lack of context, BC struggles to generalize to new tasks.

5.1       M AIN R ESULTS

MiniHack We collect offline data from 12 MiniHack tasks and train a multi-trajectory transformer
on sequences comprising eight trajectories from the same level (pb = 1). For evaluation, we test the
performance on 4 new MiniHack tasks. We would like to emphasize that environments are stochas-
tic where the stochasticity is induced by sticky actions. The results are reported in Figure 3. Our
approach achieves good performance across multiple scenarios, demonstrating that it can learn new
tasks with only a handful of demonstrations and without any weight updates. In addition, there is
a consistent increase in performance with the addition of more demonstrations across all environ-
ments. Notably, our model outperforms all the baselines. When compared to BC, it underscores the
significance of training transformers on sequences of trajectories, rather than on single trajectories,
to foster in-context learning of new tasks. In contrast to the Hashmap, our model demonstrates the
capability to learn a policy that generalizes to unseen states, rather than merely copying actions from
its context which is insufficient in this setting.
Procgen We also evaluate our approach on a high-dimensional pixel-based domain to test (Figure 1)
the generality of our findings. To do so, we collect offline data from 11 Procgen tasks and train a
transformer on Procgen sequences compromising of five episodes from the same level (pb = 1). We
then evaluate the performance on five unseen tasks. To induce stochasticity, we add gaussian noise
to the observations while performing online rollouts2 . As shown in Figure 4, the performance of
our model consistently increases as we condition on more demonstrations while outperforming the
baselines. In the case of Maze, the improvement with number of demonstrations is not substantial.
We believe this is due to the fact that in Maze, the spatial information of the agent consists of only a
few pixels and hence it maybe not be captured by the visual encoder making it difficult to take good
actions. In summary, our results show that our method works well in complex pixel environments
where learning good state representations is hard, and where states, layouts, dynamics, rewards,
colors, textures, backgrounds, and visual features all vary between training and testing.
    2
        We also evaluate with sticky actions and found no difference in performance (Appendix C.3)


                                                        5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 4: Performance on New Procgen Tasks comparing (1) our multi-trajectory transformer con-
ditioned on different number of demonstrations from the same level, (2) Hashmap baseline condi-
tioned on the same demonstrations, and (3) BC baseline conditioned on zero and one demonstration
due to context length constraints. Our model outperforms both behavioral cloning baselines, is com-
petitive with Hashmap on Maze and Plunder, and its performance improves with demonstrations.


5.2     D ETAILED A NALYSIS ON M INI H ACK

In this section, we conduct an extensive analysis on the different factors which affect in-context
learning for sequential decision-making. We highlight both zero-shot and one-shot results and con-
clude with a discussion on failure cases. As we’ve seen in the previous section, adding more demon-
strations in the context generally improves the results, so here we focus on the comparison between
zero-shot and one-shot which is the most significant.

5.2.1    E FFECT OF T RAJECTORY B URSTINESS
First, we analyze the effect of trajectory burstiness. We hypothesize that having demonstrations
similar to the query inside the context (i.e., trajectory burstiness) encourages the model to utilize
the contextual information. Our results in Figure 6a confirm that in-context learning improves with
more trajectory burstiness, resulting in strong one-shot generalization to new tasks for pb = 1. This
is consistent with insights from supervised learning Chan et al. (2022a).

5.2.2    E FFECT OF E NVIRONMENT S TOCHASTICITY
We next investigate the impact of different environment dynam-
ics on in-context learning. For this, we gather offline data using
expert E3B policies in both deterministic and stochastic environ-
ments. To introduce stochasticity in the environments, we em-
ploy sticky actions, a widely utilized technique in deep reinforce-
ment learning (Machado et al., 2018) where previous actions are
repeated with some probability (p = 0.1 in our experiments).
We gather pretraining datasets from both stochastic and de-
terministic versions of the MiniHack-MultiRoom-N6 task,               Figure 5: Mean one-shot per-
which we use to train two separate variants of the transformer        formance on unseen MiniHack
model. We then evaluate each model on unseen environments             tasks (std. across 3 seeds). Train-
with either stochastic or deterministic dynamics. Results are         ing with stochastic dynamics im-
shown in a confusion matrix in Figure 5.                              proves in-context learning.
Models trained with stochastic dynamics exhibit superior per-
formance on unseen tasks, whether their dynamics are deterministic or stochastic. An explanation
is that when dynamics are deterministic, the diversity within the training dataset is comparatively
low, resulting in identical copies of the trajectory in the context and query. This limits the model’s
in-context learning ability to pure copying behavior. In contrast, when the training environment
dynamics are stochastic, the pretraining dataset exhibits greater diversity and identical copies of the
trajectory become rarer, forcing the model to generalize from similar, but not identical, trajectories.

5.2.3    E FFECT OF DATASET S IZE , M ODEL S IZE AND TASK D IVERSITY
Dataset Size: While many studies in NLP (Brown et al., 2020; Kaplan et al., 2020; Olsson et al.,
2022a) have reported a positive correlation between dataset size and ICL, few have studied it the


                                                   6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                  (a) Effect of Trajectory Burstiness


                                      (b) Effect of Dataset Size


                                       (c) Effect of Model Size


                                     (d) Effect of Task Diversity

Figure 6: Mean performance (with std. across 3 seeds) for different levels of trajectory burstiness
(a), dataset sizes (b), model sizes (c) and numbers of training tasks (d). These factors all have a
positive effect on in-context learning.


realm of sequential decision-making (Team et al., 2023a). Consequently, here we explore the impact
of the dataset size on ICL and cross-task generalization. We train models on varying numbers of
levels from the same MiniHack task and evaluate them on a different MiniHack task. As seen
in Figure 6b, performance on unseen tasks increases with the dataset size and saturates at 30K levels
for one-shot models. This is expected as the models improve on their ability to generalize as the
dataset increases, even to these new tasks. Moreover, as the dataset sizes increases, we also see the
emergence of a performance gap between one-shot and zero-shot evaluations on these new tasks,
demonstrating the emergence of in-context learning. We also observe that the performance saturates
and subsequently increasing the dataset size above a certain scale (30K levels) yields diminishing
returns. We hypothesize that this could be due to insufficient data diversity.
Model Size: We next scale the number of model parameters and study how it affects ICL. We eval-
uate transformer models with 1M, 10M, 30M and 100M parameters, trained on a dataset consisting
of 100, 000 levels from 12 different MiniHack tasks. Figure 6c shows that increasing the model size
increases ICL on unseen tasks. However, in this case, scaling the model size has diminishing returns
and the performance plateaus after 30M parameters.
Task Diversity: In this section, we study how ICL behaves as we scale the diversity of tasks used
for training. Increasing the diversity of tasks should improve the generalization of the in-weights
learning, but its not clear how this should affect a model’s ability to ’soft-copy’ with ICL. In Fig-


                                                  7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


ure 6d we see that above a certain diversity of tasks, ICL ability plateaus, while as the task diversity
shrinks, some novel tasks are capable of demonstrating ICL, while others are not. In Section 5.2.4,
we investigate the difference between these environments detail.

5.2.4   I NVESTIGATING FAILURE M ODES
In this section, we aim to better understand why our approach
performs much better on some tasks than others. To do so, we
plot the episodic return and in-context action accuracy for 8
unseen test tasks after training the model on 12 different tasks
(see Figure 7). The in-context action accuracy is defined as the
percentage of correct actions taken by the agent (i.e., match-
ing the actions provided in the context corresponding to the
same states). High in-context action accuracy indicates that the
model is able to effectively utilize the demonstration provided
in its context. We categorize these results into four categories,
each explaining a different learning phenomenon.
In-Context Learning: In this category, we have environments
like Labyrinth and Memento F2 with both high episodic
return and high in-context action accuracy. The high in-context     Figure 7: Investigating Failure
action accuracy indicates that the transformer learns to copy       Modes: The figure illustrates dif-
the correct action when it encounters states that appear in the     ferent learning phenomena across
given demonstration, which in turn leads to good performance        eight tasks. The x-axis repre-
on the task, as expected.                                           sents the in-context action accu-
In-Weights Learning: In this category, we have environments         racy, while the y-axis presents the
like MazeWalk-15 and MazeWalk-45 where the episodic                 episodic return, with each point
return is relatively high but the in-context action accuracy is     in the plot corresponding to an
low. This means that the agent manages to perform well on           unseen task. We cluster these
the new task even without copying actions from its context.         data points using KMeans clus-
This suggests the model is leveraging information stored in its     tering and color-code each clus-
weights during training, also referred to as in-weights learn-      ter. Each cluster corresponds to
ing (Chan et al., 2022a). It is worth noting that MazeWalk-9        a different learning phenomenon,
is one of the training environments, which shares similarities      which are discussed in-depth in
with the two test ones. However, note that the test tasks are       Section 5.2.4.
much harder versions of the training one, so they require some
degree of generalization.
Unforgiving Environment: This category includes environments such as River-Narrow and
Memento-F4 with high in-context action accuracy but low episodic returns. This indicates that
while the agent is able to perform in-context learning and predict the correct action for most states
that appear in the demonstration, it still cannot achieve high reward due to reaching unrecoverable
states. This is reminiscent of the covariate shift problem in imitation learning, where despite predict-
ing actions well on the expert data, the agent performs poorly at deployment due to small mistakes
which put it outside the training distribution (Ross et al., 2011).
Distributional Drift: In the last category, we have environments like Lava-Crossing and
Hide-N-Seek-Big where both the episodic return and the in-context action accuracy are low.
Here, the agent is unable to perform in-context learning and the test tasks are too different from the
training ones for in-weights learning to be effective.

6   R ELATED W ORK
Here we give an overview of related work from the areas of learning from a few demonstrations,
using transformers for sequential decision-making, and in-context learning with transformers. We
provide additional references in Appendix A.
Learning from a Few Demonstrations: Several other works aim to learn from only a few demon-
strations using them as inverse curricula for solving very hard exploration problems, even if the
demonstrations don’t contain any actions (Resnick et al., 2018; Salimans & Chen, 2018). However,


                                                   8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


none of these works leverage the in-context learning abilities of transformers to achieve few-shot
offline learning of new tasks. There is also a large body of work focusing on meta-reinforcement
learning, but this requires online interaction and feedback from the environment in order to adapt to
new tasks at test time (Schmidhuber, 1987; Duan et al., 2016; Finn et al., 2017a; Pong et al., 2022;
Mitchell et al., 2021; Beck et al., 2023), which we do not assume. Instead, our aim is to learn to
solve new tasks from a small number of offline demonstrations.
Transformers for Sequential Decision-Making: The success of transformers in natural lan-
guage processing (Vaswani et al., 2017a) has motivated their application to sequential decision-
making (Raileanu et al., 2020a; Janner et al., 2021b; Reid et al., 2022; Ajay et al., 2022; Correia &
Alexandre, 2022; Yamagata et al., 2022; Melo, 2022; Reed et al., 2022; Zheng et al., 2022; Chen
et al., 2022; Lu et al., 2023; Ryoo et al., 2022; Lin et al.; Sun et al., 2023; Hu et al., 2023; Xu
et al., 2023; Sudhakaran & Risi, 2023), with several works emphasizing their limitations in this
setting (Brandfonbrener et al., 2022; Paster et al., 2022; Siebenborn et al., 2022). The Decision
Transformer (DT) (Chen et al., 2021) was one of the first works to treat policy optimization as a
sequence modelling problem and train transformer policies conditioned on the episode history and
future return. Inspired by DT, Multi-Game Decision Transformer (MGDT) (Lee et al., 2022) trains
a transformer to solve multiple Atari games, but the generalization capablities are limited without
additional fine-tuning on the unseen tasks. More similar to our work, Prompt-DT (Xu et al., 2022)
shows that DTs conditioned on an explicit prompt exhibit few-shot learning of new tasks (i.e., with
different reward functions) in the same environment (i.e., with the same states and dynamics). Sim-
ilarly, Melo (2022) show that transformers are meta-reinforcement learners, but they require access
to rewards and multiple demonstrations at test time. While Team et al. (2023b) also demonstrates
fast online learning of new tasks, their model is trained on billions of tasks, whereas we consider the
few-shot offline learning setting and a task space which is orders of magnitude smaller. In contrast
with all these works, our goal is to learn to generalize to completely new tasks (i.e., with different
states, dynamics, and rewards) from a small number of expert demonstrations. Our work is also first
to extensively study how different factors (such as task diversity, trajectory burstiness, environment
stochasticity, model and dataset size) influence the emergence of in-context learning in sequential
decision-making.
In-Context Learning with Transformers: In-context learning (ICL), first coined in (Brown et al.,
2020), is a phenomenon where a model learns a completely new task simply by conditioning on a
few examples, without the need for fine-tuning or parameter updating. Many works thereafter study
this phenomenon (von Oswald et al., 2022; Chan et al., 2022b; Akyürek et al., 2022; Olsson et al.,
2022b; Hahn & Goyal, 2023; Xie et al., 2021; Dai et al., 2022). For example, (Chan et al., 2022a)
analyze what makes large language models perform well on few-shot learning tasks through the lens
of data properties. Their findings suggest that ICL naturally arises when data distribution follows a
power law (i.e., Zipfian) distribution and exhibits inherent ”burstiness.” In Kirsch et al. (2022), the
authors demonstrate that ICL emerges as a function of the number of tasks and model size, with a
clear phase transition between instance memorization, task memorization, and generalization. More
recently, Garg et al. (2022) show that standard transformers can ICL learn entire function classes
such as linear functions, sparse linear functions, and two-layer MLPs. While all these works are
confined to the supervised learning setting, our work aims to study what drives the emergence of
ICL in the sequential decision-making setting.


7   C ONCLUSION
In this work, we perform an in-depth study of the different factors which influence in-context learn-
ing for sequential decision-making tasks. We find that a key ingredient during pretraining is to
include entire trajectories in the context, which belong to the same environment level as the query
trajectory. In addition, we find that larger model and dataset sizes, as well as more task diversity,
environment stochasticity, and trajectory burstiness, all result in better few-shot learning of out-
of-distribution tasks. Leveraging these insights, we are able to train models which generalize to
unseen tasks at test time on both the MiniHack and Procgen benchmarks, using only a handful of
expert demonstrations and no additional weight updates. To our knowledge, we are the first to show
cross-task generalization on MiniHack and Procgen. We also probe the limits of our approach by
highlighting different failure modes, such as those caused by environment stochasticity and covariate
shift, which we believe constitute important directions for future work.


                                                  9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Anurag Ajay, Yilun Du, Abhi Gupta, Joshua Tenenbaum, Tommi Jaakkola, and Pulkit Agrawal.
  Is conditional generative modeling all you need for decision-making?    arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2211.15657, 2022.
Ekin Akyürek, Dale Schuurmans, Jacob Andreas, Tengyu Ma, and Denny Zhou. What learning algo-
  rithm is in-context learning? investigations with linear models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.15661,
  2022.
Christopher G Atkeson and Stefan Schaal. Learning tasks from a single demonstration. In Proceed-
  ings of International Conference on Robotics and Automation, volume 2, pp. 1706–1712. IEEE,
  1997.
Jacob Beck, Risto Vuorio, Evan Zheran Liu, Zheng Xiong, Luisa Zintgraf, Chelsea Finn, and Shi-
  mon Whiteson. A survey of meta-reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.08028,
  2023.
David Brandfonbrener, Alberto Bietti, Jacob Buckman, Romain Laroche, and Joan Bruna. When
  does return-conditioned supervised learning work for offline reinforcement learning? arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2206.01079, 2022.
Tom B. Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared Kaplan, Prafulla Dhari-
  wal, Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Ariel Herbert-Voss, Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child, Aditya Ramesh, Daniel M.
  Ziegler, Jeffrey Wu, Clemens Winter, Christopher Hesse, Mark Chen, Eric Sigler, Mateusz Litwin,
  Scott Gray, Benjamin Chess, Jack Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam McCandlish, Alec Radford,
  Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. Language models are few-shot learners, 2020.
Stephanie C. Y. Chan, Adam Santoro, Andrew K. Lampinen, Jane X. Wang, Aaditya Singh, Pierre H.
  Richemond, Jay McClelland, and Felix Hill. Data distributional properties drive emergent in-
  context learning in transformers, 2022a.
Stephanie CY Chan, Ishita Dasgupta, Junkyung Kim, Dharshan Kumaran, Andrew K Lampinen, and
  Felix Hill. Transformers generalize differently from information stored in context vs in weights.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.05675, 2022b.
Chang Chen, Yi-Fu Wu, Jaesik Yoon, and Sungjin Ahn. Transdreamer: Reinforcement learning
  with transformer world models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.09481, 2022.
Lili Chen, Kevin Lu, Aravind Rajeswaran, Kimin Lee, Aditya Grover, Michael Laskin, Pieter
  Abbeel, Aravind Srinivas, and Igor Mordatch. Decision transformer: Reinforcement learning
  via sequence modeling. CoRR, abs/2106.01345, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
  2106.01345.
Karl Cobbe, Christopher Hesse, Jacob Hilton, and John Schulman. Leveraging procedural genera-
  tion to benchmark reinforcement learning, 2020.
André Correia and Luı́s A Alexandre.       Hierarchical decision transformer.     arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2209.10447, 2022.
Damai Dai, Yutao Sun, Li Dong, Yaru Hao, Zhifang Sui, and Furu Wei. Why can gpt learn in-
  context? language models secretly perform gradient descent as meta optimizers. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2212.10559, 2022.
Yan Duan, John Schulman, Xi Chen, Peter L Bartlett, Ilya Sutskever, and Pieter Abbeel. Rlˆ2: Fast
  reinforcement learning via slow reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1611.02779, 2016.
Yan Duan, Marcin Andrychowicz, Bradly Stadie, OpenAI Jonathan Ho, Jonas Schneider, Ilya
  Sutskever, Pieter Abbeel, and Wojciech Zaremba. One-shot imitation learning. Advances in
  neural information processing systems, 30, 2017.
Peter Englert and Marc Toussaint. Learning manipulation skills from a single demonstration. The
  International Journal of Robotics Research, 37(1):137–154, 2018.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Chelsea Finn, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Model-agnostic meta-learning for fast adaptation
  of deep networks. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 1126–1135. PMLR,
  2017a.
Chelsea Finn, Tianhe Yu, Tianhao Zhang, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. One-shot visual imita-
  tion learning via meta-learning. In Conference on robot learning, pp. 357–368. PMLR, 2017b.
Deep Ganguli, Danny Hernandez, Liane Lovitt, Amanda Askell, Yuntao Bai, Anna Chen, Tom
  Conerly, Nova Dassarma, Dawn Drain, Nelson Elhage, Sheer El Showk, Stanislav Fort, Zac
  Hatfield-Dodds, Tom Henighan, Scott Johnston, Andy Jones, Nicholas Joseph, Jackson Kernian,
  Shauna Kravec, Ben Mann, Neel Nanda, Kamal Ndousse, Catherine Olsson, Daniela Amodei,
  Tom Brown, Jared Kaplan, Sam McCandlish, Christopher Olah, Dario Amodei, and Jack Clark.
  Predictability and surprise in large generative models. In 2022 ACM Conference on Fairness,
  Accountability, and Transparency. ACM, jun 2022. doi: 10.1145/3531146.3533229. URL
  https://doi.org/10.11452F3531146.3533229.
Shivam Garg, Dimitris Tsipras, Percy Liang, and Gregory Valiant. What can transformers learn in-
  context? A case study of simple function classes. CoRR, abs/2208.01066, 2022. doi: 10.48550/
  arXiv.2208.01066. URL https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2208.01066.
Michael Hahn and Navin Goyal. A theory of emergent in-context learning as implicit structure
 induction. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.07971, 2023.
Mikael Henaff, Roberta Raileanu, Minqi Jiang, and Tim Rocktäschel. Exploration via elliptical
 episodic bonuses. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2022.
Kaizhe Hu, Ray Chen Zheng, Yang Gao, and Huazhe Xu. Decision transformer under random frame
  dropping. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.03391, 2023.
Maximilian Igl, Kamil Ciosek, Yingzhen Li, Sebastian Tschiatschek, Cheng Zhang, Sam Devlin,
 and Katja Hofmann. Generalization in reinforcement learning with selective noise injection and
 information bottleneck. Advances in neural information processing systems, 32, 2019.
Eric Jang, Alex Irpan, Mohi Khansari, Daniel Kappler, Frederik Ebert, Corey Lynch, Sergey Levine,
  and Chelsea Finn. Bc-z: Zero-shot task generalization with robotic imitation learning. In Confer-
  ence on Robot Learning, pp. 991–1002. PMLR, 2022.
Michael Janner, Qiyang Li, and Sergey Levine. Offline reinforcement learning as one big sequence
 modeling problem. In M. Ranzato, A. Beygelzimer, Y. Dauphin, P.S. Liang, and J. Wortman
 Vaughan (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 34, pp. 1273–1286.
 Curran Associates, Inc., 2021a. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_
 files/paper/2021/file/099fe6b0b444c23836c4a5d07346082b-Paper.pdf.
Michael Janner, Qiyang Li, and Sergey Levine. Offline reinforcement learning as one big sequence
 modeling problem. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2021b.
Jared Kaplan, Sam McCandlish, Tom Henighan, Tom B. Brown, Benjamin Chess, Rewon Child,
   Scott Gray, Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, and Dario Amodei. Scaling laws for neural language
   models. CoRR, abs/2001.08361, 2020. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2001.08361.
Louis Kirsch, James Harrison, Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, and Luke Metz. General-purpose in-context
  learning by meta-learning transformers, 2022.
Heinrich Küttler, Nantas Nardelli, Alexander H. Miller, Roberta Raileanu, Marco Selvatici, Edward
  Grefenstette, and Tim Rocktäschel. The nethack learning environment. In Proceedings of the
  34th International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, NIPS’20, Red Hook,
  NY, USA, 2020. Curran Associates Inc. ISBN 9781713829546.
Michael Laskin, Luyu Wang, Junhyuk Oh, Emilio Parisotto, Stephen Spencer, Richie Steigerwald,
 DJ Strouse, Steven Hansen, Angelos Filos, Ethan Brooks, Maxime Gazeau, Himanshu Sahni,
 Satinder Singh, and Volodymyr Mnih. In-context reinforcement learning with algorithm distilla-
 tion, 2022.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Misha Laskin, Kimin Lee, Adam Stooke, Lerrel Pinto, Pieter Abbeel, and Aravind Srinivas. Rein-
 forcement learning with augmented data. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:
 19884–19895, 2020.
Kuang-Huei Lee, Ofir Nachum, Mengjiao (Sherry) Yang, Lisa Lee, Daniel Freeman,
  Sergio Guadarrama, Ian Fischer, Winnie Xu, Eric Jang, Henryk Michalewski, and
  Igor Mordatch.    Multi-game decision transformers. In S. Koyejo, S. Mohamed,
  A. Agarwal, D. Belgrave, K. Cho, and A. Oh (eds.), Advances in Neural Infor-
  mation Processing Systems, volume 35, pp. 27921–27936. Curran Associates, Inc.,
  2022. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2022/
  file/b2cac94f82928a85055987d9fd44753f-Paper-Conference.pdf.
Runji Lin, Ye Li, Xidong Feng, Zhaowei Zhang, XIAN HONG WU FUNG, Haifeng Zhang, Jun
  Wang, Yali Du, and Yaodong Yang. Contextual transformer for offline reinforcement learning.
Chris Lu, Yannick Schroecker, Albert Gu, Emilio Parisotto, Jakob Foerster, Satinder Singh, and
  Feryal Behbahani. Structured state space models for in-context reinforcement learning, 2023.
Marlos C Machado, Marc G Bellemare, Erik Talvitie, Joel Veness, Matthew Hausknecht, and
 Michael Bowling. Revisiting the arcade learning environment: Evaluation protocols and open
 problems for general agents. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, 61:523–562, 2018.
Zhao Mandi, Fangchen Liu, Kimin Lee, and Pieter Abbeel. Towards more generalizable one-shot
  visual imitation learning. In 2022 International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA),
  pp. 2434–2444. IEEE, 2022.
Luckeciano C Melo. Transformers are meta-reinforcement learners. In International Conference on
  Machine Learning, pp. 15340–15359. PMLR, 2022.
Eric Mitchell, Rafael Rafailov, Xue Bin Peng, Sergey Levine, and Chelsea Finn. Offline meta-
  reinforcement learning with advantage weighting. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning, pp. 7780–7791. PMLR, 2021.
Anahita Mohseni-Kabir, Charles Rich, Sonia Chernova, Candace L Sidner, and Daniel Miller. Inter-
  active hierarchical task learning from a single demonstration. In Proceedings of the Tenth Annual
  ACM/IEEE International Conference on Human-Robot Interaction, pp. 205–212, 2015.
Catherine Olsson, Nelson Elhage, Neel Nanda, Nicholas Joseph, Nova DasSarma, Tom Henighan,
  Ben Mann, Amanda Askell, Yuntao Bai, Anna Chen, Tom Conerly, Dawn Drain, Deep Ganguli,
  Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Danny Hernandez, Scott Johnston, Andy Jones, Jackson Kernion, Liane
  Lovitt, Kamal Ndousse, Dario Amodei, Tom Brown, Jack Clark, Jared Kaplan, Sam McCandlish,
  and Chris Olah. In-context learning and induction heads, 2022a.
Catherine Olsson, Nelson Elhage, Neel Nanda, Nicholas Joseph, Nova DasSarma, Tom Henighan,
  Ben Mann, Amanda Askell, Yuntao Bai, Anna Chen, et al. In-context learning and induction
  heads. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.11895, 2022b.
Keiran Paster, Sheila McIlraith, and Jimmy Ba. You can’t count on luck: Why decision transformers
  fail in stochastic environments. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.15967, 2022.
Vitchyr H Pong, Ashvin V Nair, Laura M Smith, Catherine Huang, and Sergey Levine. Offline meta-
  reinforcement learning with online self-supervision. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning, pp. 17811–17829. PMLR, 2022.
Roberta Raileanu and Rob Fergus. Decoupling value and policy for generalization in reinforcement
  learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 8787–8798. PMLR, 2021.
Roberta Raileanu, Max Goldstein, Arthur Szlam, and Rob Fergus. Fast adaptation to new environ-
  ments via policy-dynamics value functions. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
  pp. 7920–7931. PMLR, 2020a.
Roberta Raileanu, Maxwell Goldstein, Denis Yarats, Ilya Kostrikov, and Rob Fergus. Automatic
  data augmentation for generalization in deep reinforcement learning. ArXiv, abs/2006.12862,
  2020b. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:219980275.


                                                12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Scott Reed, Konrad Zolna, Emilio Parisotto, Sergio Gomez Colmenarejo, Alexander Novikov,
  Gabriel Barth-Maron, Mai Gimenez, Yury Sulsky, Jackie Kay, Jost Tobias Springenberg, et al.
  A generalist agent. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.06175, 2022.
Machel Reid, Yutaro Yamada, and Shixiang Shane Gu. Can wikipedia help offline reinforcement
 learning? arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.12122, 2022.
Cinjon Resnick, Roberta Raileanu, Sanyam Kapoor, Alexander Peysakhovich, Kyunghyun Cho, and
  Joan Bruna. Backplay:” man muss immer umkehren”. arXiv preprint arXiv:1807.06919, 2018.
Stéphane Ross, Geoffrey Gordon, and Drew Bagnell. A reduction of imitation learning and struc-
   tured prediction to no-regret online learning. In Proceedings of the fourteenth international con-
   ference on artificial intelligence and statistics, pp. 627–635. JMLR Workshop and Conference
   Proceedings, 2011.
Michael S Ryoo, Keerthana Gopalakrishnan, Kumara Kahatapitiya, Ted Xiao, Kanishka Rao,
 Austin Stone, Yao Lu, Julian Ibarz, and Anurag Arnab. Token turing machines. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2211.09119, 2022.
Tim Salimans and Richard Chen. Learning montezuma’s revenge from a single demonstration. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1812.03381, 2018.
Mikayel Samvelyan, Robert Kirk, Vitaly Kurin, Jack Parker-Holder, Minqi Jiang, Eric Hambro,
 Fabio Petroni, Heinrich Kuttler, Edward Grefenstette, and Tim Rocktäschel. Minihack the planet:
 A sandbox for open-ended reinforcement learning research. In Thirty-fifth Conference on Neural
 Information Processing Systems Datasets and Benchmarks Track (Round 1), 2021. URL https:
 //openreview.net/forum?id=skFwlyefkWJ.
Jürgen Schmidhuber. Evolutionary principles in self-referential learning, or on learning how to
   learn: the meta-meta-... hook. PhD thesis, Technische Universität München, 1987.
John Schulman, Jonathan Ho, Cameron Lee, and Pieter Abbeel. Learning from demonstrations
  through the use of non-rigid registration. In Robotics Research: The 16th International Sympo-
  sium ISRR, pp. 339–354. Springer, 2016.
Li Shen, Congliang Chen, Fangyu Zou, Zequn Jie, Ju Sun, and Wei Liu. A unified analysis of
  adagrad with weighted aggregation and momentum acceleration, 2023.
Max Siebenborn, Boris Belousov, Junning Huang, and Jan Peters. How crucial is transformer in
 decision transformer? arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.14655, 2022.
Shyam Sudhakaran and Sebastian Risi. Skill decision transformer. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.13573,
  2023.
Yanchao Sun, Shuang Ma, Ratnesh Madaan, Rogerio Bonatti, Furong Huang, and Ashish
  Kapoor. Smart: Self-supervised multi-task pretraining with control transformers. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2301.09816, 2023.
Richard S Sutton and Andrew G Barto. Reinforcement learning: An introduction. MIT press, 2018.
Adaptive Agent Team, Jakob Bauer, Kate Baumli, Satinder Baveja, Feryal Behbahani, Avishkar
  Bhoopchand, Nathalie Bradley-Schmieg, Michael Chang, Natalie Clay, Adrian Collister, Vib-
  havari Dasagi, Lucy Gonzalez, Karol Gregor, Edward Hughes, Sheleem Kashem, Maria Loks-
  Thompson, Hannah Openshaw, Jack Parker-Holder, Shreya Pathak, Nicolas Perez-Nieves, Ne-
  manja Rakicevic, Tim Rocktäschel, Yannick Schroecker, Jakub Sygnowski, Karl Tuyls, Sarah
  York, Alexander Zacherl, and Lei Zhang. Human-timescale adaptation in an open-ended task
  space, 2023a.
Adaptive Agent Team, Jakob Bauer, Kate Baumli, Satinder Baveja, Feryal Behbahani, Avishkar
  Bhoopchand, Nathalie Bradley-Schmieg, Michael Chang, Natalie Clay, Adrian Collister, Vib-
  havari Dasagi, Lucy Gonzalez, Karol Gregor, Edward Hughes, Sheleem Kashem, Maria Loks-
  Thompson, Hannah Openshaw, Jack Parker-Holder, Shreya Pathak, Nicolas Perez-Nieves, Ne-
  manja Rakicevic, Tim Rocktäschel, Yannick Schroecker, Jakub Sygnowski, Karl Tuyls, Sarah
  York, Alexander Zacherl, and Lei Zhang. Human-timescale adaptation in an open-ended task
  space, 2023b.


                                                 13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N. Gomez,
  Lukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. CoRR, abs/1706.03762, 2017a.
  URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1706.03762.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N. Gomez,
  Lukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need, 2017b.
Johannes von Oswald, Eyvind Niklasson, Ettore Randazzo, João Sacramento, Alexander Mordv-
  intsev, Andrey Zhmoginov, and Max Vladymyrov. Transformers learn in-context by gradient
  descent. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.07677, 2022.
Jason Wei, Yi Tay, Rishi Bommasani, Colin Raffel, Barret Zoph, Sebastian Borgeaud, Dani Yo-
  gatama, Maarten Bosma, Denny Zhou, Donald Metzler, Ed H. Chi, Tatsunori Hashimoto, Oriol
  Vinyals, Percy Liang, Jeff Dean, and William Fedus. Emergent abilities of large language models,
  2022.
Sang Michael Xie, Aditi Raghunathan, Percy Liang, and Tengyu Ma. An explanation of in-context
  learning as implicit bayesian inference. arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.02080, 2021.
Mengdi Xu, Yikang Shen, Shun Zhang, Yuchen Lu, Ding Zhao, Joshua B. Tenenbaum, and Chuang
 Gan. Prompting decision transformer for few-shot policy generalization, 2022.
Mengdi Xu, Yuchen Lu, Yikang Shen, Shun Zhang, Ding Zhao, and Chuang Gan. Hyper-decision
 transformer for efficient online policy adaptation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.08487, 2023.
Taku Yamagata, Ahmed Khalil, and Raul Santos-Rodriguez. Q-learning decision transformer:
  Leveraging dynamic programming for conditional sequence modelling in offline rl. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2209.03993, 2022.
Qinqing Zheng, Amy Zhang, and Aditya Grover. Online decision transformer. In International
  Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 27042–27059. PMLR, 2022.


                                               14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A     A DDITIONAL R ELATED W ORK
In many application domains such as robotics, collecting data is expensive and potentially dan-
gerous (Schulman et al., 2016; Englert & Toussaint, 2018). Hence, learning new tasks from
single demonstrations is an important problem in sequential decision-making due to its practi-
cal appeal (Atkeson & Schaal, 1997; Mohseni-Kabir et al., 2015; Duan et al., 2017; Finn et al.,
2017b; Mandi et al., 2022). However, existing algorithms require large-scale datasets to learn new
skills (Jang et al., 2022). Hence, we would like to be able to train on a set of tasks for which we
have available data and generalize to new ones given a limited number of demonstrations.
Another related work is Algorithmic Distillation (AD) (Laskin et al., 2022), which aims to learn
a policy improvement operator by training a transformer on sequences of trajectories of increasing
returns. However, AD assumes access to multiple model checkpoints with different proficiency
levels and hasn’t demonstrated generalization to entirely new tasks or environments.

B     E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP
B.1     M ODEL D ETAILS

Model: For most of our MiniHack experiments, we use a 100M causal transformer model with
num layers = 12, d model = 768, and num heads = 12. For our model scaling exper-
iments presented in Section 5.2.3, we consider the following values for num layers, d model,
and num heads presented in Table 1. For procgen experiments, we use a 210M causal transformer
with num layer = 12 , d model = 1024 and n heads = 16.

               Number of Parameters      num layers        d model       num heads
                       1M                     4              128             4
                      10M                     6              256             8
                      30M                     8              512             8

Table 1: List of transformer model configurations with varying number of parameters, including
details on the number of layers (num layers), model dimension (d model), and the number of
attention heads (num heads).

For embedding the minihack observations, we use the NetHackStateEmbeddingNet from
https://github.com/facebookresearch/e3b/blob/main/minihack/src/models.py. For embedding ac-
tions and rewards, we follow the same procedure as Chen et al. (2021). For all our experiments,
we stack 3 episodes along the sequence axis and restrict the context size to 900 tokens. Since the
episodes are of variable length, we stack the three episodes contiguously and then pad the rest of the
sequence with padding tokens.
Training: For all our experiments, we used AdamW optimizer (Shen et al., 2023) for optimization
with cosine annealing learning rate scheduler. We train all our models for 25 epochs.

B.1.1    C OMPUTE
We use 8 GPUs, each with 32GB of RAM, leveraging PyTorch’s Distributed Data Parallel (DDP)
capabilities for training. The largest model in our experiments (100M), trained on a dataset com-
prising 100K MiniHack levels with a batch size of 64, took approximately 42 hours (1 day and 18
hours) for complete training. We emphasize that it is feasible to conduct the training with a single
GPU; however, this approach would extend the training duration. For inference tasks, we utilize 1
GPU.

B.2     E NVIRONMENT D ETAILS

B.2.1    M INI H ACK
Observation Space - The observation space in MiniHack is designed as a dictionary-style structure.
It primarily borrows keys from the foundational NetHack Learning Environment (NLE), with the


                                                 15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


addition of a few unique keys specific to MiniHack. To get the necessary observations from the
environment, relevant options need to be specified during the initialization process. In this paper,
we focus on a few key observation types:

     1. Glyphs: This refers to a 21x79 matrix comprising glyphs, which are identifiers of enti-
        ties present on the map. Each glyph is unique and represents a specific entity. They are
        represented as integers ranging from 0 to 5991.
     2. Blstats: This is a 26-dimensional vector that displays the status line found at the screen’s
        bottom. It provides information about the player character’s location, health status, at-
        tributes, and other vital statuses.
     3. Messages: This is a 256-dimensional vector that represents the UTF-8 encoding of the
        message displayed on the screen’s top.

Action Space - In this work, all of our environments are navigation-based, and therefore, the action
space consists of eight compass directions. Additionally, we create a padding action represented by
the number 31 for padding purposes.
Rewards - In all MiniHack environments, the rewards are sparse. In other words, the agent receives
a reward of +1 if it successfully solves the task at hand, and 0 otherwise. The environment also
penalizes the agent for bumping into lava, monsters, or walls.
In our work, we consider the following environments -

     1. MiniHack-MultiRoom-N6-v0 - In this task, the agent must navigate through six
        rooms and reach the goal. Upon reaching the goal, the agent receives a reward of +1,
        otherwise, the reward is 0. Collisions with walls incur a penalty of −0.01.
     2. MiniHack-MultiRoom-N6-Lava-v0 - In this task, the agent navigates through six
        rooms with lava-covered walls. The task is completed with a reward of +1 when the goal
        is reached; otherwise, the reward is 0. Collisions with lava result in immediate death.
     3. MiniHack-MultiRoom-N4-Lava-v0                   -   This      task    is   similar    to
        MiniHack-MultiRoom-N6-Lava-v0, but with only four rooms.                      The agent
        must avoid lava-filled walls to complete the task.The task is completed with a reward of
        +1 when the goal is reached; otherwise, the reward is 0. Collisions with lava result in
        immediate death.
     4. MiniHack-MazeWalk-9x9-v0 - The agent navigates a 9 × 9 maze. Upon reaching the
        goal, the agent receives a reward of +1 otherwise, the reward is 0. Collisions with walls
        incur a penalty of −0.01.
     5. MiniHack-CorridorBattle-Dark-v0 - The agent must battle the monsters strate-
        gically in a dark room, using corridors for isolation. The agent must keep track of its kill
        count. A reward of +1 is given upon survival, otherwise the agent receives a reward of 0.
     6. MiniHack-MultiRoom-N6-LavaMonsters-v0 - The agent must navigate through
        six rooms filled with monsters and lava. To successfully complete this task, the agent must
        avoid the lava walls and monsters. The agent receives a reward of +1, otherwise 0.
     7. MiniHack-MultiRoom-N6-Open-v0 - The agent navigates through six rooms with-
        out doors. The reward structure is identical to that of MiniHack-MultiRoom-N6-v0.
     8. MiniHack-MultiRoom-N10-LavaOpen-v0 - In this task, the agent navigates
        through ten rooms to reach the goal. Collisions with lava walls result in immediate death.
        Upon reaching the goal, the agent receives a reward of +1.
     9. MiniHack-SimpleCrossingS11N5-v0 - Here, the agent reaches the goal on the
        other side of the room. The agent receives a reward of +1 for reaching the goal, a penalty
        of −0.01 for hitting the walls, and 0 otherwise.
    10. MiniHack-SimpleCrossingS9N2-v0 - This task is an easier version of
        MiniHack-SimpleCrossingS11N5-v0.
    11. MiniHack-River-Narrow-v0 - The agent crosses a river by using boulders to create
        a dry path, aiming to reach the goal on the other side. The agent receives a reward of +1
        upon reaching the goal.


                                                16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    12. MiniHack-HideNSeek-v0 - The agent is placed in a room filled with sight-blocking
        trees and clouds. The agent must avoid monsters while navigating the environment to reach
        the goal swiftly.
    13. MiniHack-MultiRoom-N2-Monster-v0 - The agent must navigate through two
        rooms, avoiding monsters. It receives a reward of +1 upon reaching the goal and other-
        wise 0.
    14. MiniHack-LavaCrossingS11N5-v0 - This task is similar to SimpleCrossing, but
        the environment is filled with several lava streams running across the room, either hori-
        zontally or vertically. The agent needs to avoid the lava, as touching it would result in
        immediate death. The agent receives a reward of +1 upon the completion of the task.
    15. MiniHack-Memento-F2-v0 - In this task, the agent is presented with a cue at the
        beginning of the episode and the agent must navigate through the corridor. The end of
        corridor leads to a two-path fork and the agent should choose one direction based on the
        cue it saw in the beginning. Upon choosing the correct path and reaching the goal, the gent
        receives +1 reward and -1 for stepping on the trap.
    16. MiniHack-Memento-F4-v0 - In this task, the agent is presented with a cue at the
        beginning of the episode and the agent must navigate through the corridor. The end of
        corridor leads to a four-path fork and the agent should choose one direction based on the
        cue it saw in the beginning. Upon choosing the correct path and reaching the goal, the gent
        receives +1 reward and -1 for stepping on the trap.
    17. MiniHack-MazeWalk-15x15-v0 - This task is a slightly harder task than
        MiniHack-MazeWalk-15x15-v0. The agent navigates a 15 × 25 maze. Upon reach-
        ing the goal, the agent receives a reward of +1 otherwise, the reward is 0. Collisions with
        walls incur a penalty of −0.01.
    18. MiniHack-MazeWalk-45x15-v0 - This task is a very challenging task than
        MiniHack-MazeWalk-9x9-v0 The agent navigates a 45 × 15 maze. Upon reach-
        ing the goal, the agent receives a reward of +1 otherwise, the reward is 0. Collisions with
        walls incur a penalty of −0.01.
    19. MiniHack-Labyrinth-Small-v0 - This task is a very challenging task than
        MiniHack-MazeWalk-9x9-v0 The agent navigates a 45 × 15 maze. Upon reach-
        ing the goal, the agent receives a reward of +1 otherwise, the reward is 0. Collisions with
        walls incur a penalty of −0.01.

For the task diversity experiments presented in Section 5.2.3, we use the environments in Table 3.
Note that we randomly sample these environments to avoid selection bias.

B.2.2   P ROCGEN
     1. Bigfish - In the task, the agent must only eat fish smaller than itself to survive. It
        receives a small reward for eating a smaller fish and a large reward for becoming bigger
        than all other fish. The episode ends once it happens.
     2. Bossfight - In this task, the agent controls a starship, dodging boss attacks until the
        boss’s shield goes down, then damages the boss to earn small rewards. After repeated
        damage and rewards, the boss is destroyed and the player wins a large final reward.
     3. Caveflyer - In this task, the agent controls a starship through a cave network to reach
        a goal ship, moving like in Asteroids. Most reward comes from reaching the goal, but more
        can be earned by destroying targets along the way. There are lethal stationary and moving
        obstacles.
     4. Chaser - In this task, the agent collects green orbs while avoiding enemies, with stars
        temporarily making enemies vulnerable. Eating a vulnerable enemy spawns an egg that
        hatches into a new enemy. The player gets small rewards per orb and a large reward for
        completing the level.
     5. Climber - In this task, the agent climbs platforms collecting stars, getting small re-
        wards per star and a big reward for all stars, ending the level. Lethal flying monsters are
        scattered throughout.


                                               17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


          Number of Tasks                      Environments
             1 Task                    MiniHack-MultiRoom-N6-v0,
             4 Tasks                 MiniHack-LavaCrossingS11N5-v0
                                        MiniHack-MultiRoom-N6-v0
                                        MiniHack-River-Narrow-v0
                                 MiniHack-MultiRoom-N10-LavaOpen-v0
                8 Tasks            MiniHack-SimpleCrossingS11N5-v0
                                 MiniHack-MultiRoom-N10-LavaOpen-v0
                                        MiniHack-MultiRoom-N6-v0
                                     MiniHack-MultiRoom-N6-Lava-v0
                                     MiniHack-MultiRoom-N4-Lava-v0
                                        MiniHack-MazeWalk-9x9-v0
                                  MiniHack-MultiRoom-N6-LavaOpen-v0
                                   MiniHack-CorridorBattle-Dark-v0
               12 Tasks                 MiniHack-MultiRoom-N6-v0
                                     MiniHack-MultiRoom-N6-Lava-v0
                                        MiniHack-MazeWalk-9x9-v0
                                   MiniHack-CorridorBattle-Dark-v0
                                MiniHack-MultiRoom-N6-LavaMonsters-v0
                                     MiniHack-MultiRoom-N6-Open-v0
                                 MiniHack-MultiRoom-N10-LavaOpen-v0
                                   MiniHack-SimpleCrossingS11N5-v0
                                    MiniHack-SimpleCrossingS9N2-v0
                                        MiniHack-River-Narrow-v0
                                         MiniHack-HideNSeek-v0
                                   MiniHack-MultiRoom-N2-Monster-v0

        Table 2: This table illustrates the different environments used for the pretraining.


     6. Coinrun - In this task, the player must collect a coin on the far right, starting on the
        far left, dodging saws, pacing enemies, and lethal gaps. Velocity info is no longer included,
        increasing the difficulty versus prior versions.
     7. Dodgeball - In this task, the agent navigates a room with walls and enemies, losing
        if they touch a wall. The player and enemies move slowly, with enemies throwing balls
        and the player throwing balls in their facing direction. Hitting all enemies unlocks the exit
        platform; exiting earns a large reward.
     8. Fruitbot - In this task, the agent controls a robot collecting fruit and avoiding non-
        fruit objects in a scrolling gap game, getting rewards or penalties. Reaching the end brings
        a large reward.
     9. Heist - In this task, the agent controls a character in a maze filled with monsters. The
        goal is to reach the exit while collecting coins and avoiding monster attacks. More coins
        collected and reaching the exit results in a higher reward.
    10. Jumper - In this task, the goal is to navigate the world to find a carrot, using double
        jumps to reach tricky platforms and avoid deadly spikes. A compass shows direction and
        distance to the carrot. The only reward comes from collecting the carrot which ends the
        episode.
    11. Leaper - In this task, the agent crosses lanes of moving cars then hops logs on a river
        to reach the finish line and get a reward. Falling in the river ends the episode.
    12. Miner - In this task, the agent digs through dirt to collect all diamonds in a world with
        gravity and physics, avoiding deadly falling boulders. Small rewards are given for dia-
        monds, and a large reward for completing the level by exiting after collecting all diamonds.
    13. Maze - In this task, the agent must navigate to find the sole piece of cheese. Upon
        reaching the cheese, the agent receives a large reward.
    14. Ninja - As a ninja, the agent jumps across ledges avoiding bombs, charging jumps over
        time, and can clear bombs by tossing throwing stars. The player is rewarded for collecting
        the mushroom that ends the level.


                                                18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


      15. Plunder - In this task, the player controls a ship firing cannonballs at enemy pirate
          ships before the on-screen timer runs out, while avoiding friendly ships, with rewards for
          hits and penalties for misses or hitting friendlies. Firing advances the timer, so ammunition
          must be conserved. Wooden obstacles can block line of sight to enemies.
      16. Starpilot - A side scrolling shooter where all enemies target and fire at the player,
          requiring quick dodging to survive, with varying enemy speeds and health. Clouds block
          vision and meteors block movement.

                                   Train Tasks                    Test Tasks
                       Bigfish, Bossfight, Caveflyer, Chaser    Climber, Ninja
                       Fruitbot, Dodgeball, Heist, Coinrun      Plunder, Jumper
                             Leaper, Miner, Starpilot                Maze

                   Table 3: This table illustrates the Train and Test split of Procgen

Note that in some environments, the episodes are very long, making it harder to fit the full context
into the transformer. To address this, we truncate episodes to 200 steps during both training and
testing. In test environments, most games have fewer than 200 episode steps, except for Plunder
where we only show the first 200 timesteps.

B.3    DATASET D ETAILS

Data Collection for training - As mentioned in Section 3.1, we use E3B policies (Henaff et al.,
2022) for our data collection. We first train E3B policies following the protocol mentioned in Henaff
et al. (2022) on all the above-mentioned environments individually until the performance is optimal.
We then take these expert E3B models and use them for data collection. For each level in the envi-
ronment, we rollout the expert E3B policies for five episodes and collect the observations (glpyhs,
messages, blstats), actions and reward information. We repeat this for L levels per environ-
ment. Additionally, we filter out the bad trajectories which did not solve the task and only utilize the
optimal trajectories.
For Procgen, we train a PPO policy for 25M timesteps until convergence on 10K levels for each
task. We then use the final checkpoints to collect the trajectories.
Evaluation Data - For evaluation on unseen environments (Labyrinth, Memento-F2,
Memento-F4, MazeWalk 15x15 and MazeWalk 45x19), we use human expert trajecto-
ries instead of E3B policies. The main reason for this is that the E3B policies are incentivized to
explore more, which might hinder the agent from solving the task optimally. For each evaluation
environment, we manually collect trajectories on 20 levels and use these human expert trajectories
as prompts for evaluation.
For Procgen, we use PPO trajectories as expert demonstrations. For each evaluation, we consider
test 100 levels and rollout 5 episodes per level and aggregate the returns.
Multi-Task Data - For all the results presented in Section 5.2 we use the offline data collected from
12 tasks for pretraining. We consider a total number of levels L = 100, 000 across all tasks or 8, 300
levels per task. For the task diversity experiments, we consider 100, 000, 25000, 12, 500, and 8, 300
levels per task for 1, 4, 8, and 12 tasks, respectively.
Similarly for Procgen results, we use the offline data collect from 11 tasks for pretraining and for
each task, we collect trajectories from 10k levels.


C     A DDITIONAL R ESULTS

C.1    I MPACT OF R EWARD T OKENS

In this section, we study the impact of reward tokens in the context on ICL. Since we only use
expert data for our training, we hypothesize that the reward tokens do not play any cruicial role in
the learning process. Towards this end, we perform experiments where we remove reward tokens


                                                   19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 8: Impact of Reward Tokens: This figure illustrates the impact of reward tokens on the
performance. Overall, reward tokens do not seem to play a crucial role in the performance across on
all five MiniHack tasks.


from the context and keeping just state and action tokens. We contrast the performance with the
model trained with reward tokens. As we can see from

C.2     T RAINING R ESULTS

In this section, we report the performance of our pre-trained models on the training environments.
We adhere to the same evaluation protocol specified in Section 3.2 and report the mean and standard
deviation of the episodic return across three model seeds.

C.2.1    M INI H ACK

We present the results in Figure 9, 10, and 11. Overall, the performance is good on most of the
environments and there is no big difference between the zero-shot and one-shot performance. This
means that the model is utilizing the in-weights information to solve these tasks and conditioning
on one-shot demonstration is not helping much. However, we notice that the model struggles to
perform well on some tasks like /textttRiver Narrow, Corridor Battle and Lava Crossing. We
speculate that these environments are hard to solve and there is a high penalty for death.


Figure 9: Performance on Test Levels from 12 Train Tasks - This figure illustrates the episodic
returns on 12 environments used for pre-training, across three different trajectory burstiness values;
pb ∈ {0.0, 0.6, 1.0}. Overall, the performance is good on most of the environments and there is
no big difference between the zero-shot and one-shot performance. This means that the model is
utilizing the in-weights information to solve these tasks, as expected. However, we notice that the
agent’s performance on Corridor Battle, Six Rooms, River Narrow is rather poor.


C.2.2    P ROCGEN

We present results in Figure 12. We can see that the transformer model is able to perform consistently
well across all the training environments. We also notice that there is not big difference in zero-shot
and few-shot performance.


                                                  20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 10: Performance on Test Levels from 8 Train Tasks - This figure illustrates the episodic
returns on 8 pretraining environments across three different trajectory burstiness values; pb ∈
{0.0, 0.6, 1.0}. Overall, the performance is good on most of the environments and there is no big
difference between the zero-shot and one-shot performance. This means that the model is utilizing
the in-weights information to solve these tasks, as expected. However, we notice that the perfor-
mance on Corridor Battle is rather poor.


Figure 11: Performance on Test Levels from 4 Train Tasks - This figure illustrates the episodic
returns on 4 pretraining environments across three different trajectory burstiness values; pb ∈
{0.0, 0.6, 1.0}. Overall, the performance is good on most of the environments and there is no big
difference between the zero-shot and one-shot performance. This means that the model is utilizing
the in-weights information to solve these tasks, as expected. However, we notice that the perfor-
mance on Lava Crossing, River Narrow is rather poor.


C.3   P ROCGEN S TICKY ACTION R ESULTS

In this section, we perform evaluations on Procgen test environments with sticky actions. We follow
similar evaluation protocol as mentioned in Section 5 and report the performance across 5 procgen
tasks. As we can see, the performance of our model is consistent with the performance in Figure 13.
While we outperform the most of the baselines, the Hashmap is competitive in case of climber and


                                                21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                      Hyperparameters                       Values
                           Batch Size                          64
                       Number of Levels            { 10000, 30000, 100000}
                          Context Size                        900
                        Vocabulary Size                        32
                    Trajectory Burstiness pb            { 0.0, 0.6, 1.0 }
                       Sticky Probability                      0.2
                       Number of Epochs                        25
                         Learning Rate                       0.0001
                    Learning Rate Scheduler           Consine Annealing
                    Minimum Learning Rate                   1.0e-06
                          Model Size              {128, 256, 512, 768, 1024 }
                       Number of Layers                  { 4, 6, 8, 12,}
                       Number of Heads                    { 4, 8, 12 }
                        Vocabulary Size                        32
                            Dropout                            0.2
                     Nethack Hidden Size                       64
                    Nethack Embedding Size           {128, 256, 512, 768 }
                           Crop Size                           12
                   Nethack Number of Layers                     2
                       Nethack Dropout                         0.1

                    Table 4: List of hyperparameters used in our experiments


Figure 12: Procgen Train Environments Results. We observe that the model is able to perform well
across all the training environments.


                                               22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 13: Performance on New Procgen Tasks comparing (1) our multi-trajectory transformer
conditioned on different number of demonstrations from the same level, (2) Hashmap baseline con-
ditioned on the same demonstrations, and (3) BC baseline conditioned on zero and one demonstra-
tion due to context length constraints.


Figure 14: Effect of Task Diversity: This figure illustrates the effect of the number of different
training tasks on the average episode return for 5 unseen MiniHack tasks. The dashed line indicates
the zero-shot performance, and the solid line represents the one-shot performance. Overall, both the
one-shot and zero-shot performances improve when increasing the number of tasks from 1 to 8, but
then they plateau. This suggests that increasing the task diversity can help both the in-weights and
in-context learning but the improvements have diminishing returns and may depend on the similarity
between the train and test tasks. The error bars represent the standard deviation across 3 model seeds.


plunder and acts as an oracle in case of Maze. We hypothesize that the hashmap in the case of Maze
acts as an oracle since it is very difficult to go out of distribution.


C.4   TASK D IVERSITY R ESULTS

In this section, we extend the results presented in Section 5.2 by showing the performance on unseen
environments for a model pre-trained on 4 tasks. We can see that the claims made in Section 5.2
still hold - increasing the diversity of tasks improves generalization to new yet similar tasks via in-
weights learning, but it is not clear how the diversity affects the model’s ability to ’soft-copy’ via
in-context learning. In Figure 14 we see that above a certain diversity of tasks, the in-context learning
ability plateaus, while for lower task diversity, some novel tasks are capable of demonstrating in-
context learning, while others are not.


D     B ROADER I MPACT

The ability to generalize to unseen tasks with the help of single demonstration is crucial for many
real world applications like robotics, self-driving cars. In this work we focus on how to achieve
this goal with the help of in-context learning. More specifically, our work focuses on highlighting
how different factors like trajectory burstiness pb , environment dynamics, task dynamics, model and
dataset sizes influence in-context learning in sequential decision-making settings. Since our results
are based on Minihack and Procgen environments, which are somewhat simplified comapared to
real-world settings, we do not foresee any potential negative impact on the society. We believe that
our work could provide some useful insights into using transformers for sequential decision-making
settings.


                                                   23
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E   H YPERPARAMETERS
We present the hyperparameters used in this work in Table 4


                                               24
