Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


3D P OINT C LOUD S EQUENCES AS 2D V IDEOS
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                             A BSTRACT
         The irregular and unstructured nature of 3D point cloud sequences in both spatial
         and temporal domains poses great difficulties in extracting their discriminative
         features effectively and efficiently. To tackle these challenges, in contrast to exist-
         ing methods devoted to developing special architectures for modeling sequences,
         we advocate a new paradigm by proposing a novel representation modality, called
         point geometry video (PGV), that encodes the coordinates of the 3D points of a
         sequence as the pixel values of a 2D color video, with the original spatial neigh-
         borhood relationship and temporal consistency preserved. PGV significantly fa-
         cilitates the processing of sequential 3D point clouds by enabling the adaption of
         powerful learning techniques for 2D image and video processing. Technically, by
         leveraging the local aggregation and kernel-sharing properties of the convolution
         operation, we build a self-supervised auto-encoder composed of convolutional
         layers, that consumes pre-defined regular grids to produce the PGV representa-
         tion of a sequence of point clouds. We demonstrate the superiority and generality
         of the PGV on downstream tasks, including sequence correspondence, spatial up-
         sampling, and forecasting. The PGV as a novel representation modality opens up
         new possibilities for deep learning-based processing and analysis of point cloud
         sequences. The code and data will be made publicly available.


1   I NTRODUCTION
A 3D point cloud sequence is a series of 3D point cloud frames taken at consecutive time steps,
depicting the motion/change of an object/scene. Different from 2D video signals that are defined
on regular dense grids and thus can be processed by powerful 2D/3D convolutional neural networks
(CNNs) (Kalluri et al., 2023; Shi et al., 2022; Gao et al., 2022), 3D point cloud sequences are
characterized by the lack of a regular structure in both spatially and temporally, which poses great
challenges in developing efficient learning architectures for modeling such data. The lack of corre-
spondence across consecutive frames of point clouds makes it difficult to achieve reliable temporal
modeling. As a consequence, spatial-temporal neighborhood construction and down-sampling be-
come non-trivial and computationally intensive. Therefore, for many generative and reconstructive
learning tasks, one can only uses those distribution-based losses (such as the earth mover’s distance
(EMD) and Chamfer distance (CD)), which are either inefficient or ineffective (Nguyen et al., 2021;
Wu et al., 2021).
Currently, the research on deep learning-based point cloud sequence processing is still in the early
stage. Most of the existing research is focused on developing specialized learning mechanisms
and processing modules to cope with the unstructured characteristics of sequential point data. For
example, existing works seek to aggregate features, use voxel (Wang et al., 2020) or implicit (Lei &
Daniilidis, 2022; Mihajlovic et al., 2021) representations, or focus on the correspondence problem
for paired point clouds (Zeng et al., 2021) or meshes (Donati et al., 2020; Eisenberger et al., 2021;
Donati et al., 2022). These works either require geometry priors (e.g., geodesics) or a sizeable
dataset to achieve generalization and suffer from limited performance when handling sequences
with significant non-rigid motion or deformation.
Unlike existing works, we advocate a new research paradigm, i.e., developing a unified, explicit,
and structured representation modality for the general processing of point cloud sequences. Con-
ceptually, as illustrated in Fig. 1, we propose to represent an arbitrary 3D point cloud sequence with
unknown temporal correspondence as a 2D color video, called the point geometry video (PGV). In-
tuitively, as a data structurization procedure, the actual learning process of producing the PGV can


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024

                                                  Figure 1: (a) A 3D point cloud sequence with point-
                                                  wise correspondence across frames unknown. (b) The
                                                  PGV representation of the above sequence, where each
                                                  2D color image corresponding to a point cloud frame
                                                  is derived by encoding the coordinates (i.e., [x, y, z])
                                                  of spatially neighboring 3D points as the pixel values
                                                  (i.e., [r, g, b]) of adjacent pixel locations, (spatial
                                                  smoothness); moreover, the pixels with the same loca-
                                                  tion across frames generally correspond to an identical
                                                  position of the 3D object (temporal consistency). (c)
                                                  Visualization of the above PGV in 3D space, where the
                                                  value of a pixel is the coordinate of a 3D point rendered
                                                  as the same color as the corresponding pixel, demon-
                                                  strating the spatial smoothness property. (d) Visualiza-
                                                  tion of the above PGV in 3D space, where the PGV
                                                  pixels with an identical location across frames are ren-
                                                  dered with an identical color, demonstrating the tempo-
                                                  ral consistency property. Note that the circled regions
                                                  in different representations are corresponded.


be interpreted as mapping spatio-temporal 3D points to appropriate 2D pixel locations of a series of
2D image grids with desired spatial smoothness and temporal consistency, followed by encoding the
3D coordinates as color pixel values. Therefore, the generic PGV representation modality can serve
as a bridge to facilitate direct application of established powerful learning techniques and network
design for 2D images or videos to boost the processing and analysis of point cloud sequences.
Technically, leveraging the local aggregation and kernel-sharing properties of the convolution op-
eration, we developed a convolution-based auto-encoder framework shown in Fig. 2 to produce the
PGV representation in a self-supervised and over-fitting manner. We develop the framework in a
coarse-to-fine fashion. Specifically, for each frame of point ckouds of a given sequence, we regress
a 2D color image with spatial smoothness from a pre-defined 2D regular grid. Guided by the re-
sulting 2D color images, we further simultaneously deform the spatial and temporal structures of
a pre-defined 3D regular grid to ensure both spatial smoothness and temporal consistency of the
produced PGV. This framework is trained with the EMD loss between input sequence and the point
cloud output by network. We demonstrate the superiority and generality of the point geometry video
(PGV) by developing several PGV-based pipelines for efficient 3D point cloud sequence processing,
which achieve impressive performance.
In summary, the main contributions of this paper are:
      • a new regular representation modality for 3D point cloud sequences, namely PGV;
      • a self-supervised learning framework for generating PGVs; and
      • state-of-the-art baselines for temporal correspondence, spatial upsampling, and future
        frame synthesis of 3D point cloud sequences.

2   R ELATED W ORK
Deep Learning on 3D Point Clouds. Recent years have witnessed a proliferation of deep set
architectures directly operating on 3D point clouds, as pioneered by Qi et al. (2017a;b). The follow-
up works further investigated various more advanced point convolution-based (Li et al., 2018a;b;
Thomas et al., 2019; Liu et al., 2019c; Xu et al., 2021b; Xiang et al., 2021), graph-based (Verma
et al., 2018; Wang et al., 2019; Xu et al., 2020), and transformer-based (Guo et al., 2021; Zhao
et al., 2021; Park et al., 2022) modeling architectures. However, these approaches are developed for
the single point cloud input, and the adaptation to point cloud sequence processing is still highly
non-trivial due to the difficulty and complexity of spatio-temporal geometric modeling.
Another line of work resorts to a different perspective for overcoming the irregularity and unstruc-
turedness of 3D point clouds by creating regular 2D geometry image (GI) (Gu et al., 2002) or
GI-like representation structures, on which various mature 2D learning architectures (e.g., convolu-
tional neural networks (CNNs)) and processing techniques can be directly applied. Representatively,
Sinha et al. (2016; 2017); Maron et al. (2017); Haim et al. (2019) exploited mesh parameterization
techniques to implement surface-to-plane mapping, while Zhang et al. (2022; 2023) proposed to
directly learn deep regular representations from point clouds. These works are also related to a
thread of point cloud decoders that deform a pre-defined pattern, such as a 2D grid (Yang et al.,


                                                 2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                      PGV Representation
                                          Pre-defined 2D Grid   Pre-defined 3D Grid


                            Each Input Frame         Input Sequence
                                                                                                                       Applications
                                                                                                 ...
                ...                  FWSS                   STJS                                                Task-specific
                               EMD                                                               ...              Learning       Downstream
                                                                                                                                   Tasks
        Input Sequence                                                                Structuralized Sequence
                                                                                                                Frameworks
                                                 Conv2D                                          EMD
                                                            Features
                                                                                          Input Sequence


                          Each Structuralized
                                Frame


Figure 2: Flowchart of representing a point cloud sequence as a PGV and its applications. FWSS and STJS
refer to the frame-wise spatial structurization and spatio-temporal joint structurization modules, respectively.
The PGV representation stage (Sec. 3) operates sequence-by-sequence in an over-fitting manner. The applica-
tions stage takes the PGV as input for downstream tasks (Sec. 4).

2018; Groueix et al., 2018; Zhao et al., 2019; Pang et al., 2021). It is important to note that these
works encode the input point cloud into a latent codeword, which technically differs from the over-
fitting approach of our PGV representation. Moreover, the aforementioned approaches are limited
to static geometric representations and are, therefore, inapplicable to dynamic point cloud sequences
requiring spatio-temporal structurization.
Explicit vs. Implicit Learning on 3D Point Cloud Sequences. As a pioneering work learning on
point cloud sequences explicitly, Liu et al. (2019b) focused on the motion range of an object and
proposed two methods for determining the spatio-temporal neighborhood: direct grouping and chain
flow grouping. The subsequent works made efforts to design various convolutional and transformer-
based learning structures for raw point cloud sequence modeling, where the spatial and temporal
domains can be modeled in a decoupled (Fan et al., 2021b;c) or joint (Fan et al., 2021a; 2022; Wei
et al., 2022) learning manner. However, these studies didn’t fully address the irregularities in 3D
point cloud sequences, especially the correspondence in the time domain. Li et al. (2021b) learned
the underlying temporal coherence in point cloud sequences implicitly. Zhong et al. (2022) extended
the kinematic concept of ST-surfaces to the feature space, enabling the capture of 3D motions with-
out explicit tracking. He et al. (2022) proposed estimating frame-wise motions of points across
different frames through sequential scene flow estimation using spatio-temporal interactions. How-
ever, managing point cloud sequences showcasing significant deformation remains a challenge. In
contrast to the previously mentioned approaches, our work markes an early exploration into struc-
turalizing point cloud sequences explicitly.
Another research trajectory delves into implicit representation methods. Niemeyer et al. (2019) uti-
lized implicit strategies for 4D reconstruction, leveraging ground truth occupancy and trajectory.
Rempe et al. (2020) presented spatio-temporal representations for objects in normalized coordi-
nate space. Lei & Daniilidis (2022) addressed inter-frame deformations using continuous bijective
canonical maps centered on a canonical shape. Wang et al. (2020) extracted voxels directly from
depth videos for 3D motion encoding, which has potential implications for storage consumption
and shape distortion. Many of the aforementioned works rely on mesh, voxel, or occupancy rather
than pure point cloud sequences. In contrast to these works, our paper focuses on self-supervised
explicit representations, and we explicitly parameterize the point cloud sequence as PGV, ensuring
a compact representation that minimizes distortion and storage concerns.

3       P ROPOSED M ETHOD
                                                   −1
Problem Statement. Let {Pt ∈ RN ×3 }Tt=0              be an arbitrary 3D point cloud sequence with T
frames     each of N  points 1
                               , where  point-wise correspondence    across frames is unknown and pit :=
                                                                                           −1
                       is a 3D point of frame t. Our objective is to represent {Pt }Tt=0
  i i i            1×3
 xt , yt , zt ∈ R                                                                              as a 2D colored
                                                               √
video with T frames of dimensions H × W (H = W = N ), namely point geometry video (PGV),
                                    −1
denoted as {Gt ∈ RH×W ×3 }Tt=0         . More specifically, we attempt to re-organize and encode points of
         −1                                              −1
{Pt }Tt=0    into appropriate pixel locations of {Gt }Tt=0                       = xit , Gt (u, v, 2) = yti , and
                                                            , i.e., Gt (u, v, 1) √
                   i
Gt (u, v, 3) = zt , where (u, v) is the 2D pixel coordinate (1 ≤ u, v ≤ N ). At the same time, the
    1
        Note that the points of Pt are stacked randomly to form a matrix.


                                                                                 3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


resulting PGV should have the following two characteristics, which are necessary in order to adapt
PGVs to the working mechanism of 2D and 3D convolution operations (i.e., neighbor aggregation):
       • Spatial Smoothness: the pixels in a local patch of Gt correspond to a set of neighboring
         points in 3D space; and
       • Temporal Consistency: the pixels with identical (u, v) across all T frames are corre-
         sponded, i.e., they correspond to the same position of the object/scene.
Technical Motivation. The above-mentioned problem theoretically refers to 3D surface parameter-
ization (Sheffer et al., 2006). Intuitively, one can construct a neural network, denoted as fθ (·), which
can consume 3D points to predict their 2D pixel coordinates, i.e., {(uit , vti )}N           i N
                                                                                 i=1 = fθ ({pt }i=1 ), and
then encode the 3D coordinates as 2D pixel values. However, for point clouds with arbitrary and
non-manifold geometric structures, it is challenging or even infeasible to obtain the ground-truth
2D coordinates that are necessary for supervising the training of fθ (·). Moreover, the difficulty is
further amplified when parameterizing a series of point cloud frames with the temporal consistency
required.
In view of the above-mentioned difficulty, we consider a self-supervised framework from the per-
spective of self-reconstruction. Generally, we construct a network composed of 2D convolution
(Conv2D) fψ (·), which deforms a pre-defined 2D regular grid2 C ∈ RH×W ×3 to over-fit each of
       −1
{Pt }Tt=0  independently as a 2D color image It = fψ (C). The learning process of fψ (·) is driven
by minimizing the EMD loss between Pt and the point cloud re-organized from It . The intention
of such an approach lies in that owing to the local aggregation and kernel sharing properties of
Conv2D, the network tends to progressively modify the input in a smooth manner, thus retaining
and propagating the spatial smoothness of C to It to some extent, while the EMD can promote the
underlying shape of It to approach that of Pt . Furthermore, the above fashion can be extended
to sequences by employing a network of 3D convolution (Conv3D) hϕ (·) fed with a pre-defined
regular 3D grid Q ∈ RT ×H×W ×3 to take both spatial smoothness and temporal consistency into
                e t }T −1 = hϕ (Q). Similarly, the learning of hϕ (·) can be driven by minimizing the
account, i.e., {G    t=0
                            −1                                                     e t }T −1 .
EMD loss between {Pt }Tt=0     and the re-organized point cloud sequence from {G        t=0

Framework Overview. Instead of directly fitting a sequence from a pre-defined 3D regular grid
via Conv3D, which produces poor representation quality (see the last column of Table 2), due to the
great difficulty of jointly optimizing high-dimensional spatial and temporal structures from scratch,
we construct a self-supervised framework in a coarse-to-fine fashion, as shown in Fig. 2, consisting
of two modules: frame-wise spatial structurization in Sec. 3.1, which takes as input a pre-defined 2D
                                                           −1
regular grid to represent each point cloud frame of {Pt }Tt=0 as a 2D color image frame-by-frame in
an over-fitting and multi-scale manner, and spatio-temporal joint structurization in Sec. 3.2, which
simultaneously deforms the spatial and temporal structures of a pre-defined 3D regular grid, guided
by the stack of the resulting 2D color images by the preceding module. As a generic representation
modality, PGV enables the use of well-established learning techniques for 2D images/videos to
construct 3D point cloud sequence processing pipelines demonstrated in Sec. 4.
Remark. It is worth noting that our representation modality is different from that by the conven-
tional perspective/parallel projection suffering from occlusions, and our framework is permutation-
invariant (i.e., irrelevant to the order of points). In addition, the regular structure of PGVs allows
the utilization of pixel-wise ℓ1 and ℓ2 losses, which demonstrate the stronger supervision ability and
are easier to optimize than the EMD and CD (Zeng et al., 2021; Feng et al., 2021).
3.1   F RAME - WISE S PATIAL S TRUCTURIZATION
Building upon the aforementioned insight, the goal of this module is to independently represent
               −1
each of {Pt }Tt=0   as a 2D color image It . Architecturally, as shown in Fig. 3, it is composed
of three components, i.e., feature encoder, hierarchically structured embedding fψe (·) and regular
frame extraction fψd (·), all with Conv2D blocks.
                                                                                               H   W
                                                                              e ∈ R 4 × 4 ×3 into
Specifically, fψe (·) maps an encoded down-scaled pre-defined 2D regular grid C
                                                            2    1
                                                                   e and Ll = f el+1 (UP(Ll−1 ))
three embeddings at different scales {Ll }3 , i.e., L1 = f e (f e (C))
                                              l=1               ψ    ψ                     ψ

   2
     The values of a pre-defined regular 2D (resp. 3D) grid are obtained by regularly sampling 3D coordinates
within the first slice (resp. the entire volume) of the unit 3D cube [0, 1]3 .


                                                     4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                               H  W  C3
             H W
               3                             H W
             4 4                          UP      C2

                     E                    UP
                                               2 2
                                               H W
                                                  C1
                                               4 4



                             ResConv2DBlocks                Conv2DBlocks
                                                                               EMD   EMD   EMD


Figure 3: Flowchart of the frame-wise spatial structurization (FWSS) module in Sec. 3.1. “UP” denotes
up-scaling. The input grid is passed into the encoder (“E”) and a series of Conv2D-based blocks to get the
hierarchically structured embedding, which will be converted to regular frames, driven by the EMDs at three
different scales.


Figure 4: Flowchart of the spatio-temporal joint structurization (STJS) module. See the detailed description
in 3.2.
                         l
for l = 2, 3, where fψe (·) is the l-th Conv2D block and UP(·) is the up-scaling operation. Then,
fψd (·) maps the multi-scale embeddings back to the original grid space to produce spatially smooth
                                                    l                      l
2D color images of three scales {Ilt = fψd (Ll )}3l=1 , where fψd (·) is the block at the l-th scale.
Finally, we set I3t of sizes H × W as It .
We perform this module frame by frame in an over-fitting manner and drive its learning by minimiz-
ing the EMD loss between the down-scaled Pt and the point cloud re-organized from {Ilt }3l=1 at all
three scales. See Appendix Sec. A.3 for ablation studies on loss functions and multi-scale strategy.

3.2       S PATIO -T EMPORAL J OINT S TRUCTURIZATION

By taking advantage of the local aggregation and kernel-sharing properties of Conv3D, this module
learns to simultaneously optimize the spatial and temporal structures of a pre-defined 3D regular grid
for pursuing the PGV with both spatial smoothness and temporal consistency. More importantly, we
utilize the coarse information of the 2D color images by the preceding module, which are spatially
smooth but without temporal consistency, to relieve the learning difficulty in the high-dimensional
spatio-temporal space. Architecturally, as illustrated in Fig. 4, we implement this module as a 3D
convolution-based geometry embedding framework, consisting of two components: the encoder
heϕ (·) in a residual learning fashion and the decoder hdϕ (·). Both heϕ (·) and hdϕ (·) are equipped with
Conv3D blocks.
                           −1
Specifically, with {It }Tt=0  available, we set its first frame I0 as the beginning of the final PGV,
i.e., G0 = I0 . Then, we create T − 1 copies of I0 and stack them along the time dimension
                                                                                           −1
to form Sd ∈ R(T −1)×H×W ×3 . Similarly, we also stack the remaining frames {It }Tt=1         to form
          (T −1)×H×W ×3                 0     (T −1)×H×W ×3
Sr ∈ R                   . Denote by S ∈ R                     a pre-defined 3D regular grid. We first
                                                 −1
learn the flow maps from I0 to each of {It }Tt=1     as Sf = hdϕ (CAT(heϕ (Sr ), S0 )), where CAT(·)
refers to the concatenation operation. And the resulting flow maps Sf ∈ R(T −1)×H×W ×3 is added
to Sd , leading to S′ ∈ R(T −1)×H×W ×3 , the stack of the remaining frames of the final PGV.
We perform this module in an over-fitting manner and drive its learning by minimizing the EMD
                    −1
loss between {Pt }Tt=0 and the point cloud sequence re-organized from the output PGV.


4     PGV- BASED P OINT C LOUD S EQUENCE P ROCESSING

To demonstrate the advantages of our PGV representation modality, we investigate three PGV-based
sequence processing tasks. Note that to demonstrate the PGV’s generality, we construct the frame-


                                                            5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



(a)                        (b)                           (c)                      (d)


Figure 5: Visual comparison of the predicted dense correspondence. Upper: a natural sequence. Bottom: a
pseudo sequence composed of five different subjects. (a) Ours; (b) CorrNet3D (Zeng et al., 2021); (c) Neu-
romorph (Eisenberger et al., 2021); (d) The input sequence. The colors indicate the temporal correspondence.
Note that the black points in (b) and (c) mean that no valid correspondence is predicted from them. We refer
readers to the Appendix Sec. A.4 and video demo for more visual results.

work for each task by employing existing deep models for 2D videos/images. More advanced deep
models could be adopted for pursuing higher performance.
Prediction of dense correspondence across frames of raw sequences is a fundamental and chal-
lenging problem, which aims to align semantically corresponded points of any two frames in point-
wise, given a raw sequence. Although many methods for dense 3D shape correspondence have been
proposed (Deng et al., 2022), there is a very limited number of works directly handling a sequence of
multiple point cloud frames. Moreover, most methods require ground-truth dense correspondence as
supervision, limiting their practicality. As aforementioned, the constructed framework can represent
raw sequences into PGVs with temporal consistency across frames promoted. Thus, our framework
can be used to align raw sequences in an self-supervised fashion. Also, it is worth noting that in
addition to natural sequences (i.e., the real motion/change of objects/scenes), this framework can
also handle pseudo sequences, i.e., sequences constructed by concatenating point clouds of different
objects.
Spatial upsampling of point cloud sequences aims to consistently densify all point cloud frames
of an input spatially sparse sequence. Compared with single point cloud upsampling, it is more chal-
lenging due to problem of “how to effectively and efficiently explore the complementary informa-
tion across different point cloud frames.” Based on the spatial super-resolution model for multi-view
images, named LFSSR-ATO (Jin et al., 2020), we construct an effective framework for sequence
spatial upsampling, by taking each frame of the resulting PGV as a view. Generally, LFSSR-ATO
is made up of an All-to-one SR module that performs individual super-resolution for each view of a
low-frequency image by combining embedded data from all other views, followed by a structurally
consistent regularization module that forces a low-frequency parallax structure in the reconstructed
low-frequency image.
Future point cloud frame synthesis, similar to 2D video prediction, aims to generate future frames
of a point cloud sequence based on preceding frames, which is challenging, especially for sequences
with large non-rigid deformation. Credited to the regular structure of our PGV representation, we
employ two recent video processing models, i.e., FLAVR (Kalluri et al., 2023) and SimVP (Gao
et al., 2022), to achieve this task. Generally, FLAVR utilizes 3D convolution and deconvolution for
an efficient auto-encoder design, while SimVP relies on 2D convolutional modules.
We refer readers to the Appendix Sec. A.1 for the detailed frameworks of the latter two tasks. Note
that the latter two downstream processing tasks are performed under the train-test setting, i.e., the
sequences in the form of PGVs are split into training and testing sets.


5     E XPERIMENTS

We experimented with three downstream tasks on 16 sequences obtained from MIT-Animation (Vla-
sic et al., 2008) and 8iVSLF (Krivokuca et al., 2018), where the training set consists of 8 sequences
and the other 8 sequences are used for testing. We applied FPS (Eldar et al., 1997) to uniformly
sample 1024 points for each 3D point cloud frame in our sequence correspondence and forecasting
tasks. For our sequence upsampling task, we sampled 2500 points for the Swing sequence, which
can be randomly separated into sub-groups each with eight frames. Note that our representation is
agnostic to specific object types, as no modules are tailored to any particular category, making it
generalizable to various object types.

5.1   D ENSE C ORRESPONDENCE P REDICTION
We compared with two recent unsupervised correspondence learning methods named Corr-
Net3D (Zeng et al., 2021) and Neuromorph (Eisenberger et al., 2021). Note that CorrNet3D only


                                                     6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 7: Visual comparison of the results by different methods used for spatially upsampling of sequences. (a)
Input sparse sequence (b) Ground-truth dense sequence (c) Neural Points (Feng et al., 2022) (d) MAFU (Qian
et al., 2021) (e) Ours.


Figure 8: Visualizations on the sequence ‘04’ of SemanticKITTI (Behley et al., 2019) dataset. (a) visualizes
the input sequences with unknown dense correspondence across frames. (b) visualizes the resulting PGV
representation. (c) visualizes the resulting PGV in 3D space, where the colors indicate dense correspondence
across frames.

handles pairwise point clouds, and Neuromorph requires the geometry prior (i.e., geodesic informa-
tion) provided by ground-truth mesh models. The GT correspondence is unavailable for the input
sequences of all methods. To perform quantitative evaluation, for each pair of adjacent frames of the
regular sequence, we calculated the corresponding proportion of the k-nearest neighborhood of each
point, and proposed an algorithm to calculate the correspondence ratio in percentage, considering
both the reconstruction and correspondence accuracy. We refer readers to the Appendix Sec. A.2 for
the pseudocode of the algorithm.
Results of Natural Sequences. We applied the pre-trained model of Cor-
rNet3D (Zeng et al., 2021) on paired human models and re-trained Neuro-
morph (Eisenberger et al., 2021) using paired data deduced from the training
set. We fed 8 successive frames into each model during testing to infer corre-
spondence. Note that these two approaches slide from frame to frame for the
generation of sequence correspondence, while our approach can concurrently
fit the entire sequence to provide a structured PGV with higher efficacy. We
reported the quantitative results under different numbers of neighbors k on
the Swing sequence in Fig. 6 (upper), where our method provides more re-
liable correspondences than the other point-based and mesh-based methods.
Typical visual examples are given in the upper row of Fig. 5. When deal-
ing with sequences with non-rigid motion, our method successfully deduces               Figure 6: Quantita-
a regular sequence with naturally-preserved dense correspondences. Addi-                tive results. Upper:
                                                                                        the Swing sequence.
tionally, Fig. 8 showcases our method’s capability in handling rigid motions,
                                                                                        Bottom: a pseudo
producing the PGV representation of a LiDAR sequence with coherent corre-               sequence composed
spondence.                                                                              of the shapes of five
Results of Pseudo Sequences. We presented the quantitative indicators in                different      subjects.
                                                                                        (a) Ours (b) Corr-
Fig. 6 (bottom). Given a highly challenging input sequence, our method can
                                                                                        Net3D (Zeng et al.,
still achieve more than 28% correspondence ratio, which is over 1.5 times               2021) (c) Neuro-
higher than the competing methods. We also provided the visual examples in              morph (Eisenberger
the bottom row of Fig. 5, composed of mixed sequences starting from right               et al., 2021).
to left. Note that Neuromorph learns correspondence through an interpola-
tion process without generating correspondence for the last frame, while our method can handle the
whole sequence without such limitation. Moreover, our method reaches a larger proportion of cor-
respondence than other methods. For the difficult case of the “basketball” component, our method
can still produce a plausible correspondence near the hands across other shapes.

5.2   S PATIAL U P - SAMPLING FOR S EQUENCES

We compared the baseline method in Sec. 4 with state-of-the-art point cloud up-sampling methods3 ,
i.e., MAFU (Qian et al., 2021) and Neural Points (Feng et al., 2022), which spatially up-sample a
sequence frame by frame. We adopted EMD and mNUC (Li et al., 2019) metrics for quantitative
evaluation.

   3
     We attempted to compare with the only two works for upsampling point cloud sequences (Wang et al.,
2021; 2022). However, their codes are not publicly available, and the authors declined our request for codes,
making us unable to reproduce reasonable results, only based on the details given in the papers.


                                                      7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
Table 1: Quantitative evaluation (×10−3 ) of various methods on spatial upsampling of sequences (columns
2-4) and future point cloud frames synthesis (columns 5-6).
                        Ours      NeuralPoints             MAFU                    Ours        P4DTrans
                                 (Feng et al., 2022)   (Qian et al., 2021)    (SimVP/FLAVR) (Fan et al., 2021a)
             EMD ↓      1.335        8.887                 4.903               37.560/33.574    67.157
             mNUC↓      0.689        1.080                 1.085                1.681/1.352      2.379


Figure 9: Visual comparison of the results on future point cloud frame synthesis. The first five frames (a) were
used as the input to predict the last three frames (b) of the ground-truth frames. Predicted results by (c) Ours
(SimVP), (d) Ours (FLAVR), and (e) P4DTrans (Fan et al., 2021a).
Table 1 (columns 2-4) lists the quantitative results, where it can be seen that our baseline achieves
a significantly lower EMD value while maintaining a lower uniformity cost. The superiority of our
method in terms of reconstruction quality and uniformity is also validated in visual results provided
in Fig. 7. These advantages of our baseline credited to (1) the adoption of mature 2D learning tech-
niques (e.g., feature fusion, the ℓ1 loss, etc.) for powerful feature learning; and (2) the exploration
of complementary information between frames, which are fundamentally enabled by our PGV rep-
resentation modality.

5.3   F UTURE P OINT C LOUD F RAME S YNTHESIS

To verify the potential of our PGV representation on this task scenario, we compared our baseline
method (as introduced in Sec. 4) with P4DTrans (Fan et al., 2021a), a transformer-style architecture
designed to avoid point tracking when capturing spatio-temporal correlation across the entire point
cloud video. In practice, we fed five frames to all models to predict the subsequent three frames. We
used the EMD loss for the supervision of P4DTrans, and the L1 loss for our video baseline.
As listed in Table 1 (columns 5-6), both of our baselines numerically exceed P4DTrans to a signif-
icant extent. This is because the structured PGV has naturally maintained spatial smoothness and
temporal consistency, conducive to the learning of spatio-temporal information of 3D convolutional
models. Besides, Fig. 9 provides visual comparisons, where it can be seen that the results produced
by P4DTrans (Fig. 9e) cannot convey effective information, while our baseline methods produce
more reasonable prediction results (Figs. 9c and 9d).

5.4   A BLATION S TUDY

We performed necessary ablative experiments on the Swing se-
quence to understand our representation framework better, includ- Table 2: Ablation on the capa-
ing its capability of key modules and performance under various bility of the two modules FWSS
spatial and temporal resolutions and lengths of the sequence.     in Fig. 3 and STJS in Fig. 4.
Effectiveness of Key Modules. We omitted the spatio-temporal          Modules FWSS-only FWSS+STJS STJS-only
                                                                       Ratio   25.45%     86.12%   58.13%
joint structurization (STJS) module and directly stacked the 2D
color images by the frame-wise spatial structurization (FWSS) module as the resulting PGV
representation. We reported quantitative results in Table 2, from which we can conclude that
the absence of the STJS module significantly degrades the learned correspondence. As visu-
alized in Fig. 11, the FWSS module can generate 2D color images with spatial smoothness,
but lack temporal consistency (Fig. 11a), especially when dealing with large inter-frame motion.
Adding the STJS module, we can obtain the PGV with both satisfactory spatial smoothness and
temporal consistency (Fig. 11b). We refer readers to the Appendix Sec. A.1 for details.
Scale influence. Fig. 10a and Fig. 10b show the corre-
spondence ratio decreases with the sequence getting spa-
tially denser and temporally longer, respectively, because
the higher spatial and temporal dimensions make the opti-
mization of the spatial and temporal structures more diffi-
cult. Note the correspondence ratio is still at a high level.                      (a)             (b)            (c)
                                                                             Figure 10: Results of ablation studies on
Robustness to temporal resolution. We decreased the                          the effect of (a) spatial resolution, (b) the
temporal resolution of original sequences by uniformly                       length of a sequence, and (c) the temporal
selecting one frame every 1 to 7 frames, and the result-                     resolution on the performance of our repre-
                                                                             sentation framework.

                                                            8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 11: Visual results of ablation studies. (a) and (b) visualize 7 out of the 20 frames of the resulting
PGVs by the FWSS and STJS modules of our framework, respectively. For each group, Upper: PGV; Bottom:
visualization of the PGV in 3D space, where the colors of point clouds indicate the temporal correspondence.

ing sequences contain larger non-rigid motion, thus more challenging. As shown in Fig. 10c, our
model can maintain a correspondence ratio of higher than 45%, even when the temporal resolution
is reduced by seven times.

6    D ISCUSSION
Although our PGV representation modality has demonstrated impressive performance under various
scenarios, there is potential for further enhancement in the following promising aspects:
Representation quality. The two primary objectives of our structurization process are intra-frame
spatial smoothness and inter-frame temporal consistency. However, as depicted in Figs. 5 and A.9,
it is extremely challenging to completely eliminate spatial discontinuity and temporal inconsistency
in the generated PGV representation, especially for highly complex shape topologies. It is widely
recognized that distortion is inevitable when mapping complex 3D structures to 2D planar domains
(Sheffer et al., 2006), as this is fundamentally a parameterization problem. Besides, our current
technical pipeline solely relies on the property that convolutional outputs naturally incline to show
smooth distributions given smooth inputs. Nevertheless, there is a promising avenue for further
improving the representation quality by introducing explicit geometric constraints, such as the local
area- or shape-preserving regularization in the spatial domain and the Laplacian smoothing in the
temporal domain.
Computational efficiency. In our technical implementation, the overall self-reconstructive process
is driven by the EMD loss, whose computational complexity grows fast when dealing with the sig-
nificantly increased number of points. Thus, restricted by the innate inefficient nature of EMD, the
scalability of our current framework to large-scale point cloud data is still relatively unsatisfactory.
See Appendix Sec. A.3 for ablation studies on loss function choices.
Transformation robustness. Technically, although our method can straightforwardly achieve trans-
lation and scaling invariance via input normalization, it is highly non-trivial to pursue rotation invari-
ance, which itself is a challenging problem (Li et al., 2021a) in the geometry processing community.
See Appendix Sec. A.3 for some visual results.
Spatial dimensions of PGVs. In this paper, we set the spatial dimensions of a PGV to be equal for
simplicity, i.e., H = W . A more promising solution is adaptively adjusting the spatial dimensions
according to the object shape represented by the sequence, which is expected to benefit spatial
smoothness.
Wider applications. As a regular representation modality that facilitates the adaptation of 2D pro-
cessing techniques, our PGV opens up many new possibilities for point cloud sequence processing.
Notably, geometry compression (Graziosi et al., 2020) might be a promising exploration direction,
where we can directly introduce mature image/video codecs. Besides, more low-level (e.g., scene
flow estimation (Liu et al., 2019a)) and high-level (e.g., action recognition (Li et al., 2010)) tasks
can be incorporated as downstream application scenarios.

7    C ONCLUSION
We presented a new regular representation modality for 3D point cloud sequences called Point Ge-
ometry Video (PGV) for general purposes. PGV is featured with local smoothness in the spatial
domain and point-wise correspondence in the temporal domain. We constructed a learning-based
framework to conveniently obtain the PGV representation for any sequences in a self-supervised
manner. We validated the effectiveness, advantages, and universality of PGV by carrying out various
challenging applications. We believe such a representation modality can provide a new structuriza-
tion strategy for sequences and offer a fresh possibility to overcome the barriers between sequence
and 2D video processing and enhance the efficacy of sequence processing pipelines, thanks to its
regular spatio-temporal structure.


                                                     9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
J. Behley, M. Garbade, A. Milioto, J. Quenzel, S. Behnke, C. Stachniss, and J. Gall. SemanticKITTI:
   A Dataset for Semantic Scene Understanding of LiDAR Sequences. In ICCV, pp. 9297–9307,
   2019.
daerduoCarey. Pytorchemd. https://github.com/daerduoCarey/PyTorchEMD, 2022.
Bailin Deng, Yuxin Yao, Roberto M Dyke, and Juyong Zhang. A survey of non-rigid 3d registration.
  Computer Graphics Forum, 41(2):559–589, 2022.
Nicolas Donati, Abhishek Sharma, and Maks Ovsjanikov. Deep geometric functional maps: Robust
  feature learning for shape correspondence. In CVPR, pp. 8592–8601, 2020.
Nicolas Donati, Etienne Corman, and Maks Ovsjanikov. Deep orientation-aware functional maps:
  Tackling symmetry issues in shape matching. In CVPR, pp. 742–751, 2022.
Marvin Eisenberger, David Novotny, Gael Kerchenbaum, Patrick Labatut, Natalia Neverova, Daniel
 Cremers, and Andrea Vedaldi. Neuromorph: Unsupervised shape interpolation and correspon-
 dence in one go. In CVPR, pp. 7473–7483, 2021.
Yuval Eldar, Michael Lindenbaum, Moshe Porat, and Yehoshua Y Zeevi. The farthest point strategy
  for progressive image sampling. IEEE Transactions on Image Processing, 6(9):1305–1315, 1997.
Hehe Fan, Yi Yang, and Mohan S. Kankanhalli. Point 4d transformer networks for spatio-temporal
  modeling in point cloud videos. In CVPR, pp. 14204–14213, 2021a.
Hehe Fan, Xin Yu, Yuhang Ding, Yi Yang, and Mohan S. Kankanhalli. Pstnet: Point spatio-temporal
  convolution on point cloud sequences. In ICLR, 2021b.
Hehe Fan, Xin Yu, Yi Yang, and Mohan Kankanhalli. Deep hierarchical representation of point
  cloud videos via spatio-temporal decomposition. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and
  Machine Intelligence, 44(12):9918–9930, 2021c.
Hehe Fan, Yi Yang, and Mohan Kankanhalli. Point spatio-temporal transformer networks for point
  cloud video modeling. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 45(2):
  2181–2192, 2022.
Wanquan Feng, Juyong Zhang, Hongrui Cai, Haofei Xu, Junhui Hou, and Hujun Bao. Recurrent
 multi-view alignment network for unsupervised surface registration. In CVPR, pp. 10297–10307,
 2021.
Wanquan Feng, Jin Li, Hongrui Cai, Xiaonan Luo, and Juyong Zhang. Neural points: Point cloud
 representation with neural fields for arbitrary upsampling. In CVPR, pp. 18633–18642, 2022.
Zhangyang Gao, Cheng Tan, Lirong Wu, and Stan Z. Li. Simvp: Simpler yet better video prediction.
  In CVPR, pp. 3170–3180, 2022.
D Graziosi, O Nakagami, S Kuma, A Zaghetto, T Suzuki, and A Tabatabai. An overview of ongoing
  point cloud compression standardization activities: Video-based (v-pcc) and geometry-based (g-
  pcc). APSIPA Transactions on Signal and Information Processing, 9:e13, 2020.
Thibault Groueix, Matthew Fisher, Vladimir G Kim, Bryan C Russell, and Mathieu Aubry. A
  papier-mâché approach to learning 3d surface generation. In CVPR, pp. 216–224, 2018.
Xianfeng Gu, Steven J Gortler, and Hugues Hoppe. Geometry images. In Proceedings of the 29th
  annual conference on Computer graphics and interactive techniques, pp. 355–361, 2002.
Meng-Hao Guo, Jun-Xiong Cai, Zheng-Ning Liu, Tai-Jiang Mu, Ralph R Martin, and Shi-Min Hu.
 Pct: Point cloud transformer. Computational Visual Media, 7(2):187–199, 2021.
Niv Haim, Nimrod Segol, Heli Ben-Hamu, Haggai Maron, and Yaron Lipman. Surface networks
  via general covers. In ICCV, pp. 632–641, 2019.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image recog-
  nition. In CVPR, pp. 770–778, 2016.
Pan He, Patrick Emami, Sanjay Ranka, and Anand Rangarajan. Learning scene dynamics from point
  cloud sequences. International Journal of Computer Vision, 130(3):669–695, 2022.
Jing Jin, Junhui Hou, Jie Chen, and Sam Kwong. Light field spatial super-resolution via deep
   combinatorial geometry embedding and structural consistency regularization. In CVPR, pp. 2260–
   2269, 2020.
Tarun Kalluri, Deepak Pathak, Manmohan Chandraker, and Du Tran. Flavr: Flow-agnostic video
  representations for fast frame interpolation. In WACV, pp. 2071–2082, 2023.
Maja Krivokuca, Philip A Chou, and Patrick Savill. 8i voxelized surface light field (8ivslf) dataset.
 ISO/IEC JTC1/SC29/WG11 MPEG, Input Document M42914, 2018.
Jiahui Lei and Kostas Daniilidis. Cadex: Learning canonical deformation coordinate space for
   dynamic surface representation via neural homeomorphism. In CVPR, pp. 6624–6634, 2022.
Jiaxin Li, Ben M Chen, and Gim Hee Lee. So-net: Self-organizing network for point cloud analysis.
   In CVPR, pp. 9397–9406, 2018a.
Ruihui Li, Xianzhi Li, Chi-Wing Fu, Daniel Cohen-Or, and Pheng-Ann Heng. Pu-gan: a point cloud
  upsampling adversarial network. In ICCV, pp. 7203–7212, 2019.
Wanqing Li, Zhengyou Zhang, and Zicheng Liu. Action recognition based on a bag of 3d points. In
 CVPR Workshop, pp. 9–14, 2010.
Xianzhi Li, Ruihui Li, Guangyong Chen, Chi-Wing Fu, Daniel Cohen-Or, and Pheng-Ann Heng. A
  rotation-invariant framework for deep point cloud analysis. IEEE Transactions on Visualization
  and Computer Graphics, 28(12):4503–4514, 2021a.
Yangyan Li, Rui Bu, Mingchao Sun, Wei Wu, Xinhan Di, and Baoquan Chen. Pointcnn: Convolu-
  tion on χ-transformed points. In NeurIPS, pp. 828–838, 2018b.
Zijie Li, Tianqin Li, and Amir Barati Farimani. Tpu-gan: Learning temporal coherence from dy-
  namic point cloud sequences. In ICLR, 2021b.
Xingyu Liu, Charles R Qi, and Leonidas J Guibas. Flownet3d: Learning scene flow in 3d point
  clouds. In CVPR, pp. 529–537, 2019a.
Xingyu Liu, Mengyuan Yan, and Jeannette Bohg. Meteornet: Deep learning on dynamic 3d point
  cloud sequences. In ICCV, pp. 9246–9255, 2019b.
Yongcheng Liu, Bin Fan, Shiming Xiang, and Chunhong Pan. Relation-shape convolutional neural
  network for point cloud analysis. In CVPR, pp. 8895–8904, 2019c.
Haggai Maron, Meirav Galun, Noam Aigerman, Miri Trope, Nadav Dym, Ersin Yumer, Vladimir G
  Kim, and Yaron Lipman. Convolutional neural networks on surfaces via seamless toric covers.
  Acm Transactions On Graphics, 36(4):71–1, 2017.
Marko Mihajlovic, Yan Zhang, Michael J Black, and Siyu Tang. Leap: Learning articulated occu-
 pancy of people. In CVPR, pp. 10461–10471, 2021.
Trung Nguyen, Quang-Hieu Pham, Tam Le, Tung Pham, Nhat Ho, and Binh-Son Hua. Point-set
  distances for learning representations of 3d point clouds. In ICCV, pp. 10478–10487, 2021.
Michael Niemeyer, Lars Mescheder, Michael Oechsle, and Andreas Geiger. Occupancy flow: 4d
 reconstruction by learning particle dynamics. In ICCV, pp. 5379–5389, 2019.
Jiahao Pang, Duanshun Li, and Dong Tian. Tearingnet: Point cloud autoencoder to learn topology-
   friendly representations. In CVPR, pp. 7453–7462, 2021.
Chunghyun Park, Yoonwoo Jeong, Minsu Cho, and Jaesik Park. Fast Point Transformer. In CVPR,
  pp. 16949–16958, 2022.


                                                 11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Charles R Qi, Hao Su, Kaichun Mo, and Leonidas J Guibas. Pointnet: Deep learning on point sets
  for 3d classification and segmentation. In CVPR, pp. 652–660, 2017a.
Charles R Qi, Li Yi, Hao Su, and Leonidas J Guibas. Pointnet++: Deep hierarchical feature learning
  on point sets in a metric space. In NeurIPS, pp. 5099–5108, 2017b.
Yue Qian, Junhui Hou, Sam Kwong, and Ying He. Deep magnification-flexible upsampling over 3d
  point clouds. IEEE Transactions on Image Processing, 30:8354–8367, 2021.
Davis Rempe, Tolga Birdal, Yongheng Zhao, Zan Gojcic, Srinath Sridhar, and Leonidas J. Guibas.
  Caspr: Learning canonical spatiotemporal point cloud representations. In NeurIPS, pp. 13688–
  13701, 2020.
Alla Sheffer, Emil Praun, and Kenneth Rose. Mesh parameterization methods and their applications.
  Found. Trends Comput. Graph. Vis., 2(2):105–171, 2006.
Zhihao Shi, Xiangyu Xu, Xiaohong Liu, Jun Chen, and Ming-Hsuan Yang. Video frame interpola-
  tion transformer. In CVPR, pp. 17482–17491, 2022.
Ayan Sinha, Jing Bai, and Karthik Ramani. Deep learning 3d shape surfaces using geometry images.
  In ECCV, pp. 223–240, 2016.
Ayan Sinha, Asim Unmesh, Qixing Huang, and Karthik Ramani. Surfnet: Generating 3d shape
  surfaces using deep residual networks. In CVPR, pp. 6040–6049, 2017.
Robert W Sumner and Jovan Popović. Deformation transfer for triangle meshes. Acm Transactions
  On Graphics, 23(3):399–405, 2004.
Christian Szegedy, Wei Liu, Yangqing Jia, Pierre Sermanet, Scott Reed, Dragomir Anguelov, Du-
  mitru Erhan, Vincent Vanhoucke, and Andrew Rabinovich. Going deeper with convolutions. In
  CVPR, pp. 1–9, 2015.
Hugues Thomas, Charles R Qi, Jean-Emmanuel Deschaud, Beatriz Marcotegui, François Goulette,
  and Leonidas J Guibas. Kpconv: Flexible and deformable convolution for point clouds. In ICCV,
  pp. 6411–6420, 2019.
Nitika Verma, Edmond Boyer, and Jakob Verbeek. Feastnet: Feature-steered graph convolutions for
  3d shape analysis. In CVPR, pp. 2598–2606, 2018.
Daniel Vlasic, Ilya Baran, Wojciech Matusik, and Jovan Popović. Articulated mesh animation from
  multi-view silhouettes. In SIGGRAPH, pp. 1–9, 2008.
Kaisiyuan Wang, Lu Sheng, Shuhang Gu, and Dong Xu. Sequential point cloud upsampling by
  exploiting multi-scale temporal dependency. IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems for
  Video Technology, 31(12):4686–4696, 2021.
Kaisiyuan Wang, Lu Sheng, Shuhang Gu, and Dong Xu. Vpu: A video-based point cloud upsam-
  pling framework. IEEE Transactions on Image Processing, 31:4062–4075, 2022.
Yancheng Wang, Yang Xiao, Fu Xiong, Wenxiang Jiang, Zhiguo Cao, Joey Tianyi Zhou, and Jun-
  song Yuan. 3dv: 3d dynamic voxel for action recognition in depth video. In CVPR, pp. 511–520,
  2020.
Yue Wang, Yongbin Sun, Ziwei Liu, Sanjay E Sarma, Michael M Bronstein, and Justin M Solomon.
  Dynamic graph cnn for learning on point clouds. Acm Transactions On Graphics, 38(5):1–12,
  2019.
Yimin Wei, Hao Liu, Tingting Xie, Qiuhong Ke, and Yulan Guo. Spatial-temporal transformer for
  3d point cloud sequences. In WACV, pp. 1171–1180, 2022.
Tong Wu, Liang Pan, Junzhe Zhang, Tai Wang, Ziwei Liu, and Dahua Lin. Density-aware chamfer
  distance as a comprehensive metric for point cloud completion. In NeurIPS, 2021.
Tiange Xiang, Chaoyi Zhang, Yang Song, Jianhui Yu, and Weidong Cai. Walk in the cloud: Learning
  curves for point clouds shape analysis. In ICCV, pp. 915–924, 2021.

                                               12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Haozhe Xie, Hongxun Yao, Shangchen Zhou, Jiageng Mao, Shengping Zhang, and Wenxiu Sun.
  Grnet: Gridding residual network for dense point cloud completion. In ECCV, pp. 365–381,
  2020.
Jianyun Xu, Xin Tang, Yushi Zhu, Jie Sun, and Shiliang Pu. Sgmnet: Learning rotation-invariant
   point cloud representations via sorted gram matrix. In ICCV, pp. 10468–10477, 2021a.
Mutian Xu, Runyu Ding, Hengshuang Zhao, and Xiaojuan Qi. Paconv: Position adaptive convolu-
 tion with dynamic kernel assembling on point clouds. In CVPR, pp. 3173–3182, 2021b.
Qiangeng Xu, Xudong Sun, Cho-Ying Wu, Panqu Wang, and Ulrich Neumann. Grid-gcn for fast
  and scalable point cloud learning. In CVPR, pp. 5661–5670, 2020.
Yi Xu, Yao Lu, and Ziyu Wen. Owlii dynamic human mesh sequence dataset. Online”, October
  2017. 120th MPEG Meeting, Macau.
Yaoqing Yang, Chen Feng, Yiru Shen, and Dong Tian. Foldingnet: Point cloud auto-encoder via
  deep grid deformation. In CVPR, pp. 206–215, 2018.
Yiming Zeng, Yue Qian, Zhiyu Zhu, Junhui Hou, Hui Yuan, and Ying He. Corrnet3d: Unsupervised
  end-to-end learning of dense correspondence for 3d point clouds. In CVPR, pp. 6052–6061, 2021.
Junming Zhang, Ming-Yuan Yu, Ram Vasudevan, and Matthew Johnson-Roberson. Learning
  rotation-invariant representations of point clouds using aligned edge convolutional neural net-
  works. In 3DV, pp. 200–209, 2020.
Qijian Zhang, Junhui Hou, Yue Qian, Antoni B Chan, Juyong Zhang, and Ying He. Reggeonet:
  Learning regular representations for large-scale 3d point clouds. International Journal of Com-
  puter Vision, 130(12):3100–3122, 2022.
Qijian Zhang, Junhui Hou, Yue Qian, Yiming Zeng, Juyong Zhang, and Ying He. Flattening-net:
  Deep regular 2d representation for 3d point cloud analysis. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis
  and Machine Intelligence, 45(8):9726–9742, 2023.
Zhiyuan Zhang, Binh-Son Hua, David W Rosen, and Sai-Kit Yeung. Rotation invariant convolutions
  for 3d point clouds deep learning. In 3DV, pp. 204–213, 2019.
Hengshuang Zhao, Li Jiang, Jiaya Jia, Philip HS Torr, and Vladlen Koltun. Point transformer. In
  ICCV, pp. 16259–16268, 2021.
Yongheng Zhao, Tolga Birdal, Haowen Deng, and Federico Tombari. 3d point capsule networks. In
  CVPR, pp. 1009–1018, 2019.
Jia-Xing Zhong, Kaichen Zhou, Qingyong Hu, Bing Wang, Niki Trigoni, and Andrew Markham. No
   pain, big gain: classify dynamic point cloud sequences with static models by fitting feature-level
   space-time surfaces. In CVPR, pp. 8510–8520, 2022.


A     A PPENDIX
A.1   M ORE T ECHNICAL D ETAILS

Pre-defined 2D and 3D Regular Grids. The pre-defined regular 2D and 3D grids are created by
regularly sampling coordinates from the first slice and the whole space of [0, 1]3 , respectively. For
a pre-defined 2D grid C ∈ RH×W ×3 , the values of each pixel coordinate (u, v) are defined as
               u−1                  v−1
C(u, v, 1) = H−1   , C(u, v, 2) = W   −1 , and C(u, v, 3) = 0, where 1 ≤ u ≤ H and 1 ≤ v ≤ W .
For a pre-defined 3D grid Q ∈ RT ×H×W ×3 , the values of each 3D coordinate (t, u, v) are defined
as Q(t, u, v, 1) = Tt−1                       u−1                       v−1
                      −1 , Q(t, u, v, 2) = H−1 , and Q(t, u, v, 3) = W −1 , where 1 ≤ t ≤ T ,
1 ≤ u ≤ H, and 1 ≤ v ≤ W .

Downstream Task-specific Learning Framework for Sequence Spatial Upsampling. Given an
input point cloud sequence, we represent it as a PGV. The resulting PGV is further fed into the


                                                 13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


subsequent learning framework, as shown in Figure A.1, where frames of the input PGV are
spatially upsampled one by one in a residual learning manner. Specifically, for a target PGV frame,
we set it as the reference frame and the remaining PGV frames as auxiliary frames. We apply
ResNet-style (He et al., 2016) convolution modules with shared weights to extract features from
each frame. We also adopt a similar structure to learn the relationship between the features of
reference and auxiliary frames and fuse them. Finally, we regress a residual map with the desired
higher dimensions from the fused feature maps via the sub-pixel convolution operation, which is
further added to the coarsely upsampled frame via bicubic interpolation to produce the upsampled
PGV frame.

                                   Per frame feature      Concat features      Correlation


                                                                               ResConv
       Reference PGV frame         ResConv
                                                                                                                                Residual             HR PGV frame
                                                                                                  Fusion
                                                                                                               Sub-pixel
                                   ResConv                                      ResConv          ResConv
                                                                                                                 Conv                            +
       Auxiliary PGV frames        ResConv                                      ResConv

                                                                                                                           Coarse HR PGV frame


                                                                                Bicubic


Figure A.1: Flowchart of the framework for sequence spatial upsampling built upon (Jin et al.,
2020).

Downstream Task-specific Learning Framework for Future Point Cloud Frame Synthesis.
Figure A.2 shows the flowchart of the constructed framework based on SimVP (Gao et al., 2022),
where a 2D CNN-based module is used to process each frame separately, and spatio-temporal
features are learned through a translator with inception modules (Szegedy et al., 2015). Figure A.3
shows the flowchart of the constructed framework based on FLAVR (Kalluri et al., 2023), where
3D convolution is directly performed on the input PGV to capture spatio-temporal characteristics.

          Input PGV frames                                                                                                            Future PGV frames
                                          Encoder                              Translator                      Decoder

                                    ConvNormReLU                              Inception                    unConvNormReLU
                                        blocks                                 modules                          blocks



Figure A.2: Flowchart of the framework for synthesizing future point cloud frames of a sequence
built upon SimVP (Gao et al., 2022).

                      Input PGV frames                    Encoder                                 Decoder                Future PGV frames

                                                       3DConv block                          3DTransConv block

                                                       Gating module                           Gating module

                                                                            Skip connections



Figure A.3: Flowchart of the framework for synthesizing future point cloud frames of a sequence
built upon FLAVR (Kalluri et al., 2023).

The STJS-only Learning Framework for PGV Generation. In Table 2 (the last column) of our
manuscript, we demonstrated that directly fitting a sequence from a pre-defined 3D regular grid via
Conv3D leads to sub-optimal representation quality. The architecture of the corresponding STJS-
only learning framework (i.e., without using the FWSS module) is presented in the following Fig-
ure A.4.

A.2   D ETAILED E XPERIMENT S ETTINGS

Correspondence Metric. The proposed PGV representation is featured by local smoothness in
the spatial domain and point-wise correspondence in the temporal domain. To quantitatively
evaluate the dense correspondence promoted by our PGV representation, we correspondingly


                                                                                  14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                           EMD


                                                     Features

                                      ResConv3D                            Conv3D
                           ...          Blocks
                                                                 C         Blocks                    ...

                  Input sequence                                                           Output sequence
                                                                 C : Concatenation
                                   Pre-defined 3D Grid



            Figure A.4: Flowchart of the framework without using the FWSS module.


designed a computational metric to calculate the correspondence ratio, while considering the
reconstruction and correspondence accuracy. Recall that our framework represents an irregular
                          −1
sequence {Pt ∈ RN ×3 }Tt=0   , where point-wise correspondence across frames is unknown, as a
                                                ×3 T −1
PGV with T frames, denoted as {Gt ∈ RH×W     √ }t=0 with H and W being the height and width
of the 2D color video frame and H = W = N . We proposed Algorithm 1 to calculate the ratio
of semantically corresponded points of the obtained PGVs.


Algorithm 1 Algorithm for calculating correspondence ratio
Require: Gt , Pt , T, N, k
  t←0
  for t < T do                                ▷ loop for checking sequence reconstruction accuracy
      Gt ← index(Pt , knn(Pt , Gt , 1)) ▷ re-matching the original points for checking the per-frame
  reconstruction accuracy
      t+=1
  end for

  function R(a, b, k)                                                                       ▷ pairwise ratio function
     v←0
     cnt ← N
     while cnt ̸= 0 do
         sa = knn(a, a, k)                                                            ▷ graph on source point cloud
         sb = knn(b, b, k)                                                             ▷ graph on query point cloud
         v + = len(sak&sb )                                                  ▷ correspondence ratio in a local region
         cnt ← cnt − 1
     end while
     v/=N
     return v
  end function

  ratio ← 0
  t←0
  for t < T do                              ▷ loop for checking sequence correspondence accuracy
      ratio + = 12 (R(Gt , Gt−1 , k) + R(Gt−1 , Gt , k)) ▷ forward and backward correspondence ratio
  for adjacent frames
      t+=1
  end for
  return ratio / = T


Adaptation of Neuromorph (Eisenberger et al., 2021) and Corrnet3D (Zeng et al., 2021) for
Sequence Correspondence Prediction. As involved in Section 5.1 of our manuscript, the compared
methods Neuromorph (Eisenberger et al., 2021) and Corrnet3D (Zeng et al., 2021) were primarily
designed for processing a pair of 3D shapes. We made necessary adaptations to the two methods
to enable the prediction of correspondence across sequence frames. For Neuromorph (Eisenberger
et al., 2021), we set the number of interpolated in-between frames to 1, so the correspondence from


                                                            15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


the interpolated frame to the neighboring frame can be built in each step. Then, we slide the model
frame-by-frame to obtain the sequence correspondence. Similarly, for Corrnet3D (Zeng et al.,
2021), we start from the first frame to learn the correspondence between the first and second frames
and then slide frame-by-frame to achieve the sequence correspondence.

Benchmark Datasets. Here we provide more details about the sequences used in our experiments.
As shown in Table A.1, the first ten sequences of the left side are from the MIT-Animation (Vlasic
et al., 2008) dataset, with the number of frames varying from 150 to 250, and the last six sequences
are from 8iVSLF (Krivokuca et al., 2018), with the number of frames as 300. Moreover, the
first 13 sequences of the right side are the non-rigid animal poses and facial expressions from
DTTM (Sumner & Popović, 2004) with the number of frames varying from 9 to 53, and the
remaining sequences are from Owlii (Xu et al., 2017) with the number of frames as 600.

Table A.1: Details of the dataset from MIT-Animation (Vlasic et al., 2008), 8iVSLF (Krivokuca
et al., 2018), DTTM (Sumner & Popović, 2004) and Owlii (Xu et al., 2017) used in our experiment.

            MIT-Animation & 8iVSLF          # Frames      DTTM & Owlii         # Frames
                   bouncing                    175         camel-collapse          53
                      crane                    175           camel-gallop          48
                  handstand                    175           camel-poses           10
                    jumping                    150              cat-poses           9
                    march 1                    250         elephant-gallop         48
                    march 2                    250          elephant-poses         10
                     samba                     175             face-poses           9
                     squat 1                   250         flamingo-poses          10
                     squat 2                   250            head-poses            9
                      swing                    150          horse-collapse         53
                   longdress                   300           horse-gallop          48
                       loot                    300            horse-poses          10
                 redandblack                   300             lion-poses           9
                     soldier                   300        basketball player       600
                  thaidancer                   300                dancer          600
                      boxer                    300               exercise         600
                         -                      -                 model           600

Downstream task Evaluation of Sequence Spatial Upsampling. In this experiment, the sparse
input sequences and ground-truth dense sequences contain 625 and 2500 points in each point
frame, respectively. The compared methods were supervised by the per-frame Earth Mover’s
Distance (EMD) loss implemented in (daerduoCarey, 2022), and our method by L1 loss owing to
the regularity of PGVs. We used the metric of averaged EMD and mNUC per frame to verify the
reconstruction accuracy and uniformity of the output sequence, respectively.

Downstream Task Evaluation of Future Point Cloud Frame Synthesis. In this experiment, we
used the 1024-point, irregular sequences sampled from the original sequence with FPS (Eldar et al.,
1997) during the training phase. Eight consecutive frames were supplied, with the first five serving
as input frames and the last three serving as ground truth frames. To assess the effectiveness of each
method, we compared the predicted sequence with the actual sequence during the testing period. To
check the reconstruction’s correctness and the output sequence’s uniformity, we employed the EMD
and mNUC metrics averaged per frame.

A.3   A DDITIONAL V ERIFICATIONS AND D ISCUSSIONS

Loss Function. In Section 6 of the manuscript, we discussed the computational efficiency of our
framework, which is driven by the EMD loss. In fact, another alternative choice is the CD loss. Thus,
to quantitatively confirm the superiority of the EMD loss in the PGV framework, we performed an
ablation study by analyzing the impact of loss functions on the overall PGV framework. As shown


                                                 16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


in Table A.2, switching to the CD loss as supervision causes significant performance degradation.
The EMD loss turns to be much more effective in terms of promoting the temporal consistency of
PGVs.


Table A.2: Effect of loss functions on the whole PGV framework. The table presents the perfor-
mance of the PGV framework in terms of correspondence ratio (%).

                             Loss Functions      Correspondence Ratio (%)
                                 EMD                      92.06
                                  CD                      47.04


Multi-scale fitting manner. To confirm the effectiveness of the multi-scale fitting approach in the
FWSS module of the PGV framework, we conducted an ablation study by analyzing the impact of
fitting scales on the FWSS module. Specifically, we represented a point cloud frame of the Swing
sequence as a 2D color image and reported the EMD, CD, and spatial smoothness ratio (SSR) (%).4
As indicated in Figure A.5, multi-scale EMD achieves better spatial smoothness in the resulting 2D
color image.

Potential Solutions to Overcome Computational bottleneck. As mentioned in Section 6 of the
manuscript, improving computational efficiency is challenging due to the complex EMD loss used
in our framework, limiting our scalability to large-scale point cloud data. One possible solution
is to use the grid-based loss (Xie et al., 2020) to accelerate the learning process. However, voxel
resolutions still limit representation power and lead to redundancy for surface shapes. Further
research is needed to develop more efficient loss functions that can handle large-scale point cloud
data without sacrificing representation quality.

Transformation Sensitivity. Achieving rotation invariance is a longstanding and highly non-trivial
problem (Zhang et al., 2019; 2020; Xu et al., 2021a) in the geometry processing community. And
our current technical implementation of the whole PGV generation framework also suffers from
sensitivity to transformation. As shown in Figure A.6, we provide the visualization of the 2D color
images from the FWSS module by rotating the input point cloud frame randomly, showing that the
patterns of the resulting 2D color images differ significantly under different rotations.


    4
      We begin by selecting a random pixel within the 2D color image and define a patch around it. Next, we
re-organize the image in 3D space by selecting the corresponding 3D point and taking a neighborhood around
it. We then compare the ratio of overlapping points between the patch and the 3D neighborhood.


                                                    17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure A.5: Comparison of fitting the FWSS
module under different scales using various
metrics. The two strategies evaluated are (i)
multi-scaled EMD loss and (ii) single-scaled            Figure A.6: Visual results of the 2D color im-
EMD loss. Multi-scale refers to the FWSS                age produced by the FWSS module applied
module driven by EMDs at three different                to rotated input point clouds with 3 random
scales as shown in Fig. 3 of the manuscript,            angles.
while single-scale only uses the largest scale.


A.4   M ORE V ISUAL R ESULTS

We provide more visualizations on the DTTM (Sumner & Popović, 2004) dataset in Figures A.7
and A.8, where it can be seen that, despite the large non-rigid motion deformation, the obtained
PGVs still demonstrate dense correspondence across frames very well. Notably, the results highlight
the framework’s aptitude in effectively processing scanned LiDAR sequences, as evidenced by its
ability to establish dense correspondence across frames.


                                                       Figure A.8: More visualizations on the se-
Figure A.7: More visualizations on the se-             quence horse-poses. The odd rows visual-
quence camel-poses. The odd rows visual-               ize the resulting PGV in 3D space, where the
ize the resulting PGV in 3D space, where the           colors indicate dense correspondence across
colors indicate dense correspondence across            frames. The even rows are the corresponding
frames. The even rows are the corresponding            input sequences with unknown dense corre-
input sequences with unknown dense corre-              spondence across frames.
spondence across frames.


We provide more visualization of the resulting PGV for a sequences of rotating torus (Figure A.10)
and multiple objects (Figure A.11). These examples feature either holes or multiple objects. In Fig-
ure A.10, it is evident that the generated PGV sequence maintains spatial smoothness within local
areas of the PGV frames and temporal consistency among different frames of point clouds, as indi-
cated by the colors on the points for the challenging shape torus. In Figure A.11, for the generated
PGV of the sequence with multiple objects, it is observable that each object is automatically mapped


                                                  18
        Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


        Figure A.9: Visual results of the sequence Flamingo. Upper: PGV. Bottom: visualization of the
(b)     above PGV in 3D space, where the points in green correspond to the PGV region in the white boxes.

        to a patch region on the PGV frames. Moreover, the correspondence of any one object across dif-
        ferent frames of the point clouds is still preserved, as demonstrated by the colors on the points of
        different objects.


  (b)                                                     (c)



        Figure A.10: Visual results of the PGV generated by our framework on a sequence of the rotating
        torus. Upper: PGV; Bottom: visualization of the PGV in 3D space, where the colors of point clouds
        indicate the temporal correspondence.


        Figure A.11: Visual results of the PGV generated by our framework on a sequence of the rotating
        multiple objects. Upper: PGV; Bottom: visualization of the PGV in 3D space, where the colors of
        point clouds indicate the temporal correspondence.

        We also present visual results of the PGV generated by our framework on Swing to demonstrate
        the representation quality for both partial point clouds and long sequences. We fixed the cam-
        era perspective and extracted visible points from the Swing sequence to form partial point clouds,
        subsequently represented as PGV. We visualized 20 frames exhibiting significant motion from this
        sequence, displayed in a row scanning order.
        Although the representation quality of PGVs may degrade to some extent, due to the fact that incom-
        plete/partial sequences inherently pose much greater representation difficulties, there are no essential
        barriers for our technical scheme to process such challenging data. The additional experimental re-


                                                          19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


sults in Fig. A.12 of the updated pdf file demonstrate that our method works very well on partial
point cloud data.
We proposed a new PGV representation structure together with a specialized learning framework
to implement such a point cloud sequence structurization process. Pursuing long-term performance
tends to be an engineering issue, just like the standard “Low-Delay-P (IPPP)” working mode in
video compression, where a video sequence is divided into groups of pictures (GOPs).
In our method, for instance, we might set up a fitting window that spans five frames, designed to
overfit from frame i to i + 4. Then, this window shifts to start at frame i + 4, handling frames
i + 4 to i + 8, and so forth. This approach allows us to methodically fit the entire long sequence in
a chunk-by-chunk fashion, ensuring intra-frame smoothness and inter-frame temporal consistency
within each chunk. For the transitions between chunks, owing to our overfitting mechanism’s high
level of reconstructive fidelity, we align adjacent chunks by applying a nearest-neighbor strategy
at the overlapping frames of consecutive chunks. Ultimately, this yields a complete long sequence
where each frame is characterized by both spatial smoothness and temporal consistency.
Specifically, as illustrated in Fig. A.12, the PGV generated from partial point cloud sequences
demonstrate local smoothness in each frame and notable temporal consistency, despite the primary
variation due to missing points subtly altering color block distributions. For instance, the absence of
green points, as marked by the red box, results in a reduction of green within the PGV frames. These
areas are smoothly replaced by the colors of nearby points. Apart from the boundaries of missing
points, color shifts due to absent points in the local area of the PGV frame transition smoothly rather
than changing abruptly. Additionally, even in longer sequences, the PGV frames exhibit a largely
consistent pattern, with variations occurring mainly in areas of substantial motion like the hands. The
uniformity in color distribution within each frame further underscores the spatial smoothness of the
PGV representation. This consistency underscores the effectiveness of our approach in maintaining
spatial and temporal smoothness, even in dynamically moving sequences. Such spatio-temporal
regularization facilitates efficient indexing for convolution operations in downstream tasks, such as
sliding window techniques, and aids in feature learning.


                                                  20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure A.12: Visual results of the PGV generated by our framework on a long sequence of partial
point clouds from Swing, displayed in row-scanning order. The first and fourth rows showcase the
generated PGV. The other rows display the PGV in 3D space, where the colors of the point clouds
indicate temporal correspondence, with both the front (second and fifth rows) and side views (third
and sixth rows).


                                                21
