Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


CICD-C ODER : C HINESE EMR S BASED ICD C OD -
ING W ITH M ULTI - AXIAL S UPPORTED C LINICAL E VI -
DENCE

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT

        Although automatic ICD coding has achieved some success in English, there still
        exist significant challenges for the Chinese electronic medical records(EMRs)
        based ICD coding task. The first problem is the difficulty of extracting disease
        code-related information from Chinese EMRs due to the concise writing style and
        specific internal structure content of EMRs. The second problem is that previous
        methods have not exploited the disease-based multi-axial knowledge and are nei-
        ther associated with the corresponding clinical evidence, resulting in inaccuracy
        in disease coding and lack of interpretability.
        In this paper, we develop a novel automatic ICD coding framework CICD-Coder
        for the Chinese EMRs-based ICD coding task. In the presented framework, we
        first investigate the multi-axes knowledge (crucial for the ICD coding) of the given
        disease and then retrieve corresponding clinical evidence for the disease-based
        multi-axes knowledge from the whole content of EMRs. Finally, we present an
        evaluation module based on the masked language modeling strategy to ensure each
        knowledge under the axis of the recommended ICD code is supported by reliable
        evidence. The experiments are conducted on a large-scale Chinese EMRs dataset
        collected from varying hospitals and the results verify the effectiveness, reliability,
        and interpretability of our proposed ICD coding method.



1   I NTRODUCTION

The International Classification of Diseases (ICD) was developed by the World Health Organiza-
tion (WHO), which converts disease diagnosis descriptions and other health problems into an al-
phanumeric coding system. ICD codes are widely accepted and used in many countries for clinical
research, health care management, and insurance compensation. The design principle of the ICD
coding system is very different from the diseases themselves, therefore only the people who have
passed the ICD coding exam can assign the appropriate ICD codes based on the patient’s medical
records independently. In China, these professional ICD coders are few, which inspired several
researchers from technology companies and universities to explore automatic ICD coding methods.
A series of competitive frameworks for automatic ICD coding is based on the Bert method (Ji et al.
(2021); Zhang et al. (2020); Pascual et al. (2021)), in which each ICD code is associated with a
unique entity representation, and the automatic coding task is transformed into a multi-label clas-
sification across fine-tuning. Cao et al. (2020) proposed Clinical-Coder, which exploits a dilated
convolutional attention network with an n-gram matching mechanism to capture semantic features
for non-continuous words and continuous n-gram words for automatic ICD coding. Yuan et al.
(2022) proposed the MSMN method, which collected synonyms of every ICD code from UMLS
and designed a multiple synonyms matching network to leverage synonyms for better code classifi-
cation. Yang et al. (2023) presented an autoregressive generation with a prompt framework for ICD
coding by designing a mask objective for the clinical language model. Yang et al. (2022) utilized
prompt-tuning in the context of ICD coding tasks by adding a sequence of ICD code descriptions as
prompts in addition to each clinical note as KEPT LM input.


                                                  1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 1: A coarse-to-fine classification process under multi-axes of ICD code H31.403 (which is
from the Chinese medical insurance version). Each part of the code is the specific knowledge of the
corresponding axis.

Although automatic ICD coding has received much attention, there is little work that has focused on
the difficulties and realistic requirements for Chinese electronic medical records. We point out the
following two issues that have not been paid attention to and solved.
The first problem is the difficulty of Table 1: Statistics of the Chinese and MIMIC-III datasets,
extracting disease code-related infor- including the mean, variance, and median of the number of
mation from Chinese EMRs due to words per diagnosis, and the number of words per discharge
the concise writing style and specific summary respectively. For the Chinese dataset, the words
internal structure content of EMRs. were obtained through the jieba word segmentation tool.2 .
The automatic ICD coding takes                    Chinese dataset           Mean Variance Median
diagnosis-related descriptions, as well        # Words per diagnosis         3.74     3.99      3
as other key information like symp- # Words per discharge summary 731.80 104742.07 706
tom manifestations and auxiliary ex-             MIMIC-III dataset          Mean Variance Median
amination results as input. In English         # Words per diagnosis        14.73 276.91       11
EMRs, diagnosis-related information # Words per discharge summary1600.36 600303.20 1466
is described in a short sentence, such
as in the MIMIC-III dataset (Johnson
et al. (2016)). However, the diagnosis
is usually described by a phrase consisting of several words in Chinese EMRs. Furthermore, the
coding-dependent information is generally recorded in the discharge summary of English EMRs, as
researchers truncate discharge summaries of the MIMIC-III dataset at 4,000 words as input(Xie et al.
(2019), Yuan et al. (2022)). Although there is a discharge summary in the EMR, the content is only
a summary of the hospitalization process in several paragraphs, which is insufficient to support au-
tomatic coding. To substantiate the aforementioned statement, we have listed statistical information
in Table 1, which presents the length statistics of diagnostic descriptions and discharge summaries
in a Chinese and English EMRs dataset. The information required for coding is scattered in every
possible corner of the EMR. For example, if we want to determine whether a tumor is malignant,
we need to look for descriptions in the pathology report. If we want to determine whether to assign
an intestinal infectious disease code, we need to check the laboratory test results. In a word, the
diagnosis description is too short, and coding-dependent information is scattered everywhere, which
makes the previous methods not practical for Chinese EMRs.
The second problem is that previous methods have not exploited the disease-based multi-axial
knowledge and are neither associated with the corresponding clinical evidence, resulting in inaccu-
racy in disease coding and lack of interpretability. For example, Clinical-Coder (Cao et al. (2020))
claimed to concentrate on explaining the reason why each ICD code is to be predicted. However,
this method can only find several words in the medical record similar to the ICD code name as an
explanatory basis. In fact, such explicit clues are rare. In practical situations, users may have low
fault tolerance and acceptance rates for the kind of automated ICD coding system without reliable
evidence. Even a small error can greatly impact users’ trust and ultimately lead to the system not
being accepted and finally deprecated.

   2
       Here is the code link for jieba word segmentation tool: https://github.com/fxsjy/jieba


                                                 2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                     Figure 2: The general framework of the proposed method.


The ICD coding system classifies health status according to the principle of coarse to fine under
multiple classification axes. There are four kinds of classification axes: etiology, anatomical site,
pathology, and clinical manifestations. We show a coarse-to-fine extraction process of ICD code
H31.403 (which is from the Chinese medical insurance version) in Figure 1, and each part of the
code is the specific knowledge of the corresponding axis. Inspired by the above observation and
evidence-based medicine (Sackett (1997)), we proposed a knowledge-evidence ICD coding schema,
which means the multi-axial knowledge of the recommended ICD code should be supported by the
textual evidence from the corresponding EMR. Such necessary and reliable evidence guarantees the
correctness of the recommended code.
To address the two issues mentioned above, we developed CICD-Coder: Chinese EMRs-based ICD
coding with multi-axial supported clinical pieces of evidence, which is shown in Figure 2. This
framework is inspired by the coarse-to-fine classification strategy under multi-axes knowledge of
the ICD codes system and the theory of evidence-based medicine (Sackett (1997)). Specifically,
we first extract the diagnosis list from the Chinese EMR. Then we find the most likely candidate
ICD codes for each diagnosis for efficiency. We use a multi-axial parser to divide the knowledge
under the axis for each candidate code. We further use an evidence retrieval module based on prior
knowledge from ICD coders, to find out the supporting text description in the EMR for knowledge
under each axis of the candidate code. To ensure the reliability of the evidence retrieved, we propose
a Clinical-Simbert model based on the similarity computation between each piece of evidence and
corresponding knowledge under the axis. After obtaining the reliable evidence set, we need to judge
whether the ICD code is fully supported by the evidence set and worth recommending. Inspired by
the prompt tuning method which bridges the gap between pre-training and fine-tuning downstream
tasks (Schick & Schütze (2020); Liu et al. (2021)), and is demonstrated can get better performances.
We employ the prompt-tuning method by designing a template that combines evidence under all
axes and the candidate ICD code. Then we convert the binary classification task into a masked
language modeling problem to conduct supervised training. Finally, we obtain the recommended
ICD code for all diagnoses and the corresponding evidence set for each diagnosis.
We summarize the contribution of this paper as follows:

      • We point out the differences between Chinese EMRs and English EMRs in extracting ICD
        coding-dependent information. The diagnosis in Chinese EMRs is just several words, and
        other ICD coding-depend information is scattered in every corner of the medical record.
        Therefore, the previous ICD automatic coding method focused on English EMRs is not
        applicable to Chinese EMRs.


                                                  3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


        • Inspired by the coarse-to-fine classification strategy under multi-axes knowledge of the ICD
          codes system and the theory of evidence-based medicine, we proposed an evidence retrieve
          module to find out the textual description in the EMR supporting the knowledge under the
          axis of each candidate ICD code, and further evaluate the quality of evidence to ensure its
          reliable by proposed Clinical-Simbert model;
        • We convert the binary classification task of whether the candidate ICD code can be fully
          supported by the evidence set into a masked language modeling problem by designing a
          template that combines the evidence set and the candidate ICD code. We conducted ICD
          code prediction experiments on the actual Chinese dataset collected and obtained state-of-
          the-art performance. We finally present the assessment results by ICD coders to verify the
          reliability and interpretability of the evidence.


2     M ETHODS

2.1     TASK D EFINITION

Recently, reducing a multi-label to a set of binary classification problems has proved to be com-
petitive to more sophisticated multi-label classification methods, and still achieves state-of-the-art
performance for many loss functions (Wever et al. (2020)). Inspired by this, We take the automatic
ICD coding task as a set of binary classification tasks based on diagnoses and the overall EMR.
Given an EMR, we first find out the Top N candidate ICD codes for each diagnosis. Then we find
out the supporting evidence set for knowledge under the multi-axis of each candidate ICD code by
evidence retrieving and evaluating. We determine whether the ICD code is fully supported by the
evidence set. Specifically, we take ith candidate ICD code description ci and its corresponding evi-
dence set Ei = {e1 , e2 , ..., eK } organized in template form as input, which K indices the maximum
number of evidence. And assign a binary label yi ∈ {0, 1} for the ith candidate ICD code in the
label space Y , where 1 means that the ICD code is sufficiently supported by the evidence and to be
recommended, 0 is the opposite.

2.2     RETRIEVE AND EVALUATION OF SUPPORTING EVIDENCE UNDER MULTIPLE AXES


2.2.1    O BTAINING C ANDIDATE C ODES FOR E ACH D IAGNOSIS
We gather all diagnoses from the medical record. We use the edit distance (Marzal & Vidal (1993)),
tfidf, and word2vec-based (Mikolov et al. (2013)) similarity computation methods to capture Top
N candidate codes among all the ICD codes, which are related to each diagnosis at the character,
discrimination, and semantic level respectively.

2.2.2    G REEDY E VIDENCE RETRIEVE BASED ON PRIOR KNOWLEDGE
The prior knowledge we utilized was obtained through discussions with experienced professional
ICD coders. Specifically, the ICD coding system categorizes all codes into 212 categories at the
three-digit level Buck (2016). Through our discussions, we determined that each category focuses
on similar likely appearance locations of the supporting evidence in the medical record. We summa-
rized a total of 88 possible locations where evidence may appear in Chinese EMRs. Furthermore, we
asked the ICD coders to annotate the possible locations of each code category, specifically focusing
on the evidence that may appear. This process resulted in the formation of a prior information table.
For example, if we want to determine whether a tumor is malignant, we need to look for descrip-
tions in the pathology report. To provide a clearer understanding of this prior knowledge, we have
included a small excerpt from the full table in the appendix.
After obtaining the set of candidate ICD codes for each diagnosis, we extract knowledge words un-
der multi-axes of each candidate code by a pre-trained parser as keywords for evidence retrieval. In
addition, the MSMN method (Yuan et al. (2022)) has verified that rich synonym descriptions can be
more effective in ICD coding, therefore we use synonyms for these keywords as a supplement. As
well as the evidence that contains more keywords is considered to be more representative and reli-
able. Based on these, we sort all possible combinations of keywords in descending order according


                                                   4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 3: A real example to show the candidate codes of one diagnosis and the reliable evidence
under multi-axes for one of the candidate codes (also the correct ICD code), the example is from a
real Chinese EMR. Each piece of evidence is followed by a few “@@” symbols for more informa-
tion helpful for inference, including keywords, the appearing field in the medical record, and times
of appearance (The Chinese version of this figure is in the Appendix).


to the number of keywords and retrieve the sentence containing them in all likely appearance loca-
tions. We replaced the sentence containing fewer keywords with more evidence based on a greedy
strategy. Once the supporting evidence for a keyword has been retrieved, the retrieval will not con-
tinue based on this keyword. We stopped retrieving until we traversed all keywords. Supported by
prior information, the overall process is fast and efficient.

2.2.3    R ELIABILITY ASSESSMENT OF EVIDENCE
To ensure that the evidence containing the combination of keywords is a proper context for sup-
porting the knowledge of the corresponding axis, We assess the reliability of the evidence by an
evidence-scoring model named Clinical-Simbert. Specifically, we first pre-trained a sentence em-
bedding model by the Simbert framework (Su (2020)), which performed unsupervised contrast
learning based on a large number of sentence pairs from Chinese EMRs. For obtaining training
data, we take sentence pairs that contain more than 60% of the same medical entities as positively
related sentence pairs, and randomly sample pairs from EMRs in different departments as nega-
tively related sentence pairs. Based on this model, We further conduct contrastive learning based on
a knowledge-evidence dataset. Specifically, we use the correct ICD code, keywords, and retrieved
evidence in the training set as positively related pairs, and random sample the evidence of wrong
candidate ICD codes as negatively related pairs. The Clinical-Simbert model after two rounds of
training can judge the reliability of the evidence for the knowledge under the axes of ICD codes.
After obtaining a relevance score by Clinical-Simbert, we removed the sentence with a similarity
score below the threshold value, and the remaining evidence is considered reliable. As shown in
Figure 3, we give a real example to show the candidate codes of one diagnosis and the reliable
evidence under multi-axes for one of the candidate codes (also the correct encoding result), the
example is from a real Chinese EMR. Each piece of evidence is followed by a few “@@” symbols
for more useful information, which will be described in detail in the next section.

2.3     I NFERENCE BASED ON P ROMPT- TUNING METHOD

Inspired by the prompt tuning method which bridges the gap between pre-training and fine-tuning
downstream tasks (Schick Sch utze (2020); Liu et al. (2021)), and is demonstrated can get better
performances. We convert the binary classification task of whether the candidate ICD code can be
fully supported by the evidence set into a masked language modeling problem. Whether the method
works depends largely on the design of the template. So we will introduce the template design and
prediction in this section. The inference framework is shown in Figure 4.


                                                 5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


2.3.1    T EMPLATE D ESIGN

Through our observations of Chinese electronic medical records and communication with many
professional ICD coders and clinicians, we have summarized two principles for writing Chinese
EMRs, which will help me design the template for prompt tuning.
Principle1: The source of the evidence limits what the evidence can describe and how credible
it is.
For example, the past history records the patient’s condition before the current hospitalization,
whereas the present history records the patient’s condition about the current hospitalization. There-
fore, if the evidence about the patient’s current health status comes from the past history, its reference
value is much lower than that from the present history. In addition, the content of the present history
comes from the doctor’s summary of the patient’s own description of his or her health status, so the
content is subjective and not very reliable. This is because each patient has a different ability to
perceive and express the disease, and the professional level of doctors also varies. Take patients as
an example, some people suffer from heart disease and the corresponding symptom is pain in the
back of the heart. However, the patient did not expect that he would have a heart-related disease, so
he guessed and then described back pain. In contrast, the evidence from auxiliary examinations is
considered to be more objective and accurate. Based on this, the source of the evidence implies very
important information that needs to be added to the template.
Principle2: The number of repeating
times of one piece of evidence in the Chi-
nese EMR determines its importance The
patient’s essential diagnostic basis and aux-
iliary examination results support the for-
mulation of each treatment plan and the
writing logic of medical records, which are
often repeated several times in the medical
record. Based on this, we use the k-means
method to remove duplicate or highly simi-
lar evidence from the evidence set retrieved
under a set of keywords. We count the re-
peating times of one evidence and add it to
the template, to reflect the importance of the Figure 4: The inference framework based on prompt-
evidence. Finally, because each piece of ev- tuning.
idence is to prove the knowledge of the cor-
responding axis, we emphasize them by adding the keywords behind the evidence. All additional
information is appended to the evidence and separated by @@ symbols, as shown in Figure 3.


With the above principles, we give the formal definition of the template. Given the ith candidate ICD
                                1    2          P                                p
code description ci = {wci        , wci , ..., wci } composed of words, wci         indices pth word of candidate
ICD code ci and P indices the maximum number of words. The corresponding evidence set is
Ei = {e1i , e2i , ..., eQ
                        i }, which Q indices the maximum number of evidence. Each piece of evidence
eqi is composed of four parts, that is, 1) the sentence is retrieved from the clinical record; 2) the
combination of keywords used for retrieval; 3) the field of the sentence originates from; 4) the
repeating times if the evidence in the whole Chinese EMR. Because these parts are all composed of
                                                      1    2           O                o
words, we represent them as a whole by {wi,q            , wi,q , ..., wi,q } in which wi,q indicate the oth word in
qth evidence of ith candidate ICD code, and O indices the maximum number of words. We designed
the template as follows:

                             T = [CLS] Ei [soft] [soft] [soft] ci [soft] [mask]

In which [soft] indices a learnable continuous embedding, which is a trick to eliminate the trouble of
designing prompts and can get better results than designing templates manually proposed by (Li &
Liang (2021); Lester et al. (2021)). We use a [mask] token for label prediction, indicating a binary
classification label prediction.


                                                        6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


2.3.2    E VIDENCE -BASED ICD CODES PREDICTION
Raffel et al. (2020) proposed T5 model, which is a unified framework that converts all text-based
language problems into a text-to-text format. We employed this model as a text encoder, which
embeds input tokens to embedding space:
                                  T = [ewi,1
                                         1 , ..., e O , esof t , esof t ,
                                                   wi,Q
                                                                                                    (1)
                                             1 , ..., e P , esof t , emask ]
                                  esof t , ewci        wci

                                    1
where ewi,1
         1  is word embedding of wi,1  , esof t is the embedding of [soft], which is initialized follow-
ing the T5 model. emask is the embedding of [mask], which is initialized by the [mask] token by T5
model. We’ve deleted [cls] for brevity. T5 model then encodes T to achieve the hidden states:
                                 T = [hwi,1
                                        1 , ..., h O , hsof t , hsof t ,
                                                  wi,Q
                                                                                                    (2)
                                            1 , ..., h P , hsof t , hmask ]
                                 hsof t , hwci        wci


To convert the binary classification task into a masked language modeling problem, we calculate
the probability of filling the token to the [mask] position in the template. Let V and Y indices a set
of label words and class set respectively. An injective mapping function ϕ : Y → V is needed to
associate the label set with the set of label words, which is also called ”verbalizer” in some recent
papers (Hu et al. (2021); Li & Liang (2021)). We define a sample verbalizer by setting V1 = “yes”,
V0 = “no”. With the verbalizer, the probability distribution of Y can be obtained by the probability
distribution of V at the [mask] position, which is formalized as follows:
                                   p(y|T ) = p([mask] = ϕ(y)|T )                                    (3)

3     E XPERIMENTS
3.1     DATASETS

We verify the performance of the proposed method on the Chinese dataset. We collected patients’
medical records from different hospitals in four cities. We use the Chinese medical insurance version
of the ICD coding system, which contains 33243 ICD codes. We list the statistics of the dataset in
Table 2, including the number of Chinese EMRs, the average length of the overall EMR, the number
of all ICD codes, the number of all candidate ICD codes, and the recall rate of the candidate ICD
codes to the correct ICD codes for the training set, development set, and test set respectively. We also
show the mean, variance, and median values of the candidate codes of each diagnosis, the evidence
of each candidate code, and tokens of each evidence respectively in Table 3.

3.2     BASELINES AND METRICS

We choose the following competitive methods as baselines. We measure the results using macro F1,
accuracy, and precision@5 for the Chinese dataset.
LAAT&jointLAAT(Vu et al. (2020)) proposed a label attention model for ICD coding, which can
handle both the various lengths and the interdependence of the ICD code-related text fragments.
T5 Raffel et al. (2020) proposed the T5 model, which is a unified framework that converts all text-
based language problems into a text-to-text format.
MSMN Yuan et al. (2022) proposed a multiple synonyms matching network to leverage synonyms
for better code representation learning, and finally help the code classification. MSMN is the state-
of-the-art method for automatic ICD coding.

3.3     I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS

During the experiment, we set the number of candidate codes for each diagnosis to 50. Under this
setting, the recall rate of both the training set, the development set, and the test set exceeds 95%.
If the number is increased to 100, the recall rate can exceed 98%, we chose 50 for efficiency. We
used edit distance, tfidf, and similarity calculation methods to find top1-top30, top31-top40, and
top41-top50 candidate codes for each diagnosis. The similarity calculation needs the embedding of


                                                      7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 2: Statistics of the Chinese dataset collected, including the total number of Chinese EMRs,
the average length of the overall EMR, the number of all ICD codes, the number of all candidate
ICD codes and the recall rate of the candidate ICD codes to the correct ICD codes for the training
set, development set, and test set respectively.

                       Chinese dataset               Train         Dev          Test
                        Total # EMR.                70,318        8,689        8,790
               Avg # Chinese words per EMR.        83317.35     81246.56     82328.16
                     Total # ICD codes.              2,238        2,198        2,207
                Total # candidate ICD codes.        11,080       10,954       11,023
                          Recall rate               96.58%       95.43%       95.55%


Table 3: Statistics of the Chinese dataset, including the mean, variance, and median value of the
candidate codes of each diagnosis, the evidence of each candidate code, and tokens of each evidence.

                          Chinese dataset            Mean        Variance    Median
                  Candidate codes per diagnosis.     13.17         8.6        10
               Reliable evidence per candidate code.   3           2.4         2
                        Tokens per evidence          43.66          52         7


diagnoses and the ICD codes, We employ the word2vec (Mikolov et al. (2013)) to train the corpus
for getting token representations and join them to get the whole representation. Training for Clinical-
Simbert took about 156 hours with 1 NVIDIA TITAN RTX GPU with 24 GB memory in total. In
the training process, we used learning rate 2e-7, dropout rate 0.1, L2 weight decay 1e3, and batch
size of 16 with fp32. The threshold to eliminate unreliable evidence is 0.65 (after normalization).
For the inference model based on prompt-tuning, we trained it took about 65 hours with 1 NVIDIA
TITNA GPU with 24 GB memory for the Chinese dataset. During prompt-tuning, we used learning
rate 1e-4, dropout rate 0.1, L2 weight decay 0.01, and batch size of 16 with fp32.

3.4   R ESULTS

The results are shown in Table 4. For each baseline, we use the discharge summary in the EMR and
the evidence set by the CICD-Coder for all ICD codes in one EMR as input respectively. Firstly, on
average, CICD-Coder(discharge summary) is 36.73%, 37.28%, 36.79%, 16.68%, and 8.33% better
than other baselines that take the same input in precision, recall, F1, accuracy, and p@5 metrics re-
spectively. This demonstrates the superiority of the prompt-tuning framework in the context of ICD
coding tasks. Furthermore, on average, the methods using evidence sets as input improve precision,
recall, F1, accuracy, and p@5 by 11.74%, 12.28%, 11.92%, 15.15%, and 25.50%, respectively,
compared to the methods using discharge summary as input. These results prove that the discharge
summary is not enough to support ICD coding for Chinese EMRs. Simultaneously, the evidence set
obtained through prior knowledge retrieval and the evidence evaluation strategy possesses rich and
comprehensive clinical information, sufficient to validate the reasonableness of the corresponding
candidate ICD codes. Then we compare CICD-Coder(evidence set) with other baselines that take
the same input, on average, CICD-Coder(evidence set) is 34.51%, 31.56%, 31.75%, 9.09%, and
5.09% better than other baselines in precision, recall, F1, accuracy, and p@5 metrics respectively.
This underscores the superior advantage of our method in the task of automatic ICD coding for
Chinese EMRs. Finally, we remove the keywords, sources, and occurrence times added after each
piece of evidence in the template design module, and record the versions as ”CICD-Coder(without
addition)” in Table 4, we can clearly observe the benefits brought by the module.
The significant improvement in macro-averaged metrics indicates that our method performs better
in recommending rare or tail ICD codes and the enhanced discriminative ability for distinguish-
ing between confusing ICD codes. This improvement can be attributed to our approach of finding
supporting evidence sets under each candidate code axis and reasoning about the overall code sup-
port based on this evidence. At the same time, our method also exhibits distinct evidence-based
differences for codes that are prone to confusion, ultimately improving code discrimination.


                                                  8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 4: Experimental results to verify the effectiveness of CICD-Coder. For each baseline, we use
the discharge summary in the EMR and the evidence set by CICD-Coder as input respectively.

                                                      Macro
      Model                                                              Accuracy       p@5
                                    Precision         Recall  F1
      LAAT(discharge summary)        18.06%          17.81% 17.94%        36.65%       59.65%
      LAAT(evidence set)             28.90%          29.33% 29.56%        59.26%       85.29%
      jointLAAT(discharge summary)   22.29%          22.45% 22.37%        41.52%       62.35%
      jointLAAT(evidence set)        33.14%          35.17% 34.54%        63.59%       89.54%
      MSMN(discharge summary)        7.70%            6.50% 7.05%         53.46%       58.69%
      MSMN(evidence set)             29.79%          32.07% 30.89%        68.50%       94.57%
      T5(discharge summary)          58.53%          60.89% 60.05%        62.64%       65.27%
      T5(evidence set)               63.50%          64.78% 64.12%        69.58%       81.17%
      CICD-Coder(discharge summary) 63.37%           64.19% 63.64%        65.25%       69.82%
      CICD-Coder(evidence set)      73.34%           71.90% 71.53%        74.32%       92.73%
      CICD-Coder(without addition)   71.12%          69.07% 69.78%        72.45%       91.90%


Table 5: Interpretability assessment results of evidence set for the recommended ICD code on 100
Chinese EMRs by ICD coders. The evidence set contains two groups, one is evaluated by the
Clinical-Simbert model, and the other is not.

               Degree       Before Clinical-Simbert After Clinical-Simbert Variable value
         Fully supported            20.65%                  48.05%           ↑ 27.40%
        Partially supported         44.72%                  48.11%            ↑ 3.39%
       Unable to supported          34.63%                   3.84%           ↓ 30.79%


3.5    ASSESSMENTS OF I NTERPRETABILITY FROM ICD CODERS

To assess the interpretability of the evidence set under all axes for the recommended ICD code, we
invite professional ICD coders to evaluate the evidence. We selected 100 EMRs from the test set
and asked coders to mark the supporting degree of each evidence set for the corresponding ICD
code. We set three levels: fully supported, partially supported, and unable to be supported. Take
fully supported for example, which means that when ICD coders see the evidence set, they believe
that the corresponding recommended code is correct, and they no longer need to read the entire
medical record. The penultimate column in Table 5 is the final result. We can see that nearly
half of the evidence set provided can support the corresponding ICD code fully, and only 3.84%
of the evidence set is invalid. The ICD coders believe that the provision of evidence makes them
more trustful and accepting of CICD-Coder. Even if the evidence is wrong, they can only look for
evidence for the corresponding axis, and the overall efficiency is greatly improved.
On the other hand, to evaluate the effectiveness of the Clinical-Simbert model for evidence assess-
ment, we asked ICD coders to mark the supporting degree of each evidence set before assessment,
the results are shown in the second column of Table 5. Comparing the second and third columns
of Table 5, the fully supported and partially supported levels are increased by 27.4% and 3.38%
respectively, and the unable to be supported level is greatly decreased by 30.79%. This proves that
our Clinical-Simbert model can effectively evaluate the relevance of evidence and corresponding
knowledge under the axes of candidate ICD codes.

4     C ONCLUSIONS
In this paper, we proposed a Chinese EMR-based ICD coding with multi-axial supported clinical
evidence. We developed an evidence retrieval and evaluation module to find the reliable evidence set
for the recommended ICD code. We employed the prompt tuning method to determine whether the
candidate ICD code can be fully supported by the evidence set. The experimental results demonstrate
that our method has achieved state-of-the-art performance and exhibits excellent interpretability.



                                                 9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Carol J Buck. 2017 ICD-10-CM Hospital Professional Edition-E-Book. Elsevier Health Sciences,
  2016.
Pengfei Cao, Chenwei Yan, Xiangling Fu, Yubo Chen, Kang Liu, Jun Zhao, Shengping Liu, and
  Weifeng Chong. Clinical-coder: Assigning interpretable icd-10 codes to chinese clinical notes.
  In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
  System Demonstrations, pp. 294–301, 2020.
Shengding Hu, Ning Ding, Huadong Wang, Zhiyuan Liu, Juanzi Li, and Maosong Sun. Knowledge-
  able prompt-tuning: Incorporating knowledge into prompt verbalizer for text classification. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2108.02035, 2021.
Shaoxiong Ji, Matti Hölttä, and Pekka Marttinen. Does the magic of bert apply to medical code
  assignment? a quantitative study. Computers in Biology and Medicine, 139:104998, 2021.
Alistair EW Johnson, Tom J Pollard, Lu Shen, Li-wei H Lehman, Mengling Feng, Mohammad
  Ghassemi, Benjamin Moody, Peter Szolovits, Leo Anthony Celi, and Roger G Mark. Mimic-iii,
  a freely accessible critical care database. Scientific data, 3(1):1–9, 2016.
Brian Lester, Rami Al-Rfou, and Noah Constant. The power of scale for parameter-efficient prompt
  tuning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.08691, 2021.
Xiang Lisa Li and Percy Liang. Prefix-tuning: Optimizing continuous prompts for generation. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2101.00190, 2021.
Xiao Liu, Yanan Zheng, Zhengxiao Du, Ming Ding, Yujie Qian, Zhilin Yang, and Jie Tang. Gpt
  understands, too. arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.10385, 2021.
Andres Marzal and Enrique Vidal. Computation of normalized edit distance and applications. IEEE
  transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence, 15(9):926–932, 1993.
Tomas Mikolov, Kai Chen, Greg Corrado, and Jeffrey Dean. Efficient estimation of word represen-
  tations in vector space. arXiv preprint arXiv:1301.3781, 2013.
Damian Pascual, Sandro Luck, and Roger Wattenhofer. Towards bert-based automatic icd coding:
  Limitations and opportunities. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.06709, 2021.
Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Katherine Lee, Sharan Narang, Michael Matena, Yanqi
  Zhou, Wei Li, Peter J Liu, et al. Exploring the limits of transfer learning with a unified text-to-text
  transformer. J. Mach. Learn. Res., 21(140):1–67, 2020.
David L Sackett. Evidence-based medicine. In Seminars in perinatology, volume 21, pp. 3–5.
  Elsevier, 1997.
Timo Schick and Hinrich Schütze. Exploiting cloze questions for few shot text classification and
  natural language inference. arXiv preprint arXiv:2001.07676, 2020.
Jianlin Su. Simbert: Integrating retrieval and generation into bert. Technical report, 2020. URL
   https://github.com/ZhuiyiTechnology/simbert.
Thanh Vu, Dat Quoc Nguyen, and Anthony Nguyen. A label attention model for icd coding from
  clinical text. arXiv preprint arXiv:2007.06351, 2020.
Marcel Wever, Alexander Tornede, Felix Mohr, and Eyke Hüllermeier. Libre: Label-wise selection
 of base learners in binary relevance for multi-label classification. In Advances in Intelligent Data
 Analysis XVIII: 18th International Symposium on Intelligent Data Analysis, IDA 2020, Konstanz,
 Germany, April 27–29, 2020, Proceedings 18, pp. 561–573. Springer, 2020.
Xiancheng Xie, Yun Xiong, Philip S Yu, and Yangyong Zhu. Ehr coding with multi-scale feature
  attention and structured knowledge graph propagation. In Proceedings of the 28th ACM interna-
  tional conference on information and knowledge management, pp. 649–658, 2019.


                                                   10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Zhichao Yang, Shufan Wang, Bhanu Pratap Singh Rawat, Avijit Mitra, and Hong Yu. Knowledge
  injected prompt based fine-tuning for multi-label few-shot icd coding. In Proceedings of the
  Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing. Conference on Empirical
  Methods in Natural Language Processing, volume 2022, pp. 1767. NIH Public Access, 2022.
Zhichao Yang, Sunjae Kwon, Zonghai Yao, and Hong Yu. Multi-label few-shot icd coding as autore-
  gressive generation with prompt. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
  volume 37, pp. 5366–5374, 2023.
Zheng Yuan, Chuanqi Tan, and Songfang Huang. Code synonyms do matter: Multiple synonyms
  matching network for automatic icd coding. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.01515, 2022.
Zachariah Zhang, Jingshu Liu, and Narges Razavian. Bert-xml: Large scale automated icd coding
  using bert pretraining. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.03685, 2020.


                                                11
