Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D ECOUPLED ACTOR -C RITIC
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                           A BSTRACT
         Actor-critic methods are in a stalemate of two seemingly irreconcilable prob-
         lems. Firstly, critic proneness towards overestimation requires sampling temporal-
         difference targets from a conservative policy optimized using lower bound Q-
         values. Secondly, well-known results show that policies that are optimistic in the
         face of uncertainty yield lower regret levels. To remedy this dichotomy, we pro-
         pose Decoupled Actor-Critic (DAC). DAC is an off-policy algorithm that learns
         two distinct actors by gradient backpropagation: a conservative actor used for
         temporal-difference learning and an optimistic actor used for exploration. We test
         DAC on DeepMind Control tasks in low and high replay ratio regimes and ablate
         multiple design choices. Despite minimal computational overhead, DAC achieves
         state-of-the-art performance and sample efficiency on locomotion tasks.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Deep Reinforcement Learning (RL) is still in its infancy, with a variety of tasks unsolved (Sutton &
Barto, 2018; Hafner et al., 2023) or solved within an unsatisfactory amount of environment inter-
actions (Zawalski et al., 2022; Schwarzer et al., 2023). Whereas increasing the replay ratio (ie. the
number of parameter updates per environment interactions step) is a promising general approach for
increasing sample efficiency and final performance of RL agents (Janner et al., 2019; Chen et al.,
2020; Nikishin et al., 2022; Li et al., 2022), it is characterized by quickly diminishing gains (D’Oro
et al., 2022) combined with linearly increasing computational cost (Rumelhart et al., 1986; Kingma
& Ba, 2014). Moreover, the limitations of robot hardware and data acquisition frequency constrain
the maximum achievable replay ratio (Smith et al., 2022). As such, it is worthwhile to pursue or-
thogonal techniques such as enhancing the properties of the underlying model-free agents. One
continuously researched theme is how a particular algorithm handles the exploration-exploitation
dilemma (Hessel et al., 2018; Fujimoto et al., 2019; Ciosek et al., 2019; Ecoffet et al., 2021).
In Actor-Critic (AC) algorithms, it’s common to employ a single policy for both exploration (gath-
ering new data to improve the current best policy) and exploitation (leveraging gathered data to
determine the best policy) (Silver et al., 2014; Schulman et al., 2015; Wu et al., 2017; Schulman
et al., 2017; Moskovitz et al., 2021). Algorithms like TD3 (Fujimoto et al., 2018) or SAC (Haarnoja
et al., 2018) achieve exploration by introducing symmetric noise to an exploitative action. However,
this noisy exploitation strategy necessitates careful balancing of policy entropy (Duan et al., 2016).
Whereas insufficient entropy leads to suboptimal policies due to inadequate exploration (Haarnoja
et al., 2018), excessive entropy results in suboptimal policies due to noisy critic network updates
and, consequently, poor Q-value approximator convergence (Van Seijen et al., 2009). Addition-
ally, optimizing the policy towards Q-value lower bound leads to an inadequate exploration of the
state-action subspace that yields critic disagreement (Ciosek et al., 2019; Moskovitz et al., 2021).
Using a single policy for both exploration and exploitation in AC algorithms has its roots in the Pol-
icy Gradient (PG) Theorem (Sutton et al., 1999) which states that PG is a function of Q-values under
the current policy. Thus, approaches building on PG would often use SARSA-type updates to train
the critic (Silver et al., 2014; Hafner et al., 2019a; Cetin & Celiktutan, 2023), as SARSA converges
to on-policy Q-values (Sutton & Barto, 2018). This in turn reinforces a single-policy setup for AC
algorithms. Recently, there have been works in relaxing the PG Theorem toward a dual-policy, fully
off-policy setup (Laroche & Tachet des Combes, 2021). An example of a dual-policy implemen-
tation is Optimistic Actor-Critic (OAC) (Ciosek et al., 2019). OAC uses two policies: optimistic
for exploration (ie. sampling actions when interacting with the environment); and conservative for
exploitation (ie. sampling actions for temporal-difference learning). Both policies are extracted


                                                  1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    (a) Low Replay Ratio    (b) High Replay Ratio       (c) Scaling-by-Resetting   (d) DAC & DreamerV3

Figure 1: Decoupled Actor-Critic (DAC) achieves significant improvements on DeepMind Control
Suite despite minimally higher computational costs than Soft Actor-Critic (SAC), demonstrating
state-of-the-art performance in complex locomotion tasks. Figure 1a reports compute efficient ex-
periments, where algorithms perform only 3 updates per environment step. Figure 1b reports a
sample efficient, high replay ratio experimental setup. Figure 1c shows that DAC matches the per-
formance of state-of-the-art Scaled-by-Resetting (SR) SR-SAC despite using 5-times lower replay
ratio and no parameter resets, whereas SR-DAC outperforms both. Figure 1d compares low replay
DAC, DreamerV3, MPO and D4PG. The Figure highlights DAC’s competitive performance despite
significantly lower complexity, runtime, and computational demands than the model-based algo-
rithm. We detail the setting in Section 4 and Appendix G. 10 seeds, mean and 95% bootstrapped CI.


from a single conservative actor. Whereas the conservative policy is directly parameterized by the
actor, the optimistic policy stems from a local linear approximation of Q-value upper bound con-
strained by a desired Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence. This yields an approximation of a policy
that is Optimistic in the Face of Uncertainty (OFU) (Wang et al., 2020b; Neu & Pike-Burke, 2020).
Unfortunately, OAC exploration is highly dependent on the chosen hyperparameter values.
To address the above shortcomings, we propose Decoupled Actor-Critic (DAC). DAC tackles the
exploration-exploitation dilemma by adopting a novel decoupled actor AC approach. As such, DAC
employs two actors, each independently optimized using gradient backpropagation with different
objectives. The optimistic actor is trained to maximize an optimistic Q-value upper bound while ad-
justing optimism levels automatically. This actor is responsible for exploration (sampling transitions
added to the experience buffer). In contrast, the conservative actor is trained using standard lower
bound soft policy learning (Haarnoja et al., 2018) and is used for sampling temporal-difference (TD)
targets and evaluation. Secondly, DAC addresses the shortcomings of OAC. By relaxing the first-
order Taylor approximation and explicitly modeling the second policy via an actor network DAC can
accurately approximate the maximum of arbitrary complexity Q-value upper bound (Hornik et al.,
1989). We perform experiments summarized in Figure 1, and show that DAC outperforms other
model-based RL agents. We highlight the main contributions of DAC below:

       • We propose a novel off-policy dual-actor AC setup where each actor is trained via gradient
         backpropagation of a specialized objective. We define the optimistic policy objective and
         formulate a robust framework that introduces easily interpretable hyperparameters.
       • We implement a module that automatically adjusts the level of optimism applied during
         Q-value upper bound approximation, as well as the impact of the KL penalty. This in turn
         allows DAC to accommodate various levels of epistemic and aleatoric uncertainties and
         different reward scales without hyperparameter tuning.
       • We show that DAC outperforms model-free benchmarks in terms of both sample efficiency
         and final performance, in both low and high replay regimes. To facilitate further research,
         we perform extensive ablations on various design choices (over 2000 training runs). We
         release training logs, as well as implementations of DAC under the following URL.

2    P RELIMINARIES
In this paper, we address policy learning in continuous action spaces. We consider an infinite-horizon
Markov Decision Process (MDP) (Puterman, 2014) which is described with a tuple (S, A, R, p, γ),
where states S and actions A are continuous, R(s, a, s′ ) is the transition reward, p(s′ |s, a) is a
transition kernel and γ ∈ (0, 1] is a discount factor. A policy π(a|s) is a state-conditioned action


                                                    2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


         (a) Critic Variance              (b) Conservative Actor                 (c) Optimistic Actor

Figure 2: Pessimistic underexploration and state-action space coverage on the Pendulum task with
state representation embedded into 1 dimension. The dots represent 500 state-action samples gath-
ered using the latest policy (conservative (black) or optimistic (red)). Figure 2a displays the standard
deviation (σ) of the two critics, with smaller values observed in well-explored state-action regions.
In Figure 2b, we depict conservative policy probabilities. Due to lower bound optimization, the actor
prioritizes state-action subspaces that have already been explored and do not yield critic disagree-
ment. Figure 2c illustrates optimistic policy probabilities. Despite having similar entropy levels,
following the upper bound policy results in better coverage within critic disagreement regions.


distribution.
           R Value is the expected discounted return from following the policy at a given state
V π (s) = [R(s, a, s′ ) + γV (s′ )] ds′ a. Q-value is the expected
                                                               R discounted return from performing
an action and following the policy thereafter Qπ (s, a) = p(s′ ) [R(s, a, s′ ) + γV (s′ )] ds′ . A
policy is said to be optimal if it maximizes discounted return for starting state distribution. Actor-
Critic (AC) for continuous action spaces performs simultaneous gradient-based learning of Q-values
(critic) and policy (actor) that seeks local optimum of said Q-values (Silver et al., 2014; Ciosek &
Whiteson, 2020). Critic parameters are updated by minimizing the SARSA temporal-difference
variants (Sutton & Barto, 2018). Modern AC methods employ a variety of countermeasures to
overestimation of Q-values, with bootstrapping using target network (Van Hasselt et al., 2016) and
lower bound Q-value approximation (Fujimoto et al., 2018) being most prominent. Soft SARSA
updates include policy stochasticity according to the following (Haarnoja et al., 2018):


    Lθ = Qπθ (s, a) − R(s, a) + γ (Qπlb (s′ , a′ ) − α log πϕ (a′ |s′ ))       a′ ∼ πϕ   s, a, s′ ∼ D

                                                                                                        (1)

Where πϕ is the actor; Qπθ is the critic; Qπlb is the Q-value lower bound; α is the entropy temperature;
and D denotes the experience buffer (Mnih et al., 2015). To achieve a locally optimal policy, the
actor takes gradient steps aimed at maximizing the critic’s lower bound (Moskovitz et al., 2021).
The policy can use an exploration schedule (Fujimoto et al., 2018) or optimize its variance through
soft policy improvement based on an entropy target (Haarnoja et al., 2018):


                        Lϕ = −Qπlb (s, a) + α log πϕ (a|s) a ∼ πϕ              s∼D                      (2)

As the actor models a parameterized distribution, gradients can be computed using the
reparametrization trick (Kingma et al., 2014). When enforcing action domain constraints through
hyperbolic tangent, minimizing policy log probabilities not only enhances exploration but also en-
courages the policy to maintain means within the non-saturated region of the hyperbolic tangent
(Wang et al., 2020a). Additionally, the temperature can be automatically adjusted to ensure that
average log probabilities match a specified target (Haarnoja et al., 2018):

                  Lα = −α log πϕ (ai |si ) + H∗

                                                         α ∈ (0, ∞) a ∼ πϕ          s∼D                 (3)

Where H∗ is the fixed entropy target which is often a function of action dimensionality. Contrary to
fixed exploration scheduling, this method allows for heterogeneous variances across states. Given
the optimization objective, this mechanism promotes exploration in states that offer lower Q-value


                                                     3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


         (a) Qσπ /Qµ
                   π   (×102 )                  (b) Optimism                   (c) KL Penalty Weight

Figure 3: Varying reward scales, uncertainty levels, and Q-value non-stationarity pose challenges in
setting fixed optimism (β ub ) and KL penalty weights. We examine three versions of the Cheetah
Run task: regular (blue), equivalent to the vanilla DMC task; scale (orange), where we rescale Q-
values by multiplying rewards; and uncertainty (pink), where we add Gaussian noise to rewards to
increase aleatoric uncertainty. In Figure 3a), we observe how the ratios Qσ π/Qµ π change during
training for these task variants. As training progresses, the divergence between policies maximizing
Q-value lower and upper bounds decreases for any fixed β ub . In Figure 3b), we illustrate the DAC
optimism adjustment mechanism, which adapts β ub to achieve a desired empirical KL divergence
between optimistic and conservative actors. This allows for task-dependent and phase-specific levels
of optimism β ub . Finally, Figure 3c presents DAC’s KL penalty weight (τ ) on a logarithmic scale.
Similarly to optimism, DAC adjusts the impact of the KL until the divergence reaches target levels.

gradients. For both actor and critic, an ensemble statistic of k critic networks gives the Q-value
lower bound. Most commonly, an ensemble of k = 2 is used. Then:

                                              1                            1
    Qπlb (s, a) = min Q1π (s, a), Q2π (s, a) =    Q1π (s, a) + Q2π (s, a) − |Q1π (s, a) − Q2π (s, a)|
                                               |2          {z            } |2         {z            }
                                                            Mean                     Standard Deviation
                                                                                                          (4)
This observation generalized Q-value lower bound (Ciosek et al., 2019; Moskovitz et al., 2021):

                                  Qπlb (s, a) = Qµπ (s, a) + β lb Qσπ (s, a)                              (5)
Where Qµπ is the critic ensemble mean; Qσπ is the critic ensemble standard deviation; and hyperpa-
rameter β lb controls the level of conservatism of the algorithm (ie. decreasing β lb leads to bigger
penalization of critic disagreement). Setting β lb = −1 is equivalent to the standard minimum of
the two critics. Optimizing the actor with respect to the Q-value lower bound demotes state actions
for which the critic ensemble disagrees. Such effect is referred to as pessimistic underexploration
(showed in Figure 2) (Ciosek et al., 2019; Cetin & Celiktutan, 2023). OAC tackles the under-
exploration by exploring according to an optimistic policy πϕo , which is itself extracted from the
conservative actor πϕc . As such, OAC explores according to a transformed conservative policy πo
given by the following Lagrangian:

                πe = arg max E Qπub (s, a) subject to DKL πϕc (s) ∥ πηo (s) ≤ δ

                                 a∼πo
                                                                                                          (6)
                with    Qπub = a∇ Qµπ (s, a) + β ub Qσπ (s, a)

Where δ is the boundary hyperparameter, Qπub is the Q-value upper bound approximated via a linear
first-order Taylor series, and β ub hyperparameter controls the level of optimism. OAC exploration
was shown to improve sample efficiency and performance as compared to SAC (Ciosek et al., 2019).

3     D ECOUPLED ACTOR -C RITIC
Traditionally, AC algorithms use a single actor network for three main tasks: exploration (ie. sam-
pling an action to add a transition to the experience buffer); temporal-difference learning (ie. sam-
pling an action to calculate the TD target); and evaluation (ie. sampling an action to assess the


                                                      4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


performance of an agent). Using a single actor for all tasks requires a delicate balance between opti-
mism and conservatism. Exploration tends to favor optimistic behavior policies due to lower regret
guarantees (Wang et al., 2020b), while TD learning leans towards conservatism due to the critic’s
tendency to overestimate (Hasselt, 2010). DAC addresses this dichotomy by introducing two distinct
actor networks: an optimistic one and a conservative one. The optimistic actor is trained to maxi-
mize the upper bound of the Q-value and is exclusively used for exploration. On the other hand, the
conservative actor is trained to maximize the lower bound of the Q-value and is employed for both
TD learning and evaluation. By performing conservative Q-value updates on optimistic state-action
samples, DAC achieves more effective exploration without the issue of Q-value overestimation.

Algorithm 1 Decoupled Actor-Critic Step
 1: Input Models: πϕc - conservative actor; πηo - optimistic actor; Qπ                     π
                                                                     θ - critic ensemble; Qt - target
    critic; α - entropy temperature; β ub - optimism; τ - KL penalty weight;
 2: Input Hyperparameters: fσ - variance multiplier described in Eq. 7; x - copying frequency;
    KL∗ - target KL divergence described in Eq. 9; β0ub - initial β ub ; τ0 - initial τ
 3: s′ , r, t = ENV. STEP(a) with a ∼ fσ (πηo (a|s)) {sample from the optimistic actor}
 4: BUFFER . ADD(s, a, r, s′ , t)
 5: if train step modulo x = 0; then
 6:     η←  − ϕ; β ub , τ ←− β0ub , τ0 {copy conservative parameters; reinitialize β ub and τ }
 7: end if
 8: for i = 1 to ReplayRatio do
 9:     s, a, r, s′ ∼ BUFFER . SAMPLE
10:     θ←  − θ − ∇θ Lθ (s, a, r, s′ , a′ ) with a′ ∼ πϕc {update critic according to Eq. 1}
11:     ϕ←  − ϕ − ∇ϕ Lϕ (s, a) with a ∼ πϕc {update conservative actor according to Eq. 2}
12:     η←  − η − ∇η Lη (s, a) with a ∼ fσ (πηo ) {update optimistic actor according to Eq. 7}
13:     α←  − α − ∇α Lα {update entropy temperature according to Eq. 3}
          ub
14:     β ←   − β ub − ∇β Lβ {update optimism according to Eq. 9}
15:     τ←  − τ − ∇τ Lτ {update KL penalty weight according to Eq. 10}
16:     Qt = P OLYAK(Qπθ , Qπt ) {standard Polyak averaging}
           π

17: end for


The pseudo-code illustrates a single DAC training step, where changes with respect to SAC are
colored. We summarize the most important novelties of the proposed algorithm: [1] Decoupled
Actors - the conservative actor is used for TD learning (pseudo-code line 10) and the optimistic
actor is used for exploration (pseudo-code line 3); [2] Unique Variance - the exploration policy can
have a different level of entropy as compared to the TD learning policy (pseudo-code line 3); [3]
Optimistic Policy Objective - the optimistic actor learns to maximize the regularized Q-value upper
bound (pseudo-code line 12) with the levels of optimism and KL penalty weight adjusted such that
the divergence target is met (pseudo-code lines 14 and 15). We describe all DAC modules in the
following subsections and provide a detailed comparison to OAC in Appendix B.2.

3.1   C ONSERVATIVE ACTOR , E NTROPY T EMPERATURE AND C RITIC

The conservative actor denoted as πϕc , optimizes a standard soft policy target described in Equation
2. Using a soft policy target allows for state-dependent exploration and regularizes the policy such
that the hyperbolic tangent output remains unsaturated. Furthermore, the non-zero variance of the
conservative actor regularizes the critic TD learning. Since the data in D is collected exclusively
by the optimistic actor, the conservative actor is updated fully off-policy. Following standard SAC,
we update the entropy temperature and the critic via Equations 3 and 1 respectively. For both up-
dates, the sampling is performed from the conservative actor πϕc . Whereas in principle detaching
exploration from exploitation allows for zero variance when sampling the TD targets, we find that
including some levels of noise regularizes the critic. Finally, the critic uses layer normalization (Ba
et al., 2016) before every activation, which we found to slightly increase the base agent’s perfor-
mance. We discuss the design choices in more detail in Appendix A.


                                                  5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


3.2   O PTIMISTIC ACTOR

The optimistic actor, denoted as πηo , optimizes an optimistic policy objective defined as follows:


       Lη = − Qµπ (s, a) + β ub Qσπ (s, a) + τ DKL πϕc (s) ∥ πηo (s)              a ∼ fσ (πηo ) s ∼ D

             |            {z              } |          {z            }                                  (7)
                       Q-value upper bound                   Divergence penalty


Where β ub is the optimism, τ is the KL penalty weight, DKL is the KL divergence between the
conservative and optimistic policies, and fσ is the standard deviation multiplier. Optimizing for the
Q-value upper bound results in a policy that is optimistic in the face of uncertainty, but also promotes
actions that generate critic disagreement. Since ensemble disagreement is often treated as a proxy
for sample novelty (Yahaya et al., 2019; Han et al., 2021), following such a policy yields more
diverse samples and as a result better coverage of the state-action space (Pathak et al., 2019; Lee
et al., 2021). Whereas coverage is not explicitly optimized for in traditional RL, there is a growing
body of research that hints toward the importance of data diversity in the context of RL (Xie et al.,
2022; Foster et al., 2022; Zhan et al., 2022). KL divergence, the second objective term, regularizes
the optimistic policy. While policies can be represented by various parameterized distributions,
we implement both actors as simple diagonal normal distributions, transformed by the hyperbolic
tangent activation. We compute the KL divergence in a closed form using the change of variables:


                                         |A|                                             2
                                                    σϕi (s) σηi (s)2 + µiη (s) − µiϕ (s)

                                         X                                                   1
          DKL πϕc (s) ∥ πηo (s)

                                     =           log i     +                               −            (8)
                                         i=1
                                                    ση (s)            2 σϕi (s)2             2

We derive the above statement in Appendix A. Using KL stabilizes the off-policy learning by ensur-
ing that the sampled trajectories are probable under the conservative actor policy (Sutton & Barto,
2018; Ciosek et al., 2019). Secondly, it guarantees that the optimistic policy optimizes for a specified
level of variance, which can be distinct from πϕc . To this end, we define the function fσ as a simple
variance multiplication. As such, the optimistic actor will have a standard deviation fσ -times bigger
than the conservative policy (this is implemented by simply multiplying the modeled standard devi-
ations by fσ ). This mechanism allows for separate entropy for TD learning and exploration while
retaining standard convergence guarantees of AC algorithms. In fact, as limD→∞ Qσπ (s, a) = 0
(Van Hasselt et al., 2016), it follows that in the limit both actors recover a policy that differs only by
fσ . As shown in Figure 4, including the KL penalty is essential for the approach’s success.


Figure 4: Evaluating the impact of various design choices in DAC. The ablated design choices
include: (+KL) KL penalty on both actors; (−π) only optimistic actor; (−KL) not using KL at
all; (+Det) a deterministic conservative actor; (−τ ) a fixed value of τ ; (−β) a fixed value of β ub ;
(−τ &β) fixed values of both; (−σ) same variance on both actors; (−copy) not copying parameters
during the training; and (−LN ) DAC without layer normalisation. As follows, the application of
KL is of great importance, with both using KL penalty on both agents and not using it at all leading
to bad policies. β ub adjustment has more impact on the performance than τ adjustment. Finally,
using DAC with parameter copying and layer normalization with DAC is beneficial. RR=3, 500k
steps, 10 tasks, 10 seeds, and 95% bootstrapped CI. We detail the tested variations in Appendix G.



                                                         6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


3.3   A DJUSTMENT OF β ub AND τ

Since values of Qµπ and Qσπ depend on reward scales, as well as aleatoric and epistemic uncertainty
of the environment, the value of β ub cannot be easily set. Furthermore, as shown in Figure 3, fixed
levels of β ub yield decreasing the impact of uncertainty on the optimistic policy. DAC leverages an
observation that for β ub = −β lb the optimistic actor recovers the objective of the conservative actor.
Then, β ub can be defined such that the divergence between the conservative baseline policy and the
optimistic policy reaches a desired level. To this end, implement a module that automatically adjusts
the levels of optimism β ub :

                                                 DKL πϕc (s) ∥ πηo (s)

          β ub               ub        lb                                   ∗
        L        =       β        +β                                    − KL    β ub ∈ (β lb , ∞) s ∼ D    (9)
                                                         |A|

Where KL∗ is the KL divergence target between the optimistic and transformed conservative poli-
cies, DKL is the empirical KL divergence, and |A| is the action dimensionality. If the empirical KL
divergence is bigger than the KL target, then β ub is reduced with a limit at β lb . On the other hand,
if the empirical KL divergence is smaller than the target, then β ub is increased with a limit at ∞.
This update mechanism allows us to define optimism level as a divergence between optimistic and
conservative policies. We update the KL penalty weight τ in the opposite direction:

                            DKL πϕc (s) ∥ πηo (s)

                      τ                                ∗
                     L = −τ                        − KL    τ ∈ (0, ∞) s ∼ D                               (10)
                                    |A|

By dividing by |A| we allow for divergence per degree of freedom. As τ is increased when the
empirical KL target is bigger than the desired KL target, DAC can regularize the divergence be-
tween two actors even if the β ub is at its negative limit. Conversely, an automatic reduction of τ
accompanies the increase of β ub if reaching the divergence limit proves challenging. This adap-
tive approach, as illustrated in Figure 3c, accommodates different scales of Q-values and contrasts
with setups like OAC, where optimism is predefined by fixing β ub at a specific value. However,
if the adjustment mechanism operates too slowly, the KL penalty may not be effectively enforced
during training, potentially causing the two agents to diverge. This divergence can result in fully
off-policy learning, insufficient coverage in the conservative policy region, and ultimately, subop-
timal agent performance. We believe that this issue may be connected to the deadly triad (Thrun
& Schwartz, 2014; Sutton & Barto, 2018) and recent findings highlighting the limitations of fully
off-policy learning, such as in the tandem setting (D’Oro et al., 2022). To mitigate the divergence
problem, we observed that initializing both agents with identical parameter values (ϕ0 = η0 ) makes
them less likely to diverge. Additionally, during training, we employ a hard parameter copy of the
conservative actor and reinitialize the optimistic actor with copies of these parameters.

4     E XPERIMENTS
We build our experiments on JaxRL code base (Kostrikov, 2021). Since all considered algorithms
other than SAC are extensions of thereof, we fix the pool of common hyperparameters on values that
are known to work well with SAC (Nikishin et al., 2022; D’Oro et al., 2022). All algorithm-specific
hyperparameters have fixed values between low and high replay ratio settings and are reported in Ap-
pendix E. Similarly, all algorithms except RedQ use the same network architectures and a standard


Figure 5: Impact of DAC hyperparameters on the final performance. All tested setups outperformed
baseline SAC (orange), demonstrating DAC robustness and stability. The thick dot is the configura-
tion used in the main experiment. 500k steps, 10 tasks, 10 seeds, mean and 95% bootstrapped CI.


                                                                7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


ensemble of two critics (Fujimoto et al., 2018; Haarnoja et al., 2018; Ciosek et al., 2019; Moskovitz
et al., 2021; Cetin & Celiktutan, 2023). For all experiments, we report robust evaluation statistics
generated via the RLiable package (Agarwal et al., 2021). The results for the main experiments are
presented in Figures 1, 6 & 7. Additionally, we run ablations on various design choices and hyper-
parameters which we report in Figures 4 & 5. We provide further experimental results in Appendix
D and information on the experimental settings in Appendix G

Low and High Replay We consider a set of 10 proprioceptive DeepMind Control Suite (DMC)
tasks (Tassa et al., 2018) listed in Appendix F for which we run experiments in low and high replay
regimes. In both, we use 106 environment steps for each task and algorithm. Firstly, we consider
a low replay ratio of 3 gradient steps per environment step. Such a low replay does not induce
loss of plasticity or overfitting in tested algorithms (Nikishin et al., 2022; Li et al., 2022). As such,
no parameter resets are required (D’Oro et al., 2022). We consider the following baselines: OAC
(Ciosek et al., 2019); ND-TOP (Moskovitz et al., 2021); SAC (Haarnoja et al., 2018); and TD3
(Fujimoto et al., 2018). Furthermore, we consider a high replay of 15 gradient steps per environment
step. Such replay is known to degenerate the performance of most algorithms unless regularization
is used (Chen et al., 2020; D’Oro et al., 2022). To this end, all algorithms perform full-parameter
resets in 50000th step, as well as every 250000 environment steps (Nikishin et al., 2022; D’Oro
et al., 2022). In this setup, we consider SR-SAC (D’Oro et al., 2022), SR-TOP and SR-OAC.


                                    (a) Low Replay Ratio; No Resets


                                   (b) High Replay Ratio; Full Resets

Figure 6: RLiable results for two regimes. Tasks used in the evaluation are listed in Appendix F.
DAC achieves the best final performance, with a pretty sizeable performance gap in the low replay
ratio regime. We use 10 tasks, 10 random seeds, and 106 environment steps. The bars indicate the
95% bootstrapped CI. We provide detailed training curves in Appendix H.

We find that low replay DAC achieves significantly better performance than the baseline algorithms
(Figures 1a and 6a). Notably, low replay DAC matches the performance of SR-SAC (Scaled-by-
Resetting SAC), despite SR-SAC utilizing 5-times bigger replay and resets (Figure 1c). Similarly,
scaled-by-resetting DAC (SR-DAC) outperforms the baseline algorithms in the high replay regime.
As shown in Figures 1b and 6b, SR-DAC achieves better performance than the baseline algorithms
and significantly surpasses the state-of-the-art model-free SR-SAC.

Dog Domain We assess DAC performance on three tasks from the complex dog domain. The
domain features a significantly larger action space than humanoid (31 dimensions compared to hu-
manoid’s 21). and remains unsolved by a model-free agent with proprioceptive input. Recently, it
was shown that a model-based agent TD-MPC achieves substantial improvements to SAC on the dog
tasks (Hansen et al., 2022). As such, we evaluate whether DAC can find policies better than SAC
and if it is capable of surpassing the performance of model-based TD-MPC on dog tasks. As TD-
MPC uses a variety of annealing mechanisms, a prioritized experience buffer, and a much greater
number of parameters, we decided to add one hidden layer to each network in DAC and increase the
copying frequency of the optimistic agent. We refer to such changed implementation as SR-DAC+.
We run the algorithm for 306 environment steps and compare its performance against both SR-SAC
and TD-MPC. We detail this experimental setting in Appendix G and E. We summarize the results
in Figure 7 and provide an additional comparison against TD-MPC in Appendix D.


                                                   8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 7: We find that SR-DAC achieves substantially better performance than SR-SAC, and
SR-DAC+ outperforms TD-MPC. To the best of our knowledge, SR-DAC+ achieves the highest
recorded performance on the dog tasks of a model-free RL algorithm. SR-DAC and SR-SAC use 10
seeds each, and SR-DAC+ and TD-MPC use 5 seeds each. Mean and 95% bootstrapped CI.


Whereas SR-SAC is unable to find a performing policy in the dog domain (a result consistent with
the evaluations performed in Hansen et al. (2022)), DAC is able to party solve all of the dog tasks.
Furthermore, we find that the SR-DAC+ matches the state-of-the-art model-based TD-MPC.

5   L IMITATIONS
Besides the limitations that DAC inherits from the soft actor-critic algorithmic family, DAC diver-
gence minimization presents unique optimization challenges. Unlike typical uses of KL divergence,
where the target distribution remains fixed (eg. Variational Autoencoders (VAE) (Kingma et al.,
2014)), DAC deals with a constantly evolving policy that is continually improving. Consequently,
the optimistic actor needs to keep up with the conservative actor’s changes. As depicted in Figure
4, DAC heavily relies on maintaining a low divergence between the actors. While DAC adjustment
mechanisms proved effective in the tested environments, there is no guarantee that they will suffice
in more complex ones. The second drawback of DAC lies in its inherent use of two actor networks,
which results in slightly increased memory and computational demands compared to the standard
Soft Actor-Critic (SAC) approach. In practice, the wall-clock time of DAC is around 10% greater
than that of SAC and is indistinguishable from the overhead induced by OAC, which requires ad-
ditional backpropagation through the critic ensemble. Moreover, since DAC initializes both actors
with identical parameters, they must share the same network architecture. However, as indicated by
Figure 4, simply copying parameters between them offers only minimal performance enhancement.
In light of this, we believe that the necessity for identical architectures can be mitigated by employ-
ing techniques like delayed policy updates (Fujimoto et al., 2018) or by learning rate scheduling.

6   C ONCLUSIONS
In this paper, we introduced DAC, an off-policy algorithm that leverages two distinct actors trained
via specialized objectives. One actor, known as the conservative actor, is dedicated to TD learning
and evaluation tasks, while the other, the optimistic actor, is used in exploration. This allows DAC
to perform conservative Q-value updates at optimistic state-action samples. As a result, DAC di-
rectly addresses the optimism-pessimism dilemma commonly encountered in Actor-Critic agents.
To evaluate the effectiveness of the proposed method, we conducted experiments on a set of 10
complex locomotion tasks, considering two different replay ratio regimes. Our results demonstrated
that DAC significantly outperforms established benchmark algorithms in terms of both performance
and sample efficiency. To assess the impact of individual DAC components, we conducted extensive
ablation studies consisting of over 2000 runs. Finally, we showcased the robustness of DAC across
a range of hyperparameter settings, underscoring its suitability for practical applications.

R EPRODUCIBILITY
We provide the DAC implementation, results and scripts used to generate the results at the follow-
ing URL. For pseudo-code, implementation details, or additional information about specific design
choices, please refer Appendix A. We describe experimental settings in Section 4 and Appendix G.
Finally, we point the reader towards Appendix E for the hyperparameters used in experiments


                                                  9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Abbas Abdolmaleki, Jost Tobias Springenberg, Yuval Tassa, Remi Munos, Nicolas Heess, and Mar-
  tin Riedmiller. Maximum a posteriori policy optimisation. In International Conference on Learn-
  ing Representations, 2018.
Rishabh Agarwal, Max Schwarzer, Pablo Samuel Castro, Aaron C Courville, and Marc Bellemare.
  Deep reinforcement learning at the edge of the statistical precipice. Advances in neural informa-
  tion processing systems, 34:29304–29320, 2021.
Shun-Ichi Amari. Natural gradient works efficiently in learning. Neural computation, 10(2):251–
  276, 1998.
Peter Auer, Nicolo Cesa-Bianchi, and Paul Fischer. Finite-time analysis of the multiarmed bandit
  problem. Machine learning, 47:235–256, 2002.
Jimmy Lei Ba, Jamie Ryan Kiros, and Geoffrey E Hinton. Layer normalization. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1607.06450, 2016.
Philip Ball, Jack Parker-Holder, Aldo Pacchiano, Krzysztof Choromanski, and Stephen Roberts.
  Ready policy one: World building through active learning. In International Conference on Ma-
  chine Learning, pp. 591–601. PMLR, 2020.
Gabriel Barth-Maron, Matthew W Hoffman, David Budden, Will Dabney, Dan Horgan, TB Dhruva,
  Alistair Muldal, Nicolas Heess, and Timothy Lillicrap. Distributed distributional deterministic
  policy gradients. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2018.
Marc G Bellemare, Will Dabney, and Rémi Munos. A distributional perspective on reinforcement
 learning. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 449–458. PMLR, 2017.
Edoardo Cetin and Oya Celiktutan. Learning pessimism for reinforcement learning. In Proceedings
  of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 37, pp. 6971–6979, 2023.
Richard Y Chen, Szymon Sidor, Pieter Abbeel, and John Schulman. Ucb exploration via q-
  ensembles. arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.01502, 2017.
Xinyue Chen, Che Wang, Zijian Zhou, and Keith W Ross. Randomized ensembled double q-
  learning: Learning fast without a model. In International Conference on Learning Represen-
  tations, 2020.
K Ciosek and S Whiteson. Expected policy gradients for reinforcement learning. Journal of Machine
  Learning Research, 21(2020), 2020.
Kamil Ciosek, Quan Vuong, Robert Loftin, and Katja Hofmann. Better exploration with optimistic
  actor critic. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019.
Will Dabney, Mark Rowland, Marc Bellemare, and Rémi Munos. Distributional reinforcement
 learning with quantile regression. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelli-
 gence, volume 32, 2018.
Pierluca D’Oro, Max Schwarzer, Evgenii Nikishin, Pierre-Luc Bacon, Marc G Bellemare, and
  Aaron Courville. Sample-efficient reinforcement learning by breaking the replay ratio barrier.
  In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.
Yan Duan, Xi Chen, Rein Houthooft, John Schulman, and Pieter Abbeel. Benchmarking deep
  reinforcement learning for continuous control. In International conference on machine learning,
  pp. 1329–1338. PMLR, 2016.
Adrien Ecoffet, Joost Huizinga, Joel Lehman, Kenneth O Stanley, and Jeff Clune. First return, then
  explore. Nature, 590(7847):580–586, 2021.
Sarah Filippi, Olivier Cappé, and Aurélien Garivier. Optimism in reinforcement learning and
  kullback-leibler divergence. In 2010 48th Annual Allerton Conference on Communication, Con-
  trol, and Computing (Allerton), pp. 115–122. IEEE, 2010.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Dylan J Foster, Akshay Krishnamurthy, David Simchi-Levi, and Yunzong Xu. Offline reinforcement
  learning: Fundamental barriers for value function approximation. In Conference on Learning
  Theory, pp. 3489–3489. PMLR, 2022.
Scott Fujimoto, Herke Hoof, and David Meger. Addressing function approximation error in actor-
  critic methods. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 1587–1596. PMLR, 2018.
Scott Fujimoto, David Meger, and Doina Precup. Off-policy deep reinforcement learning without
  exploration. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 2052–2062. PMLR, 2019.
Aurélien Garivier and Eric Moulines. On upper-confidence bound policies for switching bandit
  problems. In International Conference on Algorithmic Learning Theory, pp. 174–188. Springer,
  2011.
Florin Gogianu, Tudor Berariu, Mihaela C Rosca, Claudia Clopath, Lucian Busoniu, and Razvan
  Pascanu. Spectral normalisation for deep reinforcement learning: an optimisation perspective. In
  International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 3734–3744. PMLR, 2021.
Tuomas Haarnoja, Aurick Zhou, Kristian Hartikainen, George Tucker, Sehoon Ha, Jie Tan, Vikash
  Kumar, Henry Zhu, Abhishek Gupta, Pieter Abbeel, et al. Soft actor-critic algorithms and appli-
  cations. arXiv preprint arXiv:1812.05905, 2018.
Danijar Hafner, Timothy Lillicrap, Jimmy Ba, and Mohammad Norouzi. Dream to control: Learn-
  ing behaviors by latent imagination. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2019a.
Danijar Hafner, Timothy Lillicrap, Ian Fischer, Ruben Villegas, David Ha, Honglak Lee, and James
  Davidson. Learning latent dynamics for planning from pixels. In International conference on
  machine learning, pp. 2555–2565. PMLR, 2019b.
Danijar Hafner, Jurgis Pasukonis, Jimmy Ba, and Timothy Lillicrap. Mastering diverse domains
  through world models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.04104, 2023.
Xu Han, Xiaohui Chen, and Li-Ping Liu. Gan ensemble for anomaly detection. In Proceedings of
  the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 35, pp. 4090–4097, 2021.
N Hansen, X Wang, and H Su. Temporal difference learning for model predictive control. In
  International Conference on Machine Learning, PMLR, 2022.
Hado Hasselt. Double q-learning. Advances in neural information processing systems, 23, 2010.
Matteo Hessel, Joseph Modayil, Hado Van Hasselt, Tom Schaul, Georg Ostrovski, Will Dabney, Dan
 Horgan, Bilal Piot, Mohammad Azar, and David Silver. Rainbow: Combining improvements in
 deep reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence,
 volume 32, 2018.
Takuya Hiraoka, Takahisa Imagawa, Taisei Hashimoto, Takashi Onishi, and Yoshimasa Tsuruoka.
  Dropout q-functions for doubly efficient reinforcement learning. In International Conference on
  Learning Representations, 2021.
Kurt Hornik, Maxwell Stinchcombe, and Halbert White. Multilayer feedforward networks are uni-
  versal approximators. Neural networks, 2(5):359–366, 1989.
Michael Janner, Justin Fu, Marvin Zhang, and Sergey Levine. When to trust your model: Model-
 based policy optimization. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019.
Piotr Januszewski, Mateusz Olko, Michał Królikowski, Jakub Swiatkowski, Marcin Andrychowicz,
  Łukasz Kuciński, and Piotr Miłoś. Continuous control with ensemble deep deterministic policy
  gradients. In Deep RL Workshop NeurIPS 2021, 2021.
Sham M Kakade. A natural policy gradient. Advances in neural information processing systems,
  14, 2001.
Emilie Kaufmann, Olivier Cappé, and Aurélien Garivier. On bayesian upper confidence bounds for
  bandit problems. In Artificial intelligence and statistics, pp. 592–600. PMLR, 2012.


                                               11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Michael J Kearns and Satinder Singh. Bias-variance error bounds for temporal difference updates.
 In COLT, pp. 142–147, 2000.
Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1412.6980, 2014.
Durk P Kingma, Shakir Mohamed, Danilo Jimenez Rezende, and Max Welling. Semi-supervised
  learning with deep generative models. Advances in neural information processing systems, 27,
  2014.
Ilya Kostrikov. JAXRL: Implementations of Reinforcement Learning algorithms in JAX, 10 2021.
   URL https://github.com/ikostrikov/jaxrl.
Anders Krogh and John Hertz. A simple weight decay can improve generalization. Advances in
  neural information processing systems, 4, 1991.
Romain Laroche and Remi Tachet des Combes. Dr jekyll & mr hyde: the strange case of off-policy
  policy updates. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:24442–24454, 2021.
Misha Laskin, Kimin Lee, Adam Stooke, Lerrel Pinto, Pieter Abbeel, and Aravind Srinivas. Rein-
 forcement learning with augmented data. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:
 19884–19895, 2020.
Kimin Lee, Michael Laskin, Aravind Srinivas, and Pieter Abbeel. Sunrise: A simple unified frame-
  work for ensemble learning in deep reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Ma-
  chine Learning, pp. 6131–6141. PMLR, 2021.
Qiyang Li, Aviral Kumar, Ilya Kostrikov, and Sergey Levine. Efficient deep reinforcement learning
  requires regulating overfitting. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Represen-
  tations, 2022.
Zhuang Liu, Xuanlin Li, Bingyi Kang, and Trevor Darrell. Regularization matters in policy
  optimization-an empirical study on continuous control. In International Conference on Learn-
  ing Representations, 2020.
Volodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, David Silver, Andrei A Rusu, Joel Veness, Marc G Belle-
  mare, Alex Graves, Martin Riedmiller, Andreas K Fidjeland, Georg Ostrovski, et al. Human-level
  control through deep reinforcement learning. nature, 518(7540):529–533, 2015.
Ted Moskovitz, Jack Parker-Holder, Aldo Pacchiano, Michael Arbel, and Michael Jordan. Tacti-
  cal optimism and pessimism for deep reinforcement learning. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 34:12849–12863, 2021.
Gergely Neu and Ciara Pike-Burke. A unifying view of optimism in episodic reinforcement learning.
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:1392–1403, 2020.
Evgenii Nikishin, Max Schwarzer, Pierluca D’Oro, Pierre-Luc Bacon, and Aaron Courville. The
  primacy bias in deep reinforcement learning. In International conference on machine learning,
  pp. 16828–16847. PMLR, 2022.
Ian Osband, Charles Blundell, Alexander Pritzel, and Benjamin Van Roy. Deep exploration via
  bootstrapped dqn. Advances in neural information processing systems, 29, 2016.
Ian Osband, John Aslanides, and Albin Cassirer. Randomized prior functions for deep reinforcement
  learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 31, 2018.
Deepak Pathak, Dhiraj Gandhi, and Abhinav Gupta. Self-supervised exploration via disagreement.
  In International conference on machine learning, pp. 5062–5071. PMLR, 2019.
Jan Peters and Stefan Schaal. Natural actor-critic. Neurocomputing, 71(7-9):1180–1190, 2008.
Murray H Protter, B Charles Jr, et al. A first course in real analysis. Springer Science & Business
 Media, 2012.


                                                12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Martin L Puterman. Markov decision processes: discrete stochastic dynamic programming. John
 Wiley & Sons, 2014.
David E Rumelhart, Geoffrey E Hinton, and Ronald J Williams. Learning representations by back-
  propagating errors. nature, 323(6088):533–536, 1986.
Julian Schrittwieser, Ioannis Antonoglou, Thomas Hubert, Karen Simonyan, Laurent Sifre, Simon
  Schmitt, Arthur Guez, Edward Lockhart, Demis Hassabis, Thore Graepel, et al. Mastering atari,
  go, chess and shogi by planning with a learned model. Nature, 588(7839):604–609, 2020.
John Schulman, Sergey Levine, Pieter Abbeel, Michael Jordan, and Philipp Moritz. Trust region
  policy optimization. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 1889–1897. PMLR,
  2015.
John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy
  optimization algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347, 2017.
Max Schwarzer, Johan Samir Obando Ceron, Aaron Courville, Marc G Bellemare, Rishabh Agar-
 wal, and Pablo Samuel Castro. Bigger, better, faster: Human-level atari with human-level effi-
 ciency. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 30365–30380. PMLR, 2023.
Ramanan Sekar, Oleh Rybkin, Kostas Daniilidis, Pieter Abbeel, Danijar Hafner, and Deepak Pathak.
  Planning to explore via self-supervised world models. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning, pp. 8583–8592. PMLR, 2020.
Tim Seyde, Igor Gilitschenski, Wilko Schwarting, Bartolomeo Stellato, Martin Riedmiller, Markus
  Wulfmeier, and Daniela Rus. Is bang-bang control all you need? solving continuous control with
  bernoulli policies. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:27209–27221, 2021.
Tim Seyde, Wilko Schwarting, Sertac Karaman, and Daniela Rus. Learning to plan optimistically:
  Uncertainty-guided deep exploration via latent model ensembles. In Conference on Robot Learn-
  ing, pp. 1156–1167. PMLR, 2022.
David Silver, Guy Lever, Nicolas Heess, Thomas Degris, Daan Wierstra, and Martin Riedmiller.
  Deterministic policy gradient algorithms. In International conference on machine learning, pp.
  387–395. PMLR, 2014.
David Silver, Julian Schrittwieser, Karen Simonyan, Ioannis Antonoglou, Aja Huang, Arthur Guez,
  Thomas Hubert, Lucas Baker, Matthew Lai, Adrian Bolton, et al. Mastering the game of go
  without human knowledge. nature, 550(7676):354–359, 2017.
Laura Smith, Ilya Kostrikov, and Sergey Levine. A walk in the park: Learning to walk in 20 minutes
  with model-free reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.07860, 2022.
Nitish Srivastava, Geoffrey Hinton, Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever, and Ruslan Salakhutdinov.
  Dropout: a simple way to prevent neural networks from overfitting. The journal of machine
  learning research, 15(1):1929–1958, 2014.
Richard S Sutton and Andrew G Barto. Reinforcement learning: An introduction. MIT press, 2018.
Richard S Sutton, David McAllester, Satinder Singh, and Yishay Mansour. Policy gradient meth-
  ods for reinforcement learning with function approximation. Advances in neural information
  processing systems, 12, 1999.
Yuval Tassa, Yotam Doron, Alistair Muldal, Tom Erez, Yazhe Li, Diego de Las Casas, David Bud-
  den, Abbas Abdolmaleki, Josh Merel, Andrew Lefrancq, et al. Deepmind control suite. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1801.00690, 2018.
Sebastian Thrun and Anton Schwartz. Issues in using function approximation for reinforcement
  learning. In Proceedings of the 1993 connectionist models summer school, pp. 255–263. Psychol-
  ogy Press, 2014.
Hado Van Hasselt, Arthur Guez, and David Silver. Deep reinforcement learning with double q-
  learning. In Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence, volume 30, 2016.

                                               13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Harm Van Seijen, Hado Van Hasselt, Shimon Whiteson, and Marco Wiering. A theoretical and
  empirical analysis of expected sarsa. In 2009 ieee symposium on adaptive dynamic programming
  and reinforcement learning, pp. 177–184. IEEE, 2009.
Che Wang, Yanqiu Wu, Quan Vuong, and Keith Ross. Striving for simplicity and performance in
  off-policy drl: Output normalization and non-uniform sampling. In International Conference on
  Machine Learning, pp. 10070–10080. PMLR, 2020a.
Yining Wang, Ruosong Wang, Simon Shaolei Du, and Akshay Krishnamurthy. Optimism in rein-
  forcement learning with generalized linear function approximation. In International Conference
  on Learning Representations, 2020b.
Yuhuai Wu, Elman Mansimov, Roger B Grosse, Shun Liao, and Jimmy Ba. Scalable trust-region
  method for deep reinforcement learning using kronecker-factored approximation. Advances in
  neural information processing systems, 30, 2017.
Tengyang Xie, Dylan J Foster, Yu Bai, Nan Jiang, and Sham M Kakade. The role of coverage in
  online reinforcement learning. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Represen-
  tations, 2022.
Salisu Wada Yahaya, Ahmad Lotfi, and Mufti Mahmud. A consensus novelty detection ensemble
  approach for anomaly detection in activities of daily living. Applied Soft Computing, 83:105613,
  2019.
Denis Yarats, Ilya Kostrikov, and Rob Fergus. Image augmentation is all you need: Regularizing
  deep reinforcement learning from pixels. In International conference on learning representations,
  2020.
Weirui Ye, Shaohuai Liu, Thanard Kurutach, Pieter Abbeel, and Yang Gao. Mastering atari games
 with limited data. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:25476–25488, 2021.
Michał Zawalski, Michał Tyrolski, Konrad Czechowski, Tomasz Odrzygóźdź, Damian Stachura,
 Piotr Piekos, Yuhuai Wu, Łukasz Kuciński, and Piotr Miłoś. Fast and precise: Adjusting planning
 horizon with adaptive subgoal search. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning
 Representations, 2022.
Wenhao Zhan, Baihe Huang, Audrey Huang, Nan Jiang, and Jason Lee. Offline reinforcement
 learning with realizability and single-policy concentrability. In Conference on Learning Theory,
 pp. 2730–2775. PMLR, 2022.


A PPENDIX C ONTENTS
We divide the Appendix into the following sections:

     1. Further Description of DAC (Appendix A) — We provide additional rationale for certain
        design choices in DAC, as well as additional implementation details.
     2. Related Work (Appendix B) — We expand on the works related to DAC and provide a
        detailed comparison to the mechanisms leveraged by Optimistic Actor-Critic (OAC).
     3. Future Work (Appendix C) – we discuss a variety of research directions related to DAC
     4. Additional Experiments (Appendix D) — We report the additional tests of decoupled ar-
        chitecture in the context of value overestimation; performance impact of action repeat; and
        additional evaluation against TD-MPC.
     5. Hyperparameter Settings (Appendix E) — We list all hyperparameter settings required for
        the reproduction of the experiments.
     6. Tested Environments (Appendix F) — We list all DMC tasks using low replay, high replay,
        and DreamerV3 experiments.
     7. Experimental Settings (Appendix G) — We provide a detailed description of all experi-
        mental settings used in the paper.
     8. Learning Curves (Appendix H) — We share learning curves for the low replay, high replay,
        and DreamerV3 comparisons.


                                                14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A     F URTHER D ESCRIPTION OF DAC

A.1    S OFT C ONSERVATIVE ACTOR

When using a Tanh-Normal distribution to represent a policy, the soft policy learning (Haarnoja
et al., 2018) serves two key purposes: enforcing entropy; and enforcing non-saturation.

Enforcing entropy soft policy learning ensures a specific level of policy entropy, thereby ensuring
exploration during the learning (Haarnoja et al., 2018). Additionally, optimizing the objective func-
tion that balances entropy maximization and Q-values, enables policies to exhibit state-dependent
entropy promoting more exploration in low Q-value states. This stands in contrast to traditional
exploration methods employed by algorithms such as TD3, or TOP, where the policy maintains a
constant entropy across different states.

Enforcing non-saturation since the Tanh function saturates, increasing the distance between the
unsquashed distribution expected value and zero naturally decreases the distribution variance after
squashing, as illustrated in Figures 8a and 8b. Consequently, when employing soft learning, the
agent experiences a loss when shifting the policy away from zero. As depicted in Figures 8c and 8d,
this results in policies that concentrate within the non-saturated region of Tanh (Wang et al., 2020a)
and thus avoid bang-bang behaviour (Seyde et al., 2021).


         (a) Normal               (b) Tanh-Normal            (c) Pre-Tanh µ         (d) Post-Tanh Actions

Figure 8: Soft policy learning enforces prevents policy saturation. Figures 8a and 8b show three
Gaussians and the Tanh transformed counterparts. Before Tanh transformation, all policies have
equal variance (8a). However, since Tanh is nonlinear, applying the transformation changes the
policy variance depending on the location of the mean (8b). Because of this effect, when using soft
policy learning, the agent incurs loss when moving along the saturated portions of the Tanh activation
function. Figures 8c and 8d show policy means and executed actions for SAC with and without soft
policy learning on a Humanoid-Stand task. As follows, SAC without the entropy objectives follows
a bang-bang policy, whereas regular SAC anchors the policy within the non-saturated portion of
Tanh. To this end, soft policy learning reduces the risk of a bang-bang policy.


When designing DAC, we were interested in enforcing entropy and non-saturation on both conserva-
tive and optimistic actors. DAC achieves this by using soft policy learning on the conservative actor
(enforcing entropy and non-saturation) and using KL divergence on the optimistic actor (enforcing
similarity between the optimistic and conservative actors).

A.2    O PTIMISTIC P OLICY L EARNING AND PARAMETER C OPYING

We define the optimistic policy learning objective as follows:


      Lη = − Qµπ (s, a) + β ub Qσπ (s, a) + τ DKL πϕc (s) ∥ πηo (s)           a ∼ fσ (πηo ) s ∼ D

            |            {z              } |          {z            }                                  (11)
                      Q-value upper bound           Divergence penalty


For an explanation of each symbol, please refer to Section 3.2. In our approach, we emphasize
explicit upper bound optimization as the core principle of the optimistic policy objective. This
aspect of the objective aims to find a policy with minimal regret. It’s important to note that the
optimistic actor is exclusively employed for exploration purposes, ensuring that it doesn’t interfere


                                                    15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


with Q-value learning. This approach stands in contrast to the pessimistic lower bound approach
used in baseline algorithms such as SAC or TOP.
Furthermore, the optimistic policy objective features a KL divergence penalty. As shown in ablation
studies in Figure 4, such a penalty is of crucial importance for DAC performance. The penalty is
applied only to the optimistic actor and serves multiple purposes:

      1. Reducing the degree of off-policy learning - since the exploration is done solely by the op-
         timistic actor, the conservative actor is updated fully off-policy (ie. on transitions sampled
         from the optimistic policy). This practice can lead to unstable learning, a problem known
         as the ”deadly triad” (Sutton & Barto, 2018). By incorporating KL divergence into the op-
         timistic objective, we ensure that the transitions sampled from the optimistic policy align
         with the probabilities expected under the conservative policy. This serves to mitigate the
         extent of off-policy learning.
      2. Anchoring the adjustment mechanisms - as discussed in Section 3.3, the automatic adjust-
         ment of β ub (optimism) and τ (KL penalty weight) is anchored on some desired divergence
         value (ie. it is designed to adjust β ub and τ such that the divergence target is met). To this
         end, without including the divergence penalty we would not be able to use the adjustment
         mechanisms as designed.
      3. Enforcing non-saturation of the optimistic policy - by minimizing KL between the conser-
         vative actor and itself, the optimistic actor is enforced to mimic a policy that is trained via
         soft policy learning. As such, the optimistic actor becomes disincentivized from saturating.

As discussed in Section ??, any differentiable divergence or distance function could be used in
place of the KL. What makes KL divergence appealing is that it has a closed-form solution for
any invertible and differentiable transformation of given distributions. Although it is a well-known
result, we leave it below for completeness. We denote x as samples from policy distributions before
applying the Tanh activation, pc and po as conservative and optimistic distributions on x, Tanh
application as y = h(x) and the resulting distributions as πc , πo . Then leveraging the change of
variables formula:

                                    Z ∞
                                                       pc (x)
                 DKL pc ∥po =             pc (x) log          dx
                                    −∞                 po (x)
                                    Z ∞                                   dy
                                                  dy          πc (h(x)) | dx (x)|
                                =         πc (h(x)) |(x)| log             dy
                                                                                  dx               (12)
                                   −∞             dx          πo (h(x)) | dx (x)|
                                  Z ∞
                                                 πc (y)
                                =     πc (y) log        dy = DKL pc ∥po
                                   −∞            πo (y

The above holds true for any distributions pc and po . Since we assume them to be diagonal Gaussian,
it follows that:

                                                                   σ 2 + (µo − µc )2

                                                               σc                      1
                                                                  + o

               DKL pc ∥po = DKL πc ∥πo =                   log              2
                                                                                     −             (13)
                                                               σo         2σc          2

Which concludes the derivation.

A.3   C RITIC R EGULARIZATION

Recently, there has been a surge of works exploring the importance of critic regularization (Liu et al.,
2020; Laskin et al., 2020; Hiraoka et al., 2021; Gogianu et al., 2021; Li et al., 2022; D’Oro et al.,
2022). Whereas there is still a lot to understand about the interplay of TD learning and network
regularization, it is clear that a regularized critic allows a higher replay ratio to be used (Hiraoka
et al., 2021; Li et al., 2022; D’Oro et al., 2022). In this paper, we explore only two regularization
methods: layer normalization (Ba et al., 2016) and full-parameter resets (Nikishin et al., 2022).
Given the effectiveness of the only regularization we tested, we hypothesize that experimenting with


                                                       16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


methods like weight decay (Krogh & Hertz, 1991), spectral normalization (Gogianu et al., 2021)
or dropout (Srivastava et al., 2014) could further improve DAC performance. As follows from
the Figure 9, layer normalization has positive effects on DAC performance, particularly in the high
replay ratio regime. This suggests, somewhat surprisingly, that layer normalization might have some
synergy effect with full-parameter resets.


Figure 9: Layer normalization applied to critic slightly improves the performance of DAC. 10 tasks,
10 seeds, mean and 95% bootstrapped CI.



B     R ELATED W ORK

B.1   U NCERTAINTY E XPLORATION AND KL C ONSTRAINED P OLICIES

The exploration-exploitation dilemma has been the subject of extensive research. One prominent
principle that has emerged in addressing this dilemma is Optimism in the Face of Uncertainty (OFU)
(Auer et al., 2002; Filippi et al., 2010; Ciosek et al., 2019), which prioritizes actions with a balance
of high expected rewards and uncertainty. Whereas OFU has been extensively studied in the tabular
and bandit RL setting (Auer et al., 2002; Garivier & Moulines, 2011; Kaufmann et al., 2012), it
has not yet become as standard in deep RL. However, it has been shown that DQN ensembles
used for uncertainty-driven updates can provide performance improvements (Osband et al., 2016;
Chen et al., 2017; Osband et al., 2018; Lee et al., 2021). Similarly, OAC (Ciosek et al., 2019) and
TOP (Moskovitz et al., 2021) leverage uncertainty estimates over the state-action value function for
exploration, albeit still using one conservative actor.
The optimism-driven exploration was also considered for model-based agents. Sekar et al. (2020)
and Seyde et al. (2022) consider exploration driven by reward model ensemble. Similarly to DAC,
Seyde et al. (2022) considers using an optimistic upper bound exploration policy and a distinct
exploitation policy. Furthermore, agents like RP1 (Ball et al., 2020) leverage reward uncertainty
despite access to the nominal rewards. Finally, a variety of agents that leverage MCTS have been
proposed (Silver et al., 2017; Schrittwieser et al., 2020; Zawalski et al., 2022). On a different note,
DAC might seem similar to natural actor-critic (Amari, 1998; Kakade, 2001; Peters & Schaal, 2008;
Schulman et al., 2015) due to the KL constraint in actor optimization. Whereas the natural policy
gradient uses KL to enforce the similarity between policies resulting in subsequent updates, DAC
leverages KL to constrain the optimistic policy to be within some range from the conservative policy
that is used for TD learning. This allows for optimistic exploration without Q-value overestimation.

B.2   C OMPARISON TO OAC

DAC leverages two policies: a conservative one used for sampling the temporal-difference target
and evaluation; and an optimistic one used for sampling transitions added to the experience buffer.
Similarly to DAC, OAC performs evaluation and Bellman backups according to a conservative lower
bound policy. However, DAC differs from OAC on three main design choices: how to model the
optimistic policy; how to constraint the optimistic policy; and how to set the level of optimism β ub .


                                                  17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


How to model the optimistic policy OAC models the optimistic policy by combining conservative
policy with the linear approximation of Q-value upper bound, and as such uses one actor network.
The linear approximation combined with constrained optimization results in simplistic solutions
along the constraint boundary (Protter et al., 2012). As such, OAC’s applicability is limited to small
δ values due to the Taylor theorem. In contrast to that, DAC uses two actors. Modeling the second
policy via an actor network allows for exploration policies that are far more complex than a linear
approximator. Whereas this introduces a computational cost, employing techniques like delayed
policy updates can result in costs smaller than that of OAC.

How to constraint the optimistic policy OAC enforces a hard KL constraint by directly solving
a Lagrangian. Since the Q-value upper bound is approximated via a linear function, the solution is
placed on the constraint boundary unless the slope is zero (Protter et al., 2012). In contrast, DAC
imposes KL as a soft constraint. Paired with the neural network approximator, this allows DAC to
balance the KL with potential gains to the upper bound and generate complex exploration policies.

How to set the level of optimism β ub Finally, OAC treats β ub as a hyperparameter which is fixed
during the training. Since values of Qµπ and Qσπ depend on reward scales, as well as aleatoric and
epistemic uncertainty of the environment, the value of β ub has to be searched per task. Furthermore,
as shown in Figure 3, fixed levels of β ub yield decreasing the impact of uncertainty on the optimistic
policy. DAC leverages that the desired level of optimism can be defined through divergence between
the conservative baseline policy and the optimistic policy optimizing objective related to β ub . Such
definition allows for dynamics adjustment of both β ub and the KL penalty weight τ .

B.3   R EPLAY R ATIO S CALING

Increasing the replay ratio was the key ingredient in increasing the sample efficiency and final per-
formance of many recent RL agents (Janner et al., 2019; Chen et al., 2020; Hiraoka et al., 2021;
Nikishin et al., 2022; Schwarzer et al., 2023). Moreover, many of the novelties brought by those
agents were focused on stabilizing the learning given the high-replay regime (Janner et al., 2019;
Chen et al., 2020; Hiraoka et al., 2021). A particularly interesting technique is scaling-by-resetting,
as it is applicable to most off-policy RL algorithms. DAC improvements are largely orthogonal to
the direction of increasing the replay ratio, but DAC also takes advantage of the scaling-by-resetting
technique. However, as the available replay ratio is often an exogenous constraint (eg. when running
models on the robot), we believe that testing new algorithms in both high and low replay is valuable.

C     F UTURE W ORK

One of the critical functions of DAC is limiting the divergence between the two actors (see Figure
4). This aspect raises an interesting question about the potential tradeoff between the performance
gains achieved by adhering to a low-regret optimistic policy and the performance losses incurred
from fully off-policy updates. To control the divergence between the two actors, we employ a KL
penalty, although we believe that alternative divergence or distance metrics could also be effective.
The main reason for using KL divergence in our implementation of DAC is that it is known to have a
closed-form solution for Tanh-Normal distributions which we use to model both policies. We think
that implementing DAC with regularization other than KL might result in better learning stability.
Novel mechanisms used by DAC are orthogonal to many recent improvements in DRL. As such,
investigating synergies between DAC and techniques like receding TD horizon (Kearns & Singh,
2000; Schwarzer et al., 2023), critic regularization (Gogianu et al., 2021), discount factor annealing
(Ye et al., 2021; Schwarzer et al., 2023), AVTD (Li et al., 2022), TOP (Moskovitz et al., 2021) or
increasing model size (Schwarzer et al., 2023; Hafner et al., 2023) might improve DAC performance.
Furthermore, distributional critics offer a capability to directly model both aleatoric and epistemic
uncertainties (Bellemare et al., 2017; Dabney et al., 2018; Moskovitz et al., 2021). We think that this
aligns with the DAC, as it builds policies leveraging epistemic uncertainty. Similarly, expanding the
size of the critic ensemble could lead to synergies and improvements surpassing those achieved by
conventional ensemble AC approaches (Lee et al., 2021; Januszewski et al., 2021). Finally, as shown
in Figure 4, the deterministic version of DAC underperforms its stochastic counterpart. Investigating
the factors contributing to this difference in performance is a compelling avenue for research.


                                                  18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D     A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENTS
D.1   C RITIC OVERESTIMATION

In this subsection, we investigate whether the decoupled architecture (using a conservative policy
for TD updates and optimistic policy for exploration) indeed mitigates Q-value overestimation char-
acteristic for non-conservative updates (Fujimoto et al., 2018; Moskovitz et al., 2021). As such, we
compare the environment returns to the returns implied by the critic of three actor-critic architec-
tures.

      1. Conservative - SAC agent performing conservative (β lb = −1)
      2. Optimistic - SAC agent performing optimistic updates (β lb = 1)
      3. Decoupled - DAC performing conservative updates on the critic and the conservative actor;
         optimistic updates on the optimistic actor (β lb = −1)

We conduct such measurements on 3 DMC environments of varying difficulty: hopper-hop;
quadruped-run; and humanoid-walk. The results are summarized in Figure 10. Assuming deter-
ministic transitions, the soft Q-value modeled by the critic is equal to the sum of discounted returns
and policy entropy. As such, to calculate the bias we have to subtract the entropy term from the
critic’s output. We estimate the entropy sum term by a geometric sum of negative average policy
log probabilities. Then, we again use the geometric sum and average recorded return to estimate the
real Q-values.


          (a) Hopper-Hop                  (b) Quadruped-Run                (c) Humanoid-Walk

Figure 10: We evaluate critic overestimation associated with conservative (SAC with β lb = −1),
optimistic (SAC with β lb = 1) and decoupled agents (DAC). We observe that the baseline conser-
vative SAC tends to underestimate the returns. 5 seeds, mean, and 3 std.

We find that the decoupled architecture indeed prevents the overestimation associated with optimistic
TD updates. Interestingly, we observe that both conservative and decoupled architectures tend to
underestimate the returns. This observation is consistent with the earlier results pointing towards
over-conservatism of clipped double Q-learning (Moskovitz et al., 2021; Cetin & Celiktutan, 2023).

D.2   ACTION R EPEAT E XPERIMENT

Furthermore, we validate the findings of our main experiment under a different setting of envi-
ronment Action Repeat (AR). AR is a key environment parameter that reduces the agent’s action
frequency while preserving the underlying environment dynamics. It achieves this by having the
agent repeat the same action for a set number of consecutive time steps instead of selecting a dis-
tinct action at each time step. When AR is employed, the transitions resulting from these repeated
actions are merged into a single transition, with rewards summed and the final next state used. Con-
sequently, higher AR values decrease the length of trajectories, thereby enhancing the diversity of
data the agent encounters within a fixed number of interactions. Action repeat is known to impact
the sample efficiency and the final performance of agents, and in the case of DMC, a variety of AR
settings have been considered. Common choices include repeats of: 1 (ie. no repeat) (D’Oro et al.,
2022; Li et al., 2022); 2 (ie. single repeat) (Hafner et al., 2019a; Nikishin et al., 2022); or varying
setting between the tasks (Hafner et al., 2019b; Yarats et al., 2020). As noted in Appendix E, we
use an action repeat of 2 throughout our experiments. However, for a matter of completeness, we
include an evaluation for AR of 1 on our benchmark of 10 DMC tasks in Figure 11 below.


                                                  19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


               (a) AR= 1 & AR= 2                             (b) AR= 1 Sample Efficiency


                                       (c) AR= 1 Aggregate

Figure 11: DAC consistently improves performance across various AR settings. In Figure 11a,
we compare SAC and DAC under low replay conditions for two AR configurations. As evident,
higher AR values generally lead to superior performance for both algorithms, with DAC significantly
outperforming SAC in both scenarios. Figures 11b and 11c present additional results when AR is set
to 1. RedQ performs similarly to a well-tuned SAC with a replay of 3, whereas DAC outperforms
both. We include SR-SAC and RedQ as reported in D’Oro et al. (2022). 10 seeds (except for SR-
SAC which has 5 seeds), 10 tasks, and 95% bootstrapped CI.



D.3   TD-MPC E VALUATION

Figure 12 summarizes additional results for the TD-MPC comparison. We list all hyperparameter
differences to regular DAC implementation in Table 2..


Figure 12: We compare SR-DAC against SR-SAC and TD-MPC. We find that SR-DAC achieves
substantially better performance than SR-SAC, whereas SR-DAC+ performs better than TD-MPC.
The lower right graph shows the average from the following 6 tasks: hopper-hop; cheetah-run;
quadruped-run; humanoid-stand; fish-swim and cartpole-swingup sparse. SR-DAC and SR-SAC
use 10 seeds for each task, and SR-DAC+ and TD-MPC use 5 seeds for each task.



                                                20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E    H YPERPARAMETER S ETTINGS
In all experiments, all algorithms use the same network architectures and a standard ensemble of
two critics (except RedQ, which by design is required to increase the ensemble size). We fix the
shared pool of hyperparameters to single values, which we list under the category share in the table
below. We use the hyperparameter values which are known to work well with SAC (Nikishin et al.,
2022; D’Oro et al., 2022).

                     Table 1: Hyperparameter values used in the experiments.

                      H YPERPARAMETER                  N OTATION           VALUE
                        N ETWORK S IZE                     NA            (256, 256)
                       ACTION R EPEAT                      NA                  2
                           O PTIMIZER                      NA              A DAM
                       L EARNING R ATE                     NA              3e − 4
                          BATCH S IZE                      B               3e − 4
                           D ISCOUNT                       γ                 0.99
                   I NITIAL T EMPERATURE                   α0                 1.0
                        I NITIAL S TEPS                    NA              10000
                      TARGET E NTROPY                      H∗              |A|/2
                       P OLYAK W EIGHT                      τ               0.005
                           P ESSIMISM                      β lb             −1.0
                                               TD3
                  P OLICY U PDATE D ELAY              NA                     2
                        E XPLORATION σ                NA                    0.5
                      TARGET P OLICY σ                NA                    0.2
                 E XPLORATION N OISE C LIP            NA                 [−0.5, 0.5]
                                         OAC / SR-OAC
                            O PTIMISM                 β ub                  4.36
               KL D IVERGENCE C ONSTRAINT              δ                    3.69
                                       ND-TOP / SR-TOP
                        O PTIMISM A RMS               NA                   [0, 1]
                  BANDIT L EARNING R ATE              NA                    0.1
                  P OLICY U PDATE D ELAY              NA                     2
                        E XPLORATION σ                NA                    0.5
                      TARGET P OLICY σ                NA                    0.2
                 E XPLORATION N OISE C LIP            NA                 [−0.5, 0.5]
                                            R ED Q
                        E NSEMBLE S IZE               NA                     10
                  E NSEMBLE S UBSET S IZE             NA                      2
                                         DAC / SR-DAC
                      I NITIAL O PTIMISM              β0ub                   0.0
                    I NITIAL KL W EIGHT                τ0                    1.0
                 TARGET KL D IVERGENCE               KL∗                     0.5
            S TANDARD D EVIATION M ULTIPLIER          fσ                    1.25
               A DJUSTMENT L EARNING R ATE            NA                   3e − 5
            A DJUSTMENT L EARNING R ATE B ETA         NA                     0.5
                                            DAC+
                         I NITIAL S TEPS              NA                   25000
                        N ETWORK S IZE                NA              (256, 256, 256)
                   C OPYING F REQUENCY                NA             every 20000 steps

In the low replay ratio regime, all algorithms use 3 gradient steps per environment step. DAC
performs parameter copying in 60000th and 500000th steps. In the high replay ratio regime,


                                                21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


all algorithms use 15 gradient steps per environment step. All algorithms perform full pa-
rameter resets in [50000, 250000, 500000, 750000] steps. DAC performs parameter copying in
[25000, 125000, 375000, 625000, 875000] steps.

F     T ESTED E NVIRONMENTS
Below, we list tasks used in the low and high replay ratio regimes, as well as the ablation and
hyperparameter studies. We choose tasks from the benchmark, but we drop those that are trivially
solved by all the considered methods.

                    Table 2: 10 DMC tasks used in the model-free benchmark.

                                 DOMAIN                TASK
                                CARTPOLE        SWINGUP - SPARSE
                                CHEETAH                RUN
                                  FISH                SWIM
                               HUMANOID        RUN , STAND , WALK
                                 HOPPER                HOP
                               PENDULUM             SWINGUP
                                SWIMMER           SWIMMER 6
                               QUADRUPED               RUN


When comparing against model-based, we choose the tasks proposed by the authors of DreamerV3
(Hafner et al., 2023). As such, we use 18 DMC tasks of easy to moderate level of difficulty. More-
over, we use the DreamerV3 performance curves provided by the authors.

                    Table 3: 18 DMC tasks used in the DreamerV3 benchmark.

                      DOMAIN                          TASK
                      ACROBOT                      SWINGUP
                     CARTPOLE       BALANCE ( SPARSE ), SWINGUP ( SPARSE )
                         CUP                         CATCH
                       FINGER          SPIN , TURN - EASY, TURN - HARD
                       HOPPER                    HOP, STAND
                     PENDULUM                      SWINGUP
                      REACHER                    EASY, HARD
                      WALKER                  RUN , STAND , WALK



G     E XPERIMENTAL S ETTINGS
G.1    L OW AND H IGH R EPLAY R EGIMES

We consider the following set of continuous-action RL algorithms:

      1. DAC / SR-DAC - Decoupled Actor-Critic. The approach proposed in this paper. DAC
         refers to the base algorithm; SR-DAC refers to DAC with a high replay ratio and periodical
         full-parameter resets.
      2. SAC / SR-SAC - Soft Actor-Critic (Haarnoja et al., 2018) builds on DDPG (Silver et al.,
         2014). SAC extends the standard approach with the following: stochastic policy with gra-
         dients calculated via the reparametrization trick; automatic adjustment of entropy temper-
         ature; clipped Q-learning; and maximum entropy updates on actor and critic networks.
         SR-SAC refers to SAC with a high replay ratio and periodic resets of all networks (D’Oro
         et al., 2022).
      3. OAC / SR-OAC - Optimistic Actor-Critic (Ciosek et al., 2019) extends SAC by designing
         an optimistic exploration policy that is a linear approximation to the Q-value upper bound.


                                                22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


         OAC was shown to perform better than SAC in the regime of a low replay ratio. SR-OAC
         refers to OAC with a high replay ratio and periodic resets of all networks (D’Oro et al.,
         2022).
      4. ND-TOP / SR-TOP - Non-Distributional Tactical Optimism and Pessimism (Moskovitz
         et al., 2021) builds. The algorithm builds on TD3 (Fujimoto et al., 2018) and addresses
         the optimism-pessimism problem by introducing an external discrete bandit that learns β lb
         from a set of predefined values. TOP was shown to perform better than OAC and SAC
         in the regime of a low replay ratio. SR-TOP refers to TOP with a high replay ratio and
         periodic resets of all networks (D’Oro et al., 2022).
      5. RedQ - Randomized Ensembled Double Q-Learning (Chen et al., 2020) is an algorithm
         designed explicitly for high replay ratio regimes. RedQ avoids plasticity loss/overfitting by
         using an ensemble of Q-networks and performing every update using a small subset of the
         ensemble.
      6. D4PG - Distributed Distributional Deterministic Policy Gradients (Barth-Maron et al.,
         2018) is a distributed version of DDPG leveraging distributional critics, prioritized ex-
         perience buffer and N-step returns.
      7. MPO - Maximum a Posteriori Policy Optimisation (Abdolmaleki et al., 2018) is an off-
         policy algorithm based on coordinate ascent on a relative entropy objective.
      8. DreamerV3 - a state-of-the-art model-based algorithm (Hafner et al., 2023). It was shown
         to perform well across a wide range of tasks, including DMC. We use the results provided
         by the authors.
      9. TD-MPC - Temporal Difference Learning for Model Predictive Control (Hansen et al.,
         2022) a state-of-the-art model-based algorithm leveraging model of the environment for
         critic-bootstrapped model-predictive control. In particular, TD-MPC was the first algorithm
         to reliably solve the dog domain tasks for proprioceptive control.

We take the maximum average performance of all algorithms (eg. first average over the seeds and
tasks, then take the results from the argmax of the average). In those experiments, the algorithms
are tested on 10 tasks listed in Table 2. Each is run for 106 environment steps and 10 random seeds.

G.2   D REAMERV3 AND TD-MPC C OMPARISON

In Figure 1d we compare DAC to DreamerV3. For this comparison, we use the results provided by
the authors of Hafner et al. (2023) in their official repository. As such, we restrict the comparison
to 18 tasks considered in the DreamerV3 paper (Hafner et al., 2023) listed in Table 3. For this
comparison, the low replay DAC uses 10 seeds and DreamerV3 uses 5 seeds.
In Figures 7 and 12 we compare DAC to TD-MPC. For this comparison we use the results provided
by the authors of Hansen et al. (2022) provided in their official repository. We run SR-SAC and SR-
DAC for 106 and SR-DAC+ for 306 environment steps. For this comparison, SR-SAC and SR-DAC
use 10 seeds each, whereas SR-DAC+ and TD-MPC use 5 seeds each.

G.3   A BLATION S TUDIES

In Figure 4, we evaluate the impact of removing or adding components to DAC. The ablation study
features DAC and 10 other variations thereof in low replay ratio (3 gradient steps per environment
step) without using layer normalization on the critic network. Below, we describe the variations:

      1. (+KL) - in DAC, only the optimistic actor backpropagates the KL penalty portion of the
         loss (ie. only the optimistic actor adjusts its parameters such that the KL is minimized).
         We add the KL penalty to the conservative actor as well. This results in low divergence
         between the two actors, at the cost of both policies being suboptimal.
      2. (−π) - in this ablated setting, we consider SAC with only an optimistic actor. As such,
         this setting performs exploration, TD learning, and evaluation according to the optimistic
         policy. As in this version, there is only one actor, we cannot use the optimism adjustment
         mechanism.


                                                 23
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


       3. (−KL) - this tested configuration does not use KL penalty on any of the actors. As such,
          the optimistic actor is unconstrained and can diverge from the conservative one. This results
          in fully off-policy learning and poor coverage of the state-action space that is used in the
          TD updates.
       4. (+Det) - here, we set the conservative actor to be a fully deterministic policy. To this
          end, the optimistic actor performs exploration and is stochastic, whereas the conservative
          one performs deterministic TD updates. We find that such a setup quite often results in
          an overestimation of the Q-values, pinpointing towards regularizing properties of the soft
          SARSA. This is the first configuration to work better than the baseline SAC.
       5. (−τ &β) - this configuration does not use automatic adjustment of optimism or the KL
          penalty weight. As such, it is DAC with fixed optimism and fixed KL penalty weight
          throughout the training. Despite its simplicity, this configuration works significantly better
          than vanilla SAC.
       6. (−β) - this configuration does not use the automatic adjustment of optimism, but it still
          uses automatic adjustment of the KL penalty weight. Results indicate that the adjustment
          of optimism has a bigger impact on the performance than the adjustment of the KL penalty
          weight alone.
       7. (−τ ) - this configuration does not use automatic adjustment of KL penalty but still uses
          automatic adjustment of the optimism. Removing the automatic adjustment of the KL
          penalty did not have a very big impact on the performance. We hypothesize that this is due
          to the constant scale of returns between the environments.
       8. (−Copy) - here, we use DAC but we omit the optimistic actor parameter copying as well as
          optimism and KL penalty weight reinitialization. We find that parameter copying offered
          marginal performance benefits.
       9. (−σ) - in this version of the algorithm, we do not use the σ multiplier. As such, the same
          level of variance is applied for exploration, as well as TD updates. We find that using σ
          multiplier yields marginal improvements.
      10. (−LN ) - here, we use complete DAC formulation, albeit we skip the layer normalization in
          the critic. We find that adding layer normalization increases the performance as compared
          to basic DAC.

We take the maximum average performance of all algorithms (eg. first average over the seeds and
tasks, then take the results from the argmax of the average). Each tested variation is run on the
entire set of 10 hard DMC tasks listed in Table 2. Each variation is run for 500k environment steps
and 10 random seeds. As such, the results shown in Figure 4 feature 1200 training runs.

G.4     H YPERPARAMETER S EARCH

Figure 5 features the results of the hyperparameter stability tests. To this end, we conduct 500k
environment step training runs of DAC with different hyperparameter settings in the low replay ratio
regime (3 gradient steps per environment step). We consider a variety of values for 3 hyperparame-
ters that are specific to DAC:

       1. KL Divergence Target (KL∗ ) - The target KL divergence between two actor networks.
          DAC adjusts optimism and KL penalty weight until the target divergence is met. We test 4
          configurations of KL∗ .
       2. Standard Deviation Multiplier (fσ ) - A multiplier defining how much bigger or smaller the
          standard deviation of an optimistic actor is as compared to the conservative one. We test 5
          configurations of fσ .
       3. Copying Frequency - The frequency of optimistic actor copying conservative actor param-
          eters. We consider the following settings: performing no copying; copying in the early
          stage of the training (50k step); copying every 250k steps; copying every 125k steps and
          copying every 67.5k steps.

Similarly to the ablation study, each hyperparameter setting is tested on tasks listed in Table 1. Each
setting is run for 500k environment steps and 10 random seeds. As such, the results shown in Figure


                                                   24
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


5 feature 1300 training runs. We find that DAC consistently improves on SAC performance across a
variety of hyperparameter setting.

H    L EARNING C URVES
In the following section, we share the training curves for the Dreamer, low replay ratio, and high
replay ratio experiments.


Figure 13: Results for the Dreamer evaluation. DAC uses no LayerNorm, a low replay ratio (RR =
3) and no parameter resets. 500k steps, 10 seeds, mean and 3 standard deviations CI.


                                               25
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 14: Results for low replay ratio (RR = 3) experiments. 106 environment steps, 10 seeds,
mean, and 3 standard deviations CI.
                                              26
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 15: Results for high replay ratio (RR = 15) experiments. 106 environment steps, 10 seeds,
and 3 standard deviations of the mean.
                                               27
