Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


H UMAN - IN - THE -L OOP T EST-T IME D OMAIN A DAPTA -
TION FOR O BJECT D ETECTION

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                             A BSTRACT

         Prior to deployment, an object detector is trained on a dataset compiled from a
         previous data collection campaign. However, the environment in which the object
         detector is deployed will invariably evolve, particularly in outdoor settings where
         changes in lighting, weather and seasons will significantly affect the appearance
         of the scene and target objects. It is almost impossible for all potential scenarios
         that the object detector may come across to be present in a finite training dataset.
         This necessitates continuous updates to the object detector to maintain satisfactory
         performance. Test-time domain adaptation techniques enable machine learning
         models to self-adapt based on the distributions of the testing data. However, ex-
         isting methods mainly focus on fully automated adaptation, which make sense for
         applications such as self-driving cars. Despite the prevalence of full automated
         approaches, in some applications such as surveillance, there is usually a human
         operator overseeing the system’s operation. We propose to involve the operator
         in domain adaptation to raise the performance of object detection beyond what
         is achievable by fully automated adaptation. To reduce manual effort, the pro-
         posed method only requires the operator to provide weak labels, which are then
         used to guide the adaptation process. Furthermore, the proposed method can be
         performed online, facilitating its applications in scenarios where inference and do-
         main adaptation must be carried out simultaneously. Our experiments show that
         the proposed method outperforms existing works, demonstrating a great benefit of
         human-in-the-loop test-time domain adaptation.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Object detection is a task that involves precisely localising and categorising objects within an image.
It has many applications in autonomous driving (Han et al., 2021), surveillance (Lu et al., 2023), and
augmented reality (Li et al., 2020). The deployment of an object detector typically includes three
main steps. Firstly, a large-scale dataset must be collected and annotated, providing the bounding
boxes and object categories for the objects of interest. Next, this annotated dataset is used to train an
object detector. Finally, the object detector is deployed into a desired system to effectively perform
real-time object detection.
However, while the training dataset is important for preparing an object detector, it may not cover all
possible scenarios that the detector may encounter during its operation. This incomplete coverage
is attributed to the various environmental conditions that can arise, such as different times of day,
weather, and seasons. These factors cause the image appearance to differ from the training dataset,
leading to a significant decline in detection accuracy. A solution to the problem is to continuously
capture new data and adapt the system (Doan et al., 2020; Mirza et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2022).
However, incorporating new data presents a substantial challenge due to the absence of labels within
this new data, making the adaptation of the object detector a challenging task.
A potential solution for this issue is unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) (Chen et al., 2018;
RoyChowdhury et al., 2019; Li et al., 2022), which formulates the training dataset as the source
domain and the newly acquired data as the target domain. The goal of UDA is to minimise the
domain discrepancy in the feature space. Popular UDA methods include adversarial learning (Chen
et al., 2018; 2021; Pasqualino et al., 2021), optimal transport (Lee et al., 2019; Xu et al., 2019),
and pseudo-labelling (RoyChowdhury et al., 2019; Li et al., 2022; Mattolin et al., 2023). However, a


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


       Pre-deployment                                          Pre-deployment                                Full label

                                                                                                                     Cyclist
                                                                                                             Car
 Source network                                          Source network
                            Source                                                Source
          Deployment         free                                 Deployment       free

                      Online                                                Online
                     prediction                                            prediction

           Online adapted                                         Online adapted
                                                                                                           Weak label
                                                  provide
                                                 weak labels                                             Car, Cyclist
                                           Human
Self-driving cars                         operator      Surveillance camera



Continually Changing Target Environment                 Continually Changing Target Environment

                    (a)                                            (b)                                            (c)

Figure 1: (a) Previous works have focused on developing fully autonomous solutions, primarily for
self-driving vehicles. (b) Our approach, however, is proposed for visual surveillance, which are
typically monitored by an operator. Therefore, our method will take advantage of the operator’s
involvement in the adaptation process. (c) The definitions of full and weak labels: A full label
includes bounding boxes and object categories. A weak label only indicates which object categories
are present in the image. By only requiring weak labels, our method reduces the amount of labour
needed significantly.


   Approach                                                                     Source      Target     Online      Human in
                                                                                 data        data    adaptation    the loop
   Unsupervised domain adaptation (Chen et al., 2018)                             ✓           ✓          ✗              ✗
   Weakly supervised domain adaptation (Inoue et al., 2018)                       ✓           ✓          ✗              ✓
   Test-time domain adaptation (Mirza et al., 2022)                               ✗           ✓          ✓              ✗
   Human-in-the-loop test-time domain adaptation                                   ✗          ✓          ✓              ✓

Table 1: A comparison of human-in-the-loop test-time domain adaptation with related approaches.

limitation of UDA is the offline setting: target data has to be acquired first before adapting the model
for multiple epochs, whereas many practical applications necessitate domain adaptation to be done
online. In addition, UDA requires complete access to the source domain, raising serious privacy and
security concerns. Recent reverse engineering techniques have demonstrated that it is possible to
use a limited amount of information about the data to fully recover the original data (Mahendran &
Vedaldi, 2015; Dosovitskiy & Brox, 2016; Pittaluga et al., 2019). In data-driven approaches, data
can be viewed as a vital asset of businesses; thus storing source data in deployed systems is indeed
a hazardous undertaking.
To address the issues of UDA, test-time domain adapation (TTA) attempts to adapt the object detec-
tor to the target domain without the need for the source dataset (Wang et al., 2021; 2022; Mirza et al.,
2022). Recent studies have demonstrated that TTA can be highly effective in image classification
by adapting the model with pseudo-labelling and entropy minimisation (Chen et al., 2022; Wang
et al., 2021). However, TTA requires full access to the target data while in practice, the target data
is usually in the form of stream, resulting in the target distribution continually evolving. To address
this challenge, continual TTA (CoTTA) (Wang et al., 2022) and Dynamic Unsupervised Adaptation
(DUA) (Mirza et al., 2022) have been proposed. These methods only require an incoming target
sample to adapt the model, making them suitable for online adaptation. The effectiveness of CoTTA
has been demonstrated in image classification and image segmentation, while DUA has been proven
to be effective in object detection.
Despite their great potential, CoTTA and DUA are striving for a fully autonomous solution, which
is suitable for applications such as self-driving cars. However, there are some applications, such
as surveillance, which usually have a human operator overseeing the system (Bloisi et al., 2016).
This raises a question of whether we should involve this operator to TTA. One benefit of human-


                                                                   2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


in-the-loop TTA is to revise the pseudo-labels used for adapting the object detector. As shown
in previous works (Li et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2022; Litrico et al., 2023), pseudo-labelling is an
effective approach for domain adaptation. However, if pseudo-labels are noisy, the object detector’s
error will accumulate, leading to a decline in the detection accuracy. Therefore, humans can be
another reliable annotator for revising pseudo-labels. Efficient use of human contributions with
minimal demands on labour cost in TTA is thus a critical objective. Our idea is illustrated in Fig. 1

Contributions This paper proposes the inclusion of humans in the adaptation of object detectors.
Our method, dubbed human-in-the-loop test-time domain adaptation (HL-TTA), uses weak labels
provided by humans to guide the domain adaptation during the testing phase. As HL-TTA only
requires weak labels to be effective; its demand on labour cost is therefore minimal. Furthermore,
HL-TTA can be done online, where the target test data is in the form of stream, allowing inference
and domain adaptation to be performed simultaneously. The experiments show that with only a few
target test images, the HL-TTA outperforms existing fully autonomous solutions. We hope that this
encouraging result will motivate further research in HL-TTA.

2     R ELATED W ORK
This section will review three main approaches to domain adaptation for object detection: unsu-
pervised domain adaptation (UDA), weakly supervised domain adaptation (WSDA), and test-time
domain adaptation (TTA). Also, we will discuss the novelty of HL-TTA in comparison to these
approaches, which are succinctly outlined in Table 1.

2.1   U NSUPERVISED DOMAIN ADAPTATION

Given a labelled source dataset and an unlabelled target dataset, UDA seeks to adapt an object
detector to perform accurately in the target domain. There are three main techniques in UDA for
object detection: adversarial learning (Chen et al., 2018; 2021; Pasqualino et al., 2021), optimal
transport (Lee et al., 2019; Xu et al., 2019), and pseudo-labelling (RoyChowdhury et al., 2019; Li
et al., 2022; Mattolin et al., 2023).
Adversarial learning attempts to minimise the domain discrepancy in the feature space. To this end,
domain adaptive Faster-RCNN (Chen et al., 2018) employs gradient reversal layers (Ganin & Lem-
pitsky, 2015) in their adversarial learning framework to align the feature and instance distributions
of source and target domains. This concept is further improved in (Chen et al., 2021), which aligns
the source and target distributions across different image scales. Additionally, adversarial learning
has been explored in anchor-free object detection techniques (Pasqualino et al., 2021; 2022). In
comparison to adversarial learning which solves a minimax optimisation problem, optimal transport
instead minimises Wasserstein distance between source and target domains. For instance, (Lee et al.,
2019) employs the sliced Wasserstein distance to address high-dimensional issue in the feature space
and (Xu et al., 2019) considers the duality of the Wasserstein distance, which can be approximated
by neural networks under certain conditions. Another approach that has been shown to be effective
is pseudo-labelling. To generate reliable pseudo-labels for target dataset, (RoyChowdhury et al.,
2019) fuses the results of detection and tracking as well as proposes a label smoothing technique.
To further improve the detection performance, some recent methods integrate pseudo-labelling to
other strategies. For instance, (Li et al., 2022) incorporates pseudo-labelling to student-teacher ar-
chitecture and (Mattolin et al., 2023) combines pseudo-labelling with domain mixing techniques.
Despite its great potential, UDA is done offline, which is not suitable for many practical applications
that require online domain adaptation. Furthermore, the need for access to the source data can be
a shortcoming in terms of privacy and security (see Sec. 1). To address this, our HL-TTA can be
performed online and is a source-free method, thus avoiding any privacy and security risks.

2.2   T EST- TIME DOMAIN ADAPTATION

TTA attempts to adapt the model in an online manner without using the source data. Some interesting
TTA works include Tent (Wang et al., 2021) which proposes to update batch normalisation layers
using entropy minimisation, CoTTA (Wang et al., 2022) which uses teacher-student architecture with
pseudo-labelling to adapt the model, and DDA (Gao et al., 2023) which employs a diffusion process


                                                  3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


to transform the appearance of images from the target domain to resemble the source domain. Since
these methods are only tested in image classification, DUA (Mirza et al., 2022) shows that TTA can
be effectively applied to object detection by introducing a momentum decay parameter to stabilise
the domain adaptation process.
As alluded, existing TTA works aim for developing fully autonomous domain adaptation techniques,
which are useful to applications like self-driving cars. However, there are some other applications,
such as surveillance, which usually have an operator overseeing the systems (Bloisi et al., 2016).
Therefore, our HL-TTA proposes to leverage this operator to generate more reliable pseudo-labels,
which can be useful for TTA.

2.3   W EAKLY SUPERVISED DOMAIN ADAPTATION
The concept of human-in-the-loop domain adaptation for object detection has been explored in the
literature, which is usually referred to as weakly supervised domain adaptation (WSDA). This ap-
proach involves asking annotators to provide weak labels for the target dataset (see Fig. 1c). Then,
domain adaptation can be done using the source dataset with full labels and the target dataset with
weak labels. Inoue et al. (2018) propose combining predictions of the source pre-trained detector
with weak labels to generate high-quality pseudo-labels for target images. Xu et al. (2022) attempt
to minimise the domain gap by using domain and weak label classifiers.
Through using weak labels, WSDA is shown to outperform UDA. However, WSDA also suffers
drawbacks similar to those of UDA, i.e., the domain adaptation is done offline and the need to access
the source data raises privacy and security concerns (see Sec. 1). Therefore, HL-TTA is proposed to
overcome these challenges.


3     M ETHOD

This section will elaborate our methodology. To begin with, Sec. 3.1 outlines the formal problem
definition. Subsequently, the HL-TTA framework is presented in Sec. 3.2, where we will explain
the loss function for domain adaptation. Given the loss function, we will discuss how the domain
adaptation can be achieved via updating batch normalisation (BN) layers in Sec. 3.3.

3.1   P ROBLEM F ORMULATION

Let f (· ; θ0 ) with  parameters θ0 be an object detector that has been trained on the labelled source
dataset X S , Y S , where X and Y are the sample space and label space. During its operation,
the detector will carry out the online inference and adaptation on the unlabelled target data X T .
Specifically, at time step t, the target data xt ∈ X T is given as an input to the detector f (· ; θt ).
Then, the detector f (· ; θt ) must make an inference ŷt = f (xt ; θt ) and adapt itself θt → θt+1 for
the next input xt+1 . The detector’s performance is evaluated based on the predictions ŷt from the
online inference. It is important to emphasise that during each time step t, the adaptation only relies
on the target data xt . This choice aligns with the recommendation of (Yang et al., 2022) that xt
should be deleted immediately after the adaptation to safeguard the privacy.
The impetus for online adaptation is derived from practical scenarios in which perception systems
are constantly operating in ever-evolving environments, with input coming in the form of streaming
data. Consequently, inference and domain adaptation must be done online. Previous studies (Mirza
et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2022; Gao et al., 2023) have mainly focused on developing fully au-
tonomous TTA solutions for applications such as self-driving cars or autonomous robots. However,
in certain applications, such as surveillance, a human operator is usually needed to supervise the
system (Bloisi et al., 2016). Therefore, our idea is to involve the operator in TTA. Specifically, let
C be a set of L object categories. For each target image xt , the operator will provide a weak label
zt = {cj }Mj=1 , where cj ∈ C is the object category present in the image and M denotes the total
number of object categories in the image; see Fig. 1c. This weak label zt will then be leveraged
to adapt the object detector’s parameters θt → θt+1 for the next input. As discussed in previous
works (Cao et al., 2021; Vo et al., 2022; Zhong et al., 2020), providing weak labels instead of full
labels will significantly reduce the amount of labour required.


                                                   4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                        pseudo labeling
                                            Detector            Pedestrian
                                                                             Cyclist                                        Cyclist
                                              RPN                 Car                  Remove wrong                 Car
                                                                                         predictions
                                           ROI Head


                                        image-level recognition
                                            Detector
                                              RPN
                      Backbone                               Aggregation
                                           ROI Head


                                        instance-level recognition
                                            Detector
                                                                                                                    Foreground
                                              RPN                                                      Foreground


                                            ROI Head


Figure 2: For an incoming target testing sample xt , HL-TTA initially produces a prediction ŷt and
the operator is required to provide a weak label zt for it. Subsequently, using the prediction ŷt and
weak label zt , a pseudo-label ytpsd is generated. Finally, the weak label zt and pseudo-label ytpsd are
used as groundtruth for image-level recognition and instance-level recognition respectively.


3.2   F RAMEWORK

The overview of HL-TTA is shown in Fig. 2. Specifically, for the model f (· ; θt ), HL-TTA adopts
a two-stage object detection architecture Faster-RCNN (Ren et al., 2015) that includes a backbone,
a region proposal network (RPN), and a detection head (ROI Head). Our HL-TTA consists of three
main components: pseudo-labelling, image-level recognition, and instance-level recognition.
Using the prediction ŷt and weak label zt , pseudo-labelling will generate a pseudo-label ytpds . The
pseudo label and weak label will be used to construct loss functions Lins
                                                                      t in instance-level recognition
and Limg
     t   in image-level recognition. The final loss for domain adaptation will be
                                                          img
                                             Lt = Lins
                                                   t + α.Lt                                                                      (1)
This loss Lt will be used to update Faster-RCNN’s parameters θt → θt+1 for the next input xt+1
(see Sec. 3.3). In this section, we will outline each component: pseudo-labelling, image-level recog-
nition, and instance-level recognition.

Pseudo-labelling The target image xt is initially given to the operator and the operator must pro-
vide a weak label zt . Then, HL-TTA makes a prediction ŷt = {b̂i , ĉi , p̂i }N
                                                                               i=1 = f (xt ; θt ), where
         4
b̂i ∈ R is the predicted bounding box, ĉi ∈ C is the predicted object category, p̂i ∈ R is the proba-
bility that b̂i belongs to ĉi , and N is the total number of predicted bounding boxes. Note that ŷt is
obtained after excluding overlapping boxes by non-maximum suppression for each object category.
However, the prediction ŷt may contain mistakes, i.e., bounding boxes with incorrect object cate-
gories. If we use ŷt as the groundtruth to adapt θt , the errors will accumulate over time, leading to a
decrease in the detector’s performance. To minimise these errors, we will create a pseudo-label ytpsd
by keeping bounding boxes of ŷt such that their object categories are present in the weak label zt
and their predicted probability is greater than 0.8
                      ytpsd = {b̂i , ĉi | b̂i , ĉi , p̂i ∈ ŷt and p̂i ≥ 0.8 and ĉi ∈ zt }                                    (2)
These pseudo-label ytpsd and weak label zt will be respectively used as groundtruth in the instance-
level recognition and image-level recognition.

Image-level recognition This component aggregates the outputs of RPN and ROI head to obtain
an image-level prediction, which is used to calculate the image-level loss Limg
                                                                            t . This aggregation


                                                        5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


operation is developed based on the idea of weakly-supervised object detection (Bilen & Vedaldi,
2016; Xu et al., 2022). Recall that L is the total number of object categories, we denote K as the total
number of proposals, the output of RPN as o ∈ RK , and the output of ROI Head as C ∈ RK×L .
Firstly, we create a matrix O that has a same size as C
                                             if l′ = arg max [C]k,1:L
                                    (
                                     [o]k
                          [O]k,l′ =                      l                                          (3)
                                     0 otherwise
where, [·]k,l denotes the element in the row k th and column lth of a matrix, and [·]k denotes the k th
element of a vector.
Next, the softmax is applied on C and O
                                     e[C]k,l              e[O]k,l
                       [σ(C)]k,l = PL [C] , [σ(O)]k,l = PK [O]                                      (4)
                                    l=1 e                k=1 e
                                             k,l                  k,l



Then, the image-level prediction ẑt ∈ RL is calculated
                                            K
                                            X
                                  [ẑt ]l =    σ (C) ⊙ σ Ō k,l                                     (5)
                                           k=1

Finally, the image-level loss can be obtained via the standard cross-entropy function
                 Limg
                   t    = cross entropy loss (ẑt , multi hot (zt ))                                (6)
where, multi hot(·) is a function to convert zt into a multi-hot vector of size L.

Instance-level recognition This component will employ the pseudo-label ytpsd from Eq. (2) as the
groundtruth. The instance-level loss is formulated as follows
                                      rpn        psd               psd
                                Lins                    roi
                                 t = Lcls (xt , yt ) + Lcls (xt , yt )                              (7)
where, Lrpn       roi
         cls and Lcls are the classification losses of RPN and ROI Head proposed in standard Faster-
RCNN (Ren et al., 2015). Here, the instance-level loss Lins
                                                          t ignores the bounding-box regression task
since the pseudo-label ytpsd in Eq. (2) indicates the confidence score of predicted bounding boxes.
Thus, the parameters θt are adapted to enhance the classification performance of the detector.

3.3   U PDATING BATCH NORMALISATION

Given the final loss from Eq. (1), we need to adapt θt → θt+1 for the next input xt+1 . We choose
to update all BN layers in θ as this has been shown to be highly effective in recent studies (Mirza
et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2021; Schneider et al., 2020). The rationale of updating BN layers is to
reduce the covariate shift between the source and target distributions (Schneider et al., 2020). If
the target distribution is different from source distributions, BN’s parameters estimated from the
source distribution are no longer normalising the target data as expected. Therefore, it is necessary
to update BN layers with the new target distribution.
Specifically, for an arbitrary BN layer of θt , let µt and σt be its running mean and running variance,
and also let γt and βt be its transformation parameters. We also denote mt as its momentum (m0 is
set to 0.1 by default). As shown in (Mirza et al., 2022), if the momentum is gradually decayed, it will
stabilise the convergence of the domain adaptation. Therefore, we initially decay the momentum
                                          mt = mt−1 .ω + δ                                          (8)
where, ω ∈ (0, 1) is a predefined decay parameter and δ defines the lower bound of momentum.
Subsequently, BN’s parameters will be updated as follows
              µt+1 = (1 − mt ).µt + m.µ̂t ,                σt+1 = (1 − mt ).σt + m.σ̂t ,          (9)
                              ∂Lt                                        ∂Lt
              γt+1 = γt + λ       ,                        βt+1 = βt + λ     ,                   (10)
                              ∂γt                                        ∂βt
where, λ is the step size of gradient update and µ̂ and σ̂ are mean and variance of the current input
data. Note that the previous work (Mirza et al., 2022) only updates µt and σt while our method can
also update transformation parameters γt and βt , thanks to weak labels provided by the operator.


                                                   6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 3: Sample images of our MSA-SYNTH dataset, where top row is RGB images and bottom
row is Infrared images.

4       E XPERIMENT

4.1       S ETUP

The following benchmarks are used in the experiment.
           • KITTI → KITTI-Fog: KITTI (Geiger et al., 2012) is a widely-used dataset in autonomous
             driving. KITTI is used to pre-train the model, which are then adapted to the target KITTI-
             Fog with the most severe fog level 30m visibility (Halder et al., 2019). Object categories
             taken into account are “Car”, “Pedestrian”, and “Cyclist”. A total of 7481 images are
             randomly divided into 3740 for training and 3741 for testing.
           • Cityscapes → KITTI: Cityscapes (Cordts et al., 2016) is another popular dataset in self-
             driving cars. We pre-train the object detector in Cityscape, then adapt it to KITTI. Three
             object categories in Cityscapes are used: “Car”, “Pedestrian”, and “Rider”. Similarly, three
             object categories in KITTI are used: “Car”, “Pedestrian”, and “Cyclist”. A total of 3475
             Cityscapes images from its training and validation sets are randomly divided into 1737 for
             training and 1738 for testing. Similarly, a total of 7481 KITTI images are randomly divided
             into 3740 for training and 3741 for testing.
           • MSA-SYNTH RGB → IR 1 : We use Unreal Engine and Infinite Studio to generate a
             maritime dataset. Three boat/vessel categories “Fishing”, “Sailing”, and “Passenger” are
             simulated. We collect 8147 RGB images and 8147 Infrared (IR) images, which are then
             divided into 4243 RGB images for training, 3904 RGB images for testing, 4243 IR images
             for training, and 3904 IR images for testing; see Fig. 3 for sample images. The model will
             be pre-trained in the source domain RGB, then adapted to the target domain IR.

We consider following baselines for comparison
           • Source: The source pre-trained model is tested on the target data without any adaptation.
           • BN stats: BN stats (Schneider et al., 2020) adapts the source pre-trained model by up-
             dating the statistics of batch normalisation (BN) layers.
           • DUA: DUA (Mirza et al., 2022) introduces a decay factor to update the momentum param-
             eters of the BN layers of the source pre-trained model.
           • Oracle: The source pre-trained model is fine-tuned in 120k iterations on the target train-
             ing set with full supervision.

To reduce labour cost, our HL-TTA uses 100 target testing images for adaptation in all benchmarks,
unless otherwise stated. For baselines, all target testing images are used for adaptation since they are
fully autonomous adaptation techniques. To simulate online adaptation, each target testing image
is given to each method one at a time to perform domain adaptation. To measure detection perfor-
mance, we present the average precision with a threshold of 50% (AP50) for each object category
and the mean average precision (mAP) across all object categories.

4.2       I MPLEMENTATION

We employ Detectron2 (Wu et al., 2019) for implementation. Faster-RCNN with backbone ResNet-
50 is pre-trained on the source dataset with a batch size of 2. Learning rate is initially set to 0.001
for 30k iterations, then reduced to 0.0001 for another 90k iterations. For HL-TTA, unless stated
    1
        The dataset will be released upon acceptance


                                                       7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


otherwise we set ω = 0.99 for KITTI → KITTI-Fog and Cityscapes → KITTI, and ω = 0.94 for
MSA-SYNTH RGB → IR. For remaining parameters, unless stated otherwise we set learning rate
λ = 0.0001, δ = 0.005, and α = 0.1 for all benchmarks.


4.3   R ESULTS

Benefits of human guidance in TTA As                                    Car      Pedestrian    Cyclist    mAP
shown in Table 2, domain adaptation sig-
                                                           Source       23.4        26.7        12.4      20.9
nificantly enhances object detection perfor-               BN Stats     41.3        41.4        20.8      34.5
mance. Specifically, the fully autonomous                  DUA          41.3        41.8        21.3      34.8
TTA methods BN Stats and DUA out-                          HL-TTA       44.6        41.9        23.1      36.5
performs Source by 11%-14% mAP in                          Oracle       85.5        65.7        68.3      73.2
all benchmarks.       When human guidance                             (a) KITTI → KITTI-Fog
is incorporated into the domain adapta-
tion, HL-TTA increases mAP by 4% mAP
in MSA-SYNTH RGB → IR and 1% in                                         Car      Pedestrian    Cyclist    mAP
KITTI → KITTI-Fog and Cityscapes → KITTI,                  Source       66.9        46.4         9.0      40.8
compared to BN Stats and DUA. The im-                      BN Stats     68.1        50.1        12.3      43.5
provement is even more significant for certain             DUA          68.1        50.3        12.7      43.7
                                                           HL-TTA       68.1        51.5        14.3      44.6
object categories. For instance, HL-TTA im-
proves “Car” in KITTI → KITTI-Fog, “Cy-                    Oracle       90.4        70.7        77.2      79.4
clist” in Cityscapes → KITTI, and “Fishing” in                        (b) Cityscapes → KITTI
MSA-SYNTH RGB → IR by about 3.3%, 2%,
and 10% respectively, compared to BN Stats
and DUA.                                                               Fishing    Sailing     Passenger   mAP
                                                         Source         42.4        15.6        33.5       30.5
Effects of noisy weak labels This experi-                BN Stats       43.8        14.8 31.8   37.0
                                                         DUA            44.6        15.1 32.2   37.0
ment examines the possibility of humans pro-             HL-TTA         54.7        21.1 37.4   36.2
viding incorrect weak labels. To simulate this,
                                                    Oracle       69.9  39.2     72.8     60.6
each element in the groundtruth multi-hot vec-
tor has a probability of being switched to an in-           (c) MSA-SYNTH RGB → IR
correct value. This probability is referred to as
the noise ratio. An example of this simulation Table 2: Comparing AP50 within each object cat-
is shown Fig 4. The results are shown in Fig. 5. egories and mAP across all categories between
In general, HL-TTA can be seen to be sensitive HL-TTA and other baselines (larger is better).
to noisy labels.
At a noise level of 50%, the performance of HL-                                            Pedes-
                                                                                       Car  trian    Cyclist
TTA decreases by about 1% in the “Car” and                                      e
                                                                             a t t
“Cyclist” categories in the KITTI → KITTI-                                 e
                                                                        C r ti - h o
                                                                             l       r
                                                                         m u e c to
Fog benchmark. A similar 1% drop is ob-              Car, Cyclist           v

served in the “Pedestrian” and “Cyclist” cate-                                                   Simulate
                                                                                                noisy label
gories in the Cityscapes → KITTI benchmark.
However, the most significant decrease is seen
                                                           noise ratio = 70%
in the MSA-SYNTH RGB → IR benchmark,
                                                                         30%
where the accuracy of the “Fishing” category
decreases by 6% and that of the “Sailing” cate-
gory drops by 2.5%.                             Figure 4: Illustration of how noisy weak labels
When the noise ratio is increased to 99%, the are simulated. Given a weak label {Car, Cyclist},
performance of HL-TTA in KITTI → KITTI- a corresponding multi-hot vector is created. If the
Fog reduces by 6% and 3% in the “Car” and noise ratio is 70%, the value 1 in “Car” element
“Cyclist” categories respectively. Similarly, will have the 70% probability of being switched
there is a significant decrease of 6% and 5% to 0, while having the 30% probability of remain-
in the “Car” and “Pedestrian” categories in ing 1. A similar operation is applied to elements
Cityscapes → KITTI. The most dramatic de- “Pedestrian” and “Cyclist”.
cline is observed in MSA-SYNTH RGB → IR,
where the performance of HL-TTA decreased by more than 8% and nearly 5% in the “Fishing” and
“Sailing” categories.


                                                     8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



        70                                                       70                                                     70

        60                                                       60                                                     60

        50                                                       50                                                     50

 AP50   40                                                       40                                                     40


                                                          AP50


                                                                                                                 AP50
        30                                                       30           Car                                       30
                                                                           Pedestrian
        20                                                       20         Cyclist                                     20
                     Car                                                                                                            Fishing
        10        Pedestrian                                     10                                                     10          Sailing
                   Cyclist                                                                                                         Passenger
         0                                                       0                                                      0
             0                   50                  99               0                     50              99               0                   50            99
                       Noise percentage (%)                                      Noise percentage (%)                                   Noise percentage (%)

                               (a)                                                      (b)                                                    (c)

Figure 5: Effects of noisy weak labels to HL-TTA are shown on benchmarks (a) KITTI → KITTI
Fog, (b) Cityscapes → KITTI, and (c) MSA-SYNTH RGB → IR.


                 40                                                                               40

                 35                                                                               35
         mAP


                                                                                            mAP
                                                                                                                                               ω = 1.0
                 30                                                                               30                                           ω = 0.99
                                                                                                                                               ω = 0.97
                                                                                                                                               ω = 0.95
                 25                            Mean                                               25                                           ω = 0.93
                                               Standard deviation                                                                              ω = 0.91

                 20                                                                               20
                         0                     500                        1,000                         0          100                 200             300
                 Number of samples used for adaptation                                            Number of samples used for adaptation
                                              (a)                                                                            (b)

Figure 6: (a) HL-TTA results on KITTI → KITTI-Fog for 30 independent runs. For each run, the
order of KITTI-Fog testing samples is randomly shuffled. (b) HL-TTA results on KITTI → KITTI-
Fog for different decay factors.


Effects of sample orders This experiment investigates the effects of sample orders. The result
on KITTI → KITTI-Fog in shown in Fig. 6a, where we conduct 30 independent runs and calculate
the mean and standard deviation of mAP. For each run, the order of samples is randomly shuffled.
In the first few samples used for adaptation, the standard deviation is large. For example, with 100
samples, we obtain mAP of 36.0 ± 0.6. When the adaptation samples increase, the mAP continues
to improve as well as the standard deviation decreases. For instance, the mAP achieves 39.8 ± 0.5
at 600 samples and 40.2 ± 0.4 at 1000 samples. However, it can be seen that the mAP saturates at
40.0 after 700 samples.


Effects of decay factors We investigate the effect of the decay factor ω on the performance of
HL-TTA on the KITTI → KITTI-Fog benchmark. Fig. 6b shows the results when different decay
factors ω from 1.0 (no decay) to 0.91 are applied. We observe that when ω is set to 0.99 or 0.97,
the mAP is better than that of ω = 1.0, indicating that decaying the momentum accelerates the
convergence of domain adaptation. However, if the momentum decays too quickly (i.e. ω < 0.97),
the detection accuracy decreases. This suggests that tuning the decay factor ω is essential to achieve
the optimal domain adaptation performance.

5            C ONCLUSION
This paper presents a method involving a human operator in TTA. The algorithm only requires the
operator to provide weak labels for images, which are then used to guide the adaptation process. The
experiments show that the proposed method outperforms existing autonomous test-time adaptation
solutions, demonstrating great potential of human guidance for TTA.


                                                                                        9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Hakan Bilen and Andrea Vedaldi. Weakly supervised deep detection networks. In Proceedings of
  the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 2846–2854, 2016.

Domenico D Bloisi, Fabio Previtali, Andrea Pennisi, Daniele Nardi, and Michele Fiorini. Enhancing
  automatic maritime surveillance systems with visual information. IEEE Transactions on Intelli-
  gent Transportation Systems, 2016.

Tianyue Cao, Lianyu Du, Xiaoyun Zhang, Siheng Chen, Ya Zhang, and Yan-Feng Wang. Cat:
  Weakly supervised object detection with category transfer. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
  International Conference on Computer Vision, 2021.

Dian Chen, Dequan Wang, Trevor Darrell, and Sayna Ebrahimi. Contrastive test-time adaptation. In
  Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2022.

Yuhua Chen, Wen Li, Christos Sakaridis, Dengxin Dai, and Luc Van Gool. Domain adaptive faster
  r-cnn for object detection in the wild. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision
  and pattern recognition, 2018.

Yuhua Chen, Haoran Wang, Wen Li, Christos Sakaridis, Dengxin Dai, and Luc Van Gool. Scale-
  aware domain adaptive faster r-cnn. International Journal of Computer Vision, 2021.

Marius Cordts, Mohamed Omran, Sebastian Ramos, Timo Rehfeld, Markus Enzweiler, Rodrigo
 Benenson, Uwe Franke, Stefan Roth, and Bernt Schiele. The cityscapes dataset for semantic
 urban scene understanding. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and
 Pattern Recognition, 2016.

Anh-Dzung Doan, Yasir Latif, Tat-Jun Chin, and Ian Reid. Hm4 : Hidden markov model with
  memory management for visual place recognition. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, 2020.

Alexey Dosovitskiy and Thomas Brox. Inverting visual representations with convolutional networks.
  In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2016.

Yaroslav Ganin and Victor Lempitsky. Unsupervised domain adaptation by backpropagation. In
  International Conference on Machine Learning, 2015.

Jin Gao, Jialing Zhang, Xihui Liu, Trevor Darrell, Evan Shelhamer, and Dequan Wang. Back to
   the source: Diffusion-driven adaptation to test-time corruption. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
   Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2023.

Andreas Geiger, Philip Lenz, and Raquel Urtasun. Are we ready for autonomous driving? the kitti
  vision benchmark suite. In IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2012.

Shirsendu Sukanta Halder, Jean-François Lalonde, and Raoul de Charette. Physics-based rendering
  for improving robustness to rain. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on
  Computer Vision, 2019.

Jianhua Han, Xiwen Liang, Hang Xu, Kai Chen, Lanqing Hong, Jiageng Mao, Chaoqiang Ye, Wei
   Zhang, Zhenguo Li, Xiaodan Liang, and Chunjing Xu. Soda10m: A large-scale 2d self/semi-
   supervised object detection dataset for autonomous driving, 2021.

Infinite Studio. Infinite studio. https://infinitestudio.software/. Accessed: 2023-
   08-07.

Naoto Inoue, Ryosuke Furuta, Toshihiko Yamasaki, and Kiyoharu Aizawa. Cross-domain weakly-
  supervised object detection through progressive domain adaptation. In Proceedings of the IEEE
  Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2018.

Chen-Yu Lee, Tanmay Batra, Mohammad Haris Baig, and Daniel Ulbricht. Sliced wasserstein
  discrepancy for unsupervised domain adaptation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference
  on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2019.


                                               10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Xiang Li, Yuan Tian, Fuyao Zhang, Shuxue Quan, and Yi Xu. Object detection in the context of
  mobile augmented reality. In IEEE International Symposium on Mixed and Augmented Reality,
  2020.
Yu-Jhe Li, Xiaoliang Dai, Chih-Yao Ma, Yen-Cheng Liu, Kan Chen, Bichen Wu, Zijian He, Kris
  Kitani, and Peter Vajda. Cross-domain adaptive teacher for object detection. In Proceedings of
  the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2022.
Mattia Litrico, Alessio Del Bue, and Pietro Morerio. Guiding pseudo-labels with uncertainty esti-
 mation for test-time adaptation. 2023.
Yan-Feng Lu, Jing-Wen Gao, Qian Yu, Yi Li, Yi-Sheng Lv, and Hong Qiao. A cross-scale and
  illumination invariance-based model for robust object detection in traffic surveillance scenarios.
  IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems, 2023.
Aravindh Mahendran and Andrea Vedaldi. Understanding deep image representations by inverting
  them. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2015.
Giulio Mattolin, Luca Zanella, Elisa Ricci, and Yiming Wang. Confmix: Unsupervised domain
  adaptation for object detection via confidence-based mixing. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
  Winter Conference on Applications of Computer Vision, 2023.
M Jehanzeb Mirza, Jakub Micorek, Horst Possegger, and Horst Bischof. The norm must go on:
 Dynamic unsupervised domain adaptation by normalization. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
 Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2022.
Giovanni Pasqualino, Antonino Furnari, Giovanni Signorello, and Giovanni Maria Farinella. An
  unsupervised domain adaptation scheme for single-stage artwork recognition in cultural sites.
  Image and Vision Computing, 2021.
Giovanni Pasqualino, Antonino Furnari, and Giovanni Maria Farinella. Unsupervised multi-camera
  domain adaptation for object detection in cultural sites. In International Conference on Image
  Analysis and Processing, 2022.
Francesco Pittaluga, Sanjeev J Koppal, Sing Bing Kang, and Sudipta N Sinha. Revealing scenes
  by inverting structure from motion reconstructions. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on
  Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2019.
Shaoqing Ren, Kaiming He, Ross Girshick, and Jian Sun. Faster r-cnn: Towards real-time object
  detection with region proposal networks. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  2015.
Aruni RoyChowdhury, Prithvijit Chakrabarty, Ashish Singh, SouYoung Jin, Huaizu Jiang, Lian-
  gliang Cao, and Erik Learned-Miller. Automatic adaptation of object detectors to new domains
  using self-training. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition, 2019.
Steffen Schneider, Evgenia Rusak, Luisa Eck, Oliver Bringmann, Wieland Brendel, and Matthias
  Bethge. Improving robustness against common corruptions by covariate shift adaptation. Ad-
  vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2020.
Unreal Engine. Unreal engine. https://www.unrealengine.com/. Accessed: 2023-08-07.
Huy V Vo, Oriane Siméoni, Spyros Gidaris, Andrei Bursuc, Patrick Pérez, and Jean Ponce. Active
  learning strategies for weakly-supervised object detection. In European Conference on Computer
  Vision, 2022.
Dequan Wang, Evan Shelhamer, Shaoteng Liu, Bruno Olshausen, and Trevor Darrell. Tent: Fully
  test-time adaptation by entropy minimization. International Conference on Learning Represen-
  tations, 2021.
Qin Wang, Olga Fink, Luc Van Gool, and Dengxin Dai. Continual test-time domain adaptation. In
  Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2022.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Yuxin Wu, Alexander Kirillov, Francisco Massa, Wan-Yen Lo, and Ross Girshick. Detectron2.
  https://github.com/facebookresearch/detectron2, 2019.
Pengcheng Xu, Prudhvi Gurram, Gene Whipps, and Rama Chellappa. Wasserstein distance based
  domain adaptation for object detection. arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.08675, 2019.
Yunqiu Xu, Yifan Sun, Zongxin Yang, Jiaxu Miao, and Yi Yang. H2 FA R-CNN: Holistic and hier-
  archical feature alignment for cross-domain weakly supervised object detection. In Proceedings
  of IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2022.
Luyu Yang, Mingfei Gao, Zeyuan Chen, Ran Xu, Abhinav Shrivastava, and Chetan Ramaiah. Burn
  after reading: Online adaptation for cross-domain streaming data. In European Conference on
  Computer Vision, 2022.
Yuanyi Zhong, Jianfeng Wang, Jian Peng, and Lei Zhang. Boosting weakly supervised object de-
  tection with progressive knowledge transfer. In European conference on computer vision, 2020.


                                              12
