Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E XE D EC : E XECUTION D ECOMPOSITION
FOR C OMPOSITIONAL G ENERALIZATION
IN N EURAL P ROGRAM S YNTHESIS

 Kensen Shi                         Joey Hong ∗                            Yinlin Deng ∗
 Google DeepMind                    UC Berkeley                            University of Illinois
 kshi@google.com                    joey hong@berkeley.edu                 Urbana-Champaign
                                                                           yinlind2@illinois.edu


 Pengcheng Yin                   Manzil Zaheer                         Charles Sutton
 Google DeepMind                 Google DeepMind                       Google DeepMind
 pcyin@google.com                manzilzaheer@google.com               charlessutton@google.com


                                                 A BSTRACT

             When writing programs, people have the ability to tackle a new complex task by
             decomposing it into smaller and more familiar subtasks. While it is difficult to
             measure whether neural program synthesis methods have similar capabilities, we
             can measure whether they compositionally generalize, that is, whether a model that
             has been trained on the simpler subtasks is subsequently able to solve more complex
             tasks. In this paper, we characterize several different forms of compositional
             generalization that are desirable in program synthesis, forming a meta-benchmark
             which we use to create generalization tasks for two popular datasets, RobustFill
             and DeepCoder. We then propose ExeDec, a novel decomposition-based synthesis
             strategy that predicts execution subgoals to solve problems step-by-step informed
             by program execution at each step. When used with Transformer models trained
             from scratch, ExeDec has better synthesis performance and greatly improved
             compositional generalization ability compared to baselines. Finally, we use our
             benchmarks to demonstrate that LLMs struggle to compositionally generalize when
             asked to do programming-by-example in a few-shot setting, but an ExeDec-style
             prompting approach can improve the generalization ability and overall performance.


1       I NTRODUCTION

Program synthesis aims to assist programmers by automatically producing code according to a
user’s specification of what the code should do (Gulwani et al., 2017). Program synthesis systems,
such as programming by example (PBE) systems, have been effective for tasks such as string
manipulation (Gulwani, 2011; Devlin et al., 2017; Shi et al., 2022b), writing short Java functions (Shi
et al., 2019), and tensor manipulation (Shi et al., 2022a). Neural program synthesizers, especially
those based on large language models (Chen et al., 2021a; Austin et al., 2021; Li et al., 2022), have
been particularly successful at generating code functions and blocks across a variety of general-
purpose programming languages.
An essential capability of human programmers is their ability to generalize by recombining parts of
prior knowledge to solve new tasks. For example, a capable programmer can quickly adapt to new
concepts and APIs, and compose different code idioms in unseen ways to solve novel problems. These
skills are instances of compositional generalization, which is the ability to generalize to test examples
consisting of different compositions of components individually seen during training (Keysers et al.,
2020). While compositionality has been studied in natural language processing (Chomsky, 1957;
Lake & Baroni, 2018; Gu et al., 2021), it has not been studied deeply in the context of programming
by example. This problem is potentially fruitful not only because it might help to build more robust
program synthesizers, but also as an example of how more general problem-solving is compositional.
    ∗
        These authors contributed during internships at Google DeepMind.


                                                       1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


To build neural synthesis systems that are better at compositional generalization, we propose designing
systems that learn to decompose a complex task into a list of simpler subtasks. Each subtask is defined
by a goal, so the process of decomposing a task is essentially planning. Indeed, decomposition is a
skill so fundamental to software engineering that the first programming course at Stanford University
introduces decomposition within the first week (Parlante, 2022). This can enable compositional
generalization because subtasks seen during training can be combined in different ways at test time.
Based on this intuition, we propose ExeDec, a novel search method for neural program synthesis
that performs decomposition within the execution space. A PBE task defines a program by pairs of
program inputs with their desired outputs. Thus, it is natural to describe a subgoal by the desired
intermediate state, i.e., values of local variables, for the next subtask. To describe the intuition in
another way, we imagine that a human programmer does not decide on what code to write one token
at a time, but rather thinks about what the result of the next code block should be, and then writes
code to accomplish that. Specifically, ExeDec uses two neural models, a subgoal model that predicts
the desired program state for the next part of the program, and a synthesizer model that attempts to
generate a program that reaches that subgoal from the prior state. We interleave neural prediction with
program execution within a beam search that enables exploring different predicted decompositions.
To evaluate this approach, we introduce a new meta-benchmark for measuring the compositional
generalization abilities of program synthesizers. Given a standard program synthesis benchmark
containing a domain-specific language and a distribution over target programs, our meta-benchmark
describes train-test splits for 5 different types of compositional generalization, such as length gener-
alization or composing API functions in different combinations in the training and test sets. While
ExeDec has slightly better performance than a Transformer baseline in the i.i.d. setting, ExeDec also
achieves a 2× to 4× accuracy increase in the compositional generalization setting. Additionally,
ExeDec improves upon an ablation that does not explicitly propose subgoals, showing the importance
of reasoning about execution subgoals instead of directly predicting code.
Interestingly, a similar approach can be applied to explore compositional generalization in large
language models (LLMs). We explore whether the LLM can solve PBE tasks that compositionally
generalize beyond those in a few-shot prompt. We similarly find that the LLM performs significantly
worse when compositional generalization is required, and that an adaptation of ExeDec to the few-shot
prompting setup increases the LLM’s performance overall, including in compositional generalization.
Even so, compositional generalization during program generation in LLMs remains a challenge.

2    C OMPOSITIONAL G ENERALIZATION IN P ROGRAMMING
The goal in program synthesis is to find a program in a given language that is consistent with a
specification. Formally, we are given a domain specific language (DSL) which defines a set P of
programs. Elements in the DSL include functions (which we call operations), identifiers, constants,
and so on. In programming by example (PBE), the desired program is specified by a set of input/output
(I/O) examples denoted X = {(I1 , O1 ), . . . (In , On )}. Then, solving specification X means finding
a program P ∈ P that correctly solves all of the examples: P (Ii ) = Oi , ∀i. A robust program
synthesizer should generalize to programs not in the training set. Regardless of the programming
language or DSL, programs are nearly always built from smaller parts, which we call subprograms,
such as lines and blocks of code, functions, and so on. For compositional generalization, we are
interested in whether the synthesizer can combine subprograms in new ways from the training set.
We design our benchmark around five compositional generalization tasks applicable to program
synthesis (Figure 1). These tasks measure whether synthesizers can generalize to longer programs
or to programs that use concepts, such as API methods, in different compositional ways. These
concepts partition the DSL operations into groups.1 In this section, we describe the generalization
tasks abstractly, forming a meta-benchmark that can be applied in future work to construct new
compositional generalization benchmarks using existing datasets or DSLs. Then, in Section 3, we
concretize the tasks for specific DSLs for our experiments. The five generalization tasks are:

1. Length-Generalization: Can a model produce longer code than seen in training, when necessary?
   Here, “length” counts the number of subprograms and not the number of tokens, so there is more
   1
     Ideally, operations within a group should have meaningful commonalities that form one concept, and each
concept should have roughly equal semantic complexity, but these are not strictly required.


                                                     2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



               Length        Compose Different   Switch Concept      Compose New        Add Operation
            Generalization      Concepts             Order            Operation         Functionality



    Train


    Test


Figure 1: Our five compositional generalization tasks. Circles represent subprograms that join to
form programs as train or test examples, colored circles represent subprograms of a particular concept
or operation, and bold outlines represent analogous functionality of different operations.

   emphasis on generalizing to more complex compositional patterns. For this task, we train on
   problems of lengths 1 to n and test on lengths n + 1 to m (where m > n).
2. Compose-Different-Concepts: Can a model use concepts in different combinations than seen in
   training? Specifically, train the model on compositions of operations from the same concept, and
   test on compositions from different concepts. For example, if two concepts consist of operations
   {A1 , A2 , . . .} and {B1 , B2 , . . . }, then the training programs have the form Ai ◦ Aj and Bi ◦ Bj ,
   and the testing programs have the form Ai ◦ Bj and Bi ◦ Aj (and similarly for compositions
   of 3 or more operations). A real-world example might be training on program containing only
   TensorFlow or only NumPy, but synthesizing code at test time using both libraries.
3. Switch-Concept-Order: Can a model compose concepts in different orders than seen in training?
   We train on compositions of operations drawn from one sequence of concepts and test on a
   different sequence of concepts, e.g., train on Ai ◦ Bj and test on Bi ◦ Aj . As a real-world
   example, in the training data a function might be validating inputs at the beginning of the code,
   but we want to use the function in a different context, e.g., to validate results at the end.
4. Compose-New-Operation: Can a model learn to use a new isolated operation within a larger
   composition? In this task, we train on the isolated operation and compositions without the
   operation, and test on compositions using the operation. A real-world example of this kind of
   generalization would be composing a new function with others in a larger solution, after seeing
   examples of the function used in isolation.
5. Add-Operation-Functionality: Can a model extend its understanding of an operation by drawing
   on parallels to other operations? We omit from the training data some functionality of an operation
   that could be inferred from other context, and test on programs using that functionality. This
   task can occur when a library function is upgraded with a new parameter whose behavior can be
   inferred from analogous parameters in other functions.

These five tasks can be grouped into three themes: (a) length generalization; (b) mix and match
concepts (tasks 2 and 3): compose concepts in ways that were not seen during training; and (c) apply
general principles (tasks 4 and 5): adapt to new, updated, or custom APIs.

3    B ENCHMARK C REATION
While Section 2 focused on the meta-benchmark describing five compositional generalization tasks,
this section describes our instantiation of those tasks into compositional generalization datasets for
two popular synthesis domains, RobustFill (Devlin et al., 2017) and DeepCoder (Balog et al., 2017).
RobustFill. In the RobustFill domain, the objective is to synthesize a sequence of string manip-
ulation operations from I/O examples, where each example’s input is a single string. A RobustFill
program is a concatenation of expressions. There are 4 categories of expressions: operations that ex-
tract a substring from the input (e.g., GetToken(regex, index)), operations that return a modified
version of the input (e.g., ToCase(case)), a special Compose operation (applying a modification
operation to the result of another operation), or a constant string character. For example, the program
GetFrom(' ') | Const('.') | Compose(ToCase(PROPER), GetToken(WORD, 1)) is a


                                                    3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 1 ExeDec: synthesis via decomposition in the execution space.
Note, {xi } is short for [x1 , . . . , xn ] throughout, where n is the number of I/O examples.
 1: function E XE D EC({(Ii , Oi )})
 2:   t←1
        (1)     (1)
 3:   (Ii , Oi ) ← (Ii , Oi ), ∀i
 4:   while True do
            (t)                      (t) (t)
 5:      {Si } ← S UBGOAL M ODEL({(Ii , Oi )})                    . Predict the next execution subgoals
            (t)                         (t) (t)
 6:      P ← S YNTHESIZER M ODEL({(Ii , Si )})                           . Predict the next subprogram
            (t)                 (t)
 7:      Ei ← E XECUTE(P (t) , Ii ), ∀i
                 (t)  (t)
 8:      if ∀i. Ei = Oi then                                            . Is this the last subprogram?
 9:         return C OMBINE P ROGRAM PARTS(P , . . . , P (t) )
                                            (1)
                       (t)   (t)
         . Update {(Ii , Oi )} to represent work that is left to be done (domain-specific).
           (t+1)    (t+1)                              (t)    (t)   (t)
10:      (Ii     , Oi     ) ← U PDATE S PECIFICATION(Ii , Oi , Ei ), ∀i
11:      t←t+1


concatenation of 3 expressions and transforms the input string “TURING, Alan” into the output string
“Alan.Turing”. See Appendix A for the full RobustFill DSL, which we extended from the original
RobustFill paper (Devlin et al., 2017) by adding more operations. Appendix B contains further details
about our constructed datasets, including the different compositional generalization splits and the
process for generating synthetic programming tasks according to those splits.
DeepCoder. The DeepCoder domain involves manipulation of integer lists in a line-by-line pro-
gramming style. Tasks have one or more inputs which may be integers or integer lists. Each line
of a DeepCoder program applies one DSL operation to inputs or previous variables and assigns
the result to a new variable. The result of the last line is the program’s output. Operations include
first-order list operations (Sort, Reverse, and various forms of indexing, slicing, and aggregating)
and higher-order operations (Haskell-inspired Map, Filter, Count, ZipWith, and Scanl1) which
manipulate lists using one of several hardcoded lambda functions. As an example, the program x0
= INPUT | x1 = Map (**2) x0 | x2 = Sort x1 (where “|” denotes a new line) transforms
the input list [5, 3, −4] into the output list [9, 16, 25]. See Appendix A for the full DeepCoder DSL
and Appendix B for more details about our instantiation in the DeepCoder domain.
Choice of Domains. Both domains allow us to generate a large amount of synthetic training data
with ground-truth decompositions into subprograms. For more realistic code in general-purpose
programming languages, such data collection requires more effort, especially if “natural” decomposi-
tions are desired. Beyond the difference in string versus list manipulation, RobustFill and DeepCoder
are quite different in other important ways, allowing us to study the compositional generalization of
various approaches in different scenarios. First, RobustFill gradually builds an output by combining
results of subprograms that are mostly independent, while DeepCoder applies operations repeatedly
to the same few objects until the output is reached. In this sense, RobustFill is closer to inverse
CAD (Ellis et al., 2019), instantiating complex objects with many fields like dataclasses, or other
tasks involving several independent analyses, while DeepCoder is closer to tensor manipulation (Shi
et al., 2022a), dynamic programming, or other tasks involving sequences of manipulations or updates
applied to the same objects. Second, RobustFill uses the same input for each subprogram while
DeepCoder involves program states that change due to the new variable bindings on each line, making
DeepCoder more complex and closer to realistic programs with execution states changing over time.


4     P ROGRAM S YNTHESIS VIA D ECOMPOSITION

In this section we describe our proposed program synthesis method based on execution decomposition,
where the model predicts step-by-step execution subgoals and synthesizes subprograms for each step.
Execution Decomposition (ExeDec). The ExeDec strategy outlined in Algorithm 1 aims to reason
about the step-by-step execution behavior of a program rather than the code tokens. As in Section 2,
we assume that the program is a sequence of one or more subprograms that may be combined
later. At each step, to synthesize the next subprogram, we first call a SubgoalModel that takes I/O


                                                    4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


examples and predicts the next execution subgoals, i.e., the output of the next subprogram for each
example. Because the subgoal is the desired output at this step, predicting the next subprogram is
itself a PBE task. Thus, we provide the inputs and subgoals to a SynthesizerModel which predicts the
corresponding subprogram. Finally, we execute the predicted subprogram and compute an updated
specification that describes the work that remains to be done by the rest of the program.
This updated specification is maintained throughout the step-by-step synthesis process. Because the
overall program is specified by I/O examples, we use I/O examples for the updated specification
as well. Intuitively, the inputs in the updated specification will be the current program state, and
the outputs will be the output of the overall task, but the details are slightly different because of
specifics of the DSLs. We begin with the original I/O examples for the overall synthesis task, and
we update them in a domain-specific way as subprograms are synthesized (line 10). For instance,
in RobustFill the input for each subprogram is the same as the original input, while the output
                                                                                       (t+1)     (t+1)
becomes smaller as we remove already-synthesized prefixes of the output: (Ii                 , Oi       ) ←
  (t)                      (t)   (t)
(Ii , R EMOVE P REFIX(Oi , Ei )); this is because the top level operation in RobustFill programs is
always concatenation.2 For DeepCoder, the input is the full program state (i.e., the set of variables and
their values for each example) which is expanded with new variables as subprograms are synthesized,
                                                            (t+1)    (t+1)         (t)       (t)    (t)
while the output remains constant for each example: (Ii           , Oi     ) ← (Ii ∪ Ei , Oi ). If
ExeDec synthesizes a subprogram that executes to the entire remaining output, there are no more
subprograms to synthesize, so the subprograms are combined to form the full synthesized program.
Algorithm 1 describes a single synthesis attempt, but we actually perform a search comprising
multiple synthesis attempts running efficiently in parallel using a modified beam search where each
beam state is a partial rollout of the step-by-step synthesis algorithm. Appendix C has more details.
Model Architecture. Recall from Algorithm 1 that ExeDec relies on two models, the Sub-
goalModel and SynthesizerModel. We let both be sequence-to-sequence (seq2seq) models, which
have been shown to be successful on various natural language (Bahdanau et al., 2016; Vaswani et al.,
2017) and program synthesis tasks (Devlin et al., 2017). We choose our seq2seq model to be a Trans-
former due to its impressive performance on natural language tasks over traditional RNNs (Vaswani
et al., 2017). We modify the baseline Transformer architecture to account for the fact that we operate
on sets of inputs due to having multiple I/O examples. We call our model a Specification-Transformer.
For consistent notation for the two models, we let {Xi } be the multi-example input to the transformer
and Y its output. Formally, Xi = (Ii , Oi ) for SubgoalModel and (Ii , Si ) for SynthesizerModel, and
Y = [S1 , Sep, S2 , Sep, . . . , Sn ] for SubgoalModel and Y = P for SynthesizerModel, where Sep is
a new token added to our vocabulary to partition the subgoals across examples. Note that subgoals Si
and subprogram P are sequences of tokens.
Our Specification-Transformer consists of two modules. A Transformer encoder receives the speci-
fication {Xi } and produces an encoding φ. Following Devlin et al. (2017), our encoder performs
double attention on the specification. That is, for each example Xi , the encoder performs the op-
eration φi ← TransformerEncoder(Xi ), where the encoder performs self-attention on input Ii
followed by cross-attention from the output (either Oi or Si ) to Ii . Then, the encoding φ is simply the
concatenation across examples φ ← Concat({φi }). Next, a Transformer decoder takes the encoding
and autoregressively generates the output token-by-token. Formally, let Y`−1 = [y1 , y2 , . . . , y`−1 ] be
the output (subgoals or subprogram) generated so far. The decoder predicts the next output token as
y` ← TransformerDecoder(Y`−1 , φ). As described by Vaswani et al. (2017), the Transformer en-
coder and decoder both apply a stack of self-attention and feed-forward units. For the SubgoalModel,
we use Aligned Relative Attention (ARA), a new technique that helps the model output a sequence of
sequences (a subgoal for each I/O example, concatenated together); see Appendix D for details.
No-Subgoal Ablation. We also experiment with an ablation of ExeDec that performs step-by-step
decomposition but without predicting execution subgoals first, instead directly predicting the next
subprogram from the I/O examples. In Algorithm 1, this ablation is achieved by replacing lines 5 and
                                                   (t)    (t)
6 with a single line, P (t) ← C OMBINED M ODEL({(Ii , Oi )}), thus skipping the step of predicting
execution subgoals. This ablation uses the same model architecture (without ARA) and an analogous
    2
      If the synthesized subprogram does not execute to a prefix of the current output for all examples, this
synthesis attempt cannot succeed due to RobustFill’s concatenation of subprograms. Such “invalid” subprograms
are detected and handled during a beam search.


                                                     5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 2: Compositional generalization results with beam size 10. Error bars denote 95% confidence
intervals of the mean across 5 trials. On both datasets, ExeDec generalizes better than the no-subgoal
ablation, while both decomposition variations greatly outperform the Transformer baseline.

beam search. Several prior works (Zohar & Wolf, 2018; Ellis et al., 2019; Chen et al., 2019) perform
synthesis step-by-step, providing execution feedback to the synthesizer after each step to inform
future predictions. Our ablation captures the essence of those approaches adapted to our setting.
Model Training. We generate training problems as described in Section 3. We train the ExeDec
and ablation models using decomposed data, that is, based on teacher forcing using Algorithm 1.
Specifically, for each subprogram in the ground-truth solution, we collect (A) the updated specifica-
tion based on executing the previous ground-truth subprograms, (B) the subprogram’s execution result
on all examples, and (C) the subprogram itself. Then, we train the SubgoalModel to predict (B) given
(A), the SynthesizerModel to predict (C) given (B) and the example inputs from (A), and the Com-
binedModel to predict (C) given (A). Each model type is trained separately for each generalization
task. Appendix E contains more training details, including model sizes and hyperparameters.


5     E XPERIMENTS

We experiment with Transformers trained from scratch and with LLMs using few-shot prompting.

5.1   T RANSFORMERS T RAINED FROM S CRATCH

These experiments compare ExeDec, a version with smaller models called ExeDec-Small, the no-
subgoal ablation, a Transformer baseline without any decomposition, and Latent Programmer (Hong
et al., 2021). All models use the same hyperparameters and architecture except: (1) ExeDec-Small
and Latent Programmer use smaller models (details and reasoning in Appendix E), (2) ARA only
applies to the SubgoalModel, and (3) because the baseline Transformer and Latent Programmer
are trained on entire programs instead of subprograms, but the number of training examples is held
constant, they actually see more subprograms during training than our models.
Using our compositional generalization datasets (Section 3) and models (Section 4), we ran the
different approaches and measured their overall success rate on 1000 test examples per generalization
task. We repeated the experiments using 5 different random initializations for model training. Figure 2
shows the results when using a beam size of 10, Appendix F contains results with beam size 1, and
Appendix G analyzes the accuracy of individual steps.


                                                  6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Discussion. On both domains, ExeDec significantly outperforms the Transformer baseline on
every generalization task and in the i.i.d. setting (testing on the training distribution without any
compositional generalization). Specifically, ExeDec achieves +44% higher average compositional
generalization than the Transformer baseline on RobustFill and +18% on DeepCoder, a 4.4× higher
success rate. But despite the notable improvements, DeepCoder in particular remains a difficult
domain with deeply nested operation compositions that obscure the intended computation, while
RobustFill has a more flat compositional structure that is easier to learn.
Our step-by-step decomposition approach introduces important inductive biases into the approach. By
training models on the decomposed data, we teach the models that subprograms can be reasoned about
separately, regardless of the compositional patterns present in other subprograms. The SubgoalModel
does not see any code tokens and is only affected by compositional generalization patterns indirectly
(since the distribution over programs affects the distribution over execution traces), and the Synthe-
sizerModel only sees code tokens for the current subprogram and cannot reference any compositional
patterns that appear when comparing to other subprograms. In contrast, the Transformer baseline
sees all compositional patterns in the full programs, making it more likely to overfit to those patterns.
The decomposition strategy also encourages our models to understand intermediate program states
while the Transformer baseline is not trained with such execution information.
Compared to the no-subgoal ablation, ExeDec achieves higher compositional generalization perfor-
mance on a majority of generalization tasks across the two domains, averaging +7% improvement on
RobustFill (a 34% reduction in failures) and +5% on DeepCoder (a 1.28× multiplicative improve-
ment). This supports our hypothesis that predicting execution states is more robust than predicting
code in the compositional generalization setting. ExeDec-Small performs slightly worse than ExeDec
(1.4% worse on average and up to 3% worse on any individual generalization task) but ExeDec-Small
still significantly outperforms the other approaches overall.
Even though ExeDec performs the best in most situations, the no-subgoal variation is slightly better
on DeepCoder’s training distribution and Length-Generalization. Appendix H provides some intuition
on “spurious patterns” related to this result. In theory, one could combine the two decomposition
variations in an ensemble to get the best of both approaches on unknown test distributions. Finally,
we observe that in most cases ExeDec has smaller variance across random initializations than the
no-subgoal variation, i.e., ExeDec might be more consistent in practice.
As a case study, we compare ExeDec, the no-subgoal ablation, and the Transformer baseline on
example RobustFill and DeepCoder problems in Appendix I. Through these examples, we discuss
some behaviors and observations that clarify the advantages to ExeDec’s approach.

5.2   LLM E XPERIMENTS

It is fundamentally difficult to measure compositional generalization in LLMs, because compositional
generalization is a function of the relationship between the training and test distributions, but in LLMs
it is not easy to control the pretraining data. However, we have more control in a few-shot prompting
setup, as long as we focus on program concepts that cannot have occurred in the pretraining data set.
Based on this insight, in these experiments, we used our benchmarks to measure the compositional
generalization ability of PaLM 2 Unicorn (Google et al., 2023) during few-shot prompting for PBE.
We use the same compositional generalization splits for DeepCoder and RobustFill, except that the
few-shot examples and test problems have length at most 3. We make the problems easier because
LLMs in general perform poorly on program synthesis tasks specified only through I/O examples,
compared to natural language specifications. Within each split we balance the distribution of program
lengths as much as possible,3 and we use 200 test problems per generalization task. Each prompt
contains a description of the DSL including the available functionality, followed by 4 few-shot
examples of PBE tasks and solutions drawn from the training split (different tasks are randomly
chosen for different test problems), followed by the specification for a test problem (see Appendix J).
To make the tasks better suited to LLMs, we transform our DSL programs into Python functions
that call a hypothetical dsl library to access the DSL functionality. The RobustFill subprogram
GetToken(WORD, 1) becomes dsl.GetToken(x, dsl.Type.Word, 1), and the DeepCoder

   3
     For example, Compose-Different-Concepts, Switch-Concept-Order, and Compose-New-Operation all require
programs of length at least 2, so these tasks have a 50/50 split between programs of lengths 2 and 3.


                                                   7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 1: Compositional generalization results for the LLM experiments. Each cell contains the
number of solved tasks out of 200 test problems. For approaches, @1 means 1 greedy decoding and
@5 means using 5 samples with temperature 0.4. For columns, “None” means no generalization, “Gen.
Tasks” refers to the 5 compositional generalization tasks in the order given in Section 2 (consistent
with the other figures), and “Avg” is the average across the 5 generalization tasks.
                       RobustFill                     DeepCoder             DeepCoder-Pythonic
 Approach      None    Gen. Tasks    Avg   None       Gen. Tasks   Avg   None   Gen. Tasks     Avg
 Baseline @1      4    4 0 1 0 0     1.0     23    0 1 6 0 5       2.4    25    1 0 11 0 4       3.2
 Ablation @1     16    4 0 0 1 6     2.2     31    1 2 13 3 5      4.8    30    4 0 12 4 4       4.8
 ExeDec @1       21    5 0 0 1 6     2.4     36    2 3 11 4 10     6.0    46    3 3 15 5 16      8.4
 Baseline @5     15    1 0 1 2 5     1.8     36    0 1 11 5 13 6.0        34    2 1 15 5 8        6.2
 Ablation @5     29    7 1 0 4 7     3.8     51    1 4 18 8 21 10.4       42    4 8 19 10 11     10.4
 ExeDec @5       32    5 0 0 5 10    4.0     56    2 5 17 8 17 9.8        59    5 9 25 12 30     16.2


subprogram x2 = Map (**2) x1 becomes x2 = dsl.Map(dsl.SQUARE, x1). For DeepCoder,
we alternatively try using Pythonic expressions for all DSL functionality except the Scanl1 operation,
which is difficult to inline; the previous example then becomes x2 = [x ** 2 for x in x1].
By representing DSL programs as Python functions in this way, we enable the LLM to draw upon
its general understanding of Python from its pretraining data, while requiring the LLM to use a new
Python library from only a description of the library along with 4 few-shot examples. This setting
mirrors realistic use-cases where a user asks about a new, custom, or proprietary library that the LLM
was not trained on. Appendix J contains examples of our prompts and Python-style programs. The
LLM is allowed to use arbitrary Python, although it usually follows the style in the examples.
We experimented with three prompting approaches analogous to the other experiments:

1. The baseline approach is to predict the entire solution program in one decoding.
2. The Ablation-style approach predicts the program step-by-step. Given the problem specification
   and history of previous steps, the LLM predicts the next line of code. We then execute the program-
   so-far and concatenate the predicted line of code along with its execution results into the history
   portion of the prompt, which will influence future steps. This stepwise process continues until the
   desired outputs are reached, the program fails to execute, or a budget of 3 steps is exhausted.
3. The ExeDec-style approach is similar, except that at each step, the LLM predicts the next execution
   subgoal followed by a line of code for that step (analogous to calling the SubgoalModel and
   SynthesizerModel). Note that the LLM’s subgoal prediction might be inconsistent with the
   predicted code, so in the history of previous steps, we replace the predicted subgoals with the
   actual execution results (analogous to how the specification is updated in ExeDec). Over multiple
   steps, this process creates a prompt almost identical to that of the Ablation-style approach, except
   that ExeDec-style has the execution results of a step before the code for that step, while the
   Ablation-style has the execution results after the code.

The results are in Table 1. The ExeDec-style prompting strategy leads to the best performance for all
no-generalization cases, and all but one case for the generalization average. Also, the ExeDec-style
approach significantly improves when programs are written in a more natural form (going from
DeepCoder to DeepCoder-Pythonic), which is a promising sign for its general applicability. For
DeepCoder-Pythonic, the ExeDec-style approach solves between 40% and 75% more tasks than the
next-best approach, considering each combination of no-generalization vs. generalization average and
greedy decoding vs. pass@5 sampling. But despite these improvements, compositional generalization
remains difficult for LLMs. Appendix K discusses common failure modes in the LLM experiments.

6    R ELATED W ORK
Compositional Generalization. Compositional generalization is well-studied in NLP, with estab-
lished benchmarks evaluating the understanding of natural language sentences with compositionally
novel structures, either constructed by synthesizing examples based on predefined generalization
patterns similar to this work (Lake & Baroni, 2018; Bahdanau et al., 2019), or by partitioning
i.i.d. samples into splits with disjoint compositional structures (Finegan-Dollak et al., 2018; Keysers


                                                  8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


et al., 2020; Shaw et al., 2021). Our benchmark takes inspiration from SCAN (Lake & Baroni, 2018)
and COGS (Kim & Linzen, 2020), which define a taxonomy of compositional patterns in natural lan-
guage. While some generalization concepts are similar to those in Section 2, we focus on measuring
compositional generalization of computer programs using I/O examples without natural language
utterances, whose compositional structures are quite different from those in natural language.
To improve compositional generalization in natural language understanding, earlier works have
proposed specialized task-dependent neural architectures (Russin et al., 2019; Li et al., 2019; Liu
et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2020; Herzig & Berant, 2020). More generalized approaches include meta-
learning (Lake, 2019; Wang et al., 2021a; Conklin et al., 2021) and data augmentation (Andreas, 2020;
Oren et al., 2021; Akyürek et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2021b; Qiu et al., 2022). There have also been
recent attempts in improving the compositional generalization capabilities of large language models
via representation learning (Furrer et al., 2020; Herzig et al., 2021) and in-context learning (Zhou
et al., 2023; Drozdov et al., 2023).
In machine learning for code, some works include length generalization results (Bieber et al., 2020;
Balog et al., 2017; Ellis et al., 2019), and Nye et al. (2021) use compositional generalization in some
experiments, but we study compositional generalization in a much more systematic manner.
Programming by Example. Various techniques have been applied to program synthesis (Gulwani
et al., 2017), and recently much attention has focused on machine learning for programming by
example (Devlin et al., 2017; Parisotto et al., 2017; Ellis et al., 2021). Many methods incorporate
learning to guide the search over programs, such as using learned premise selection (Balog et al., 2017;
Odena & Sutton, 2020), syntax-guided search (Yin & Neubig, 2017; Lee et al., 2018), bottom-up
search (Shi et al., 2022a; Barke et al., 2020), two-level search (Nye et al., 2019), and execution-guided
synthesis methods (Odena et al., 2020; Shi et al., 2022b).
Multi-step Program Synthesis. ExeDec is an instance of multi-step program synthesis, which
broadly refers to methods involving multiple calls to (potentially different) models. Execution-guided
synthesis is a popular form of this, iteratively generating and refining partial programs using execution
information (Zohar & Wolf, 2018; Ellis et al., 2019; Chen et al., 2019; Shrivastava et al., 2021),
and some approaches do this with latent representations of the program state (Chen et al., 2021b)
or execution traces (Shin et al., 2018). Planning is another form of multi-step synthesis that first
generates high-level plans of what the program should do (Nye et al., 2019; Murali et al., 2018;
Zhang et al., 2023), sometimes with latent representations of plans (Hong et al., 2021). Our method,
ExeDec, draws ideas from both avenues of multi-step synthesis, making plans by predicting subgoals
and using step-by-step program execution to guide the search.


7   C ONCLUSION

We explored the important aspect of compositional generalization in neural program synthesis. The
ability to decompose complex tasks into smaller subtasks is a fundamental skill employed by human
programmers, and measuring whether neural program synthesis methods exhibit similar capabilities
is crucial for assessing their potential. We introduced a meta-benchmark that characterizes 5 forms of
compositional generalization in program synthesis, and we instantiated these generalization tasks
in the RobustFill and DeepCoder domains. The findings demonstrate that the ExeDec approach of
predicting decompositions of program execution, rather than solely focusing on program syntax, leads
to significantly improved compositional generalization for both Transformers trained from scratch
and LLMs in a few-shot setting. This suggests that incorporating information about the step-by-step
decomposition and leveraging it in the synthesis of programs can enhance the ability of neural models
to tackle more complex tasks. Even so, compositional generalization remains challenging for neural
program synthesizers, and our meta-benchmark can help measure continued progress in this area.
Limitations. One limitation of ExeDec is its need for a training dataset with ground-truth decom-
positions. Our experiments used synthetic programs with line-by-line decomposition, but perhaps
better results could be obtained with a dataset containing more natural decompositions. Furthermore,
the line-by-line decomposition could be a limitation as programmers often think in larger chunks or
hierarchically; Appendix L discusses a potential hierarchical formulation of ExeDec to address this
limitation in future work. Lastly, our SubgoalModel predicts tokenizations of objects, but to handle
more complex objects, a more general SubgoalModel might instead predict abstractions of objects.


                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT
Our code, datasets, and checkpoints for the Transformer models trained from scratch are available
at https://github.com/google-deepmind/exedec. Additionally, Appendix E contains
details about model hyperparameters and sizes for the models we trained.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors would like to thank Xinyun Chen, Martin Abadi, Rif Saurous, and the anonymous
reviewers for their helpful comments.

R EFERENCES
Ekin Akyürek, Afra Feyza Akyürek, and Jacob Andreas. Learning to recombine and resample data for
  compositional generalization. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR),
  2021.
Jacob Andreas. Good-enough compositional data augmentation. In Assocation for Computational
  Linguistics (ACL), 2020.
Jacob Austin, Augustus Odena, Maxwell Nye, Maarten Bosma, Henryk Michalewski, David Dohan,
  Ellen Jiang, Carrie Cai, Michael Terry, Quoc Le, and Charles Sutton. Program synthesis with large
  language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.07732, 2021.
Dzmitry Bahdanau, Kyunghyun Cho, and Yoshua Bengio. Neural machine translation by jointly
  learning to align and translate. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR),
  2016.
Dzmitry Bahdanau, Harm de Vries, Timothy J. O’Donnell, Shikhar Murty, Philippe Beaudoin, Yoshua
  Bengio, and Aaron C. Courville. CLOSURE: Assessing systematic generalization of CLEVR
  models. arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.05783, 2019.
Matej Balog, Alexander L Gaunt, Marc Brockschmidt, Sebastian Nowozin, and Daniel Tarlow.
 DeepCoder: Learning to write programs. In International Conference on Learning Representations
 (ICLR), 2017.
Shraddha Barke, Hila Peleg, and Nadia Polikarpova. Just-in-time learning for bottom-up enumerative
  synthesis. In Object-oriented Programming, Systems, Languages, and Applications (OOPSLA),
  2020.
David Bieber, Charles Sutton, Hugo Larochelle, and Daniel Tarlow. Learning to execute programs
  with instruction pointer attention graph neural networks. In Neural Information Processing Systems
 (NeurIPS), 2020.
Mark Chen, Jerry Tworek, Heewoo Jun, Qiming Yuan, Henrique Pondé de Oliveira Pinto, Jared
 Kaplan, Harrison Edwards, Yuri Burda, Nicholas Joseph, Greg Brockman, Alex Ray, Raul Puri,
 Gretchen Krueger, Michael Petrov, Heidy Khlaaf, Girish Sastry, Pamela Mishkin, Brooke Chan,
 Scott Gray, Nick Ryder, Mikhail Pavlov, Alethea Power, Lukasz Kaiser, Mohammad Bavarian,
 Clemens Winter, Philippe Tillet, Felipe Petroski Such, Dave Cummings, Matthias Plappert, Fotios
 Chantzis, Elizabeth Barnes, Ariel Herbert-Voss, William Hebgen Guss, Alex Nichol, Alex Paino,
 Nikolas Tezak, Jie Tang, Igor Babuschkin, Suchir Balaji, Shantanu Jain, William Saunders,
 Christopher Hesse, Andrew N. Carr, Jan Leike, Joshua Achiam, Vedant Misra, Evan Morikawa,
 Alec Radford, Matthew Knight, Miles Brundage, Mira Murati, Katie Mayer, Peter Welinder, Bob
 McGrew, Dario Amodei, Sam McCandlish, Ilya Sutskever, and Wojciech Zaremba. Evaluating
 large language models trained on code. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.03374, 2021a.
Xinyun Chen, Chang Liu, and Dawn Song. Execution-guided neural program synthesis. In Interna-
  tional Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2019.
Xinyun Chen, Chen Liang, Adams Wei Yu, D. Song, and Denny Zhou. Compositional generalization
  via neural-symbolic stack machines. In Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2020.


                                                10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Xinyun Chen, Dawn Song, and Yuandong Tian. Latent execution for neural program synthesis
  beyond domain-specific languages. In Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2021b.

Noam Chomsky. Syntactic Structures. Mouton de Gruyter, 1957.

Henry Conklin, Bailin Wang, Kenny Smith, and Ivan Titov. Meta-learning to compositionally
  generalize. In Association for Computational Linguistics and International Joint Conference on
  Natural Language Processing (ACL/IJCNLP), 2021.

Róbert Csordás, Kazuki Irie, and Jürgen Schmidhuber. The devil is in the detail: Simple tricks
  improve systematic generalization of transformers. In Empirical Methods in Natural Language
  Processing (EMNLP), 2021.

Jacob Devlin, Jonathan Uesato, Surya Bhupatiraju, Rishabh Singh, Abdel-rahman Mohamed, and
  Pushmeet Kohli. RobustFill: Neural program learning under noisy I/O. In International Conference
  on Machine Learning (ICML), 2017.

Andrew Drozdov, Nathanael Schärli, Ekin Akyürek, Nathan Scales, Xinying Song, Xinyun Chen,
  Olivier Bousquet, and Denny Zhou. Compositional semantic parsing with large language models.
  In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2023.

Kevin Ellis, Maxwell I. Nye, Yewen Pu, Felix Sosa, Josh Tenenbaum, and Armando Solar-Lezama.
  Write, execute, assess: Program synthesis with a REPL. In Neural Information Processing Systems
  (NeurIPS), 2019.

Kevin Ellis, Catherine Wong, Maxwell I. Nye, Mathias Sablé-Meyer, Lucas Morales, Luke B. Hewitt,
  Luc Cary, Armando Solar-Lezama, and Joshua B. Tenenbaum. DreamCoder: bootstrapping
  inductive program synthesis with wake-sleep library learning. In Programming Language Design
  and Implementation (PLDI), 2021.

Catherine Finegan-Dollak, Jonathan K. Kummerfeld, Li Zhang, Karthik Ramanathan, Sesh Sadasivam,
  Rui Zhang, and Dragomir Radev. Improving text-to-SQL evaluation methodology. In Assocation
  for Computational Linguistics (ACL), 2018.

Daniel Furrer, Marc van Zee, Nathan Scales, and Nathanael Schärli. Compositional generalization
  in semantic parsing: Pre-training vs. specialized architectures. arXiv preprint arXiv:2007.08970,
  2020.

Google, Rohan Anil, Andrew M. Dai, Orhan Firat, Melvin Johnson, Dmitry Lepikhin, Alexandre
  Passos, Siamak Shakeri, Emanuel Taropa, Paige Bailey, Zhifeng Chen, Eric Chu, Jonathan H. Clark,
  Laurent El Shafey, Yanping Huang, Kathy Meier-Hellstern, Gaurav Mishra, Erica Moreira, Mark
  Omernick, Kevin Robinson, Sebastian Ruder, Yi Tay, Kefan Xiao, Yuanzhong Xu, Yujing Zhang,
  Gustavo Hernandez Abrego, Junwhan Ahn, Jacob Austin, Paul Barham, Jan Botha, James Bradbury,
  Siddhartha Brahma, Kevin Brooks, Michele Catasta, Yong Cheng, Colin Cherry, Christopher A.
  Choquette-Choo, Aakanksha Chowdhery, Clément Crepy, Shachi Dave, Mostafa Dehghani, Sunipa
  Dev, Jacob Devlin, Mark Dı́az, Nan Du, Ethan Dyer, Vlad Feinberg, Fangxiaoyu Feng, Vlad
  Fienber, Markus Freitag, Xavier Garcia, Sebastian Gehrmann, Lucas Gonzalez, Guy Gur-Ari,
  Steven Hand, Hadi Hashemi, Le Hou, Joshua Howland, Andrea Hu, Jeffrey Hui, Jeremy Hurwitz,
  Michael Isard, Abe Ittycheriah, Matthew Jagielski, Wenhao Jia, Kathleen Kenealy, Maxim Krikun,
  Sneha Kudugunta, Chang Lan, Katherine Lee, Benjamin Lee, Eric Li, Music Li, Wei Li, YaGuang
  Li, Jian Li, Hyeontaek Lim, Hanzhao Lin, Zhongtao Liu, Frederick Liu, Marcello Maggioni,
 Aroma Mahendru, Joshua Maynez, Vedant Misra, Maysam Moussalem, Zachary Nado, John
  Nham, Eric Ni, Andrew Nystrom, Alicia Parrish, Marie Pellat, Martin Polacek, Alex Polozov,
  Reiner Pope, Siyuan Qiao, Emily Reif, Bryan Richter, Parker Riley, Alex Castro Ros, Aurko Roy,
  Brennan Saeta, Rajkumar Samuel, Renee Shelby, Ambrose Slone, Daniel Smilkov, David R. So,
  Daniel Sohn, Simon Tokumine, Dasha Valter, Vijay Vasudevan, Kiran Vodrahalli, Xuezhi Wang,
  Pidong Wang, Zirui Wang, Tao Wang, John Wieting, Yuhuai Wu, Kelvin Xu, Yunhan Xu, Linting
 Xue, Pengcheng Yin, Jiahui Yu, Qiao Zhang, Steven Zheng, Ce Zheng, Weikang Zhou, Denny
  Zhou, Slav Petrov, and Yonghui Wu. PaLM 2 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.10403,
  2023.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Yu Gu, Sue Kase, Michelle Vanni, Brian Sadler, Percy Liang, Xifeng Yan, and Yu Su. Beyond IID:
  three levels of generalization for question answering on knowledge bases. In The Web Conference
  (WWW), 2021.

Sumit Gulwani. Automating string processing in spreadsheets using input-output examples. In
  Principles of Programming Languages (POPL), 2011.

Sumit Gulwani, Oleksandr Polozov, and Rishabh Singh. Program Synthesis, volume 4 of Foundations
  and Trends® in Programming Languages. 2017.

Jonathan Herzig and Jonathan Berant. Span-based semantic parsing for compositional generalization.
  In Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), 2020.

Jonathan Herzig, Peter Shaw, Ming-Wei Chang, Kelvin Guu, Panupong Pasupat, and Yuan Zhang.
  Unlocking compositional generalization in pre-trained models using intermediate representations.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.07478, 2021.

Joey Hong, David Dohan, Rishabh Singh, Charles Sutton, and Manzil Zaheer. Latent programmer:
  Discrete latent codes for program synthesis. In International Conference on Machine Learning
  (ICML), 2021.

Daniel Keysers, Nathanael Schärli, Nathan Scales, H. Buisman, Daniel Furrer, Sergii Kashubin,
  Nikola Momchev, Danila Sinopalnikov, Lukasz Stafiniak, Tibor Tihon, D. Tsarkov, Xiao Wang,
  Marc van Zee, and O. Bousquet. Measuring compositional generalization: A comprehensive
  method on realistic data. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2020.

Najoung Kim and Tal Linzen. COGS: A compositional generalization challenge based on semantic
  interpretation. In Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), 2020.

Brenden M. Lake. Compositional generalization through meta sequence-to-sequence learning. In
  Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2019.

Brenden M. Lake and Marco Baroni. Generalization without systematicity: On the compositional
  skills of sequence-to-sequence recurrent networks. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning (ICML), 2018.

Woosuk Lee, Kihong Heo, Rajeev Alur, and Mayur Naik. Accelerating search-based program synthe-
 sis using learned probabilistic models. In Programming Language Design and Implementation
 (PLDI), 2018.

Yuanpeng Li, Liang Zhao, JianYu Wang, and Joel Hestness. Compositional generalization for
  primitive substitutions. In Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and International
  Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP), 2019.

Yujia Li, David H. Choi, Junyoung Chung, Nate Kushman, Julian Schrittwieser, Rémi Leblond,
  Tom Eccles, James Keeling, Felix Gimeno, Agustin Dal Lago, Thomas Hubert, Peter Choy,
  Cyprien de Masson d’Autume, Igor Babuschkin, Xinyun Chen, Po-Sen Huang, Johannes Welbl,
  Sven Gowal, Alexey Cherepanov, James Molloy, Daniel J. Mankowitz, Esme Sutherland Robson,
  Pushmeet Kohli, Nando de Freitas, Koray Kavukcuoglu, and Oriol Vinyals. Competition-level
  code generation with AlphaCode. Science, 378(6624):1092–1097, 2022.

Qian Liu, Shengnan An, Jianguang Lou, B. Chen, Zeqi Lin, Yan Gao, Bin Zhou, Nanning Zheng,
  and Dongmei Zhang. Compositional generalization by learning analytical expressions. In Neural
  Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2020.

Vijayaraghavan Murali, Letao Qi, Swarat Chaudhuri, and Chris Jermaine. Neural sketch learning for
  conditional program generation. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR),
  2018.

Maxwell Nye, Luke Hewitt, Joshua B. Tenenbaum, and Armando Solar-Lezama. Learning to infer
 program sketches. In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2019.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Maxwell Nye, Yewen Pu, Matthew Bowers, Jacob Andreas, Joshua B. Tenenbaum, and Armando
 Solar-Lezama. Representing partial programs with blended abstract semantics. In International
 Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2021.
Augustus Odena and Charles Sutton. Learning to represent programs with property signatures. In
 International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2020.
Augustus Odena, Kensen Shi, David Bieber, Rishabh Singh, Charles Sutton, and Hanjun Dai.
  BUSTLE: Bottom-up program synthesis through learning-guided exploration. In International
 Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2020.
Inbar Oren, Jonathan Herzig, and Jonathan Berant. Finding needles in a haystack: Sampling
  structurally-diverse training sets from synthetic data for compositional generalization. In Empirical
  Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), 2021.
Emilio Parisotto, Abdel-rahman Mohamed, Rishabh Singh, Lihong Li, Dengyong Zhou, and Pushmeet
  Kohli. Neuro-symbolic program synthesis. In International Conference on Learning Representa-
  tions (ICLR), 2017.
Nick Parlante. CS106A: Programming methodologies. Course at Stanford University, 2022.
Linlu Qiu, Peter Shaw, Panupong Pasupat, Pawel Krzysztof Nowak, Tal Linzen, Fei Sha, and Kristina
  Toutanova. Improving compositional generalization with latent structure and data augmentation.
  In North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language
  Technologies (NAACL-HLT), 2022.
Jake Russin, Jason Jo, Randall O’Reilly, and Yoshua Bengio. Compositional generalization in a deep
  seq2seq model by separating syntax and semantics. arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.09708, 2019.
Peter Shaw, Jakob Uszkoreit, and Ashish Vaswani. Self-attention with relative position representations.
  In North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics (NAACL), 2018.
Peter Shaw, Ming-Wei Chang, Panupong Pasupat, and Kristina Toutanova. Compositional generaliza-
  tion and natural language variation: Can a semantic parsing approach handle both? In Association
  for Computational Linguistics and International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing
  (ACL/IJCNLP), 2021.
Kensen Shi, Jacob Steinhardt, and Percy Liang. FrAngel: Component-based synthesis with control
  structures. Proceedings of the ACM on Programming Languages (PACMPL), 3(POPL):1–29, 2019.
Kensen Shi, David Bieber, and Rishabh Singh. TF-Coder: Program synthesis for tensor manipulations.
  ACM Transactions on Programming Languages and Systems (TOPLAS), 44(2):1–36, 2022a.
Kensen Shi, Hanjun Dai, Kevin Ellis, and Charles Sutton. CrossBeam: Learning to search in
  bottom-up program synthesis. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR),
  2022b.
Richard Shin, Illia Polosukhin, and Dawn Song. Improving neural program synthesis with inferred
  execution traces. In Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2018.
Disha Shrivastava, Hugo Larochelle, and Daniel Tarlow. Learning to combine per-example solutions
  for neural program synthesis. In Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2021.
Ilya Sutskever, Oriol Vinyals, and Quoc V. Le. Sequence to sequence learning with neural networks.
   In Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2014.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N. Gomez, Lukasz
  Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. In Neural Information Processing Systems
  (NeurIPS), 2017.
Bailin Wang, Mirella Lapata, and Ivan Titov. Meta-learning for domain generalization in semantic
  parsing. In North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human
  Language Technologies (NAACL-HLT), 2021a.


                                                  13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Bailin Wang, Wenpeng Yin, Xi Victoria Lin, and Caiming Xiong. Learning to synthesize data for
  semantic parsing. In North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
  Human Language Technologies (NAACL-HLT), 2021b.
Pengcheng Yin and Graham Neubig. A syntactic neural model for general-purpose code generation.
  In Assocation for Computational Linguistics (ACL), 2017.
Shun Zhang, Zhenfang Chen, Yikang Shen, Mingyu Ding, Joshua B. Tenenbaum, and Chuang Gan.
  Planning with large language models for code generation. In International Conference on Learning
  Representations (ICLR), 2023.
Denny Zhou, Nathanael Schärli, Le Hou, Jason Wei, Nathan Scales, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans,
  Claire Cui, Olivier Bousquet, Quoc V. Le, and Ed H. Chi. Least-to-most prompting enables complex
  reasoning in large language models. In International Conference on Learning Representations
  (ICLR), 2023.
Amit Zohar and Lior Wolf. Automatic program synthesis of long programs with a learned garbage
 collector. In Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2018.


                                               14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Appendices
A     ROBUST F ILL AND D EEP C ODER DSL S
Figure 3 contains the DSL for the RobustFill experiments. See Devlin et al. (2017) for a description
of what the operations do. We add the operations Substitute, SubstituteAll, which replace the
ith occurrence (or all occurrences) of a regex r with character c, and Remove, RemoveAll, which
remove the ith occurrence (or all occurrences) of a regex r, to increase the expressivity of our DSL.
Figure 4 shows the DSL used for the DeepCoder experiments. The operations are exactly as described
in Balog et al. (2017).


     Program P      :=    Concat(e1 , e2 , . . .)
    Expression e    :=    s | m | o | ConstStr(c)
     Compose o      :=    m1 (m2 ) | m(s)
     Substring s    :=    SubStr(k1 , k2 ) | GetSpan(r1 , i1 , b1 , r2 , i2 , b2 ) | GetToken(r, i)
                           | GetUpto(r) | GetFrom(r)
Modification m      :=    ToCase(a) | Replace(δ1 , δ2 ) | Trim() | GetFirst(r, i) | GetAll(r)
                           | Substitute(r, i, c) | SubstituteAll(r, c) | Remove(r, i) | RemoveAll(r)
        Regex r     :=    NUMBER | WORD | ALPHANUM | ALL CAPS | PROPER CASE | LOWER | DIGIT | CHAR | δ
         Case a     :=    ALL CAPS | PROPER CASE | LOWER
      Position k    :=    − 100 | − 99 | . . . | − 1 | 0 | 1 | 2 | . . . | 100
         Index i    :=    − 5 | − 4 | ... | − 1 | 1 | 2 | ... | 5
     Boundary b     :=    START | END
     Character c    :=    A | ... | Z | a | ... | z | 0 | ... | 9 | δ
     Delimiter δ    :=    &,.?!@()[]%{}/:;$# "’


Figure 3: The DSL for string transformation tasks in the RobustFill domain, slightly modified from
Devlin et al. (2017) to add more functionality.


               Program P        :=   i1 ; i2 ; . . . ; a1 ; a2 ; . . .
           Initialization i     :=   v ← INPUT
            Assignment a        :=   v←f |v←h
  First-Order Operation f       :=   Head(l) | Last(l) | Access(n, l) | Minimum(l) | Maximum(l) | Sum(l)
                                      | Take(n, l) | Drop(n, l) | Reverse(l) | Sort(l)
Higher-Order Operation h        :=   Map(λ, l) | Filter(β, l) | Count(β, l) | ZipWith(Σ, l, l) | Scanl1(Σ, l)
       int → int Lambda λ       :=   (+1) | (−1) | (∗2) | (/2) | (∗(−1)) | (∗∗2) | (∗3) | (/3) | (∗4) | (/4)
     int → bool Lambda β        :=   (> 0) | (< 0) | (%2 == 0) | (%2 == 1)
(int, int) → int Lambda Σ       :=   (+) | (−) | (∗) | (min) | (max)
          Integer Variable n    :=   v
              List Variable l   :=   v
           Variable Name v      :=   x1 | x2 | . . .


Figure 4: The DSL for integer and list manipulation tasks in the DeepCoder domain, originally
proposed in Balog et al. (2017).


                                                      15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B       ROBUST F ILL AND D EEP C ODER B ENCHMARK D ETAILS

RobustFill. To create a task for our RobustFill datasets, we first sample random input strings up
to 20 characters, one string for each of 4 examples. We then sample a program according to the
train or test distribution for the generalization task (as described below), such that the program
executes successfully on the inputs to form the example outputs. Due to the concatenation structure
of RobustFill programs, we treat each concatenated expression as a subprogram, and recall that we
denote the length of a program to be the number of subprograms.
For Length-Generalization, we train on programs of length 1 to 6 inclusive and test on programs of
length 7 to 10. For Compose-Different-Concepts, we group together all of the substring operations
into a substring concept and all of the modification operations plus constant strings as a non-substring
concept (the Compose operation is omitted), using programs of length 2-6 for both train and test.
We use the same lengths and concepts for Switch-Concept-Order, where training tasks use only the
substring concept for the first half of the parts and only the non-substring concept for the latter half,
and test tasks have the ordering reversed. For Compose-New-Operation, 25% of training tasks are
length 1 programs containing only a Compose operation, the remainder of the training tasks are
length 2-6 programs without Compose, and we test on length 2-6 programs that use Compose. For
Add-Operation-Functionality, all tasks are length 1-6 programs, we train on those where a substring
operation is not used within a Compose operation, and we test on programs where a substring
operation is used within a Compose operation.
DeepCoder. For DeepCoder, we treat each non-input line as a subprogram, so the example program
above has length 2. We use 3 I/O examples, at most 2 inputs, lists with at most 5 elements, and
integers between −50 and 50 inclusive. For Length-Generalization, we train on programs of length
1 to 4 and test on length 5. For Compose-Different-Concepts and Switch-Concept-Order, we use
programs of length 1 to 4 and split the operations into a concept containing all first-order operations
plus the Map operation, and another concept containing all remaining higher-order operations. For
Compose-New-Operation, 25% of training tasks are length 1 programs containing only a Scanl1
operation, the remainder of training tasks are length 2-4 programs without Scanl1, and we test on
length 2-4 programs that use Scanl1. For Add-Operation-Functionality, all tasks are length 1-4
programs, Scanl1 is only used with the lambdas (-) and (min) during training, and we test on
tasks where Scanl1 is used with the other lambdas (+), (*), and (max).
The program sampling procedure that we used for RobustFill ensures that the ground-truth program
for a test task is within the test distribution over programs. However, the task might actually have
a different solution within the train distribution. Then, solving this test task is not necessarily a
signal of generalization.4 To address this, we construct the DeepCoder dataset more carefully as
follows. We sample random inputs as before. Then, we perform an exhaustive enumerative search of
all programs in the train distribution up to a maximum length, and similarly for programs in the test
distribution. As a result, we can identify all minimal-length solution programs for a given task (if it is
solvable by any program up to the maximum enumerated length). Finally, we sample training tasks
among those where there exists a minimal-length solution program in the train distribution, and test
tasks among those where all minimal-length solutions are in the test distribution.5


C       B EAM S EARCH DURING E XE D EC

Section 4 and Algorithm 1 describe a single synthesis attempt, but we design a beam search process
to run multiple synthesis attempts efficiently in parallel.
Our goal is the same as in traditional beam search (Sutskever et al., 2014), which is to output k
sequences that maximize a score function. Formally, a candidate sequence C at step t is a sequence
                                                 (1)                (t)
of execution subgoals and subprograms C = [{Si }, P (1) , . . . , {Si }, P (t) ]. As notation, we let
C denote the prefix of C up to and including the j-th subprogram P (j) . The score for a candidate
  (j)


    4
      This issue is far less prevalent in the RobustFill dataset due to the concatenation program structure reducing
the number of different programs that solve a task.
    5
      Note that it is still possible for a test task to be solved with a longer program in the train distribution, but
detecting these cases in general is extremely difficult.


                                                         16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


sequence C is given by
                                t
                                                (j)
                                X
                   Score(C) =          Score({Si }) + Score(P (j) ) + Valid(C (j) ) .                (1)
                                 j=1

Here, since both SubgoalModel and SynthesizerModel in ExeDec are autoregressive sequence
models (see Section 4 for more details), they can produce token sequences (either set of subgoals
or a subprogram) with their corresponding log-probabilities which we use as the score function,
               (j)                (j)     (j)   (j)                                        (j)   (j)
i.e., Score({Si }) = log p(Si | {(Ii , Oi )}) and Score(P (j) ) = log p(P (j) | {(Ii , Si )}).
By default, Valid(C (j) ) = 0 unless C (j) fails to meet some required conditions. First, we set
Valid(C (j) ) = −∞ if any subgoal or subprogram in C (j) is a token sequence that does not parse, or
if any subprogram does not execute successfully. We also check whether C (j) leads to unique program
functionality within the beam of k candidate sequences. Note that different candidate sequences
can result in the same subprograms even if the subgoals are different, and furthermore, combining
different subprograms might result in full programs with the same functionality that are practically
equivalent for future steps. Therefore, we set Valid(C (j) ) = −∞ for all candidate sequences in the
beam with corresponding program functionality equivalent to that of another higher-scoring candidate
sequence in the beam. Finally, domain-specific checks may determine that the candidate sequence
C (j) is unlikely to result in a successful program in later steps, or that some computation limit such
as a maximum number of steps is reached. In any case, an “invalid” beam element will drop out of
the beam at the next step, freeing space in the beam for expansions of other surviving beam elements.
Note that we do not perform separate beam searches for each call to a model, since an isolated beam
search would start with a single empty beam element with score 0. Instead, we perform a single long
beam search throughout Algorithm 1 where each beam element is a candidate sequence C with score
Score(C). Model calls can be seen as “extending” the ongoing beam search, adding more tokens to
the existing candidate sequences while maintaining their scores.

D    A LIGNED R ELATIVE ATTENTION FOR THE S UBGOAL M ODEL
In the Specification-Transformer (Section 4), we use relative attention (Shaw et al., 2018), i.e.,
representations of relative positions (distances between positions) instead of absolute positions of
tokens. This improves Transformer performance, particularly in length generalization (Shaw et al.,
2018; Csordás et al., 2021). However, unlike the other models, our SubgoalModel actually predicts a
sequence of sequences, i.e., a subgoal for each I/O example, concatenated together. Thus, the relative
position between subgoal Si and I/O encoding φi is not consistent for every example index i, so a
naive relative position embedding would not represent consistent information across examples. To
remedy this, we propose aligned relative attention (ARA), which alters the “positions” of subgoal
tokens in the relative distance calculation. Specifically, we increment the current position by 1 for
each token during subgoal prediction as usual, but when starting a new subgoal Si we set the current
position to the position of φi . This ensures that the relative position between the beginnings of Si and
φi is always 0. ARA only applies to the SubgoalModel to help it perform the sequence-of-sequences
prediction, and it is not intended to address compositional generalization directly.

E    T RAINING D ETAILS
For the experiments involving Transformer models trained from scratch (Section 5.1), we performed
a small hyperparameter search varying the learning rate and model size, choosing a single setting
that performed well on training metrics across generalization tasks and model types. We used an
embedding dimension of 512, hidden dimension of 1024, 3 layers, and 4 attention heads. For
relative attention, we use 32 buckets for relative position embeddings, with bucket boundaries placed
logarithmically given the maximum relative distance which is computed based on the lengths of the
input and output sequences. We train with the Adam optimizer with a learning rate of 2 × 10−4 with
linear warmup for 16,000 steps and square root decay, with a batch size of 128 and 500K training
steps, using fresh synthetic training data without repeating examples. Training took about 1 day for
RobustFill (or about 5 hours for DeepCoder) with 8 TPU v2 accelerators per model.
In our experiments, some models have different sizes (with the other hyperparameters held constant):


                                                      17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 • ExeDec, the no-subgoal ablation, and the Transformer baseline all use an embedding dimension of
   512 and hidden dimension of 1024, as selected from the hyperparameter search mentioned above.
 • ExeDec-Small uses an embedding dimension of 360 and hidden dimension of 720, such that the
   total number of parameters between the SubgoalModel and SynthesizerModel is approximately
   equal to the number of parameters in the no-subgoal ablation or in the baseline, which only
   use one model each. ExeDec’s code solution only comes from the SynthesizerModel, while the
   SubgoalModel’s predictions do not show up anywhere in the solution and only encourage the
   SynthesizerModel to think about the next subgoal instead of the end goal. Thus, compared to
   the ablation and baseline, ExeDec holds the SynthesizerModel size constant to compare the two
   modes of thinking, while ExeDec-Small holds the total number of parameters constant to verify
   that the improvements are not only due to extra parameters in the SubgoalModel.
 • Latent Programmer uses a smaller embedding dimension of 256 and hidden dimension of 512
   because we ran into out-of-memory issues when using the Latent Programmer’s training script
   which trains two models at once. Our trained Latent Programmer models are still larger than
   those reported in the Latent Programmer paper leading to a corresponding performance increase,
   reaching 76% accuracy on no-generalization RobustFill compared to 57% reported in the Latent
   Programmer paper.

Additionally, for Latent Programmer, we performed a separate hyperparameter search varying the
learning rate and number of pretraining steps. We chose a learning rate of 5 × 10−4 for RobustFill
and 2 × 10−4 for DeepCoder, and 20,000 pretraining steps for both datasets. We use a beam size of
10 and a latent beam size of 3, as in the Latent Programmer paper. (For experiments with beam size
of 1, the latent beam size is also 1.) All other settings were kept the same as for the other models.
For DeepCoder, the ground-truth training programs have variable names chosen randomly among a
fixed set of possible names. If the variable names were used in a canonical order instead, the models
would be unable to predict subprograms using variable names unseen during training, as is required
for length generalization. When predicting a subprogram, the model only predicts the right hand side
of the assignment, which at test time is assigned to a new variable name using a canonical ordering.


F     B EAM S IZE 1 R ESULTS FOR M ODELS T RAINED FROM S CRATCH

Figure 2 in Section 5.1 shows detailed results for all generalization tasks, using beam size 10. We
also performed experiments with beam size 1, summarized below in Table 2.

Table 2: Results for beam size 1 and beam size 10 (end-to-end test accuracy as percentages). “NoGen”
refers to the case where no compositional generalization is required, while “GenAvg” refers to the
average across the 5 compositional generalization tasks.

                                    RobustFill                            DeepCoder
                          Beam Size 1       Beam Size 10        Beam Size 1      Beam Size 10
    Approach            NoGen GenAvg NoGen GenAvg             NoGen GenAvg NoGen GenAvg
    ExeDec               81.4    73.1      95.5        87.0    39.1       8.4      61.2      23.1
    ExeDec-Small         78.7    71.2      94.4        85.9    36.1       7.7      58.4      21.4
    Ablation             79.5    63.8      94.9        80.2    39.9       5.6      64.7      18.1
    Transformer          83.7    33.9      90.9        42.4    50.7       4.9      53.6       5.7
    Latent Programmer    66.0    26.3      76.1        33.7    40.5       2.4      46.5       3.5



We observe that ExeDec achieves the highest generalization average, for both RobustFill and Deep-
Coder and for both beam size 1 and 10. Additionally, for both no-generalization and average
generalization, the baseline Transformer’s performance does not improve that much going from beam
size 1 to 10. On the other hand, ExeDec improves significantly more from beam size 1 to 10, showing
the effectiveness of our modified beam search (Appendix C) that enables exploring different solution
routes by planning in the execution space.


                                                  18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


G    S INGLE -S TEP ACCURACY
To gain more insight into the step-by-step synthesis process, we measured the “single-step accuracy”
for ExeDec’s SubgoalModel and SynthesizerModel, and the CombinedModel from the no-subgoal
ablation. More specifically, for a single step in a trajectory that matches the ground-truth so far,
how often does the SubgoalModel predict subgoals exactly matching the ground-truth ones (for
all I/O examples) with a single greedy decoding? And, given a ground-truth trajectory so far, how
often does the SynthesizerModel or CombinedModel predict a program whose behavior matches the
ground-truth subprogram? The single-step accuracy results are in Table 3.

                               Table 3: Single-step accuracy percentages.

                                            RobustFill                         DeepCoder
 Generalization Task             Subgoal   Synthesizer Combined     Subgoal   Synthesizer Combined
 No Generalization                97.7        97.1        94.9        55.8        98.9         64.4
 Length-Generalization            97.2        96.4        94.0        31.6        96.4         41.9
 Compose-Different-Concepts       95.3        98.9        90.5        38.0        94.3         40.0
 Switch-Concept-Order             90.8        98.9        87.4        16.4        77.8         17.9
 Compose-New-Operation            93.9        94.0        84.4        40.8        91.3         44.4
 Add-Operation-Functionality      94.0        84.4        82.3        40.3        60.0         41.5


Note that the single-step accuracy metric is particularly low for the SubgoalModel and Combined-
Model on DeepCoder because there are potentially many correct ways of solving the problem, and
this metric only considers the single ground-truth solution. In fact, the SubgoalModel does not need
to have super high accuracy in order for ExeDec to achieve good end-to-end results, because the
SynthesizerModel can ignore slight errors in the subgoals and still produce a program that behaves
as closely as possible while using only 1 DSL operation. We have seen many concrete cases of the
SynthesizerModel being given a slightly incorrect subgoal and then producing the correct subprogram
anyway, which disagrees with the subgoal but correctly makes progress overall.

H    I NTUITION OF S PURIOUS PATTERNS
In Figure 2, ExeDec sometimes performs worse than the no-subgoal ablation in Length-Generalization
and Switch-Concept-Order, while ExeDec performs much better in Compose-Different-Concepts and
Compose-New-Operation. For Add-Operation-Functionality, ExeDec and the no-subgoal ablation
have a much smaller improvement over the Transformer baseline, especially in RobustFill. These
observations may be explained by analyzing the different kinds of “spurious patterns” that arise in
the various compositional generalization splits:

• For Length-Generalization and Switch-Concept-Order, the index of the current subprogram carries
  major implications in the training distribution, for example, “the problem should be almost solved
  by now” or “we must use this category of operation”. However, these implications are drastically
  changed in the test distribution, leading to spurious patterns that may lead to poor performance on
  the test split. The Transformer baseline is aware of the length of the prediction so far, so it can be
  easily confused by this distribution shift — and indeed, it performs particularly poorly on these
  tasks. On the other hand, both ExeDec and the no-subgoal ablation are less aware of the current
  index of the subprogram, since the prior subprograms are only indirectly provided to the models
  through the program state. For these tasks, ExeDec and the no-subgoal ablation have relatively
  similar performance but greatly outperform the Transformer baseline.
• For Compose-Different-Concepts and Compose-New-Operation, the spurious patterns arise from
  comparison to what work needs to be done outside the current subprogram, for example, “this
  subprogram uses the same category of operation as the other subprograms” or “this subprogram
  can use operation X only if there are no other subprograms”. Again, these patterns are changed
  between the train and test distributions. The no-subgoal ablation is susceptible to overfitting on
  these patterns because it sees the I/O specification for the current subprogram composed with all
  future subprograms. On the other hand, ExeDec is more shielded from these spurious patterns
  because its SynthesizerModel only sees the I/O specification for the current subprogram (provided


                                                     19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  that the SubgoalModel predicts the correct subgoals). This difference may explain why ExeDec
  has a larger performance improvement over the no-subgoal ablation for these generalization tasks.
• For Add-Operation-Functionality, the spurious pattern is actually within an individual subprogram,
  i.e., some subprograms in test problems are outside the distribution of subprograms seen during
  training. None of the compared approaches are well-shielded from this form of spurious pattern,
  leading to the relatively low performance of our methods on this generalization task for RobustFill.
  (For DeepCoder, the trend is less clear since some problems may be solved using longer programs
  outside the test distribution.)

I   A LGORITHM C OMPARISON C ASE S TUDY
RobustFill. Figure 5 and Figure 6 compare how ExeDec, the no-subgoal ablation, and the Trans-
former baseline perform on two example problems from the RobustFill DSL, under the Compose-
New-Operation generalization task where models were not trained on composed programs (other
than length-1 programs) that use the Compose operation. A beam size of 1 (greedy decoding) is used
for simplicity. In the figures, subprograms and execution results are colored red if they are incorrect.
Portions of the final programs are colored yellow if they do execute correctly but implement the
desired functionality suboptimally, i.e., with more subprograms than necessary.
For both example problems, ExeDec successfully solves the problem using a minimal-length program
that is within the test distribution of the compositional generalization task, showing successful
generalization. However, the no-subgoal ablation does not perform as well. In Figure 5, it uses the
Compose operation incorrectly because, due to the Compose-New-Operation task, it has never been
trained to use Compose to produce a prefix of the output. This is not an issue for ExeDec because
the prefixes are provided by the SubgoalModel. In Figure 6, the ablation predicts a correct but
suboptimal program in the training distribution, replacing a Compose operation with three separate
steps. The Transformer baseline is comparatively the worst, predicting incorrect programs in the
training distribution for both problems, showing a clear inability to compositionally generalize.

DeepCoder. Figure 7 shows a similar comparison between the three approaches, this time on a
DeepCoder list manipulation problem under the Compose-Different-Concepts generalization task.
For this generalization task, we partition the DSL operations into two groups or “concepts” – one
concept contains the higher-order operations Scanl1, Filter, Count, and ZipWith, while the
other concept contains all of the first-order operations6 . The training problems have minimal-length
ground-truth programs that only compose operations within the same concept, while test problems
require mixing operations from different concepts to achieve a minimal-length solution program.
The problem in Figure 7 is solved using operations from both concepts: Scanl1 is higher-order,
while Take and Sort are first-order operations. The Transformer baseline fails to solve this problem.
It correctly uses Scanl1 as the first step but incorrectly continues to use higher-order operations.
This behavior makes sense because the model was trained on programs showing a similar pattern,
and it does not deviate from the pattern because this approach is not compositionally general.
Similarly, the no-subgoal ablation correctly uses Scanl1 in the first step but also continues to use
higher-order operations in subsequent steps until eventually the program fails to typecheck. We
observe that, after successfully using Scanl1 in the first subprogram, the updated specification
actually describes a problem with a solution program within the training distribution (using first-
order operations Take and Sort from the same concept). So, why is the ablation unable to solve
the updated specification, even though the SynthesizerModel is not directly conditioned on the
previous subprograms like the Transformer baseline is? We hypothesize that the SynthesizerModel
recognizes from the specification that x2 was computed by applying a Scanl1 operation to x0, and
thus according to patterns seen during training, the model is inclined to continue using higher-order
operations. This hypothesis is supported by the fact that the ablation, as well as ExeDec and the
baseline, all correctly solve a simplified version of this problem where the input x0 is replaced with
the result of the first subprogram, x2 = Scanl1 (+) x0, such that the Scanl1 portion is “already
computed” but not in a way visible from the specification. In other words, the ablation succeeds for
the simplified problem because it is now unable to refer to previous subprograms.
   6
     The concept with first-order operations also contains the higher-order operation Map, to better balance the
number of different program functionalities obtainable within each concept.


                                                      20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


In contrast, ExeDec successfully solves the problem with a minimal-length solution that switches
between concepts. Note that its SynthesizerModel cannot directly or indirectly reference previous
subprograms. The SubgoalModel can indirectly refer to previous subprograms by examining the
specification, but it is generally less susceptible to spurious compositional patterns. For example, the
ablation’s SynthesizerModel might learn the pattern “predict an operation in the same concept as
previously” which is very easy for a neural model to recognize and implement, whereas it is more
difficult for ExeDec’s SubgoalModel to learn the pattern “predict a subgoal that is implementable
with an operation in the same concept as previously”. This provides some intuition for why ExeDec
is more compositionally general overall.


                                                  21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                  RobustFill Example Problem 1
Speciﬁcation:
[ (“alan Turing1” → “1.TURING,Alan”),     (“21.Donald@knuTh” → “21.KNUTH,Donald”),
  (“8:grace,HoppeR&” → “8.HOPPER,Grace”), (“EDSGER99 DIJKSTRA” → “99.DIJKSTRA,Edsger”) ]

                      ExeDec                                        No-Subgoal Ablation
Step 1:                                              Step 1:
 ● Subgoals: [“1”, “21”, “8”, “99”]                   ● Subgoals: not predicted
 ● Subprogram: GetAll(NUMBER)                         ● Subprogram: GetToken(NUMBER, -1)
 ● Execution: [“1”, “21”, “8”, “99”]                  ● Execution: [“1”, “21”, “8”, “99”]
 ● Updated speciﬁcation:                              ● Updated speciﬁcation:
   [ (“alan Turing1” → “.TURING,Alan”), ... ]           [ (“alan Turing1” → “.TURING,Alan”), ... ]

Step 2:                                              Step 2:
 ● Subgoals: [“.”, “.”, “.”, “.”]                     ● Subgoals: not predicted
 ● Subprogram: Const('.')                             ● Subprogram: Const('.')
 ● Execution: [“.”, “.”, “.”, “.”]                    ● Execution: [“.”, “.”, “.”, “.”]
 ● Updated speciﬁcation:                              ● Updated speciﬁcation:
   [ (“alan Turing1” → “TURING,Alan”), ... ]            [ (“alan Turing1” → “TURING,Alan”), ... ]

Step 3:                                              Step 3:
 ● Subgoals: [“TURING”, “KNUTH”, “HOPPER”, ... ]      ● Subgoals: not predicted
 ● Subprogram: Compose(ToCase(ALL_CAPS),              ● Subprogram: Compose(ToCase(ALL_CAPS),
                        GetToken(WORD, -1))                                       GetFrom(','))
● Execution: [“TURING”, “KNUTH”, “HOPPER”, ... ]         ● Execution: [“”, “”, “HOPPER&”, “”]
● Updated speciﬁcation:                                  ● Updated speciﬁcation: Invalid
  [ (“alan Turing1” → “,Alan”), ... ]
                                                     No more steps: In example #3, the subprogram’s
Step 4:                                              output “HOPPER&” is not a preﬁx of the desired output
 ● Subgoals: [“,”, “,”, “,”, “,”]                    “HOPPER,Grace”.
 ● Subprogram: Const(',')
 ● Execution: [“,”, “,”, “,”, “,”]                   Synthesis result: Failure
 ● Updated speciﬁcation:
   [ (“alan Turing1” → “Alan”), ... ]                              Transformer Baseline
Step 5:                                              Prediction:
 ● Subgoals: [“Alan”, “Donald”, “Grace”, ... ]       GetToken(NUMBER, -1) | Const('.') |
 ● Subprogram: Compose(ToCase(PROPER),               ToCase(ALL_CAPS) | Const(',') |
                        GetToken(WORD, 1))           Const('A') | GetFirst(LOWER, 1)
● Execution: [“Alan”, “Donald”, “Grace”, ... ]
● Updated speciﬁcation:                              Execution: [“1.ALAN TURING1,Aalan”,
  [ (“alan Turing1” → “”), ... ]                                   “21.21.DONALD@KNUTH,Aonald”,
                                                                   “8.8:GRACE,HOPPER&,Agrace”,
No more steps: The updated speciﬁcation output is                  “99.EDSGER99 DIJKSTRA,A”]
empty for all examples.
                                                     Synthesis result: Failure
Synthesis result: Success

Final program:
GetAll(NUMBER) | Const('.') | Compose(ToCase(ALL_CAPS), GetToken(WORD, -1)) |
Const(',') | Compose(ToCase(PROPER), GetToken(WORD, 1))


Figure 5: A comparison of different approaches on the same string manipulation problem in the
RobustFill domain, under the Compose-New-Operation generalization task. ExeDec is able to solve
the problem correctly with a length 5 program including two usages of the new operation (Compose).
The no-subgoal ablation fails to correctly use the Compose operation in step 3, likely because the
model has not seen the Compose operation used to produce a prefix of the output. On the other
hand, ExeDec succeeds in that step because the relevant prefixes are predicted as subgoals first. The
Transformer baseline performs poorly on this task and does not use a single Compose operation.

                                                    22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                  RobustFill Example Problem 2
Speciﬁcation:
[ (“12.04 1999” → “1999/12/04”), (“07/08, 2000” → “2000/07/08”),
  (“04/12/1995” → “1995/04/12”), (“09.30.2001” → “2001/09/30”) ]

                      ExeDec                                      No-Subgoal Ablation
Step 1:                                              Step 1:
 ● Subgoals: [“1999”, “2000”, “1995”, “2001”]         ● Subgoals: not predicted
 ● Subprogram: GetToken(NUMBER, -1)                   ● Subprogram: GetToken(NUMBER, -1)
 ● Execution: [“1999”, “2000”, “1995”, “2001”]        ● Execution: [“1999”, “2000”, “1995”, “2001”]
 ● Updated speciﬁcation:                              ● Updated speciﬁcation:
   [ (“12.04 1999” → “/12/04”), ... ]                   [ (“12.04 1999” → “/12/04”), ... ]

Step 2:                                              Step 2:
 ● Subgoals: [“/”, “/”, “/”, “/”]                     ● Subgoals: not predicted
 ● Subprogram: Const('/')                             ● Subprogram: Const('/')
 ● Execution: [“/”, “/”, “/”, “/”]                    ● Execution: [“/”, “/”, “/”, “/”]
 ● Updated speciﬁcation:                              ● Updated speciﬁcation:
   [ (“12.04 1999” → “12/04”), ... ]                    [ (“12.04 1999” → “12/04”), ... ]

Step 3:                                              Step 3:
 ● Subgoals: [“12/04”, “07/08”, “04/12”, ... ]        ● Subgoals: not predicted
 ● Subprogram: Compose(Replace('.', '/'),             ● Subprogram: GetUpto(NUMBER)
                        GetFirst(CHAR, 5))            ● Execution: [“12”, “07”, “04”, “09”]
● Execution: [“12/04”, “07/08”, “04/12”, ... ]        ● Updated speciﬁcation:
● Updated speciﬁcation:                                 [ (“12.04 1999” → “/04”), ... ]
  [ (“12.04 1999” → “”), ... ]
                                                     Step 4:
No more steps: The updated speciﬁcation output is     ● Subgoals: not predicted
empty for all examples.                               ● Subprogram: Const('/')
                                                      ● Execution: [“/”, “/”, “/”, “/”]
Synthesis result: Success                             ● Updated speciﬁcation:
                                                        [ (“12.04 1999” → “04”), ... ]
Final program:
GetToken(NUMBER, -1) | Const('/') |                  Step 5:
Compose(Replace('.', '/'),                            ● Subgoals: not predicted
        GetFirst(CHAR, 5))
                                                      ● Subprogram: GetToken(NUMBER, -2)
                                                      ● Execution: [“04”, “08”, “12”, “30”]
              Transformer Baseline                    ● Updated speciﬁcation:
                                                        [ (“12.04 1999” → “”), ... ]
Prediction:
GetToken(NUMBER, -1) | Const('/') |                  No more steps: The updated speciﬁcation output is
GetToken(DIGIT, 1) |
                                                     empty for all examples.
GetSpan(CHAR, 2, START, NUMBER, 1, END) |
Const('/') |
GetSpan(NUMBER, 1, START, CHAR, 5, END)              Synthesis result: Success

Execution: [“1999/12/12.04”, “2000/07/07/08”,        Final program:
            “1995/04/04/12”, “2001/09/09.30”]        GetToken(NUMBER, -1) | Const('/') |
                                                     GetUpto(NUMBER) | Const('/') |
                                                     GetToken(NUMBER, -2)
Synthesis result: Failure


Figure 6: Another comparison on a different string manipulation problem. Here, ExeDec finds a
minimal-length solution using 3 subprograms and 1 Compose operation. Meanwhile, the no-subgoal
ablation solves the problem in a suboptimal way, replacing the Compose operation with 3 separate
steps. The Transformer baseline also used a suboptimal approach in the middle of the program and
was wrong in the last step.


                                                    23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                  DeepCoder Example Problem
Speciﬁcation:
[ ( { x0 = [5,-2,1], x1 = 2 } → [3,5] ), ( { x0 = [7,1,5,-2], x1 = 4 } → [7,8,11,13] ),
  ( { x0 = [8,-4,-1,7], x1 = 3 } → [3,4,8] ) ]

                      ExeDec                                      No-Subgoal Ablation
Step 1:                                         Step 1:
● Subgoals: [[5,3,4], [7,8,13,11], [8,4,3,10]]  ● Subgoals: not predicted
● Subprogram: x2 = Scanl1 (+) x0                ● Subprogram: x2 = Scanl1 (+) x0
● Execution: [[5,3,4], [7,8,13,11], [8,4,3,10]] ● Execution: [[5,3,4], [7,8,13,11], [8,4,3,10]]
● Updated speciﬁcation:                         ● Updated speciﬁcation:
  [ ( { x0 = [5,-2,1], x1 = 2, x2 = [5,3,4] }     [ ( { x0 = [5,-2,1], x1 = 2, x2 = [5,3,4] }
      → [3,5] ), ... ]                                → [3,5] ), ... ]

Step 2:                                              Step 2:
● Subgoals: [[5,3], [7,8,13,11], [8,4,3]]            ● Subgoals: not predicted
● Subprogram: x3 = Take x1 x2                        ● Subprogram: x3 = Scanl1 (max) x2
● Execution: [[5,3], [7,8,13,11], [8,4,3]]           ● Execution: [[5,5,5], [7,8,13,13], [8,8,8,10]]
● Updated speciﬁcation:                              ● Updated speciﬁcation:
  [ ( { x0 = [5,-2,1], x1 = 2, x2 = [5,3,4],           [ ( { x0 = [5,-2,1], x1 = 2, x2 = [5,3,4],
        x3 = [5,3] } → [3,5] ), ... ]                        x3 = [5,5,5] } → [3,5] ), ... ]

Step 3:                                              Step 3:
● Subgoals: [[3,5], [7,8,11,13], [3,4,8]]            ● Subgoals: not predicted
● Subprogram: x4 = Sort x3                           ● Subprogram: x4 = Filter (>0) x0
● Execution: [[3,5], [7,8,11,13], [3,4,8]]           ● Execution: [[5,1], [7,1,5], [8,7]]
● Updated speciﬁcation:                              ● Updated speciﬁcation:
  [ ( { x0 = [5,-2,1], x1 = 2, x2 = [5,3,4],           [ ( { x0 = [5,-2,1], x1 = 2, x2 = [5,3,4],
        x3 = [5,3], x4 = [3,5] } → [3,5] ), ... ]            x3 = [5,5,5], x4 = [5,1] } → [3,5] ), ... ]

No more steps: The updated speciﬁcation has x4       Step 4:
matching the output for all examples.                ● Subprogram: x5 = Filter (%2==1) x2
                                                     ● Execution: [[5,3], [7,13,11], [3]]
Synthesis result: Success
                                                     Step 5:
Final program:                                       ● Subprogram: x6 = Filter (>0) x3
x0 = INPUT | x1 = INPUT |                            ● Execution: [[5,5,5], [7,8,13,13], [8,8,8,10]]
x2 = Scanl1 (+) x0 | x3 = Take x1 x2 |
x4 = Sort x3                                         Step 6:
                                                     ● Subprogram: x7 = ZipWith (min) x2 x6
              Transformer Baseline                   ● Execution: [[5,3,4], [7,8,13,11], [8,4,3,10]]

Prediction:                                          Step 7:
x0 = INPUT | x1 = INPUT |                            ● Subprogram: x8 = Drop x2 x7
x2 = Scanl1 (+) x0 |                                 ● Execution: TypeError
x3 = Filter (%2==1) x2 |
x4 = ZipWith (min) x2 x3
                                                     No more steps: The last subprogram contains an error
                                                     because x2 is a list but Drop expects an integer.
Execution: [[5,3], [7,8,11], [3]]
                                                     Synthesis result: Failure
Synthesis result: Failure


Figure 7: A comparison on a DeepCoder list manipulation problem under the Compose-Different-
Concepts generalization task. All three approaches get the first step correct, but the ablation and
baseline are unable to continue correctly, erroneously using higher-order operations for subsequent
steps according to the compositional pattern in the training data. However, the design of ExeDec
makes it less susceptible to overfitting on such patterns, and indeed ExeDec solves this problem using
a minimal-length program from the test distribution.


                                                    24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


J     P ROGRAMS AND P ROMPTS FOR LLM E XPERIMENTS
J.1   DSL P ROGRAMS AS P YTHON F UNCTIONS

For the LLM experiments, we transform the DSL programs into Python functions that call a hypo-
thetical dsl library, enabling the LLM to use its understanding of Python programming while we
measure how well it generalizes to new functionality it has not been trained on.
The RobustFill program GetFrom(' ') | Const('.') | Compose(ToCase(PROPER),
GetToken(WORD, 1)) transforms the input string “TURING, Alan” into the output string
“Alan.Turing”. For the LLM experiments, it is written as a Python function as follows:
    def program(x):
      parts = [
          dsl.GetFrom(x, ' '),
          dsl.Const('.'),
          dsl.ToCase(dsl.GetToken(x, dsl.Type.WORD, 1), dsl.Case.PROPER),
      ]
      return ''.join(parts)

The DeepCoder program x0 = INPUT | x1 = Map (**2) x0 | x2 = Sort x1 transforms
the input list [5, 3, −4] into the output list [9, 16, 25]. As a Python function, this would be:
    def program(x0):
      x1 = dsl.Map(dsl.SQUARE, x0)
      x2 = dsl.Sort(x1)
      return x2

We also experiment with a “Pythonic” form of DeepCoder programs, for example:
    def program(x0):
      x1 = [x ** 2 for x in x0]
      x2 = sorted(x1)
      return x2


J.2   LLM P ROMPTS

We programmatically create prompts for 3 LLM approaches (baseline, ablation, and ExeDec), for 3
kinds of datasets (RobustFill, DeepCoder, and DeepCoder-Pythonic). We provide prompts for a few
example combinations in figures:

       • Figure 8 has a Baseline-style prompt for RobustFill,
       • Figure 9 has an Ablation-style prompt for DeepCoder,
       • Figure 10 has an ExeDec-style prompt for RobustFill, and
       • Figure 11 has an ExeDec-style prompt for DeepCoder-Pythonic.

In each figure, the prompt contains only 1 few-shot example for brevity, but our experiments used 4
few-shot examples for all prompts. Line wrapping is denoted with the ,→ symbol.
Observe that the information contained in the ExeDec-style prompt is the same as in the Ablation-style
prompt, just with different ordering of the code for a step and its corresponding execution results.
Although this difference may seem slight, it leads to the improved performance for the ExeDec-style
approach.


                                                 25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 The `dsl` module is a custom library for manipulating strings. It
     ,→ contains the following functions:

 Const, SubStr, GetSpan, GetToken, ToCase, Replace, Trim, GetUpto,
     ,→ GetFrom, GetFirst, GetAll, Substitute, SubstituteAll, Remove,
     ,→ RemoveAll

 Additionally, the module defines the following constants:

 dsl.Type.NUMBER, dsl.Type.WORD, dsl.Type.ALPHANUM, dsl.Type.ALL_CAPS,
     ,→ dsl.Type.PROP_CASE, dsl.Type.LOWER, dsl.Type.DIGIT,
     ,→ dsl.Type.CHAR, dsl.Case.PROPER, dsl.Case.ALL_CAPS,
     ,→ dsl.Case.LOWER, dsl.Boundary.START, dsl.Boundary.END

 Below are example programming problems using the `dsl` module, with
     ,→ input-output test cases illustrating their behavior.

 Important: All programs begin with ```python and end with ``` alone.


 [BEGIN PROBLEM]
 Input-output test cases:
   Case 1. "TURING, Alan" --> "Alan.Turing"
   Case 2. "knuth Donald" --> "Donald.Knuth"
   Case 3. "Hopper Grace" --> "Grace.Hopper"
   Case 4. "DIJKSTRA... Edsger" --> "Edsger.Dijkstra"

 Program:
 ```python
 def program(x):
   parts = [
       dsl.GetFrom(x, ' '),
       dsl.Const('.'),
       dsl.ToCase(dsl.GetToken(x, dsl.Type.WORD, 1), dsl.Case.PROPER),
   ]
   return ''.join(parts)
 ```
 [END PROBLEM]


 [BEGIN PROBLEM]
 Input-output test cases:
   Case 1. "apple" --> "Apple!"
   Case 2. "banana" --> "Banana!"
   Case 3. "clementine" --> "Clementine!"
   Case 4. "durian" --> "Durian!"

 Program:
 ```python

Figure 8: Baseline-style prompt on RobustFill. The LLM’s continuation contains its predicted
program as one entire function, terminated with triple backticks.


                                               26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 The `dsl` module is a custom library for manipulating lists of integers. It contains the
      ,→ following functions:

 Head, Last, Take, Drop, Access, Minimum, Maximum, Reverse, Sort, Sum, Map, Filter, Count,
      ,→ ZipWith, Scanl1

 Additionally, the module defines the following constants:

 PLUS_ONE, MINUS_ONE, TIMES_TWO, DIV_TWO, NEGATE, SQUARE, TIMES_THREE, DIV_THREE,
      ,→ TIMES_FOUR, DIV_FOUR, IS_POSITIVE, IS_NEGATIVE, IS_EVEN, IS_ODD, ADD, SUBTRACT,
      ,→ MULTIPLY, MIN, MAX

 Below are example programming problems using the `dsl` module, with input-output test cases
      ,→ illustrating the program behavior step-by-step.

 Important: All programs begin with ```python and end with ``` alone.


 [BEGIN PROBLEM]
 Input-output test cases:
   Case 1. x0 = [5, 3, -4] --> [9, 16, 25]
   Case 2. x0 = [-2] --> [4]
   Case 3. x0 = [3, 7, 1, 4] --> [1, 9, 16, 49]

 We solve this problem step-by-step.

 Step 1 code:
 ```python
 x1 = dsl.Map(dsl.SQUARE, x0)
 ```

 Step 1 computes:
   Case 1. x1 = [25, 9, 16]
   Case 2. x1 = [4]
   Case 3. x1 = [9, 49, 1, 16]

 Step 2 code:
 ```python
 x2 = dsl.Sort(x1)
 ```

 Step 2 computes:
   Case 1. x2 = [9, 16, 25]
   Case 2. x2 = [4]
   Case 3. x2 = [1, 9, 16, 49]

 Putting the steps together, the problem is solved with the program:
 ```python
 def program(x0):
   x1 = dsl.Map(dsl.SQUARE, x0)
   x2 = dsl.Sort(x1)
   return x2
 ```
 [END PROBLEM]


 [BEGIN PROBLEM]
 Input-output test cases:
   Case 1. x0 = [1, 3, 5, 7], x1 = 2 --> [3, 9]
   Case 2. x0 = [2, -4, 1, 0, 5], x1 = 4 --> [6, -12, 3, 0]
   Case 3. x0 = [11], x1 = 3 --> [33]

 We solve this problem step-by-step.

 Step 1 code:


Figure 9: Ablation-style prompt on DeepCoder. For the ablation-style approach, the execution
result of each step is shown after the code for that step. The LLM will respond with the first step
toward solving the test problem, surrounded by triple backticks. We then execute that code (making
some assumptions about its format, e.g., that it assigns to a variable) and construct a new prompt with
the first step’s code and execution results in the history, following the pattern in the few-shot example,
so that the LLM’s next prediction is the second step conditioned on the first step.


                                                   27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 [... Description of the `dsl` module ...]

 [BEGIN PROBLEM]
 Input-output test cases:
   Case 1. x = "TURING, Alan" --> "Alan.Turing"
   Case 2. x = "knuth Donald" --> "Donald.Knuth"
   Case 3. x = "Hopper Grace" --> "Grace.Hopper"
   Case 4. x = "DIJKSTRA... Edsger" --> "Edsger.Dijkstra"

 We solve this problem step-by-step.

 Step 1 computes:
   Case 1. "Alan" so ".Turing" remains
   Case 2. "Donald" so ".Knuth" remains
   Case 3. "Grace" so ".Hopper" remains
   Case 4. "Edsger" so ".Dijkstra" remains

 Step 1 code:
 ```python
 dsl.GetFrom(x, ' ')
 ```

 Step 2 computes:
   Case 1. "." so "Turing" remains
   Case 2. "." so "Knuth" remains
   Case 3. "." so "Hopper" remains
   Case 4. "." so "Dijkstra" remains

 Step 2 code:
 ```python
 dsl.Const('.')
 ```

 Step 3 computes:
   Case 1. "Turing" so "" remains
   Case 2. "Knuth" so "" remains
   Case 3. "Hopper" so "" remains
   Case 4. "Dijkstra" so "" remains

 Step 3 code:
 ```python
 dsl.ToCase(dsl.GetToken(x, dsl.Type.WORD, 1), dsl.Case.PROPER)
 ```

 Putting the steps together, the problem is solved with the program:
 ```python
 def program(x):
   parts = [
       dsl.GetFrom(x, ' '),
       dsl.Const('.'),
       dsl.ToCase(dsl.GetToken(x, dsl.Type.WORD, 1), dsl.Case.PROPER),
   ]
   return ''.join(parts)
 ```
 [END PROBLEM]


 [BEGIN PROBLEM]
 Input-output test cases:
   Case 1. x = "apple" --> "Apple!"
   Case 2. x = "banana" --> "Banana!"
   Case 3. x = "clementine" --> "Clementine!"
   Case 4. x = "durian" --> "Durian!"

 We solve this problem step-by-step.

 Step 1 computes:

Figure 10: ExeDec-style prompt on RobustFill. For the ExeDec-style approach, the execution
result of a step comes before the code for that step. This is how we get the LLM to perform “execution
decomposition” — it must predict execution subgoals before predicting code for that step. We extract
the predicted code (surrounded by triple backticks), run it, and construct a new prompt containing
this step’s code and execution results (ignoring the model’s predicted subgoals). The dsl module’s
description at the top of the prompt is omitted for space, but is identical to that in Figure 8.


                                                 28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 The `dsl` module is a custom library for manipulating lists of integers. It contains the
      ,→ following functions:

 def Scanl1(f, xs):
   ys = []
   for i, x in enumerate(xs):
     if i == 0:
       ys.append(x)
     else:
       ys.append(f(ys[-1], x))
   return ys

 Below are example programming problems using the `dsl` module, with input-output test cases
      ,→ illustrating the program behavior step-by-step.

 Important: All programs begin with ```python and end with ``` alone.


 [BEGIN PROBLEM]
 Input-output test cases:
   Case 1. x0 = [5, 3, -4] --> [9, 16, 25]
   Case 2. x0 = [-2] --> [4]
   Case 3. x0 = [3, 7, 1, 4] --> [1, 9, 16, 49]

 We solve this problem step-by-step.

 Step 1 computes:
   Case 1. x1 = [25, 9, 16]
   Case 2. x1 = [4]
   Case 3. x1 = [9, 49, 1, 16]

 Step 1 code:
 ```python
 x1 = [x ** 2 for x in x0]
 ```

 Step 2 computes:
   Case 1. x2 = [9, 16, 25]
   Case 2. x2 = [4]
   Case 3. x2 = [1, 9, 16, 49]

 Step 2 code:
 ```python
 x2 = sorted(x1)
 ```

 Putting the steps together, the problem is solved with the program:
 ```python
 def program(x0):
   x1 = [x ** 2 for x in x0]
   x2 = sorted(x1)
   return x2
 ```
 [END PROBLEM]


 [BEGIN PROBLEM]
 Input-output test cases:
   Case 1. x0 = [1, 3, 5, 7], x1 = 2 --> [3, 9]
   Case 2. x0 = [2, -4, 1, 0, 5], x1 = 4 --> [6, -12, 3, 0]
   Case 3. x0 = [11], x1 = 3 --> [33]

 We solve this problem step-by-step.

 Step 1 computes:


Figure 11: ExeDec-style prompt on DeepCoder-Pythonic. For DeepCoder-Pythonic, only the
Scanl1 operation remains in the hypothetical dsl library while every other operation and lambda
function is written in Pythonic form. Thus, the beginning of the prompt has the library description
updated correspondingly. We provide the implementation of Scanl1 because it’s only one function.


                                                29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


K    FAILURE M ODES IN LLM E XPERIMENTS
In the LLM experiments, ExeDec’s incorrect solution programs encounter a variety of errors. Table 4
lists the specific errors, the number of programs encountering an error considering all generalization
tasks (including no generalization), and the proportion of that error among all incorrect programs for
that dataset.

         Table 4: Error analysis for LLM experiments for ExeDec @ 1 (greedy decoding).

                                      RobustFill         DeepCoder         DeepCoder-Pythonic
       (Correct)                    33        —          66       —          88          —
       AssertionError                2       0.2%         0      0.0%         0         0.0%
       AttributeError                6       0.5%        63      5.6%         0         0.0%
       IndexError                    0       0.0%         0      0.0%        18         1.6%
       NameError                     0       0.0%         0      0.0%         9         0.8%
       SyntaxError                   1       0.1%         1      0.1%         0         0.0%
       TypeError                   234      20.1%       150     13.2%         9         0.8%
       ValueError                    0       0.0%         0      0.0%         3         0.3%
       ZeroDivisionError             0       0.0%         0      0.0%        15         1.3%
       Wrong behavior              924      79.2%       920     81.1%      1058        95.1%


For RobustFill, about 20% of failures are TypeErrors caused by using the DSL incorrectly, while
about 79% of failures do not encounter a runtime error but simply have behavior inconsistent with
the I/O specification.
For DeepCoder, AttributeError accounts for about 5.6% of failures (when the predicted pro-
gram attempts to use a hallucinated function or constant in the DSL), TypeError accounts for
about 13% of failures, and about 81% of failures are due to wrong behavior. For DeepCoder-Pythonic,
about 5% of failures are from various runtime errors, while about 95% are due to wrong behavior.
Overall, the vast majority of failures are due to wrong behavior. Although LLMs have seen much
success in predicting programs from natural language specifications, they still perform poorly in
programming-by-example without natural language hints, especially for synthetic problems.

L    H IERARCHICAL E XE D EC
The following is Python-like pseudocode describing how ExeDec might be extended to enable
hierarchical decompositions. We leave exploration of this extension to future work.
 def ExeDecHierarchical(inputs, outputs):
   difficulty = DifficultyModel(inputs, outputs)                     # outputs easy/hard
   if difficulty == 'easy': # base case
     return SynthesizerModel(inputs, outputs)

    # recursive case
    subprograms = []
    while True:
      subgoals = SubgoalModel(inputs, outputs)
      subprogram = ExeDecHierarchical(inputs, subgoals) # recurse
      subprograms.append(subprogram)
      execution_result = Execute(subprogram, inputs)
      if execution_result == outputs:
        return CombineProgramParts(subprograms)
      (inputs, outputs) = UpdateSpecification(inputs, outputs,
                                               execution_result)


                                                   30
