Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A MORTIZING INTRACTABLE INFERENCE
IN LARGE LANGUAGE MODELS

 Edward J. Hu* , Moksh Jain* , Eric Elmoznino                   Younesse Kaddar∞
 Mila – Quebec AI Institute, Université de Montréal           University of Oxford
 {edward.hu,moksh.jain,eric.elmoznino,...                       younesse.kaddar@chch.ox.ac.uk


 Guillaume Lajoie† , Yoshua Bengio⋄ , Nikolay Malkin
 Mila – Quebec AI Institute, Université de Montréal
 ...,guillaume.lajoie,yoshua.bengio,nikolay.malkin}@mila.quebec



                                              A BSTRACT
          Autoregressive large language models (LLMs) compress knowledge from their
          training data through next-token conditional distributions. This limits tractable
          querying of this knowledge to start-to-end autoregressive sampling. However, many
          tasks of interest—including sequence continuation, infilling, and other forms of
          constrained generation—involve sampling from intractable posterior distributions.
          We address this limitation by using amortized Bayesian inference to sample from
          these intractable posteriors. Such amortization is algorithmically achieved by fine-
          tuning LLMs via diversity-seeking reinforcement learning algorithms: generative
          flow networks (GFlowNets). We empirically demonstrate that this distribution-
          matching paradigm of LLM fine-tuning can serve as an effective alternative to
          maximum-likelihood training and reward-maximizing policy optimization. As an
          important application, we interpret chain-of-thought reasoning as a latent variable
          modeling problem and demonstrate that our approach enables data-efficient adapta-
          tion of LLMs to tasks that require multi-step rationalization and tool use.
          Code: https://github.com/GFNOrg/gfn-lm-tuning.

1    I NTRODUCTION
Autoregressive large language models (LLMs) trained on general-domain data are vast stores of
world knowledge (Petroni et al., 2019). They are typically optimized by predicting a token given
its preceding context; therefore, tractable inference over this knowledge is limited to sampling
conditioned on a prefix. Many useful tasks, such as infilling (Zhu et al., 2019; Liu et al., 2019),
generating text conditioned on length or lexical constraints (Hokamp & Liu, 2017; Hu et al., 2019),
and finding the most likely sequence continuation, involve intractable inference in LLMs.
Such tasks are related to the problem of reasoning, which has been framed as one of probabilistic
inference (Gershman & Goodman, 2014). Correspondingly, the linguistic expression of reasoning
can be seen as inference over language. For example, we can interpret chain-of-thought reasoning
(Wei et al., 2022; Kojima et al., 2022), a paradigm of reasoning in language models, as a problem
of intractable posterior inference. Given a question-answer pair (𝑋, 𝑌 ), we are interested in finding
latent chains of thought – token sequences 𝑍 that contribute the most to the conditional likelihood
                                ∑︁                  ∑︁
                    𝑝(𝑌 | 𝑋) =      𝑝 LM (𝑍𝑌 | 𝑋) =    𝑝 LM (𝑌 | 𝑋 𝑍) 𝑝 LM (𝑍 | 𝑋),                 (1)
                                  𝑍                      𝑍
where 𝑝 LM denotes the likelihood assigned to a sequence by a language model and apposition of
variables (e.g., 𝑋 𝑍𝑌 ) denotes the concatenation of the token sequences.
While past work has relied on prompting and in-context learning to produce 𝑍’s that lead to the
correct 𝑌 , treating 𝑍 as a hidden variable in a latent variable model (LVM) renders chain-of-thought
reasoning a Bayesian inference problem (Fig. 1). For this LVM, the distribution we must sample
                                                 (𝑋𝑍𝑌 )
from is the posterior 𝑝 LM (𝑍 | 𝑋, 𝑌 ) = Í 𝑝′ LM      ′  . Such sampling is intractable: while it is easy
                                           𝑍 𝑝LM (𝑋𝑍 𝑌 )
to evaluate 𝑝 LM (𝑋 𝑍𝑌 ), the conditional distributions needed to sample 𝑍 from 𝑝 LM (𝑍 | 𝑋, 𝑌 ) one
token at a time are not easy to compute.
    ∗ Equal contribution. ∞ Work done during internship at Mila. † CIFAR AI Chair. ⋄ CIFAR Senior Fellow.



                                                     1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



         𝑍            She caught and ate a mouse. / She meowed until she was fed. / . . .                 𝑋           𝑌

     𝑋       𝑌            The cat was hungry.         Now the cat is sleepy, not hungry.
                                                                                                       GFlowNet
                                                                                                    (as fine-tuned LM)
     The review expresses a personal opinion.           eval(3 + 4) = 7, eval(7 − 8) = −1
                                                                                            𝑞 GFN (𝑍 |𝑋 [, 𝑌 ])
                                                                                                                      reward
“A deeply moving storyline.”      Label: Subjective          3+4−8           Answer: −1                           𝑍   𝑅(𝑍, 𝑋, 𝑌 )

Figure 1: Left: Three problems of reasoning in language – sentence infilling, chain-of-thought reasoning, and
problem-solving with external tool use – can all be seen as instances of the latent variable model at the top left,
where an input (𝑋) generates the output (𝑌 ) via a latent variable (𝑍). Right: We fine-tune an LLM to sample
from the Bayesian posterior over 𝑍, conditioning on 𝑋 and optionally on 𝑌 . If conditioned on 𝑌 , the trained
policy can be used to sample diverse latent sequences (e.g., for infilling, §4.2). If not conditioned on 𝑌 , the policy
can sample 𝑍, and thus predict 𝑌 , for inputs 𝑋 not seen during training (e.g., for classification and multi-step
reasoning, §4.3, 4.4). As shown in §4.4, modeling the full diversity of the posterior aids generalization.

A standard method to sample approximately from intractable posterior distributions is Markov
chain Monte Carlo (MCMC), but it is difficult to craft good proposal distributions for multi-modal
distributions over language data (Miao et al., 2019; Zhang et al., 2020a; Lew et al., 2023), and
inference on a new input may be prohibitively slow. Alternatively, one can turn to reinforcement
learning (RL) approaches such as proximal policy optimization (PPO; Schulman et al., 2017), where
the language model is treated as a policy to be fine-tuned. However, these do not aim to model the
full diversity of the distribution; instead, learned policies settle around a small number of modes. In
both cases, issues with this mode collapse are exacerbated when the target distribution is misspecified,
leading to the undesirable behavior of overoptimized samplers (Gao et al., 2023).
Amortized probabilistic inference – that is, training a model to approximate a distribution of interest –
provides a principled, efficient, and potentially scalable way to draw samples from the distribution
(Beal, 2003). One way to implement amortized inference for high-dimensional discrete data such as
text is using generative flow networks (GFlowNets; Bengio et al., 2021), which are diversity-seeking
reinforcement learning algorithms that train policies to sample objects (such as a token sequence 𝑍)
with probability proportional to a given reward function, such as the joint 𝑝 LM (𝑋 𝑍𝑌 ).
In this work, we present a method that initializes the GFlowNet policy with a pretrained LLM
and continues to train it with a reward objective that can be evaluated with the same LLM. The
result is a different type of fine-tuning (FT) procedure for text generation that has a number of
advantages, including improved sample diversity, data efficiency, and out-of-distribution generaliza-
tion. GFlowNet fine-tuning makes the language model sample from the target distribution, enabling
amortized inference in a number of applications (Fig. 1).
Leveraging this approach, we empirically demonstrate the possibilities and benefits of learning to
sample from intractable distributions over text continuations, latent reasoning chains, and tool use
sequences using GFlowNet fine-tuning. Notably, the diversity of samples from the models trained with
GFlowNet fine-tuning is beneficial in Bayesian model averaging settings, such as when aggregating
answers to questions obtained via multiple reasoning chains. For example, using a pretrained language
model with 6B parameters, our method shows an absolute improvement of 10.9% over supervised
fine-tuning on subjectivity classification with only 10 labeled examples (§4.3) and outperforms
supervised fine-tuning and PPO by 63% on integer arithmetic with 50 demonstrations, with notable
improvements in out-of-distribution generalization (§4.4). Moreover, the benefits of amortized
inference allow us to efficiently sample from the fine-tuned model at scale. Our contributions include:
(1) A general algorithm for amortized sampling from intractable LLM posteriors.
(2) A probabilistic approach to fine-tuning LLMs to perform chain-of-thought reasoning.
(3) Empirical results on sequence continuation, natural language reasoning, integer arithmetic with
    tool use, and story infilling.

2    M OTIVATING EXAMPLE : G ENERATING RANDOM NUMBERS WITH LLM S
We consider a simple task that highlights the limitations of reward-maximizing reinforcement learning
(RL) methods in fine-tuning LLMs. For readers unfamiliar with RL, we refer to Sutton & Barto
(2018) and include a glossary in §A.1 to define key terms used throughout this paper. The task
involves generating random numbers from a given distribution when prompted ‘The following is a
random integer drawn uniformly between 0 and 100: ’. This task is a minimal instantiation of the
problem we study in the paper: sample from a target distribution given an unnormalized density.


                                                                2
                     Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                   100
Probability mass   10 1

                   10 2

                   10 3

                   10 4

                   10 5

                          0     20    40    60       80   100 0    20     40       60   80   100 0      20     40   60   80     100
                                 Generated number                   Generated number                      Generated number
                                 (a) Base model                   (b) PPO fine-tuning                (c) GFlowNet fine-tuning
                                50.5% of samples                    95.8% of samples                      100% of samples
                                are valid numbers.                 are valid numbers.                    are valid numbers.

                      Figure 2: Empirical distributions of 512,000 integers from 1 to 100 generated by GPT-J fine-tuned with PPO
                      (reward-maximizing; b) and GFlowNet fine-tuning (distribution-matching; c). Note the logarithmic 𝑦-scale.
                     Although the target distribution is tractable, making the task seemingly straightforward, it serves as a
                     useful illustration of the behaviors of different fine-tuning methods.
                     Renda et al. (2023) found that pretrained LLMs perform quite poorly on this task: the distribution of
                     numbers generated with the above prompt will be far from uniform (Fig. 2a shows an example using
                     an instruction fine-tuned GPT-J 6B (Wang & Komatsuzaki, 2021)1 ). There may be many reasons for
                     this, among them the effects of instruction fine-tuning and the LLM’s possible bias towards numbers
                     that are more frequent in the training data (e.g., numbers starting with ‘1’ are more frequent due to
                     the properties of many natural data-generating processes (Benford, 1938)).
                     While reward-maximizing RL can teach the model to generate valid numbers (by penalizing outputs
                     that are not numbers from 1 to 100), it would not resolve the distribution skew introduced during
                     pretraining. Indeed, rewarding all valid integers equally leads to an expected gradient of zero for
                     policy gradient methods. Fig. 2b shows that while most samples are valid numbers after PPO training,
                     the distribution remains highly skewed.
                     Instead, we can take a principled approach by training the LLM to match the target distribution with
                     a GFlowNet learning objective. Such an objective directly optimizes the likelihood of the model gen-
                     erating a number to be proportional to the reward for that number, which is the number’s (potentially
                     unnormalized) probability under the target distribution. When the policy is initialized as the pretrained
                     LLM, the resulting distribution after GFlowNet fine-tuning is shown in Fig. 2c. Quantitatively, the
                     KL divergence from the sampling distribution to the target (uniform) distribution decreases from 3.37
                     for the original LLM (on the support [0, 100]) to 9.75 · 10−5 for the GFlowNet-fine-tuned model.
                     This example illustrates a general point: GFlowNet objectives provide a principled and flexible
                     approach to fine-tuning LLMs to match a target distribution where reward-maximizing RL fails to.
                     On this simple task, this distribution matching could also be achieved through supervised fine-tuning;
                     however, this would require access to samples from the target distribution, which are unavailable in
                     general (though not in this simple example). In the following sections, we further illustrate this point
                     in non-trivial problems involving intractable inference, reasoning with latent variables, and tool use.

                     3        F INE - TUNING LLM S TO SAMPLE FROM INTRACTABLE DISTRIBUTIONS
                     We first describe how intractable inference emerges from interesting applications of LLMs, one
                     of which is chain-of-thought reasoning seen through the lens of latent variable models, where the
                     posterior distribution over the latent variable is intractable. We then discuss how GFlowNet objectives
                     can be used to train amortized samplers to perform such intractable inference.
                     3.1      P ROBLEM : I NTRACTABLE INFERENCE IN LARGE LANGUAGE MODELS
                     Autoregressive language models decompose the distribution over sequences of tokens as a product of
                     ordered conditionals: 𝑝(𝑤 1:𝑁 ) = 𝑝(𝑤 1 ) 𝑝(𝑤 2 | 𝑤 1 ) · · · 𝑝(𝑤 𝑁 | 𝑤 1:𝑁 −1 ). While this decomposition
                     makes left-to-right sampling from the distribution tractable, sampling from other conditional distribu-
                          1We use the Instruct-GPT-J model available at    .co/nlpcloud/instruct-gpt-j-fp16.


                                                                               3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



Table 1: Objects in language posterior inference. Given a pretrained ‘teacher’ LM 𝑝 LM , we train a GFlowNet
𝑞 GFN to sample the posterior 𝑝(𝑍 | 𝑋, 𝑌 ). Amortization and generalization are achieved by making 𝑋, and
optionally 𝑌 , an input to 𝑞 GFN .
Object         Meaning                           Example 1 (infilling)                 Example 2 (subjectivity classification)
𝑋              cause / condition / question      The cat was hungry.                    A deeply moving storyline.
𝑍              mechanism / reasoning chain       She ate a mouse.                       This review expresses personal feelings.
𝑌              effect / answer                   Now the cat is sleepy, not hungry.     Answer: Subjective
𝑝(𝑍 | 𝑋)       conditional prior                                                  𝑝 LM (𝑍 | 𝑋)
𝑝(𝑌 | 𝑋, 𝑍)    likelihood of effect given                                        𝑝 LM (𝑌 | 𝑋 𝑍)
               cause and mechanism
𝑝(𝑍, 𝑌 | 𝑋)    conditional joint, reward for 𝑍                                   𝑝 LM (𝑍𝑌 | 𝑋)
𝑝(𝑍 | 𝑋, 𝑌 )   posterior (intractable!)                  approximated and amortized
                                                                              Í by GFlowNet 𝑞 GFN (𝑍 | 𝑋 [, 𝑌 ])
𝑞(𝑌 | 𝑋)       posterior predictive /                          approximated as 𝑍 𝑞 GFN (𝑍 | 𝑋) 𝑝 LM (𝑌 | 𝑋 𝑍),
               Bayesian model average                         sampled as 𝑍 ∼ 𝑞 GFN (𝑍 | 𝑋), 𝑌 ∼ 𝑝 LM (𝑌 | 𝑋 𝑍)

tions is intractable. Various problems of language modeling can be viewed as sampling from such
intractable conditionals in the distribution over sequences of an LLM; we give two such examples
and related terminologies in Table 1. Some tasks we study in §4 are instances of these examples.
Tempered and contrastive sampling. In many applications (e.g., translation, summarization,
dialogue systems), one wishes to sample from a low-temperature distribution over sequences 𝑍
conditioned on a prefix 𝑋, i.e., 𝑞(𝑍 | 𝑋) ∝ 𝑝 LM (𝑋 𝑍) 1/𝑇 for some temperature 𝑇 < 1, as high-
likelihood samples are more likely to be fluent or accurate continuations of 𝑋 (Tillmann & Ney,
2003). The limit of 𝑇 → 0 gives a distribution that is peaky on the most likely continuation. However,
sampling from 𝑞, or finding its mode, is intractable, and it is common to resort to approximations,
such as tempering the tokenwise conditional distributions or using beam search to search for a mode.
A related problem is sampling a continuation with a correction for its unconditional likelihood,
e.g., 𝑞(𝑍 | 𝑋) ∝ 𝑝 LM (𝑋 𝑍) 𝛼 𝑝 LM (𝑍) 𝛽 with 𝛽 < 0 and 𝛼 > 0, where applications again resort to
approximating the next-token conditionals of 𝑞 by tempering (Malkin et al., 2022b; Li et al., 2023).
Infilling and reverse generation. Infilling is the task of sampling a sequence of tokens conditioned
on both its prior and subsequent context, which can be understood as sampling from the distribution
𝑞(𝑍 | 𝑋, 𝑌 ) ∝ 𝑝 LM (𝑋 𝑍𝑌 ), where 𝑋 and 𝑌 are fixed. Reverse generation is a special case, where 𝑋
is an empty sequence. Besides being a meaningful task in its own right (Liu et al., 2019; Zhu et al.,
2019; Donahue et al., 2020; Susanto et al., 2020; Lu et al., 2022a), infilling and reverse generation
are key components of newly emerging methods of LLM prompting, such as when LLMs are tasked
with optimizing their own instruction sequences or reasoning steps (Zhou et al., 2023; Sordoni et al.,
2023; Xu et al., 2023). Current applications achieve this by resorting to hand-engineered instructions
and inverted prompts.
Constrained generation. Sampling of text with constraints and penalties – for example, those on
the presence or the absence of certain words or on the score of an auxiliary classifier evaluated on
the text – can be understood as sampling from a distribution 𝑞(𝑍) ∝ 𝑝 LM (𝑍)𝑐(𝑍), where 𝑐 is an
externally specified constraint. Current approaches to the problem use tokenwise approximations
(Liu et al., 2021), various problem-specific beam search and local search techniques (e.g., Schmaltz
et al., 2016; Hokamp & Liu, 2017; Hu et al., 2019; Sha, 2020; Lu et al., 2022b) or classifier-guided
conditional generation approaches (e.g., Yang & Klein, 2021; Meng et al., 2022).
3.2      R EASONING THROUGH LATENT VARIABLES
Chain-of-thought reasoning (Wei et al., 2022; Kojima et al., 2022) helps LLMs solve complex
problems by producing a reasoning chain before giving the final answer. LLMs pretrained on general
domain data can learn to produce useful chains of thoughts given demonstrations, which are usually
handcrafted or generated by prompting the LM. Interestingly, although the capacity for chain-of-
thought reasoning only emerges in large language models, knowledge can also be extracted from
smaller language models when they are carefully fine-tuned (Schick & Schütze, 2021).
Motivated by this, we connect chain-of-thought reasoning to the general problem of inference in latent
variable models illustrated in Fig. 1. Here, reasoning can be seen as posterior inference: sampling
from the posterior distribution over a string of tokens 𝑍 conditioned on a prefix 𝑋 and a suffix 𝑌 ,
given an autoregressive language model 𝑝 LM . The posterior is defined as
                                                         𝑝 LM (𝑋 𝑍𝑌 )
                             𝑝 LM (𝑍 | 𝑋, 𝑌 ) = Í                    ′
                                                                          ∝ 𝑝 LM (𝑋 𝑍𝑌 ).                                     (2)
                                                        𝑍 ′ 𝑝 LM (𝑋 𝑍 𝑌 )

Our goal is to train models to sample 𝑍 from this posterior distribution. Intuitively, this allows us to
sample likely reasoning chains that lead to the desired outcome 𝑌 . Although we take 𝑍 to be a string


                                                              4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


of tokens, the same formalism and the GFlowNet objectives apply to other structured latent objects,
such as trees or sets of natural language statements, as long as one has access to a likelihood model
𝑝(𝑌 | 𝑋 𝑍). While not investigated in this work, these generalizations could be important for formal
reasoning and multi-step chains of inference. See, e.g., Yao et al. (2023); Hao et al. (2023); Besta
et al. (2024) for approaches to reasoning in language using tree- or list-structured state spaces.
A latent variable model of this form is useful when the marginal distribution 𝑝 LM (𝑌 | 𝑋) is harder
to model than 𝑝 LM (𝑍 | 𝑋) and 𝑝 LM (𝑌 | 𝑋 𝑍), i.e., a difficult inference is broken down into a chain
of easier ones. By training a model to match the Bayesian posterior 𝑝 LM (𝑍 | 𝑋, 𝑌 ), we can learn to
sample latent reasoning chains that increase the likelihood of producing 𝑌 from 𝑋 via the sampled 𝑍.
However, we can also fine-tune the language model 𝑝 LM (𝑍 | 𝑋𝑌 ) itself to maximize the likelihood
of data pairs (𝑋, 𝑌 ) under theÍLVM. While it is generally intractable to directly maximize the
data likelihood 𝑝 LM (𝑋, 𝑌 ) = 𝑍 𝑝 LM (𝑋 𝑍𝑌 ) because of the summation over 𝑍, the (variational)
expectation-maximization (EM) algorithm (Dempster et al., 1977; Beal, 2003; Koller & Friedman,
2009) can be used for this purpose. In the expectation step (E-step), we draw samples from the
posterior over the latent variable 𝑝 LM (𝑍 | 𝑋, 𝑌 ), which could come from an amortized sampler of 𝑍.
In the maximization step (M-step), we maximize the log-likelihood of the joint probability of the
sampled latent variables E 𝑍∼ 𝑝LM (𝑍 | 𝑋,𝑌 ) log 𝑝 LM (𝑋 𝑍𝑌 ) with respect to the parameters of the language
model 𝑝 LM . This combination of amortized inference (learning to sample the chain of thought) and
supervised fine-tuning (optimizing the language model with the ‘supervision’ involving 𝑍 sampled
from the amortized posterior) will be illustrated in one of our experiments (§4.3, Table 3).
3.3   A MORTIZED INFERENCE WITH GF LOW N ET OBJECTIVES
For inference in the latent variable model, we leverage the probabilistic framework of generative
flow networks (GFlowNets; Bengio et al., 2021; 2023). Using notation from Malkin et al. (2022a),
we briefly introduce relevant GFlowNet concepts pertaining to autoregressive sequence generation.
Here, GFlowNets learn policies to sample sequences 𝑍 = 𝑧1 𝑧2 . . . 𝑧 𝑛 ⊤ ∈ Z (where ⊤ denotes a stop
symbol) from a distribution over the space of sequences Z, given an unnormalized density (reward)
𝑅 : Z → R>0 . The generative process is the same as in autoregressive language models: generation
begins with an empty string, and at the 𝑖-th step a token 𝑧 𝑖 is sampled from a policy 𝑞 GFN (𝑧𝑖 | 𝑧1:𝑖−1 ),
which is then appended to the sequence. This process continues until a stop symbol ⊤ is generated.
The marginal likelihood 𝑞 ⊤ GFN (𝑍) of sampling a terminal state 𝑍 = 𝑧 1:𝑛 ⊤ is given by       𝑖=1 𝑞 GFN (𝑧 𝑖 |
                                                                                            Î𝑛
𝑧1:𝑖−1 )𝑞 GFN (⊤ | 𝑧), where 𝑧1:0 is understood to be the empty string. The goal of GFlowNet training is
to fit a parametric policy 𝑞 GFN (· | ·; 𝜃) such that 𝑞 ⊤
                                                        GFN (𝑍) ∝ 𝑅(𝑍), i.e., the likelihood of generating a
complete sequence is proportional to its reward.
Learning objective. We use a modified version of the subtrajectory balance (SubTB; Madan et al.,
2023) objective to account for trajectories being terminable at all states (Deleu et al., 2022). The
objective for a sequence 𝑍 = 𝑧 1:𝑛 ⊤ is
                                                                                              !2
                                     𝑅(𝑧1:𝑖 ⊤) 𝑘=𝑖+1 𝑞 GFN (𝑧 𝑘 | 𝑧 1:𝑘−1 )𝑞 GFN (⊤ | 𝑧1: 𝑗 )
                         ∑︁                   Î𝑗
            L (𝑍; 𝜃) =           log                                                             , (3)
                       0≤𝑖< 𝑗 ≤𝑛
                                                 𝑅(𝑧 1: 𝑗 ⊤)𝑞 GFN (⊤ | 𝑧1:𝑖 )

For sequence generation tasks, the SubTB objective is equivalent to the path consistency objec-
tive (Nachum et al., 2017) in max-entropy RL (Haarnoja et al., 2017), which has been previously
used in the context of text generation (Guo et al., 2021). See Appendix A.2 for further discussion.
Training policy. As the objective in Eq. 3 can be minimized to 0 for all trajectories 𝜏 simultaneously
given enough model capacity, we can use trajectories sampled from any full-support distribution
(training policy) to perform gradient descent on L (𝜏; 𝜃) with respect to 𝜃. As the space we are
sampling from is combinatorially large, it is important to have a training policy that can efficiently
explore Z. To this end, we compose the mini-batch during training using trajectories from three
sources: (1) the policy 𝑞 GFN , (2) a tempered version of the current policy 𝑞 GFN and (3) a replay
buffer storing past trajectories. Replay buffers have been shown to be quite effective in improving
GFlowNet training (Jain et al., 2022; Deleu et al., 2022; Shen et al., 2023).
Parametrization, amortization, and generalization. To sample the latent sequence 𝑍 from the
posterior defined in Eq. 2, we parametrize the GFlowNet policy as an autoregressive language
model that samples the latent 𝑍 one token at a time from left to right. By setting the reward
𝑅(𝑍) = 𝑝 LM (𝑋 𝑍𝑌 ) ∝ 𝑝 LM (𝑍 | 𝑋, 𝑌 ), we learn a sampler for the posterior at convergence.


                                                      5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


As illustrated in Fig. 1, depending on the task, we can condition the GFlowNet policy on either 𝑋
or 𝑋, 𝑌 . In cases such as reasoning (§3.2), where there is only a single correct 𝑌 for each 𝑋 and we
interested in predicting 𝑌 for unseen 𝑋 at test time, we can simply condition on 𝑋. In this case, the
GFlowNet policy is simply a language model that generates 𝑍 as a continuation of 𝑋. To be precise,
we initialize 𝑞 GFN as a copy of 𝑝 LM that is conditioned on the prefix 𝑋, and then fine-tune2 it with a
GFlowNet objective. With this view, sampling 𝑍 is an inverse problem: we need to infer 𝑍 given a
(conditional) prior 𝑝 LM (𝑍 | 𝑋) and an observation 𝑌 under likelihood model 𝑝 LM (𝑌 | 𝑋 𝑍).
Allowing the GFlowNet policy to explicitly take 𝑋 as input amortizes the sampling procedure and
allows generalization to unseen 𝑋. In this sense, the GFlowNet is a Bayesian model (akin to a
LM cascade (Dohan et al., 2022) or deep language network (Sordoni et al., 2023)), in which 𝑍
are conditionally sampled ‘parameters’ that transform 𝑋 into 𝑌 . To predict the 𝑌 for an unseen 𝑋,
one performs Bayesian model averaging by drawing samples of 𝑍 from 𝑞 GFN (𝑍 | 𝑋) followed by
sampling from 𝑝 LM (𝑌 | 𝑋 𝑍).
In tasks such as infilling (§4.2), however, the mapping from 𝑋 to 𝑌 is one-to-many and 𝑌 is available
at test-time. Here, we are interested in 𝑍 itself, rather than using it as an intermediate variable en
route to generating 𝑌 . The GFlowNet policy thus has to be conditioned on both 𝑋 and 𝑌 . To achieve
this, the policy is conditioned on a prompt that contains both 𝑋 and 𝑌 (for example, see Appendix C).

4     E MPIRICAL RESULTS
We first validate GFlowNet fine-tuning on text generation, where we seek to find likely sentence
continuation given a prompt (§4.1) or fill in a missing sentence in a story (§4.2). Then, we study
reasoning tasks that benefit from chain-of-thought reasoning (§4.3) and external tool use (§4.4).
4.1    S ENTENCE CONTINUATION
                                                                                                   Diverse beam           T = 0.8
Task description. A natural application for au-                                              10    (5X compute)
                                                           Maximum sentence log-likelihood


toregressive language models is that of sequence                                                                    GFlowNet
continuation: given a prompt, the model should                                               15
                                                                                                  Diverse beam     fine-tuning
generate a high-likelihood completion. In ap-
plications such as creative writing, we would                                                         Sampling                T = 0.95
like the continuations to be semantically diverse                                            20       w/ T = 0.8
while still having a high likelihood under the
language model. To demonstrate the benefits of                                               25     Greedy
GFlowNet fine-tuning, we consider the task of                                                                       Nucleus       Sampling
sampling the next sentence following a prompt.                                                                                    w/ T = 1.0
                                                                                             30
Sampling autoregressively from the LM until
a “.” token is reached is unlikely to produce                 0.675 0.700 0.725 0.750 0.775 0.800
                                                                          Sentence diversity
samples that have a high likelihood because the
distribution over sentences has a fat tail. Exist- Figure 3: Maximum log-likelihood and diversity of con-
ing approaches to generate sequence continua- tinuations sampled for fixed prompts. GFlowNet fine-
                                                   tuning (★) samples higher log-likelihood sentences while
tions include beam search and its variations (Vi- maintaining more sample diversity than the baselines (•
jayakumar et al., 2018; Shao et al., 2017), top-𝑘 and ---), even when they are given 5× the compute.
sampling (Fan et al., 2018), nucleus sampling
(Holtzman et al., 2019), tempered autoregressive sampling, and fine-tuning using importance sampling
(Shih et al., 2023), among others. While useful, most of these methods are ultimately hand-crafted
heuristics that leave room for improvement. Furthermore, some of these methods (e.g., beam search)
involve a computationally expensive search procedure, compared to a single pass of a learned in-
ference model that amortizes over prompts. Our GFlowNet policy autoregressively samples the
sequence until a period is sampled, indicating the end of the sentence. Given prompts 𝑋, the LM is
fine-tuned to generate the continuations 𝑍 from the tempered posterior by being trained with reward
                     1
𝑅(𝑍) = 𝑝 LM (𝑍 |𝑋) 𝑇 . When 𝑇 = 1, the GFlowNet will trivially sample proportional to 𝑝 LM without
any fine-tuning, so we consider 0 < 𝑇 < 1 to focus on the likely continuations.
We consider a dataset of prompts from OpenWebText (Gokaslan et al., 2019) with a 1.5B param
GPT-2 XL (Radford et al., 2019) as the base model. We draw 8 samples from the fine-tuned
model conditioned on a fixed prompt, consider the maximum-likelihood sample under the LM,
and report the average over the dataset of prompts. To measure the semantic diversity of the
    2We use LoRA (Hu et al., 2022) instead of full fine-tuning for hardware efficiency in all experiments.



                                                       6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


samples, we compute the mean pairwise cosine distance between the embeddings (from a pretrained
encoder (Reimers & Gurevych, 2019)) of the generated samples and average it over the dataset. We
compare to baselines that are commonly used for producing continuations from LMs at inference
time (beam search, diverse beam search, nucleus sampling, autoregressive sampling, tempered
autoregressive sampling, and greedy generation).
Results. Quantitative results are reported in Fig. 3 and empirical samples are shown in Appendix B.
At lower temperatures, our method excels in generating high-likelihood sentences, outperforming the
leading baseline, diverse beam search. If we increase the number of beams (and therefore compute)
to 5× the number of samples produced by the GFlowNet, our performance remains comparable.
Nevertheless, even in this scenario, the GFlowNet’s generated samples exhibit notably higher diversity
compared to diverse beam search and are on par with the best diversity-scoring benchmarks.
4.2    I NFILLING STORIES
Task description. Next, we consider the story infilling task, a special case of the general infilling
problem (§3.1), where given the beginning 𝑋 and end 𝑌 of a story, the goal is to generate the middle
of the story 𝑍 (Zhu et al., 2019). This is challenging for a language model sampled left to right
since continuations 𝑍 conditioned only on 𝑋 might be incompatible with the ending 𝑌 . We use
the ROCStories corpus (Mostafazadeh et al., 2016), a dataset of short stories containing exactly 5
sentences each. Given the first 3 sentences and the last sentence, the goal is to generate the fourth
sentence, which often involves a turning point in the story and is thus challenging to fill in.
As we expect the base model to contain the required knowledge, for this task we use a GPT-2 Large
model (Radford et al., 2019) fine-tuned on the entire ROCStories training set as the base model.
For evaluating the approach, we consider 900 samples from the dataset as training data to learn
𝑞 GFN (𝑍 |𝑋, 𝑌 ) and evaluate the similarity of the generated infills on a dataset of 100 unseen stories.
Along with the GFlowNet-fine-tuned model, we also consider two baselines: prompting the model to
infill the story and supervised fine-tuning on the same data. Further details are in Appendix C.
Results. To measure the similarity of the gen-              Table 2: Evaluation of the generated infills.
erated infills with the reference infills available Method                   BERTScore    BLEU-4 GLEU-4 GPT4Eval
in the dataset, we compute BERTScore (Zhang Prompting                       0.081 ± 0.009 1.3 ± 0.5 3.2 ± 0.1 2.4
                                                                fine-tuning 0.094 ± 0.007 1.6 ± 0.8 3.7 ± 0.4 2.7
et al., 2020b), with DeBERTa (He et al., 2021) Supervised
                                                      GFlowNet fine-tuning 0.184 ± 0.004 2.1 ± 0.2 4.2 ± 0.7  3.4
– which is correlated with human judgments –
along with BLEU-4 (Papineni et al., 2002) and GLEU-4 (better suited for sentences; Wu et al., 2016)
metrics. Additionally, we also evaluate each method using GPT-4 as a judge. From our results
summarized in Table 2, we observe that the infills generated by the model with GFlowNet fine-tuning
are closer to the reference infills in the dataset than the baselines. By sampling from 𝑝 LM (𝑍 |𝑋, 𝑌 ),
the GFlowNet is able to account for the ending while generating the infill, resulting in infills that link
the beginning and the end of the story coherently. For further analysis and details see Appendix C.
4.3    S UBJECTIVITY CLASSIFICATION
Task description. SUBJ (Pang & Lee, 2004) Table 3: Test accuracy (%) on SUBJ using an instruct-
is a binary classification dataset for natural lan- fine-tuned GPT-J 6B.
guage understanding. It is a collection of movie Method                                  Test accuracy (%) ↑
reviews in which each review is labeled as objec- Zero-shot prompting                            51.7
tive, meaning that it references facts about the                                          Training samples
movie, or subjective, meaning that it expresses                                     10           20          50
an opinion of the reviewer (see Table D.1 for ex- Few-shot prompting            61.3 ± 6.2 61.8 ± 5.4 65.8 ± 10.5
amples). Given an unlabeled review, the model Supervised fine-tuning            64.3 ± 2.8 69.1 ± 0.8 89.7 ± 0.4
must predict whether it is objective or subjective. GFlowNet fine-tuning        71.4 ± 1.8 81.1 ± 0.4 87.7 ± 2.2
                                                       + Supervised fine-tuning 75.2 ± 1.8 78.7 ± 1.6 89.9 ± 0.2
While supervised fine-tuning on the full dataset
can achieve high test accuracy, we are interested in the low-data regime where we only have tens of
labeled examples. We use the same instruction-tuned GPT-J 6B variant as in §2 for this experiment.
Without any demonstrations, the model struggles with this task using the prompt in Table D.2 and
achieves only 51.7% zero-shot accuracy.
This task is hard likely because it requires a latent reasoning step. A review could be considered
objective because it analyzes the plot or facts about the movie, or it could be subjective because it
expresses a personal opinion or makes a judgment. We denote the review 𝑋, the predicted subjectivity
𝑌 , and the latent reason 𝑍. Then, we GFlowNet-fine-tune the LLM 𝑞 GFN (𝑍 | 𝑋), initialized with the


                                                       7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


base model 𝑝 LM to match the Bayesian posterior over rationales in Eq. 2. At test time, 𝑞 GFN (𝑍 | 𝑋)
generates 10 latent rationales (𝑍’s) for an unseen 𝑋. The LLM 𝑝 LM then autoregressively samples
from 𝑝 LM (𝑌 | 𝑋 𝑍) to produce 10 answers, the majority vote of which becomes the final prediction.
This posterior inference corresponds to the E-step in the EM algorithm, where the posterior 𝑝 LM (𝑍 |
𝑋, 𝑌 ) is defined in Eq. 2. Further, as described in §3.2, we can take an M-step by updating 𝑝 LM to
maximize log 𝑝 LM (𝑋 𝑍𝑌 ) over a collection of 𝑍’s sampled from the amortized posterior 𝑞 GFN . This
is equivalent to applying supervised fine-tuning after GFlowNet fine-tuning.
Results. We present few-shot prompting and supervised fine-tuning with LoRA as baselines. In
few-shot prompting, we prepend 0, 10, 20, or 50 training examples to each test example using the
prompt shown in Table D.2. We randomly shuffle few-shot demonstrations and report the mean and
variance in Table 3. In supervised fine-tuning, we directly maximize log 𝑝 LM (𝑌 | 𝑋) over the same
10, 20, or 50 (𝑋, 𝑌 ) pairs. The variance is over model initialization and batch order. All entries except
zero-shot prompting are aggregated over 3 random seeds. See Appendix D for experiment details.
GFlowNet fine-tuning consistently outperforms supervised fine-tuning in the low-data regime, as
shown in Table 3. In some cases, performing supervised fine-tuning on top, which corresponds to
running one step of the EM algorithm, further improves the performance.
4.4    S OLVING ARITHMETIC PROBLEMS STEP BY STEP
 Task description. Arithmetic reasoning is a Table 4: Test accuracy (%) on an integer arithmetic task
 fitting benchmark to evaluate reasoning abilities with addition and subtraction using a GPT-J 6B model.
 of large language models as it requires multi- Training data only include samples with 3 or 4 operands.
 step reasoning and correctness is easy to evalu-                                   Number of Operands
 ate (Cobbe et al., 2021). While the distribution                               In-distribution        OOD
 of pretraining and fine-tuning data (Magister Method                           3              4         5
 et al., 2023; Lee et al., 2023; Luo et al., 2023) 𝑘-shot CoT 𝑘 = 0            10.2           6.4       3.2
 and prompting choices (Imani et al., 2023) play                  𝑘=3      15.8 ± 3.1      11 ± 1.7  5.4 ± 0.2
 a critical role in their arithmetic abilities, LLMs              𝑘=5      20.4 ± 10.4 17.6 ± 0.6 6.6 ± 1.1
                                                                  𝑘 = 10    26.5 ± 1.4 15.2 ± 1.7 8.9 ± 1.9
 are susceptible to poor generalization by learn-                 𝑘 = 20    35.5 ± 1.9     21 ± 1.4 10.5 ± 0.9
 ing ‘shortcuts’ to reasoning (Dziri et al., 2023). Supervised fine-tuning 72.1 ± 1.3 19.6 ± 2.2 12.8 ± 5.7
We consider a simple integer arithmetic task PPO                            30.6 ± 4.1 13.7 ± 4.1 5.6 ± 3.1
(Fig. 1), with a general pretrained base model, GFlowNet fine-tuning 95.2 ± 1.3 75.4 ± 2.9 40.7 ± 9.1
 rather than a one pretrained on mathematical
 tasks (Jelassi et al., 2023). To avoid the pitfalls of symbolic calculations with language models, we
 adopt the tool use setting (Schick et al., 2023), where the model is equipped with a calculator that can
 perform parts of the computation, implemented as in Cobbe et al. (2021): when the model outputs
‘=’ the expression preceding it is evaluated and appended to the sequence. To prevent the model from
“cheating”, we limit the calculator to evaluate only two-term expressions. Consequently, reasoning
 here involves learning to plan using a tool with limited capabilities (Hao et al., 2023).
For training, we use a synthetic dataset of arithmetic expressions, limited to addition and subtraction.
Following Zelikman et al. (2022), we use a small set of 50 demonstrations (𝑋, 𝑍, 𝑌 ) to seed the replay
buffer in addition to 1000 examples (𝑋, 𝑌 ). We use the same instruction-tuned GPT-J as in §4.3 as
the base model. Further details are in Appendix E. We report the accuracy on two types of examples:
(1) unseen in-distribution expressions (3 or 4 operands) and (2) longer out-of-distribution expressions
(5 operands). As baselines, we consider zero-shot chain-of-thought prompting, 𝑘-shot prompting,
supervised fine-tuning on the tool use sequences, and fine-tuning with PPO (Schulman et al., 2017).
For all methods, we enable tool use and limit the model to generate only numbers and operators.
Results. From the results summarized in Table 4, the base model performs poorly even with chain-
of-thought prompts. Including examples in context improves the performance considerably, with
monotonic improvements as the number of examples increases. Supervised fine-tuning improves the
performance significantly on the in-distribution examples, but the model still struggles to generalize
on the out-of-distribution examples. Fine-tuning with PPO results also yields poor performance,
caused in part by the poor calibration of the base reward model, i.e. it cannot distinguish good
rationales from bad ones. Even though the sequences generated with PPO (illustrated in Appendix E)
have high rewards, they are spurious and do not even define valid calls to the tool.
Such overoptimization to a misspecified reward is a widely noted issue in LLMs trained with
RL (Gao et al., 2023). On the other hand, by matching the entire distribution, GFlowNet fine-tuning
avoids collapsing to a single mode of the reward, thereby being robust to the misspecification of


                                                      8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


the reward (Eysenbach & Levine, 2022) and achieving significantly better performance on in and
out-of-distribution examples. See Appendix E for additional results and analysis.

5    F URTHER RELATED WORK
Sampling from intractable marginals. Beyond the approximations mentioned in §3.1, sampling
from intractable posterior distributions given by pretrained models for tasks such as infilling and
constrained generation has been an object of study. Miao et al. (2019); Zhang et al. (2020a) use
MCMC for these problems, Malkin et al. (2021) used a variable-neighborhood ascent for finding
modes, and a sequential Monte Carlo approach was recently proposed by Lew et al. (2023). Others
have studied the problem with masked language models, using them to perform variants of Gibbs
sampling (Wang & Cho, 2019; Goyal et al., 2022; Yamakoshi et al., 2022) and recovering marginal
distributions over small sets of tokens (Torroba Hennigen & Kim, 2023).
GFlowNets. GFlowNets (Bengio et al., 2021) were originally proposed to learn policies for sam-
pling discrete compositional objects from an unnormalized reward distribution, motivated by the
need to sample diverse high-reward objects in scientific discovery (Jain et al., 2023), in particular, for
biological sequence generation (Jain et al., 2022). The interpretation of GFlowNets as variational
inference algorithms (Malkin et al., 2023; Zimmermann et al., 2023) makes them appropriate for
sampling Bayesian posterior distributions over structured objects (e.g., Deleu et al., 2022; 2023; van
Krieken et al., 2023; Hu et al., 2023).
Chain-of-thought reasoning in LLMs. In recent work on classification and completion with
language models, the latent reasoning chain 𝑍, in the notation of §3.1, is called a ‘chain of thought’
(Wei et al., 2022). The chain of thought is typically generated by conditioning the language model on
𝑋 with the use of specialized demonstrations or prompts (Kojima et al., 2022), with no guarantee of
sampling the posterior accurately. Related to our Bayesian formulation, Wang et al. (2023b) noted
that appropriately aggregating the conclusions 𝑌 from several latent chains 𝑍 improves predictive
performance. In Xu et al. (2023); Zhou et al. (2022), a posterior over latent token sequences is
sampled using MCMC, while Zelikman et al. (2022) propose fine-tuning on successful (high-reward,
in our language) chains of thought, which achieves reward maximization but gives no guarantee of
diversity. In concurrent work, Phan et al. (2023) use MCMC to sample chains-of-thought in problems
with binary feedback. We expect these methods to generalize poorly to difficult exploration problems,
while GFlowNet fine-tuning takes advantage of generalizable structure in the posterior and has a goal
of sampling the full posterior over latent reasoning chains.

6    C ONCLUSION
The knowledge compressed in LLMs is crucial for tasks such as infilling and constrained generation,
but querying this knowledge involves sampling from intractable posterior distributions. We propose
to use GFlowNet objectives to train LLMs to sample from such posterior distributions. Empirical
results show that GFlowNet fine-tuning finds a better fidelity-diversity trade-off for text generation
and also improves sample efficiency and generalization on downstream tasks compared to maximum-
likelihood training or reward-maximizing policy optimization. As an amortized inference algorithm,
our method converts computation into better test-time performance without additional data.
Future work should investigate transfer and generalization across tasks, in particular, building a
‘universal reasoner’ as a model 𝑞(𝑍 | 𝑋) shared between 𝑋 from different tasks, as was recently
considered by Wang et al. (2023a). One should investigate the benefit of using a better knowledge
model, e.g., a more capable base LLM, as a starting point for GFlowNet fine-tuning. The ability to
draw multiple samples from a GFlowNet can also be used to quantify epistemic uncertainty. Finally,
we adopt the GFlowNet formalisms with the perspective of generalizing to latent variables 𝑍 with
a richer generative process than left-to-right sampling. We hope that the GFlowNet paradigm will
enable more flexible reasoning with LLMs in the future: extending probabilistic programming with
language variables (Beurer-Kellner et al., 2023), using structured chains of thought (Yao et al., 2023;
Besta et al., 2024), and extending to program synthesis and planning with world models.
Limitations. Due to resource constraints, our experiments use models up to 6B parameters, but we
expect the conclusions to hold for larger models. In fact, our method can potentially benefit larger
models more: it is harder to optimize a larger model with maximizing objectives on a small amount of
data. As with any on-policy method, exploration, especially in problems with more complex latents,
remains an open problem. Furthermore, our method improves inference but not the knowledge in
the LM. Issues such as hallucination or miscalibration, which are closely related to the knowledge
representation, are thus not addressed.
                                                    9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E THICS STATEMENT
While we foresee no immediate negative societal consequences of our work, we hope that future
researchers who build upon it will, as we have, bear in mind the potential of LLMs – and in particular
of human-like reasoning in LLMs – to be used both for good and for harm.
Research areas in safe and explainable AI that can benefit from GFlowNet fine-tuning include (1)
interpretability of LLMs’ reasoning processes and (2) fine-tuning with human feedback or an external
reward, where diverse sampling can help prevent ‘reward hacking’ and overfitting to a misspecified
target.

R EPRODUCIBILITY
We discuss the details of the proposed algorithms in §3.3 and provide all the implementation details
and hyperparameters for the experiments in the main paper and appendix. Code for our experiments
is available at https://github.com/GFNOrg/gfn-lm-tuning.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors are grateful to Bonaventure Dossou and Salem Lahlou for their help in the early stages
of this project. We also thank Robert Hawkins, Arian Hosseini, Zhen Wang, and Anirudh Goyal for
valuable discussions and suggestions of related work.
GL acknowledges funding from CIFAR, Samsung, and a Canada Research Chair in Neural Computa-
tion and Interfacing.
YB acknowledges funding from CIFAR, NSERC, IBM, Intel, Genentech, and Samsung.
The research was enabled in part by computational resources provided by the Digital Research
Alliance of Canada (https://alliancecan.ca), Mila (https://mila.quebec), and
NVIDIA.

R EFERENCES
Matthew J. Beal. Variational algorithms for approximate Bayesian inference, 2003. URL https:
 //cse.buffalo.edu/faculty/mbeal/papers/beal03.pdf.
Frank Benford. The law of anomalous numbers. Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society,
  78(4):551–572, 1938. ISSN 0003049X. URL http://www.jstor.org/stable/984802.
Emmanuel Bengio, Moksh Jain, Maksym Korablyov, Doina Precup, and Yoshua Bengio. Flow
 network based generative models for non-iterative diverse candidate generation. Neural Information
 Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2021.
Yoshua Bengio, Salem Lahlou, Tristan Deleu, Edward J Hu, Mo Tiwari, and Emmanuel Bengio.
  GFlowNet foundations. Journal of Machine Learning Research, (24):1–76, 2023.
Maciej Besta, Nils Blach, Ales Kubicek, Robert Gerstenberger, Lukas Gianinazzi, Joanna Gajda,
 Tomasz Lehmann, Michal Podstawski, Hubert Niewiadomski, Piotr Nyczyk, et al. Graph of
 thoughts: Solving elaborate problems with large language models. Association for the Advancement
 of Artificial Intelligence (AAAI), 2024.
Luca Beurer-Kellner, Marc Fischer, and Martin Vechev. Prompting is programming: A query
  language for large language models. Proceedings of the ACM on Programming Languages, 7, jun
  2023.
Karl Cobbe, Vineet Kosaraju, Mohammad Bavarian, Mark Chen, Heewoo Jun, Lukasz Kaiser,
  Matthias Plappert, Jerry Tworek, Jacob Hilton, Reiichiro Nakano, et al. Training verifiers to solve
  math word problems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.14168, 2021.
Tristan Deleu, António Góis, Chris Emezue, Mansi Rankawat, Simon Lacoste-Julien, Stefan Bauer,
  and Yoshua Bengio. Bayesian structure learning with generative flow networks. Uncertainty in
  Artificial Intelligence (UAI), 2022.
Tristan Deleu, Mizu Nishikawa-Toomey, Jithendaraa Subramanian, Nikolay Malkin, Laurent Charlin,
  and Yoshua Bengio. Joint Bayesian inference of graphical structure and parameters with a single
  generative flow network. Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2023.


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A. P. Dempster, N. M. Laird, and D. B. Rubin. Maximum likelihood from incomplete data via the
  EM algorithm. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society B, 39(1):1–38, 1977.

David Dohan, Winnie Xu, Aitor Lewkowycz, Jacob Austin, David Bieber, Raphael Gontijo Lopes,
 Yuhuai Wu, Henryk Michalewski, Rif A. Saurous, Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Kevin Murphy, and
  Charles Sutton. Language model cascades. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.10342, 2022.

Chris Donahue, Mina Lee, and Percy Liang. Enabling language models to fill in the blanks. In
  Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pp.
  2492–2501, Online, July 2020. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2020.
  acl-main.225. URL https://aclanthology.org/2020.acl-main.225.

Nouha Dziri, Ximing Lu, Melanie Sclar, Xiang Lorraine Li, Liwei Jian, Bill Yuchen Lin, Peter West,
  Chandra Bhagavatula, Ronan Le Bras, Jena D Hwang, et al. Faith and fate: Limits of transformers
  on compositionality. Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2023.

Benjamin Eysenbach and Sergey Levine. Maximum entropy RL (provably) solves some robust RL
  problems. International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2022.

Angela Fan, Mike Lewis, and Yann Dauphin. Hierarchical neural story generation. In Proceedings
  of the 56th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long
 Papers), pp. 889–898, Melbourne, Australia, July 2018. Association for Computational Linguistics.
  doi: 10.18653/v1/P18-1082. URL https://aclanthology.org/P18-1082.

Leo Gao, John Schulman, and Jacob Hilton. Scaling laws for reward model overoptimization.
  International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2023.

Samuel J. Gershman and Noah D. Goodman. Amortized inference in probabilistic reasoning.
  Cognitive Science, 36, 2014.

Aaron Gokaslan, Vanya Cohen, Ellie Pavlick, and Stefanie Tellex. Openwebtext corpus. http:
 //Skylion007.github.io/OpenWebTextCorpus, 2019.

Kartik Goyal, Chris Dyer, and Taylor Berg-Kirkpatrick. Exposing the implicit energy networks
  behind masked language models via Metropolis-Hastings. International Conference on Learning
  Representations (ICLR), 2022.

Han Guo, Bowen Tan, Zhengzhong Liu, Eric P. Xing, and Zhiting Hu. Efficient (soft) Q-learning for
  text generation with limited good data. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.07704, 2021.

Tuomas Haarnoja, Haoran Tang, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Reinforcement learning with
  deep energy-based policies. International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2017.

Shibo Hao, Yi Gu, Haodi Ma, Joshua Hong, Zhen Wang, Daisy Wang, and Zhiting Hu. Reasoning
  with language model is planning with world model. In Houda Bouamor, Juan Pino, and Kalika
  Bali (eds.), Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
  Processing, pp. 8154–8173, Singapore, December 2023. Association for Computational Linguis-
  tics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.507. URL https://aclanthology.org/2023.
  emnlp-main.507.

Pengcheng He, Xiaodong Liu, Jianfeng Gao, and Weizhu Chen. DeBERTa: Decoding-enchanced
  BERT with disentangled attention. International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR),
  2021.

Chris Hokamp and Qun Liu. Lexically constrained decoding for sequence generation using grid
  beam search. In Proceedings of the 55th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
  Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 1535–1546, Vancouver, Canada, July 2017. Association
  for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/P17-1141. URL https://aclanthology.
  org/P17-1141.

Ari Holtzman, Jan Buys, Li Du, Maxwell Forbes, and Yejin Choi. The curious case of neural text
  degeneration. International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2019.


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Edward J. Hu, Yelong Shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, and Weizhu
  Chen. Lora: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. International Conference on Learning
  Representations (ICLR), 2022.
Edward J Hu, Nikolay Malkin, Moksh Jain, Katie Everett, Alexandros Graikos, and Yoshua Bengio.
  GFlowNet-EM for learning compositional latent variable models. International Conference on
  Machine Learning (ICML), 2023.
J. Edward Hu, Huda Khayrallah, Ryan Culkin, Patrick Xia, Tongfei Chen, Matt Post, and Benjamin
   Van Durme. Improved lexically constrained decoding for translation and monolingual rewriting.
   In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for
   Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers),
   pp. 839–850, Minneapolis, Minnesota, June 2019. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi:
   10.18653/v1/N19-1090. URL https://aclanthology.org/N19-1090.
Shima Imani, Liang Du, and Harsh Shrivastava. MathPrompter: Mathematical reasoning us-
  ing large language models. In Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association
  for Computational Linguistics (Volume 5: Industry Track), pp. 37–42, Toronto, Canada, July
  2023. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2023.acl-industry.4. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/2023.acl-industry.4.
Moksh Jain, Emmanuel Bengio, Alex Hernandez-Garcia, Jarrid Rector-Brooks, Bonaventure F.P.
 Dossou, Chanakya Ekbote, Jie Fu, Tianyu Zhang, Micheal Kilgour, Dinghuai Zhang, Lena Simine,
 Payel Das, and Yoshua Bengio. Biological sequence design with GFlowNets. International
 Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2022.
Moksh Jain, Tristan Deleu, Jason Hartford, Cheng-Hao Liu, Alex Hernandez-Garcia, and Yoshua
 Bengio. GFlowNets for AI-driven scientific discovery. Digital Discovery, 2(3):557–577, 2023.
Samy Jelassi, Stéphane d’Ascoli, Carles Domingo-Enrich, Yuhuai Wu, Yuanzhi Li, and François
  Charton. Length generalization in arithmetic transformers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.15400,
  2023.
Takeshi Kojima, Shixiang Shane Gu, Machel Reid, Yutaka Matsuo, and Yusuke Iwasawa. Language
  models are zero-shot reasoners. Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2022.
Daphne Koller and Nir Friedman. Probabilistic graphical models: principles and techniques. MIT
  press, 2009.
Nayoung Lee, Kartik Sreenivasan, Jason D Lee, Kangwook Lee, and Dimitris Papailiopoulos.
  Teaching arithmetic to small transformers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.03381, 2023.
Alexander K. Lew, Tan Zhi-Xuan, Gabriel Grand, and Vikash K. Mansinghka. Sequential Monte Carlo
  steering of large language models using probabilistic programs. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.03081,
  2023.
Xiang Lisa Li, Ari Holtzman, Daniel Fried, Percy Liang, Jason Eisner, Tatsunori Hashimoto,
  Luke Zettlemoyer, and Mike Lewis. Contrastive decoding: Open-ended text generation as op-
  timization. In Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
  Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 12286–12312, Toronto, Canada, July 2023. Asso-
  ciation for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2023.acl-long.687. URL https:
  //aclanthology.org/2023.acl-long.687.
Alisa Liu, Maarten Sap, Ximing Lu, Swabha Swayamdipta, Chandra Bhagavatula, Noah A. Smith,
  and Yejin Choi. DExperts: Decoding-time controlled text generation with experts and anti-experts.
  In Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics and
  the 11th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (Volume 1: Long Papers),
  pp. 6691–6706, Online, August 2021. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/
  v1/2021.acl-long.522. URL https://aclanthology.org/2021.acl-long.522.
Dayiheng Liu, Jie Fu, Pengfei Liu, and Jiancheng Lv. TIGS: An inference algorithm for text infilling
  with gradient search. In Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-
  tational Linguistics, pp. 4146–4156, Florence, Italy, July 2019. Association for Computational
  Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/P19-1406. URL https://aclanthology.org/P19-1406.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Yang Liu, Dan Iter, Yichong Xu, Shuohang Wang, Ruochen Xu, and Chenguang Zhu. G-Eval: NLG
  evaluation using GPT-4 with better human alignment. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.16634, 2023.
Sidi Lu, Tao Meng, and Nanyun Peng. Insnet: An efficient, flexible, and performant insertion-based
  text generation model. Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2022a.
Ximing Lu, Sean Welleck, Peter West, Liwei Jiang, Jungo Kasai, Daniel Khashabi, Ronan
  Le Bras, Lianhui Qin, Youngjae Yu, Rowan Zellers, Noah A. Smith, and Yejin Choi. Neu-
  roLogic a*esque decoding: Constrained text generation with lookahead heuristics. In Proceed-
  ings of the 2022 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computa-
  tional Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, pp. 780–799, Seattle, United States, July
  2022b. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2022.naacl-main.57. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/2022.naacl-main.57.
Haipeng Luo, Qingfeng Sun, Can Xu, Pu Zhao, Jian-Guang Lou, Chongyang Tao, Xiubo Geng,
  Qingwei Lin, Shifeng Chen, and Dongmei Zhang. WizardMath: Empowering mathematical
  reasoning for large language models via reinforced evol-instruct. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308:09583,
  2023.
Kanika Madan, Jarrid Rector-Brooks, Maksym Korablyov, Emmanuel Bengio, Moksh Jain, An-
  drei Cristian Nica, Tom Bosc, Yoshua Bengio, and Nikolay Malkin. Learning GFlowNets from
  partial episodes for improved convergence and stability. International Conference on Machine
  Learning (ICML), 2023.
Lucie Charlotte Magister, Jonathan Mallinson, Jakub Adamek, Eric Malmi, and Aliaksei Severyn.
  Teaching small language models to reason. In Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the
  Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 2: Short Papers), pp. 1773–1781, Toronto,
  Canada, July 2023. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2023.acl-short.
  151. URL https://aclanthology.org/2023.acl-short.151.
Nikolay Malkin, Sameera Lanka, Pranav Goel, and Nebojsa Jojic. Studying word order through
  iterative shuffling. In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
  Language Processing, pp. 10351–10366, Online and Punta Cana, Dominican Republic, November
  2021. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2021.emnlp-main.809. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/2021.emnlp-main.809.
Nikolay Malkin, Moksh Jain, Emmanuel Bengio, Chen Sun, and Yoshua Bengio. Trajectory balance:
  Improved credit assignment in GFlowNets. Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS),
  2022a.
Nikolay Malkin, Zhen Wang, and Nebojsa Jojic. Coherence boosting: When your pretrained language
  model is not paying enough attention. In Proceedings of the 60th Annual Meeting of the Association
  for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 8214–8236, Dublin, Ireland, May
  2022b. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2022.acl-long.565. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/2022.acl-long.565.
Nikolay Malkin, Salem Lahlou, Tristan Deleu, Xu Ji, Edward Hu, Katie Everett, Dinghuai Zhang,
  and Yoshua Bengio. GFlowNets and variational inference. International Conference on Learning
  Representations (ICLR), 2023.
Tao Meng, Sidi Lu, Nanyun Peng, and Kai-Wei Chang. Controllable text generation with neurally-
  decomposed oracle. Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2022.
Ning Miao, Hao Zhou, Lili Mou, Rui Yan, and Lei Li. CGMH: Constrained sentence generation by
  Metropolis-Hastings sampling. Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (AAAI),
  2019.
Nasrin Mostafazadeh, Nathanael Chambers, Xiaodong He, Devi Parikh, Dhruv Batra, Lucy Van-
  derwende, Pushmeet Kohli, and James Allen. A corpus and cloze evaluation for deeper under-
  standing of commonsense stories. In Proceedings of the 2016 Conference of the North American
  Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, pp.
  839–849, San Diego, California, June 2016. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi:
 10.18653/v1/N16-1098. URL https://aclanthology.org/N16-1098.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Ofir Nachum, Mohammad Norouzi, Kelvin Xu, and Dale Schuurmans. Bridging the gap between
  value and policy based reinforcement learning. Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS),
  2017.

Bo Pang and Lillian Lee. A sentimental education: Sentiment analysis using subjectivity summa-
  rization based on minimum cuts. In Proceedings of the 42nd Annual Meeting of the Associa-
  tion for Computational Linguistics (ACL-04), pp. 271–278, Barcelona, Spain, July 2004. doi:
 10.3115/1218955.1218990. URL https://aclanthology.org/P04-1035.

Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei-Jing Zhu. Bleu: a method for auto-
  matic evaluation of machine translation. In Proceedings of the 40th Annual Meeting of the
  Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 311–318, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA,
  July 2002. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.3115/1073083.1073135. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/P02-1040.

Fabio Petroni, Tim Rocktäschel, Sebastian Riedel, Patrick Lewis, Anton Bakhtin, Yuxiang Wu,
  and Alexander Miller. Language models as knowledge bases? In Proceedings of the 2019
  Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and the 9th International Joint
  Conference on Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP), pp. 2463–2473, Hong Kong,
  China, November 2019. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/D19-1250.
  URL https://aclanthology.org/D19-1250.

Du Phan, Matthew Douglas Hoffman, Sholto Douglas, Tuan Anh Le, Aaron T Parisi, Pavel Sountsov,
  Charles Sutton, Sharad Vikram, Rif A Saurous, et al. Training chain-of-thought via latent-variable
  inference. Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2023.

Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, Ilya Sutskever, et al. Language
  models are unsupervised multitask learners. OpenAI blog, 1(8):9, 2019.

Nils Reimers and Iryna Gurevych. Sentence-BERT: Sentence embeddings using Siamese BERT-
  networks. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
  Processing and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-
  IJCNLP), pp. 3982–3992, Hong Kong, China, November 2019. Association for Computational
  Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/D19-1410. URL https://aclanthology.org/D19-1410.

Alex Renda, Aspen K. Hopkins, and Michael Carbin. Can LLMs generate random numbers?
  evaluating LLM sampling in controlled domains, 2023. URL http://people.csail.mit.
  edu/renda/llm-sampling-paper.

Timo Schick and Hinrich Schütze. It’s not just size that matters: Small language models are also
  few-shot learners. In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference of the North American Chapter of
  the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, pp. 2339–2352,
  Online, June 2021. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2021.naacl-main.
  185. URL https://aclanthology.org/2021.naacl-main.185.

Timo Schick, Jane Dwivedi-Yu, Roberto Dessı̀, Roberta Raileanu, Maria Lomeli, Luke Zettlemoyer,
  Nicola Cancedda, and Thomas Scialom. Toolformer: Language models can teach themselves to
  use tools. Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2023.

Allen Schmaltz, Alexander M. Rush, and Stuart Shieber. Word ordering without syntax. In Pro-
  ceedings of the 2016 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp.
  2319–2324, Austin, Texas, November 2016. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi:
  10.18653/v1/D16-1255. URL https://aclanthology.org/D16-1255.

John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy
  optimization algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347, 2017.

Lei Sha. Gradient-guided unsupervised lexically constrained text generation. In Proceedings of the
  2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), pp. 8692–
  8703, Online, November 2020. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2020.
  emnlp-main.701. URL https://aclanthology.org/2020.emnlp-main.701.


                                                14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Yuanlong Shao, Stephan Gouws, Denny Britz, Anna Goldie, Brian Strope, and Ray Kurzweil.
  Generating high-quality and informative conversation responses with sequence-to-sequence models.
  In Proceedings of the 2017 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp.
  2210–2219, Copenhagen, Denmark, September 2017. Association for Computational Linguistics.
  doi: 10.18653/v1/D17-1235. URL https://aclanthology.org/D17-1235.
Max W Shen, Emmanuel Bengio, Ehsan Hajiramezanali, Andreas Loukas, Kyunghyun Cho, and
 Tommaso Biancalani. Towards understanding and improving gflownet training. International
 Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2023.
Andy Shih, Dorsa Sadigh, and Stefano Ermon. Long horizon temperature scaling. International
 Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2023.
Alessandro Sordoni, Xingdi Yuan, Marc-Alexandre Côté, Matheus Pereira, Adam Trischler, Ziang
  Xiao, Arian Hosseini, Friederike Niedtner, and Nicolas Le Roux. Joint prompt optimization of
  stacked LLMs using variational inference. Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS),
  2023.
Raymond Hendy Susanto, Shamil Chollampatt, and Liling Tan. Lexically constrained neural ma-
  chine translation with Levenshtein transformer. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting
  of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 3536–3543, Online, July 2020. Asso-
  ciation for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2020.acl-main.325. URL https:
  //aclanthology.org/2020.acl-main.325.
Richard S. Sutton and Andrew G. Barto. Reinforcement Learning: An Introduction. The MIT Press,
  second edition, 2018. URL http://incompleteideas.net/book/the-book-2nd.
  html.
Christoph Tillmann and Hermann Ney. Word Reordering and a Dynamic Programming Beam Search
  Algorithm for Statistical Machine Translation. Computational Linguistics, 29(1):97–133, 03 2003.
  ISSN 0891-2017. doi: 10.1162/089120103321337458. URL https://doi.org/10.1162/
  089120103321337458.
Lucas Torroba Hennigen and Yoon Kim. Deriving language models from masked language models. In
  Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume
  2: Short Papers), pp. 1149–1159, Toronto, Canada, July 2023. Association for Computational
  Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2023.acl-short.99. URL https://aclanthology.org/
  2023.acl-short.99.
Emile van Krieken, Thiviyan Thanapalasingam, Jakub Tomczak, Frank van Harmelen, and Annette
 ten Teije. A-NeSI: A scalable approximate method for probabilistic neurosymbolic inference.
 Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2023.
Ashwin K Vijayakumar, Michael Cogswell, Ramprasath R Selvaraju, Qing Sun, Stefan Lee, David
  Crandall, and Dhruv Batra. Diverse beam search: Decoding diverse solutions from neural sequence
  models. Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (AAAI), 2018.
Leandro von Werra, Younes Belkada, Lewis Tunstall, Edward Beeching, Tristan Thrush, Nathan
  Lambert, and Shengyi Huang. Trl: Transformer reinforcement learning. https://github.
  com/huggingface/trl, 2020.
Alex Wang and Kyunghyun Cho. BERT has a mouth, and it must speak: BERT as a Markov random
  field language model. In Proceedings of the Workshop on Methods for Optimizing and Evaluating
  Neural Language Generation, pp. 30–36, Minneapolis, Minnesota, June 2019. Association for
  Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/W19-2304. URL https://aclanthology.
  org/W19-2304.
Ben Wang and Aran Komatsuzaki. GPT-J-6B: A 6 billion parameter autoregressive language model.
  https://github.com/kingoflolz/mesh-transformer-jax, May 2021.
Peiyi Wang, Lei Li, Liang Chen, Feifan Song, Binghuai Lin, Yunbo Cao, Tianyu Liu, and Zhifang Sui.
  Making large language models better reasoners with alignment. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.02144,
  2023a.


                                               15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Xuezhi Wang, Jason Wei, Dale Schuurmans, Quoc Le, Ed Chi, Sharan Narang, Aakanksha Chowdh-
  ery, and Denny Zhou. Self-consistency improves chain of thought reasoning in language models.
  International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2023b.
Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Brian Ichter, Fei Xia, Ed Chi, Quoc Le,
  and Denny Zhou. Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models. Neural
  Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2022.
Sean Welleck, Ilia Kulikov, Jaedeok Kim, Richard Yuanzhe Pang, and Kyunghyun Cho. Consistency
  of a recurrent language model with respect to incomplete decoding. In Proceedings of the 2020
  Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), pp. 5553–5568,
  Online, November 2020. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2020.
  emnlp-main.448. URL https://aclanthology.org/2020.emnlp-main.448.
Yonghui Wu, Mike Schuster, Zhifeng Chen, Quoc V. Le, Mohammad Norouzi, Wolfgang Macherey,
  Maxim Krikun, Yuan Cao, Qin Gao, Klaus Macherey, Jeff Klingner, Apurva Shah, Melvin Johnson,
  Xiaobing Liu, Łukasz Kaiser, Stephan Gouws, Yoshikiyo Kato, Taku Kudo, Hideto Kazawa, Keith
  Stevens, George Kurian, Nishant Patil, Wei Wang, Cliff Young, Jason Smith, Jason Riesa, Alex
  Rudnick, Oriol Vinyals, Greg Corrado, Macduff Hughes, and Jeffrey Dean. Google’s neural
  machine translation system: Bridging the gap between human and machine translation. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1609.08144, 2016.
Weijia Xu, Andrzej Banburski-Fahey, and Nebojsa Jojic. Reprompting: Automated chain-of-thought
 prompt inference through Gibbs sampling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.09993, 2023.
Takateru Yamakoshi, Thomas Griffiths, and Robert Hawkins. Probing BERT’s priors with serial
  reproduction chains. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2022, pp.
  3977–3992, Dublin, Ireland, May 2022. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/
  v1/2022.findings-acl.314. URL https://aclanthology.org/2022.findings-acl.
  314.
Kevin Yang and Dan Klein. FUDGE: Controlled text generation with future discriminators. In
  Proceedings of the 2021 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Com-
  putational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, pp. 3511–3535, Online, June 2021.
  Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2021.naacl-main.276. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/2021.naacl-main.276.
Shunyu Yao, Dian Yu, Jeffrey Zhao, Izhak Shafran, Thomas L. Griffiths, Yuan Cao, and Karthik
  Narasimhan. Tree of thoughts: Deliberate problem solving with large language models. Neural
  Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2023.
Eric Zelikman, Yuhuai Wu, Jesse Mu, and Noah D. Goodman. STaR: Bootstrapping reasoning with
  reasoning. Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2022.
Maosen Zhang, Nan Jiang, Lei Li, and Yexiang Xue. Language generation via combinatorial
 constraint satisfaction: A tree search enhanced Monte-Carlo approach. In Findings of the Asso-
 ciation for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2020, pp. 1286–1298, Online, November 2020a.
 Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2020.findings-emnlp.115. URL
 https://aclanthology.org/2020.findings-emnlp.115.
Tianyi Zhang, Varsha Kishore, Felix Wu, Kilian Q. Weinberger, and Yoav Artzi. BERTScore:
  Evaluating text generation with BERT. International Conference on Learning Representations
  (ICLR), 2020b.
Hattie Zhou, Azade Nova, Hugo Larochelle, Aaron Courville, Behnam Neyshabur, and Hanie Sedghi.
  Teaching algorithmic reasoning via in-context learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.09066, 2022.
Yongchao Zhou, Andrei Ioan Muresanu, Ziwen Han, Keiran Paster, Silviu Pitis, Harris Chan, and
  Jimmy Ba. Large language models are human-level prompt engineers. International Conference
  on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2023.
Wanrong Zhu, Zhiting Hu, and Eric Xing. Text infilling. arXiv preprint arXiv:1901.00158, 2019.
Heiko Zimmermann, Fredrik Lindsten, Jan-Willem van de Meent, and Christian A. Naesseth. A
  variational perspective on generative flow networks. Transactions on Machine Learning Research
 (TMLR), 2023.


                                               16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A     A DDITIONAL BACKGROUND
A.1    G LOSSARY OF RL FOR LLM S
We provide definitions for key terms used throughout the paper, with a focus on their relevance to our
setting of fine-tuning large language models (LLMs).
Reinforcement learning. Reinforcement learning (RL) is a branch of machine learning concerned
with how agents should take actions in an environment to maximize cumulative rewards. In our
context, RL is used to fine-tune the decision-making process of LLMs to improve their performance
on specific tasks. For a more comprehensive overview, we refer readers to Sutton & Barto (2018).
Policy. In RL, a policy is a strategy that defines the behavior of an agent by mapping states of
the environment to actions. In our setting, a policy dictates how the language model generates text
sequences based on the current context and learned parameters.
Reward. A reward is a signal that evaluates the quality of an action taken by an agent in a particular
state. In the fine-tuning of LLMs, rewards are used to guide the model towards generating more
desirable text, such as more accurate predictions or more coherent continuations. More specifically, in
the context of GFlowNets, the reward corresponds to the unnormalized posterior probability, and the
GFlowNet aims to match it by learning a policy that generates samples proportional to their reward.
Matching a distribution. Matching a distribution involves training a model to approximate a target
probability distribution. In our work, this concept is applied to fine-tune LLMs so that their generated
text matches the desired characteristics, such as adhering to a particular style or content constraint.
Policy gradient methods. Policy gradient methods (such as PPO) are a subset of RL algorithms
that optimize a policy by computing gradients of the expected reward with respect to the policy
parameters. In the context of LLMs, these methods are used to fine-tune the model’s parameters to
increase the likelihood of generating high-reward text sequences.
A.2    L EARNING OBJECTIVE
We use the subtrajectory balance learning objective for training GFlowNets (Madan et al., 2023). In
the notation of that paper, with a forward policy 𝑃𝐹 , backward policy 𝑃 𝐵 and state flow function 𝐹,
the objective over a partial trajectory 𝜏 = 𝑠 𝑚 → · · · → 𝑠 𝑛 is defined as follows
                                                                                 !2
                                                  𝐹 (𝑠 𝑚 ) 𝑖=𝑚 𝑃 𝐹 (𝑠𝑖+1 |𝑠𝑖 )
                                                             Î𝑛−1
                          L 𝑆𝑢𝑏𝑇 𝐵 (𝑍; 𝜃) =   log                                                     (4)
                                                  𝐹 (𝑠 𝑛 ) 𝑖=𝑚 𝑃 𝐵 (𝑠𝑖 |𝑠𝑖+1 )
                                                          Î𝑛−1

In the case of autoregressive generation of a sequence of tokens in a fixed order (left-right), the
generative process is a tree, so there is only a single path to each state, and each state has a single
parent. Thus, 𝑃 𝐵 (𝑠|𝑠′ ) = 1 trivially. Additionally, since each state is a valid terminable state, we
can incorporate the modification to account for this from Deleu et al. (2022). Specifically, note
that at convergence we have 𝑅(𝑠⊤     𝑛 ) = 𝐹 (𝑠 𝑛 )𝑃 𝐹 (⊤ | 𝑠 𝑛 ). Using this, we can simply substitute
𝐹 (𝑠 𝑛 ) = 𝑅(𝑠⊤
              𝑛 )/𝑃 𝐹 (⊤ | 𝑠 𝑛 ) in Eq. (4). This allows us to avoid parameterizing a flow function
separately, reducing additional complexity. The only learned object is now the forward sampling
policy 𝑃𝐹 , which we refer to as 𝑞 𝐺𝐹 𝑁 . Summing this over all partial trajectories in a trajectory with
equal weight (𝜆 = 1), we get the final learning objective in Eq. (3).

B     S ENTENCE CONTINUATION
Additional details. We choose sentences as the level of granularity for our sequence continuation
task because they are a natural unit of generation in language. Moreso than individual words,
sentences are analogous to whole thoughts, reasoning steps, etc. because the compositional rules of
syntax operate at the level of sentences. Whereas the meaning of a word is often ambiguous and
context-dependent, the meaning of a sentence tends to be more self-contained.
A naive solution to the task is to simply sample autoregressively from the LM until a “.” token is
reached, marking the end of the sentence. In practice, however, this is unlikely to produce samples
that have high likelihood because the distribution over sentences has a long tail: a vast number of
sentences have small but non-zero probability, and collectively account for a substantial portion of the
total probability mass. Instead, it would be desirable to sample from a low-temperature distribution
over sentences, so that the distribution becomes more sparse and highly probable sentences are


                                                   17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


sampled more often. However, this in itself is a difficult distribution to sample from, and it is
different from simply sampling autoregressively from the LM with a lower temperature applied to
the distributions over the next words. For instance, as the temperature approaches 0, the desired
distribution over sentences should converge to an argmax and produce the single most likely next
sentence. However, if we try to apply the temperature to the distribution over the next words and
sample autoregressively, then as the temperature approaches 0, the resulting policy will greedily
construct a sentence by sequentially picking the most likely next word, which is unlikely to produce
the highest probability sentence.
Our GFlowNet sampling policy parametrizes a distribution 𝑝 GFN (𝑤 𝑖+1 |𝑤 1:𝑖 ) using the same archi-
tecture as the LM 𝑝 LM (𝑤 𝑖+1 |𝑤 1:𝑖 ), and at the start of training, it is initialized with the same weights.
The initial state of the GFlowNet consists of a prompt 𝑤 1:𝑘 that conditions generation (i.e., the text
whose next sentence we are trying to sample). Each subsequent state 𝑤 1:𝑘+𝑖 is an extension of this
text and is obtained by sampling autoregressively from 𝑝 GFN . This process terminates when a period
“.” is sampled, indicating the end of the next sentence. If a predefined maximum sentence length is
reached, we force a “.” action to manually terminate the generation.
The GFlowNet policy is trained to sample sentences in proportion to their tempered probability under
the original LM given the prompt. Denote the length of the prompt by 𝑘, the length of the sampled
sentence by 𝑚, and the temperature by 𝑇. Then, the reward is:
                                                               𝑚                                  𝑇1
                             def                          1
                                                               Ö
                 𝑅(𝑤 1:𝑘+𝑚 ) = 𝑝 LM (𝑤 𝑘+1:𝑘+𝑚 |𝑤 1:𝑘 ) 𝑇 =          𝑝 LM (𝑤 𝑘+𝑖 |𝑤 1:𝑘+𝑖−1 )             (5)
                                                               𝑖=1

The intuition behind this reward is that we are assuming that the LM can reliably assign a high
likelihood to high-probability sentences, that we wish to preferentially sample over low-probability
ones. If we were to set 𝑇 = 1, then the solution for the GFlowNet would be to sample proportionally
to 𝑝 LM (which it is initialized to). The preferential sampling of high-probability sentences is therefore
obtained by setting 0 < 𝑇 < 1.
To run our experiment, we obtained a dataset of 1000 prompts from OpenWebText (Gokaslan et al.,
2019) that were each 1-3 sentences long, 50 of which were used for validation. Our LM consisted of
a pretrained 1.5B parameter GPT2-XL (Radford et al., 2019), and our GFlowNet was a copy of this
model that was fine-tuned in a lower-dimensional space of 80M parameters using LoRA (Hu et al.,
2022).
Additional results. We show examples of empirical next-sentence samples generated by our model
in Table B.1 compared to baselines. The model was trained using a reward temperature of 0.875,
which achieves a good balance between log-likelihood and diversity.

C     I NFILLING S TORIES
Additional details. See Table C.1 for training examples from the subset of the ROC Stories dataset
used for the task. To condition the model on 𝑋 and 𝑌 , as well as for the prompting baseline, we use
the following prompt:
"Beginning:          {X}\n End:         {Y}\n Middle:           "
An assumption we make in this paper is that the base language model already contains the knowledge
required for the task, and the goal is to perform inference over this knowledge. However, for this task,
none of the pretrained base models were good at assigning high likelihoods to plausible stories. Thus,
we fine-tuned GPT-2 Large model (Radford et al., 2019) on the entirety of the stories dataset and
used this fine-tuned model as the reward model. This was done with full fine-tuning using the trl
library (von Werra et al., 2020). We trained for 20 epochs with a batch size of 64 and 32 gradient
accumulation steps and a learning rate of 0.0005.
We detail the hyperparameters used for training GFlowNets in our experiments in Table C.2. During
training, we sample (𝑋, 𝑌 ) from the dataset and then sample (batch size) 𝑍s for every (𝑋, 𝑌 ), before
using 𝑝 LM (𝑋 𝑍𝑌 ) as the reward. We use the replay buffer described in §3.3 and seed it with rationales
from the dataset. We linearly anneal the reward temperature, the temperature of the behavior policy
during training, and the learning rate during warmup. For supervised fine-tuning, we use a batch
size of 256 and train for 10 epochs with a learning rate of 0.0001 with trl and LoRA. At test time,
we sample 1024 infills for each example in the test set from all the models at temperature 0.9, and
average over 10 such draws.


                                                     18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table B.1: Empirical examples for sequence continuation. Sentences generated from GFlowNet fine-tuning tend
to be more reasonable than autoregressively generated samples from the LM with temperature 1.0 and tend to be
more diverse than samples generated from diverse beam search.
   Input Prompt:                The matching campaign starts on Friday and will continue through
                                midnight on Monday.
   Sampling w/ 𝑇 = 1.0:         (1) Participate with a fairly low $1 donation so we can motivate
                                more volunteers on Sunday afternoon.
                                (2) However, the information regarding Cutler’s suspicious death
                                may not become widely known until early in the week.

   Diverse beam search:         (1) If you are interested in participating in the matching campaign,
                                you can do so by clicking here.
                                (2) There is no limit to the number of times you can enter.

   GFlowNet fine-tuning:        (1) If you are interested in signing up you can do so here.
                                (2) Please share.
   Input Prompt:                I want hockey to become a huge thing in Houston.
   Sampling w/ 𝑇 = 1.0:         (1) We’ll be here in Texas from late November till end March.
                                (2) To that end, I’ve been following the Houston Aeros (Houston
                                Dynamo’s minor-league affiliate) and their AHL affiliate (the Texas
                                Stars).

   Diverse beam search:         (1) That’s why I’m here.
                                (2) That’s why I’m doing this.

   GFlowNet fine-tuning:        (1) This is something I’ve always wanted.
                                (2) When I was a teenager in middle school, I went to the Ice Arena
                                in University of Houston and loved it.
   Input Prompt:                That incident got a lot of attention in part because it was captured
                                on video. Israel said he recorded what happened at the synagogue,
                                and made it public, to document it and leave no doubt about what
                                transpired.
   Sampling w/ 𝑇 = 1.0:         (1) He blogged about it here as well.
                                (2) Israeli TV stations broadcast the video before it aired in Israel,
                                as the country’s rule requires.

   Diverse beam search:         (1) However, there is no evidence that he did so.
                                (2) However, there is no video of what happened inside the
                                synagogue.

   GFlowNet fine-tuning:        (1) He is on tape doing all of it.
                                (2) It’s a message countries can use to deter future attacks.
   Input Prompt:                The Rolling Stones in Concert has since been released solely by
                                ABKCO Records. The band would remain incensed with Klein for
                                decades for that act. Klein died in 2009.
   Sampling w/ 𝑇 = 1.0:         (1) Actually art has become as obscene as investment banking.
                                (2) Some believe he shot himself in the chest.

   Diverse beam search:         (1) The Rolling Stones, however, would not be deterred.
                                (2) The Rolling Stones would go on to release their own version of
                                The Rolling Stones in Concert.

   GFlowNet fine-tuning:        (1) He received a lifetime achievement award from the Jazz Times.
                                (2) Sometimes it seems like we are destined to repeat our own
                                mistakes.



                                                     19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                 Table C.1: Examples of training samples for the stories infilling task.
 Beginning (𝑋)                                Middle (𝑍)                      End (𝑌 )
 I was going to a Halloween party. I          I put my costume on and         My friends loved my cos-
 looked through my clothes but could not      went to the party.              tume.
 find a costume. I cut up my old clothes
 and constructed a costume.
 Allen thought he was a very talented Carl told him that he                   Because of this, Allen
 poet. He attended college to study cre- wasn’t very good.                    swore off poetry forever.
 ative writing. In college, he met a boy
 named Carl.


                        Table C.2: Hyperparameters for the story infilling task.
                             LoRA rank                              64
                             LoRA scaling factor                    16
                             LoRA dropout                          0.1
                             Batch size                             64
                             Gradient accumulation steps            16
                             Learning rate                       0.0001
                             Optimizer                           AdamW
                             𝑃𝐹 temperature max                      2
                             𝑃𝐹 temperature min                    0.5
                             Reward temperature start              1.1
                             Reward temperature end               0.85
                             Reward temperature horizon            100
                             Buffer capacity                        25
                             Number of training steps             1000
                             Evaluation temperature                0.8
                             Maximum length                         25
                             Minimum length                          5


                                                   20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Analysis. Table C.3, C.4, C.5, C.6, C.7, C.8 illustrate some examples of the infills generated with
the prompting baseline, supervised fine-tuned and GFlowNet fine-tuned models on the test examples.

For evaluating the infills we generate a rating for the stories with infills from each of the methods
based on the coherence of the story. We average the rating over 10 infills sampled from each method
and average it over all the 100 test examples. The prompt used for evaluation is the following, adapted
from Liu et al. (2023). Stories with infills generated by the GFlowNet fine-tuned model on average
receive a much higher rating than the baselines. The average rating for the reference infills is 4.3
which should be viewed as an upper bound, as the stories may potentially be present in the GPT-4
training data.


You will be given a short story.

Your task is to rate the story on one metric.

Please make sure you read and understand these instructions
carefully. Please keep this document open while reviewing,
and refer to it as needed.

Evaluation Criteria:

Coherence (1-5) - the collective quality of all sentences.
The story should be well-structured and well-organized.
The story should not just be a heap of related information,
but should build from sentence to a coherent narrative.
The story should also be realistic and all the sentences
when put together should make sense.

Evaluation Steps:

1. Read the story carefully. Check if the story is coherent
and all the sentences follow a logical order.
2. Assign a score for coherence on a scale of 1 to 5,
where 1 is the lowest and 5 is the highest based on the
Evaluation Criteria. If there are grammatical errors
or logical inconsistencies,
simply assign a lower score and do not elaborate on the reasoning.


Example:

Randy had recently separated from his wife.
He felt very lonely and sad all the time.
He considered trying to patch things up with Vera, his ex-wife.
He decided to get a puppy instead.
His decision made him happy and he no longer felt sad.

- Coherence: 5

Randy had recently separated from his wife.
He felt very lonely and sad all the time.
He considered trying to patch things up with Vera, his ex-wife.
Eventually Randy missed Vera very much and developedWhile making
memories with
His decision made him happy and he no longer felt sad.

- Coherence 1



                                                  21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Story:

{{Story}}

Evaluation Form (scores ONLY):

- Coherence:

D    S UBJECTIVITY CLASSIFICATION
Additional details. See Table D.1 for some training examples in the SUBJ dataset. We use the
prompts in Table D.2 for all baselines.
We run GFlowNet fine-tuning for 1000 steps with a linear warmup over 200 steps, a fixed learning
rate of 0.0005, and a batch size of 512 samples; see Table D.3 for all the hyperparameters used. Each
batch consists of 8 queries (𝑋’s), randomly drawn with replacement. We then sample 64 rationales
(𝑍’s) for every 𝑋, before using 𝑝 LM (𝑍𝑌 | 𝑋) as the reward. We also use the replay buffer described
in §3.3 and seed it with potential rationales generated from 𝑝 LM . For supervised fine-tuning, both on
its own and on top of GFlowNet fine-tuning, we use a batch size of 256 with 8 queries, randomly
drawn with replacement. We train for 100 steps with a linear warm-up over 20 steps and a constant
learning rate. We sweep the learning rate in [0.001, 0.0001] and report the best performance. The
reward temperature is annealed from 1.2 down to 1 over the first 150 steps of training.
Additional results. To encourage exploration in the space of 𝑍, we inverse-prompt the model to
generate potential chains of thoughts and store them in a replay buffer at the beginning of training.
The replay buffer is a priority queue indexed by the reward. Under-performing chains of thoughts
are evicted as we collect more trajectories. We ablate the effect of seeding the replay buffer with
inverse-prompted chains of thoughts and aggregating multiple chains at test time in Table D.4.

E    I NTEGER ARITHMETIC
Additional details. See Table E.1 for examples from synthetically generated training data for the
integer arithmetic task.
As with the infilling task, for the integer arithmetic task, the pretrained base models we tested were
imperfect knowledge models, i.e. incorrect rationales are sometimes assigned very high likelihood.
To assign the correct rationales higher rewards, we prepend some demonstrations with hand-crafted
rationales to the query when computing the reward, i.e. 𝑝 LM (𝑋 𝑍𝑌 |(𝑋𝑖 𝑍𝑖𝑌𝑖 )𝑖=1𝑘 ) where 𝑘 = 3 in our
experiments. This improves the calibration to some extent. Note that these (𝑋𝑖 , 𝑍𝑖 , 𝑌𝑖 ) are taken from
the dataset and used only in the reward. The GFlowNet policy here is conditioned only on 𝑋, i.e.,
𝑞 GFN (𝑍 |𝑋).
We detail the hyperparameters used for training GFlowNets in our experiments in Table E.2. During
training, we sample (𝑋, 𝑌 ) from the dataset and then sample (batch size) 𝑍s for every (𝑋, 𝑌 ), before
using 𝑝 LM (𝑋 𝑍𝑌 |(𝑋𝑖 𝑍𝑖𝑌𝑖 )𝑖=1
                             𝑘 ) as the reward. During the generation of 𝑍, as mentioned in §4.4,
whenever a “=” is generated we extract the preceding expression and evaluate the last two terms
using eval in Python. We use the replay buffer described in §3.3 and seed it with rationales from
the dataset 𝑝 LM . We linearly anneal the reward temperature, and the learning rate during warmup.
During evaluation, for all methods, we aggregate the response over multiple samples drawn from
the model at some fixed temperature. For the zero-shot baseline, we observe the best performance
with the “Let us think step by step.” prompt appended at the end of the question. For
supervised fine-tuning and PPO, we use the implementation from trl. For supervised fine-tuning
we use a batch size of 128 with 8 gradient accumulation steps and train for 10 epochs with a learning
rate of 0.0001 using LoRA. For PPO we use a minibatch size of 64 with 16 gradient accumulation
steps, a learning rate of 0.0001, 4 epochs (on the minibatch), a clip range of 0.2, and an adaptive KL
coefficient initialized at 0.2.
Effect of the number of rationales. As mentioned in §4.4, we seed the buffer with rationales from
a dataset. Table E.3 summarizes the results of ablation on the number of examples used to seed
the buffer. We observe, as expected, that the performance generally improves as we the number of
examples used to seed the buffer grows. When no buffers are used to seed the buffer, the performance
is quite poor. We hypothesize that without the good rationales used to seed the buffer, the exploration
problem of searching for good rationales becomes very challenging.


                                                   22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table C.3: Examples of infills generated by the prompting baseline along with reference infills for the stories
infilling task.
 Beginning (𝑋)                        Middle (𝑍)                                      End (𝑌 )
                                      He decided to get a puppy instead
                                      He now happily had a new wife who he
                                      really liked.
 Randy had recently separated         His wife missed him, but for the wrong
 from his wife. He felt very          reasons. Now
                                                                                      His decision made
 lonely and sad all the time.         He finally found someone he could be
                                                                                      him happy and he
 He considered trying to patch        happy with. It was
                                                                                      no longer felt sad.
 things up with Vera, his             He began spending more time with his
 ex-wife.                             new girlfriend and friends.
                                      Randy remained single and mostly satis-
                                      fied with that. He found his
                                      When Randy was happy he went to the
                                      aquarium, a place
                                      He started going out more with a display
                                      of male affection.
                                      He bought Vera a moonstone and gave it
                                      to her as
                                      He and Vera got back together, even
                                      though they had stayed
                                      He introduced Paige to his new employ-
                                      ees and they were great.
                                      Randy is happily married to Vera and
                                      they have a healthy relationship
                                      He found a new lady with a lot of the
                                      same interests
                                      He didn’t want to wait for another
                                      beer to get cold
                                      He went to sleep and came awake with
                                      an angry stomach.
 Ken put a bottle of beer in the
                                      Ken had another beer as a treat. After
 freezer. He heard a popping
                                      the third beer                                  He drank a warm
 noise. He looked in the
                                      He stored the beer in the freezer and for-      beer instead.
 freezer and saw the bottle had
                                      got about it.
 burst.
                                      He walked around the bar a bit. He
                                      thinks he’ll
                                      Weeks later, Ken preferred his cold beer.
                                      However, he
                                      He poured a fresh bottle with a sigh of
                                      relief. It
                                      He went to the bar for cold beer. No one
                                      knew
                                      Ken hung up the phone on his friend. He
                                      didn’t
                                      He bought some veggies from the gro-
                                      cery store. It was warm
                                      Ken watched the movie Goalkeeper. He
                                      was glad the cold
                                      He laid down for a rest. His belly was
                                      full!
                                      He laid down for the night and finally
                                      sleep again. The


                                                      23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table C.4: Additional examples of infills generated by the prompting baseline along with reference infills for
the stories infilling task.
 Beginning (𝑋)                        Middle (𝑍)                                     End (𝑌 )
                                      The room did not have a pencil
                                      Jasmine made her pencil and done her
                                      work. She looked
                                      Her mom brought her a pencil. Jasmine
 Jasmine had homework to do.          wrote her homework
                                                                                     Jasmine decided not
 She did not have a pencil. She       Jasmine took her pencil out of the room.
                                                                                     to do her
 looked around the room for           She now
                                                                                     homework.
 one.                                 Jasmine pretended not to have done her
                                      homework. She got
                                      Her brother finally brought a pencil.
                                      They could finally start!
                                      Her brother brought a pencil and solved
                                      her problem. Jasmine
                                      Her brother brought a pencil and solved
                                      her problem. Jasmine
                                      Her friend offered her a pencil. Jasmine
                                      used the pencil
                                      Her teacher saw her looking at her phone.
                                      Then, Jas
                                      Her mom came in and handed her the
                                      extra pencil! Jas
                                      Her mom brought her a pencil. Jasmine
                                      then got to
                                      Jasmine sent her friend money to do it.
                                      She was
                                      Jane arrived at work an hour late
                                      Despite arriving late, Jane was greeted
                                      warmly by her coworkers
                                      Jane learned that you never can predict
 Jane had recently gotten a
                                      the future. It was
 new job. She was nervous                                                            Jane did not make a
                                      Jane learned not to rush into anything.
 about her first day of work.                                                        good impression at
                                      Jane made a good
 On the first day of work, Jane                                                      her new job.
                                      Many of her peers were not pleased with
 overslept.
                                      her. Jane got
                                      Jane ended up quitting her new job early.
                                      She was happy
                                      More time with the wrong people gave
                                      her anxiety. She was
                                      Jane learned that you do not mess up at
                                      a job well
                                      Jane realized she needed to find new
                                      work contacts.‘. At
                                      After her first day of work, Jane was too
                                      tired to
                                      Secretly, Jane hated her new job. It made
                                      her
                                      Jane realized she worked at a mid-sized
                                      company with long
                                      Jane’s boss realized she did not show up
                                      to work on


                                                     24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table C.5: Examples of infills generated by the supervised fine-tuned model along with reference infills for the
stories infilling task.
 Beginning (𝑋)                        Middle (𝑍)                                       End (𝑌 )
                                      He decided to get a puppy instead
                                      He started enjoying his time with Vera
                                      even more. Now,
 Randy had recently separated         Eventually Randy missed Vera very
 from his wife. He felt very          much and developedWhile making mem-
                                                                                       His decision made
 lonely and sad all the time.         ories with
                                                                                       him happy and he
 He considered trying to patch        He finally decided he had enough pain
                                                                                       no longer felt sad.
 things up with Vera, his             for no good reason.
 ex-wife.                             He began spending more time with his
                                      new girlfriend. Now he
                                      For the first time since the divorce he
                                      started to make new
                                      Soon Randy and Vera were rekindling
                                      their romance. They
                                      He started seeing someone new a day.
                                      Now, he feels
                                      He signed up for a class in Same Sex
                                      Loving Uniqueness
                                      For the first time in months, Randy and
                                      Vera celebrated a
                                      He introduced Paige to his new employ-
                                      ees. They are now good
                                      After some contemplating, he decided to
                                      patch things up with Vera
                                      He now looks for another partner to en-
                                      joy his life with.
                                      He didn’t want to wait for another
                                      beer to get cold
                                      The popping noise was a freezer needle
                                      getting caught. It fell
 Ken put a bottle of beer in the
                                      Ken had a cold for thirty minutes. After
 freezer. He heard a popping
                                      the popping noise                                He drank a warm
 noise. He looked in the
                                      He stored the beer in the freezer. The           beer instead.
 freezer and saw the bottle had
                                      pouring sound was
 burst.
                                      He didn’t know why it didn’t stop the
                                      ringing.
                                      Weeks later, Ken knew the reason for the
                                      freezing. It
                                      Later Ken learned the gas is out of gas
                                      and will end
                                      He left the freezer for the beer. It stayed
                                      in there
                                      Before he knew it, the popping noise was
                                      gone. He
                                      The popping noise that Ken heard indi-
                                      cated it should have freezer shut
                                      The popping noise became louder and
                                      more frequent. Now Ken’s
                                      He froze the beer and drank it from a
                                      mason jar
                                      He went to the store to buy another. Now,
                                      he


                                                      25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table C.6: Additional examples of infills generated by the supervised fine-tuned model along with reference
infills for the stories infilling task.
 Beginning (𝑋)                       Middle (𝑍)                                    End (𝑌 )
                                     The room did not have a pencil
                                     Jasmine decided to talk to her mom
                                     about it. They
                                     Her dad now has to teach her math! Pick-
 Jasmine had homework to do.         ing up
                                                                                   Jasmine decided not
 She did not have a pencil. She      Jasmine took her math test later in the
                                                                                   to do her
 looked around the room for          day. She
                                                                                   homework.
 one.                                Jasmine got an A on her assignment. She
                                     continued to
                                     Her brother finally brought a pencil.
                                     They could finally start!
                                     Her brother brought a pencil and solved
                                     her problem. Jasmine
                                     Jasmine used her pink and brown high-
                                     lighter instead.
                                     Jasmine went to school. She was able to
                                     finish her
                                     Jasmine made her own pencil. At school,
                                     everyone was
                                     Her brotherly earrings helped her stay
                                     up more. While
                                     Jasmine made her own pencil. She ended
                                     up getting good
                                     Jasmine sent her sister to do it. Now it
                                     was
                                     Jane arrived at work an hour late
                                     After arriving home, Jane realized her
                                     apartment was not ready.
                                     After work, Jane returned home and ate
 Jane had recently gotten a
                                     a lousy sandwich.
 new job. She was nervous                                                          Jane did not make a
                                     After her first day of work, Jane learned
 about her first day of work.                                                      good impression at
                                     that mistakes happen
 On the first day of work, Jane                                                    her new job.
                                     Due to her bad first day, Jane was fired
 overslept.
                                     from her
                                     Ending: Jane ended up late for work.
                                     Although she
                                     On her 2nd day of work, Jane came
                                     home late
                                     On the second day of work, Jane arrived
                                     late and unprepared
                                     By the end of the day, Jane was tired and
                                     weary
                                     After her first day of work, Jane’s boss
                                     recommended her
                                     Secretly, Jane hated her new job. Se-
                                     cretly,
                                     After work, Jane felt worn out and tired.
                                     The end
                                     By the end of the day Jane felt confident
                                     and like she


                                                    26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table C.7: Examples of infills generated by the GFlowNet fine-tuned model along with reference infills for the
stories infilling task.
 Beginning (𝑋)                        Middle (𝑍)                                     End (𝑌 )
                                      He decided to get a puppy instead
                                      He went to a friend’s house to talk.
                                      He took Vera to the park for a picnic.
 Randy had recently separated         He finally decided to call Vera on the
 from his wife. He felt very          phone.
                                                                                     His decision made
 lonely and sad all the time.         He asked Vera to meet him and they did.
                                                                                     him happy and he
 He considered trying to patch        He decided to get a dog for his family.
                                                                                     no longer felt sad.
 things up with Vera, his             He went to Vera’s house.
 ex-wife.                             He told Vera that he was ready to love
                                      again.
                                      He bought Vera a nice gift.
                                      He had two dogs and felt like he missed
                                      Vera.
                                      He had a good couple of years.
                                      He wanted to get Vera and he eventually
                                      did.
                                      He wanted to sit in a room alone.
                                      He didn’t want to wait for another
                                      beer to get cold
                                      He decided to stop drinking beer.
                                      Ken suddenly smelled a bottle of beer.
 Ken put a bottle of beer in the
                                      He thought it was something
 freezer. He heard a popping
                                      He walked around the freezer to see the        He drank a warm
 noise. He looked in the
                                      bottle.                                        beer instead.
 freezer and saw the bottle had
                                      He tried to clean up the freezer.
 burst.
                                      He was angry when he had to drink it.
                                      He stepped down from the freezer
                                      He made a big joke that night.
                                      He looked in a jug and see it was, out.
                                      He then looked for a beer the freezer.
                                      He tried to enjoy the rest.
                                      He watered the bottle,


                                                     27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table C.8: Additional examples of infills generated by the GFlowNet fine-tuned model along with reference
infills for the stories infilling task.
 Beginning (𝑋)                      Middle (𝑍)                                     End (𝑌 )
                                    The room did not have a pencil
                                    She was in a panic.
                                    She had to place the pencil in her pocket.
                                    She had several her classmates.
 Jasmine had homework to do.        She looked for a neat pencil.
                                                                                   Jasmine decided not
 She did not have a pencil. She     She thought she looked everywhere.
                                                                                   to do her
 looked around the room for         Her brother walked in and borrowed her
                                                                                   homework.
 one.                               pencil.
                                    She only had a few minutes to do it.
                                    She never had her pencil.
                                    She saw a pen in her closet.
                                    She searched everywhere for a pencil.
                                    She went to her room.
                                    She didn’t find one.
                                    Jane arrived at work an hour late
                                    She lost her job after the first day of
                                    work.
                                    She was egged on by her boss.
 Jane had recently gotten a
                                    She decided to over hyp her first day.
 new job. She was nervous                                                          Jane did not make a
                                    She arrived late and missed her first day
 about her first day of work.                                                      good impression at
                                    of work.
 On the first day of work, Jane                                                    her new job.
                                    She was nervous about going to work.
 overslept.
                                    She ended up getting a good job.
                                    Jane waited almost a day to get to work.
                                    Her first day was very difficult.
                                    She made a couple of phone calls.
                                    She arrived at the office and was fired.
                                    She was all out of coffee.
                                    Jane was surprised she did not make a
                                    good impression.


                         Table D.1: Two training examples from the SUBJ dataset.
Text (𝑋)                                                                                         Label (𝑌 )
another story follows the relationship between a stepfather ( neeson ) and his young stepson .   objective
hoffman ’s performance is authentic to the core of his being .                                   subjective


                                                    28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                          Table D.2: Prompts used for subjectivity classification.
Few-shot learning / Supervised fine-tuning               GFlowNet fine-tuning
Classify this movie review as objective or sub-          Classify this movie review as objective or sub-
jective: “[𝑋]” This review is [𝑌 ].                      jective: “[𝑋]” This review is [𝑍], so it is [𝑌 ].



            Table D.3: Hyperparameters for GFlowNet fine-tuning on subjectivity classification.
                               LoRA rank                            256
                               LoRA scaling factor                  16
                               LoRA dropout                          0.
                               Batch size                            16
                               Gradient accumulation steps          32
                               Learning rate                      0.0005
                               Optimizer                          AdamW
                               𝑃𝐹 temperature max                     2
                               𝑃𝐹 temperature min                   0.5
                               Reward temperature start             1.2
                               Reward temperature end               1.0
                               Reward temperature horizon          150
                               Buffer capacity                       50
                               Number of steps                     100
                               Number of samples                     10
                               Maximum length                         5
                               Minimum length                         1


Analysis. In Table E.4 we show some examples generated by PPO and GFlowNet fine-tuned models.
We observe that PPO generates sequences with high rewards under the base model. These sequences,
however, are not valid expressions, and, in fact, do not even call the tool. Instead, the model learns
to simply repeat the expression. Repetitions being assigned high likelihood is an issue that has also
been noted by Welleck et al. (2020). On the other hand, GFlowNets are able to generate the correct
rationale to evaluate the expression.
There are still cases where the GFlowNet fails to produce the correct reasoning chain. We illustrate
some of these examples in Table E.5. The errors fall mainly into 3 categories: 1) missing operands in
longer OOD problems 2) incorrect operand being copied 3) incorrect operator being copied. The
potential source for such errors is that the reward model assigns equally high rewards to rationales
with these minor mistakes and thus the model generates them with likelihood. These errors can
potentially be reduced by using better and potentially larger reward models.


                Table D.4: Ablation studies on subjectivity classification using GPT-J 6.8B.
            Method                                             Test accuracy (%) ↑
                                                                Training samples
                                                          10            20              50
            GFlowNet fine-tuning                    71.4 ± 1.8     81.1 ± 0.4        87.7 ± 2.2
              (-) Seed buffer                       64.7 ± 8.9     68.7 ± 1.7        77.0 ± 5.5
              (-) Seed buffer (-) Aggregating       63.9 ± 7.1     65.9 ± 2.4        75.4 ± 3.3


                                                    29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table D.5: Top sample rationales for the SUBJ test set using the instruct-fine-tuned GPT-J 6B as both the reward
model and the base model for the GFlowNet, which is trained on 50 labeled examples.
   True label           Rationale                                                            Frequency
                        This review is      about a factual event                            11.45%
                                            describing a factual event                       10.23%
                                            based on a factual statement                     9.47%
   Objective                                about a historical event                         8.77%
                                            about a movie review                             7.41%
                                            based on facts                                   5.64%
                                            about a factual statement                        4.61%
                        This review is      about a movie review                             26.21%
                                            about the movie experience                       26.17%
                                            about the movie                                  7.60%
   Subjective                               describing a movie review                        3.44%
                                            about the movie review                           2.31%
                                            based on a fictional story                       2.30%
                                            describing the movie experience                  2.01%


Table E.1: Examples from the integer arithmetic dataset. Note that the results of the two-term expressions are
evaluated by the calculator.
                     Question (𝑋)                        Rationale (𝑍)                  Answer (𝑌 )
         Question: 6 - 0 - 4 - 8 = ? Answer:         6 - 0 =, 6 - 4 =, 2 - 8 =    . The answer is -6.
          Question: 9 + 4 - 8 = ? Answer:                9 + 4 =, 13 - 8 =         . The answer is 5.


                          Table E.2: Hyperparameters for the Integer Arithmetic Task
                                 LoRA rank                               64
                                 LoRA scaling factor                     16
                                 LoRA dropout                           0.1
                                 Batch size                              16
                                 Gradient accumulation steps             32
                                 Learning rate                        0.0001
                                 Optimizer                            AdamW
                                 𝑃𝐹 temperature max                       2
                                 𝑃𝐹 temperature min                     0.5
                                 Reward temperature start               1.1
                                 Reward temperature end                 0.5
                                 Reward Temperature horizon             150
                                 Buffer capacity                         50
                                 Number of training steps              1000
                                 Evaluation temperature                 0.1
                                 Number of samples                       10
                                 Maximum length                          20
                                 Minimum length                           5


Table E.3: Ablation study to understand the effect of the number of rationales used to seed the buffer on the test
accuracy (%) for the integer arithmetic task.
                                                             Number of operands
                                                            In-distribution      OOD
                         Number of seed rationales           3         4          5
                                       0                    22.6     5.8         3.4
                                       10                   58.6     52.3        20.2
                                       25                   48.8     56.8        24.6
                                       50                   95.2     75.4        40.7



                                                       30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


           Table E.4: Samples generated by PPO fine-tuned and GFlowNet fine-tuned models.
      Question (𝑋)                     Generated rationale (𝑍)                      log 𝑅
      Question: 1 - 9 + 8 = ?
                                       1-9-8                                        -13.17
      Answer:
                                       1 - 9 = -8, -8 + 8 = 0                       -27.75
      Question: 8 + 7 + 2 + 7 = ?
                                       8+7+2+7                                      -2.39
      Answer:
                                       8 + 7 = 15, 15 + 2 = 17, 17 + 7 = 24         -11.72
      Question: 7 - 5 + 8 - 0 - 6 =?
                                       7-5+                                         -1.22
      Answer:
                                       7 - 5 = 2, 2 + 8 = 10, 10 - 0 = 10, 10 - 6
                                                                                    -7.99
                                       =4


                Table E.5: Examples of errors made by the GFlowNet-fine-tuned model.
       Question (𝑋)                                Generated rationale (𝑍)
       Question: 7 + 3 + 4 - 9 + 9 =? Answer:      7 + 3 = 10, 10 - 9 = 1, 1 + 4 = 5
                                                   8 + 5 = 13, 13 - 1 = 12, 12 + 4 = 16, 16 -
       Question: 8 + 5 - 1 - 4 + 5 =? Answer:
                                                   4 = 12
                                                  0 + 5 = 5, 5 - 6 = -1, -1 - 6 = -7, -7 + 1 =
       Question: 0 + 5 - 6 - 1 - 6 =? Answer:
                                                  -6


                                                31
