Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EWARD D ESIGN FOR J USTIFIABLE S EQUENTIAL
D ECISION -M AKING
 Aleksa Sukovic 1, 2 Goran Radanovic 1
 Max Planck Institute for Software Systems 1 Saarland University 2
 {asukovic, gradanovic}@mpi-sws.org



                                              A BSTRACT
         Equipping agents with the capacity to justify made decisions using supporting
         evidence represents a cornerstone of accountable decision-making. Furthermore,
         ensuring that justifications are in line with human expectations and societal norms
         is vital, especially in high-stakes situations such as healthcare. In this work, we
         propose the use of a debate-based reward model for reinforcement learning agents,
         where the outcome of a zero-sum debate game quantifies the justifiability of a de-
         cision in a particular state. This reward model is then used to train a justifiable pol-
         icy, whose decisions can be more easily corroborated with supporting evidence.
         In the debate game, two argumentative agents take turns providing supporting ev-
         idence for two competing decisions. Given the proposed evidence, a proxy of a
         human judge evaluates which decision is better justified. We demonstrate the po-
         tential of our approach in learning policies for prescribing and justifying treatment
         decisions of septic patients. We show that augmenting the reward with the feed-
         back signal generated by the debate-based reward model yields policies highly
         favored by the judge when compared to the policy obtained solely from the envi-
         ronment rewards, while hardly sacrificing any performance. Moreover, in terms
         of the overall performance and justifiability of trained policies, the debate-based
         feedback is comparable to the feedback obtained from an ideal judge proxy that
         evaluates decisions using the full information encoded in the state. This sug-
         gests that the debate game outputs key information contained in states that is most
         relevant for evaluating decisions, which in turn substantiates the practicality of
         combining our approach with human-in-the-loop evaluations. Lastly, we show-
         case that agents trained via multi-agent debate learn to propose evidence that is
         resilient to refutations and closely aligns with human preferences.


1    I NTRODUCTION
Reinforcement learning (RL) has been achieving impressive successes in a wide range of complex
domains. However, specifying a reward function which incentivizes RL agents to exhibit a desired
behavior remains difficult (Leike et al., 2018). Prior work proposes several approaches that address
these difficulties (Kwon et al., 2023; Bahdanau et al., 2018; Jothimurugan et al., 2019), including
those based on learning from pairwise preferences (Christiano et al., 2017). However, such reward
models are not informative enough for agents to learn how to substantiate their decisions with sup-
porting evidence – a key property needed for accountable decision-making (Bovens, 2007). Hence,
we ask the following question: How can we design rewards that incentivize agents to carry out a
given task, but through decisions that can be justified?
To answer this questions, we consider a setting in which an RL agent acts as a principal, influencing
the state of the world, while a human agent acts as a verifier responsible for validating the justifia-
bility of the decisions taken by the RL agent, based on the evidence provided. This scenario mirrors
common real-world situations where accountability is critical, including healthcare scenarios where
doctors are tasked with scrutinizing the validity of automated decisions. We recognize three impor-
tant properties that the provided evidence should satisfy. First, it should reflect the underlying state of
the world, i.e., include the key information based on which an action was taken. A naive solution is
to provide the full state as evidence. However, this discards the fact that the human, as a suboptimal-
decision maker, may not easily reason about the taken decision because the state might be too large


                                                    1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 1: To obtain a debate reward rtd in the state st , two argumentative agents A1 and A2 take
turns proposing supporting evidence (depicted as triangles) for two decisions, up to a predefined
limit (here, 3 evidence each). Then, a positive debate reward is issued whenever a proxy of a judge
J considers action at , taken by the justifiable policy π J , better justified than action aB
                                                                                            t taken by the
baseline policy π B . This reward is then mixed with the environment reward rte via debate coefficient
λ, yielding the final reward rt used to train the justifiable agent.


or otherwise incomprehensible. This brings us to the second property: the provided evidence should
also be concise and only reflect the most relevant information. The third property builds on the
second one: given that the provided evidence contains only partial information about the state, this
information should not be easy to refute. More specifically, additional information about the un-
derlying state, e.g., additional evidence, should not change the human’s judgment. Therefore, the
overall challenge is to design a framework which can enable such justifications through a reward
model that incentivizes both performance and justifiability.
To tackle this challenge, we consider a framework which modifies the environment rewards by mix-
ing them with rewards coming from a debate-based reward model (see Figure 1). Each debate-based
reward is defined through the outcome of a two-player zero-sum debate game. More specifically, we
let two argumentative agents debate by taking turns providing supporting evidence contingent on
the current state, each corroborating a decision made by one of two competing policies. Based on
the proposed set of evidence, the human then states their preference over these two decisions, and
this preference defines the debate reward. In this setup, one decision comes from a baseline policy,
while the other comes from a justifiable policy that we optimize. Our approach builds upon the work
of Irving et al. (2018), but we consider sequential decision-making problems and utilize debate to
quantify a decision’s justifiability. To this end, we recognize two main technical challenges. First,
learning a proxy of a human judge that evaluates decisions solely based on the proposed evidence,
with comparable performance to methods requiring full state exposure. Second, learning a represen-
tation of argumentative strategies that are solutions to different instances of the debate game. These
two components are needed to enable efficient learning of the justifiable policy.
Contributions. Our contributions are as follows. (i) We formalize the problem of justifiable
decision-making, modeling debate as an extensive-form game (Sec. 3). (ii) We provide a method for
learning a proxy of a human judge that evaluates a decision’s justifiability using proposed evidence
(Sec. 4.2). (iii) We propose an approach to learning contextualized argumentative strategies that
constitute approximate solutions of the debate games (Sec. 4.3). (iv) We conduct extensive empir-
ical evaluation of our approach on a real-world problem of treating sepsis, testing the performance
and justifiability of policies trained through our framework (Sec. 5.2), as well as the effectiveness
and robustness of argumentative agents (Sec. 5.3, Sec. 5.4, and Sec. 5.5) 1 .

2       R ELATED W ORK
Debate. Irving et al. (2018) first outlined theoretical and practical implications of debate as a method
for training aligned agents. Debate has also been used to improve factuality of large language models
(Du et al., 2023), reason in knowledge graphs (Hildebrandt et al., 2020), and aid in Q&A tasks (Perez
et al., 2019). We build on this line of work by bringing the utility of debate in sequential decision-
making problems, where it is used as an approach of quantifying justifiability of made decisions.
In addition, by leveraging learning from pairwise preferences as in Christiano et al. (2017), our
    1
        Our code is publicly available at github.com/aleksa-sukovic/iclr2024-reward-design-for-justifiable-rl.


                                                          2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


framework enables encoding of human judgments in a form of the preferred evidence that renders a
decision justified.
Reward Design. Previous work proposes several approaches that address difficulties of reward
design, based on natural language (Kwon et al., 2023; Bahdanau et al., 2018), rule-based methods
(Jothimurugan et al., 2019) and preferences (Biyik & Sadigh, 2018; Christiano et al., 2017). Further-
more, there is a line of work considering interpretable reward design, including reward sparsification
(Devidze et al., 2021) and reward decomposition (Juozapaitis et al., 2019; Bica et al., 2020). Dif-
ferently, we define a reward model as an outcome of a zero-sum debate game, which in itself is
interpretable, and learn contextualized policies that solve it. Most similar to our methodology is
learning from pairwise preferences as in Christiano et al. (2017), only we assume comparisons are
made over justifying evidence, without exposure to the underlying state or trajectory.
Explainable AI and Other Related Work. Our approach is most similar to the attribution-based
techniques for explaining the inner workings of models. In such approaches, contributions of input
features are quantified numerically (Lundberg & Lee, 2017; Ribeiro et al., 2016) or visually repre-
sented as heatmaps (Selvaraju et al., 2017; Mundhenk et al., 2019). This line of research has received
a significant attention, also in the context of explaining decisions of RL agents (Ragodos et al., 2022;
Bastani et al., 2018). However, one limitation of these explanations is the inability to further align
them with human preferences (Hadfield, 2021; Brundage et al., 2020). In contrast, our approach
additionally enables human-specified justifications, facilitating the incorporation of preferences into
their generation. There is also a line of work that examines approaches for adaptation of agent’s
recommendations (actions) to a baseline human policy in an expert-in-loop setup (Grand-Clément
& Pauphilet, 2022; Faros et al., 2023). Differently, we consider a problem of learning to take actions
that can be justified, where the agent itself acts as a primary decision-maker in the environment.

3       F ORMAL S ETUP
We consider a sequential decision-making problem, where an agent interacts with an environment
over a series of time-steps, modeled by a discrete-time Markov Decision Processes (MDP). The
episode begins by sampling a starting state from the initial state distribution ρ. At each time-step
t, an agent observes the current state st ∈ S, takes an action at ∈ A and receives an environment
reward re (st , at ). The environment then transitions to a successor state st+1 with a probability
specified by the transition function T (st+1 |st , at ).

3.1       AGENTS

We consider two kinds of agents that operate in the defined MDP: baseline and justifiable agent.
Baseline Agent. The baseline agent aims to maximize the expected discounted value of the envi-
                                  PT −1
ronment’s return given as R = t=0 γ t re (st , at ), where γ ∈ [0, 1] is a user-specified discount
factor. Its optimal action-value function, defined as Q∗ (s, a) = maxπ E [R|st = s, at = a, π], is
the maximum expected discounted return obtained after taking action a in state s. We will refer
to a deterministic policy that maximizes the expected value of R as the baseline policy π B , which
satisfies π B (s) ∈ argmaxa Q∗ (s, a). 2
Justifiable Agent. While the baseline agent learns to solve the environment, its decisions may not
be easy to justify when evaluated by a human. To design an agent that accounts for the justifiability
of its decisions, we consider a reward defined as a weighted combination of the environment reward
re and the debate reward rd , which encapsulates human judgment of justifiability and is specified
in the next subsection. The expected return is then defined as:
                            XT −1
                                    γ t (1 − λ) · re (st , at ) + λ · rd (st , at , aB

                     RJ =                                                            t )
                                      t=0
where λ ∈ [0, 1] is a debate coefficient, balancing between environment and debate rewards, and
aB
 t is the action of the baseline agent in state st . The value of λ = 0.0 corresponds to the return
of the baseline policy, whereas for the value λ = 1.0 we obtain a setup similar to Christiano et al.
(2017), where the agent relies only on the debate reward model. We refer to an agent that maxi-
mizes the expected value of RJ as the justifiable agent, denote its optimal action-value function as
    2
        In practice, we require the baseline policy to be well-performing, but not necessarily optimal.


                                                          3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Q∗J (s, a) = maxπ E [RJ |st = s, at = a, π] and its deterministic policy π J (s) ∈ argmaxa Q∗J (s, a)
as the justifiable policy.


3.2     R EWARD M ODELING VIA D EBATE

Our objective is to learn a reward model, denoted as rd (st , at , aB
                                                                    t ), which quantifies the justifiability
of a decision. To this end, we introduce a reward model based on a debate game. In this model,
rd (st , at , aB                                                                        B
               t ) represents the value of a debate game induced by a tuple (st , at , at ). In more details,
                                B
for a given tuple (st , at , at ), the induced debate game is formulated as a two-player zero-sum
extensive-form game (Shoham & Leyton-Brown, 2008), in which the first player argues for taking
the decision at in state st , while the second player argues for taking the baseline decision aB    t in st .

Debate Game. With N we denote a set of nodes in a finite, rooted game tree. The action space is
represented by a finite set of evidence E, and each node n ∈ N consists of evidence proposed thus
far in the game n = {e} ⊆ E. Additionally, the edges to successors of each node define actions
(evidence) {e : e ∈ E \ n} available to the acting player, where we disallow evidence repetition. The
debate game is a perfect-information game: at all times, the players have no ambiguity about the
evidence proposed up until the current point and have a complete knowledge about the state of the
game. The game proceeds as players take turns: in turn l, player i = l mod 2+1 proposes evidence
eil/2 . 3 The total number of turns L is assumed to be even and significantly smaller than the evidence
set, i.e., L ≪ |E|. After the last turn, a terminal node nL = (e11 , e21 , ..., e1L/2 , e2L/2 ) = {enL } is
evaluated. The players’ utilities are u1 (nL ) = −u2 (nL ) = U(at , aBt , {enL }), with U defined as:
                                           
                                            +1,               J (at , {e}) > J (aB
                                                                                  t , {e})
                        U(at , aB
                                t , {e}) =   0,                J (at , {e}) = J (aB
                                                                                  t , {e})
                                            −1,                                otherwise

Here, J is a model of a human judge that, for a given decision a and evidence {e}, outputs a
numerical value J (a, {e}) ∈ R quantifying how justifiable a is under evidence {e}.
Strategies and Solution Concept. A player’s strategy σ i : N → E outputs available evidence
σ i (n) ∈ E \ n in a given node n and Σi is the set of all strategies of the player i. Based on the utility
function, we additionally define G({σ 1 , σ 2 }, st , at , aB     t ) as the payoff (utility) of the first player,
conditioned on both players following the strategy profile {σ 1 , σ 2 }. Then, a set of the best responses
of the first (resp. second) player to its opponent strategy σ 2 (resp. σ 1 ) is defined as b1 (σ 2 ) =
arg maxσ1 ∈Σ1 G({σ 1 , σ 2 }, st , at , aB                  2 1                                1    2
                                               t ) (resp. b (σ ) = arg minσ 2 ∈Σ2 G({σ , σ }, st , at , at )). A
                                                                                                                B
                                 1    2                                                i          i −i
strategy profile σ̄ = {σ̄ , σ̄ } is a pure-strategy Nash equilibrium if σ̄ ∈ b (σ̄ ). Because the
debate game is a perfect-information extensive-form game, a pure-strategy Nash equilibrium exists
(Shoham & Leyton-Brown, 2008), and due to its zero-sum structure, it can be obtained by solving
the following max-min optimization problem: maxσ1 ∈Σ1 minσ2 ∈Σ2 G({σ 1 , σ 2 }, st , at , aB                   t ). We
refer to G({σ̄ 1 , σ̄ 2 }, st , at , aB
                                      t ) as the  value of the game 4
                                                                      and  define r d
                                                                                      (s t , at , aB
                                                                                                   t ) to be equal to it,
i.e., rd (st , at , aB                  1    2           B
                     t ) = α · G({σ̄ , σ̄ }, st , at , at ), where α > 0 is a scaling coefficient.



4       L EARNING F RAMEWORK

To effectively use a debate game outcome during training of justifiable policies, it is necessary to
devise a model of a human judge J (Sec. 4.2) that encapsulates justifiability judgment and addi-
tionally learn argumentative policies that approximate a Nash equilibrium and are able to generalize
across different instances of the debate game. With r̂d (st , at , aB  t ) we denote an approximation of
rd (st , at , aB
               t ), obtained  by  running  the argumentative  policies from Sec. 4.3 in the debate game
induced by (st , at , aB t ). In all our experiments, we set α =  5.

    3
      In our implementation of the debate game, we randomly chose which player has the first turn, i.e., i =
(l + τ ) mod 2 + 1, where τ ∼ U ({0, 1}). This only affects the order of the evidence in nL .
    4
      For a two-player zero-sum game, the value of the game (or payoff) is unique (von Neumann & Morgen-
stern, 1947).


                                                           4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


4.1      P REFERENCE DATASET

We assume the human judgments are collected in a preference dataset D of tuples (st , a0 , a1 , p),
where st is a state, a0 ̸= a1 are two decisions and p ∈ {0, 1} indicates which of the two decision is
more justified in a particular state. The value of p = 0 (resp. p = 1) indicates that a0 (resp. a1 ) is
more preferred.

4.2      J UDGE M ODEL

Because asking for human feedback is expensive, we aim to learn a judge model from the dataset D
of preferences that can be used to evaluate the outcome of debate games. The judge, parametrized
with learnable parameter θ ∈ Rd1 , is defined as a scalar reward function Jθ (a, {e}) ∈ R quantifying
how justifiable a decision a is, given evidence {e}. Similar to Christiano et al. (2017), we addition-
ally assume that justifiability preference for decision a0 over decision a1 follows the Bradley-Terry
model (Bradley & Terry, 1952):
                                                          exp Jθ (a0 , {e})
                          P(a0 ≻ a1 , {e}) =                                           .
                                                 exp Jθ (a0 , {e}) + exp Jθ (a1 , {e})
Here, we require the judge to quantify the level of justifiability given all evidence at once. Note
the lack of dependency on the state st : the judge evaluates only proposed evidence, whereas the
argumentative agents are in charge of providing those evidence, contingent on the state. We optimize
the parameters by minimizing the cross-entropy loss between preference-predictions and labels from
the dataset. See App. C.1 for more details.

4.3      A RGUMENTATIVE AGENT

Our overarching goal is to learn a generalizable argumentative policy that is able to solve any de-
bate game, conditioned on its defining tuple (st , at , aB  t ). This is a difficult feat, as the evidence
set available to the agent is contingent on the state st . To this end, we can treat the debate game
as an instance of a contextualized extensive form game (Sessa et al., 2020), where we consider
the tuple (st , at , aB                                                                       J
                       t ) as a context z ∈ Z. In a general case, the justifiable agent π observes the
state st and takes action at which, paired with an action aB        t  the baseline  agent  π B
                                                                                                 would have
taken, sets the debate game context z = {st , at , aB  t }. In  the  specific case of offline  reinforcement
learning we consider here, the contexts are sampled i.i.d. from the static dataset throughout train-
ing of both, argumentative and justifiable agents. Therefore, given a sample from the preference
dataset (st , a0 , a1 , p) ∼ D, we set the context to z = (st , ap , a1−p ). Player i’s contextual strategy,
parametrized with learnable parameter ϕi ∈ Rd2 , is defined as σϕc i : Z → Σi , mapping a con-
text to the strategy of the player for the induced debate game 5 . To learn parameters ϕi , we solve:
maxϕ1 ∈Rd2 minϕ2 ∈Rd2 Ez∼D [G({σϕc 1 (z), σϕc 2 (z)}, z)].

4.4      M ETHOD

Judge. The judge Jθ is parametrized by weights θ ∈ Rd1 of a neural network with two fully-
connected layers of size 256, using parametric relu (He et al., 2015) activation and batch normal-
ization (Ioffe & Szegedy, 2015). The network receives a vector x in R|E| , where only the values of
evidence {e} are shown, while the rest are set to zero. In addition, a binary mask of the same dimen-
sion, wherein all elements corresponding to the evidence {e} are assigned a value of one, while the
remaining elements are set to zero, as well as a one-hot encoded action a are passed. The learning is
done for a total of 100 epochs using batches of 64 comparisons sampled from the preference dataset
D, Adam optimizer and a learning rate of 5e-4. See App. C.1 for more details.
Argumentative Agent. We represent parameters ϕ ∈ Rd2 of the argumentative agent σϕc (·|z),
as weights of a neural network composed of 2 fully-connected layers of size 512 with leaky-relu
activation function (Maas et al., 2013) with slope of 1e-2. The network takes as input a 44-dim
state, a one-hot encoded decision for which the agent argues, as well as a binary mask of currently
proposed evidence. The evidence (action) space of the policy is discrete and has 44 choices, each
corresponding to exactly one state feature. To train the agent, we use PPO (Schulman et al., 2017)
   5
       Equivalently, we will also denote the contextual strategy of player i as σϕc i (·|z) : N → E for z ∈ Z.


                                                          5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                    λ=0.0                                         λ=0.25               λ=0.50                            λ=0.75                     λ=1.0                      clinician

              1.00                                                                1.00                                            0.50                                                  0.50


                                                       Preference Over Baseline
              0.90
                                                                                  0.90                                            0.40                                                  0.40
              0.80
Performance


                                                                                                                                                                            Mortality
                                                                                                                      Mortality
                                                                                  0.80                                            0.30                                                  0.30
              0.70

              0.60                                                                0.70                                                                                                  0.20
                                                                                                                                  0.20

              0.50
                                                                                  0.60                                            0.10                                                  0.10
              0.40

              0.30 0    100   200   300    400   500                              0.50 λ=0.25 λ=0.50 λ=0.75   λ=1.0               0.00−0.08 −0.04    0.00    0.04    0.08               0.00 −0.50 −0.25   0.00   0.25   0.50
                              Iterations                                                     Policy Variant                                         Excess           1e4                               Excess

                (a) WIS evaluation                                  (b) Preferred to baseline                                        (c) IV dose excess                                   (d) VC dose excess

Figure 2: Evaluation of justifiable policies. For (b)-(d), the confidence intervals represent ±2 stan-
dard errors of the mean over 5 random seeds. (a) Policy performance as measured by WIS evaluation
on a held-out test set with ±1 terminal rewards for every patient discharge or death. The mean and
standard deviation are reported over 5 random seeds. (b) Percent of times judge preferred decisions
of justifiable policies (i.e., λ > 0.0) compared to those of the baseline policy (i.e., λ = 0.0). (c)
(d) Observed patient mortality (y-axis) against variations in IV/VC treatment doses prescribed by
clinicians compared to the recommendations of learned policies (x-axis).


and examine two optimization strategies, namely self-play and maxmin. We train the self-play debate
by letting the agent argue with a copy of itself 6 , updating that copy every 100k steps, and repeating
the procedure for 500 generations. For maxmin debate, we use 2 different set of weights, ϕ1 and
ϕ2 , to represent the agents’ policies. The first agent i.e., ϕ1 is trained for 4k steps, followed by
training of the second agent i.e., ϕ2 for 100k steps, repeating this procedure for 500 generations.
This approach of overfitting the second agent to the current version of the first ensured learning of
defense strategies against a very strong adversary. See App. C.2 for more details.
Justifiable Agent. To learn a justifiable policy π J (s) ∈ arg maxa Q∗J (s, a), we consider model-free
reinforcement learning methods based on Q-learning. Our approach builds on top of Raghu et al.
(2017) and is based on a variant of Deep-Q networks (Mnih et al., 2015), specifically double-deep
Q-network with the dueling architecture (Wang et al., 2016; Van Hasselt et al., 2016). The final
network consists of 2 fully-connected layers of size 128 using leaky-relu activation function with
slope 1e-2. The learning is done in batches of 256 (s, a, r, s′ ) tuples sampled from a Prioritized
Experience Replay buffer (Schaul et al., 2015) using a learning rate of 1e-4, for a total of 25k
iterations, evaluating the policy every 50 iterations on a held-out test set. When incorporating signal
from the debate, i.e., r̂d , we augment the reward from the replay buffer as described in Sec. 3.1.
Modifying just the observed reward, without changing the state dynamics, has been shown to be
sufficient to induce learning of an alternative policy (Ma et al., 2019). See App. C.3 for more
details, including additional loss terms and a list of all hyperparameters.

5                    E XPERIMENTS
In our experiments, we aim to empirically evaluate the properties of debate as a method for reward
specification. To this end, we perform quantitative and qualitative evaluation of justifiable policies
(Sec. 5.2), analyze the effect of pairwise comparison only over proposed evidence on performance
and justifiability (Sec. 5.3), examine the necessity of multi-agent debate in learning to provide
evidence that is resilient to refutations (Sec. 5.4), and compare efficiency in providing supporting
evidence for a decision of argumentative policies and SHAP feature-attribution method (Sec. 5.5).

5.1                    E NVIRONMENTAL S ETUP

Sepsis. Data for our cohort were obtained following steps outlined in Komorowski et al. (2018),
utilizing MIMIC-III v1.4 database (Johnson et al., 2016). We focus our analysis on patients that
fulfill Sepsi-3 criteria (Singer et al., 2016), 18,585 in total. The patient vector consists of 40 contin-
uous and 4 discrete features, and the action space consists of 5 × 5 discrete choices of intravenous
                6
                    In terms of learnable parameters, this implies ϕ2 := ϕ1 .


                                                                                                                      6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


(IV) fluids and vasopressors (VC). As in Raghu et al. (2017), the environment rewards are clinically
guided. We set the environment reward re to ±15 for terminal states resulting in patient survival or
death, respectively, and shape the intermediate rewards based on the SOFA score (measure of organ
failure). See App. B for more details.
Preference Dataset. To make a comprehensive evaluation possible, we define a synthetic ground-
truth preference by making an assumption that a human judge always prefers a treatment prescribed
by the clinician. Therefore, clinician’s actions are the justified actions in our experiments. More
formally, we bootstrap the dataset of preferences D by matching every pair (st , at ) from the cohort
with an alternative action ar ∼ U(A), ar ̸= at sampled uniform-random from the action space,
initializing the preference variable p to point to the true action at , as taken by the clinician (see App.
D.5 for alternative dataset bootstrapping methods). The number of evidence is fixed to 6 (∼ 13.6%
of the full state) (see App. D.1 for results with L = 4 evidence). The dataset is split into chunks
of 70%, 15%, 15% used for training, validation, and testing respectively. We report all our results
on a held-out test set, not seen by any of the agents nor the judge. When training a judge model,
we additionally augment a tuple (st , a0 , a1 , p) with an evidence set {e}. To generate it, we sample
a predetermined number of state features uniform-random i.e., {e} ∼ U(st ), from the state, which
is inspired by Irving et al. (2018) and ensures evidence is contingent on the state (Sec. 3.2) 7 . On
the test set, the judge is able to correctly recover the underlying preference from the dataset with a
relatively low accuracy of 65%.
Baselines. When comparing effectiveness of treatment policies, we consider two baselines. First,
we consider the observed reward of the clinician from the dataset (depicted as a gray horizontal
line in plots). Second, the baseline policy (Sec. 3.1) serves as an indicator of the optimal treatment
policy. To demonstrate the robustness of multi-agent debate, we introduce an isolated argumentative
agent. This agent aims to find an evidence set {e} that maximizes J (ap , {e}), for a given ap . To
achieve this, we solve a search problem akin to the debate game by applying reinforcement learning
(see App. C for more details). Lastly, we use SHAP when comparing effectiveness of debate to a
feature-importance approach in providing supporting evidence for a decision.

5.2    E XPERIMENT 1: E FFECTIVENESS OF TASKS P OLICIES

To examine the potential of specifying the reward as an adversarial game and its effect on the quality
of learned behaviors, we train several policies by varying the debate coefficient λ.
Quantitative Evaluation. In Plot 2a, we evaluate the performance of different justifiable policies on
a held-out test set during the course of training using weighted importance sampling (WIS) (Sutton
& Barto, 2018) 8 . Likewise, in Plot 2b, we show the judge’s preference over decisions made by
justifiable policies (i.e., λ > 0.0), compared to the baseline policy (i.e., λ = 0.0), when the two
were different 9 . The observed inherent trade-off between performance and justifiability suggests
that tuning the debate coefficient λ is important in practice, and we further elaborate on this in Sec.
6.
Qualitative Evaluation. In addition to quantitative evaluation, we perform qualitative analysis
similar to Raghu et al. (2017). Plots 2c and 2d showcase correlation between observed mortality and
difference between the optimal doses suggested by policies, and the actual doses prescribed by the
clinicians. For all trained policies, the lowest mortality is observed when the difference is near zero,
thus further showcasing their potential validity. It is also encouraging to see that the policy trained
solely with debate rewards (i.e., λ = 1.0) remains quantitatively and qualitatively competitive in
addition to being highly favored by the judge, even though it relies only on debate rewards.

5.3    E XPERIMENT 2: D EBATE -BASED F EEDBACK VS . S TATE -BASED F EEDBACK

Because the judge is evaluating justifiability using only proposed evidence, a natural question to
ask is how much does this affect the performance and alignment of trained policies. To provide an
answer, we train a new judge that evaluates decisions based on the full state, namely J ′ (at , st ). We
then use this judge instead of r̂d to train a new justifiable policy using state-based feedback, one
   7
     We discuss different approaches for defining a set of evidence in Sec. 6.
   8
     The behavior policy used in WIS was derived via behavior cloning, further described in App. C.3.
   9
     See Plot 6a in App. D for a detailed breakdown of actions proposed by justifiable policies.


                                                     7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


               1.00                                                    1.00                                                    1.00                                                    1.00

               0.90                                                    0.90                                                    0.90                                                    0.90

               0.80                                                    0.80                                                    0.80                                                    0.80

 Performance


                                                         Performance


                                                                                                                 Performance


                                                                                                                                                                         Performance
               0.70                                                    0.70                                                    0.70                                                    0.70

               0.60                                                    0.60                                                    0.60                                                    0.60

               0.50            debate-based feedback                   0.50            debate-based feedback                   0.50            debate-based feedback                   0.50            debate-based feedback
                               state-based feedback                                    state-based feedback                                    state-based feedback                                    state-based feedback
               0.40                                                    0.40                                                    0.40                                                    0.40
                               clinician                                               clinician                                               clinician                                               clinician
               0.30 0    100     200   300   400   500                 0.30 0    100     200   300   400   500                 0.30 0    100     200   300   400   500                 0.30 0    100     200   300   400   500
                                Iterations                                              Iterations                                              Iterations                                              Iterations

                        (a) λ = 0.25                                            (b) λ = 0.50                                            (c) λ = 0.75                                            (d) λ = 1.0

Figure 3: Performance of policies trained with state-based feedback compared to debate-based feed-
back, as measured by the weighted importance sampling evaluation on a held-out test set with ±1
terminal rewards for every patient discharge or death. The mean and standard deviation are reported
over 5 random seeds.


for each λ. Given a sample (st , a0 , a1 , p) ∼ D, we consider a policy π aligned to the ground-truth
preference if Q∗π (s, ap ) ≥ Q∗π (s, a1−p ).
The results are shown in Plot 4a for various policies trained with state- and debate-based feedback.
We see that, even though the debate-based approach uses only ∼ 13.6% of the full state, the achieved
level of alignment remains similar. Likewise, in Plots 3a-3d we observe a matching trend when it
comes to performance of the policies, although here we additionally note that the difference seems
to increase in favor of policies trained with the state-based feedback as we increase the debate
coefficient λ. These results seem promising, as they indicate one can expect to obtain a competitive
level of alignment and performance, while requiring the judge to elicit preference over relatively
small number of evidence.

5.4                   E XPERIMENT 3: E FFECTIVENESS OF ARGUMENTATIVE POLICIES

Preference Recovery Rate. We recall the judge’s accuracy in correctly predicting the preferred ac-
tion ap from the preference dataset was 65%. To evaluate the effectiveness of argumentative policies,
for each sample (st , a0 , a1 , p) ∼ D we measure the judge’s accuracy in predicting the more justified
action ap , when evidence {e} is provided by one of the argumentative policies. In Plot 4b (green) we
show the judge’s accuracy when different argumentative agents propose L = 6 required evidence for
action ap , averaged across 1000 different debate games. The judge’s accuracy is boosted from 65%
to a near 90%, demonstrating that agents can significantly amplify the capabilities of an otherwise
limited judge.
Robust Argumentation. A good supporting evidence is both convincing and not easily refutable by
counterarguments. To test the robustness of the proposed evidence, we train 3 adversarial confuser
agents 10 , each targeting one of the three (frozen) argumentative agents. The goal of the confuser
is to convince the judge of the opposing action a1−p . For L = 6, to obtain evidence {e}, the agent
(maxmin or self-play) and its corresponding confuser take turns and propose 3 evidence each. The
isolated agent is trained to first propose L = 3 evidence, followed by the confuser proposing the
remainder (see App. C.2.1 for more details and App. D.3 for additional results). Plot 4b (red)
shows judge’s accuracy in this setting for 1000 different debate games. We observe that the isolated
argumentative agent (Sec. 5.1) is not resilient to refutations, enabling the confuser to bring the
judge’s accuracy down to 38%, effectively convincing it of the opposite of its preference. Differently,
both maxmin and self-play agents managed to keep the judge’s accuracy to about 85%.

5.5                   E XPERIMENT 4: C OMPARISON TO SHAP- BASED E XPLANATIONS

A widely used approach to analyze black-box machine learning models is through feature-attribution
techniques. We aim to demonstrate that these explanations may not necessarily be as effective when
used as supporting evidence. We focus on the SHAP framework (Lundberg & Lee, 2017), specifi-
cally in providing justifications for decisions of various justifiable policies (Sec. 5.2). To justify a
         10
                Confuser agents use the same architecture as argumentative agents, further described in App. C.


                                                                                                                 8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                             1.00                                                1.00                                                        1.00                                   state-based feedback    shap (λ=0.0)


Frac. Of Aligned Decisions
                                                                                                                                                                                    debate-based feedback   shap (λ=0.25)
                                                                                                                                             0.95                                                           shap (λ=0.50)
                             0.80                                                0.80                                                                                               without confuser        shap (λ=0.75)


                                                                Judge Accuracy


                                                                                                                            Judge Accuracy
                                                                                                                                             0.90                                   with confuser           shap (λ=1.0)

                             0.60                                                0.60
                                                                                                                                             0.85                                   isolated
                                                                                                                                                                                    debate (maxmin)
                                                                                                                                             0.80                                   debate (self-play)
                             0.40                                                0.40

                                                                                                                                             0.75
                             0.20                                                0.20
                                                                                                                                             0.70

                             0.00 λ=0.25 λ=0.50 λ=0.75 λ=1.00                    0.00   isolated   maxmin   self-play                        0.65 lab lab lab lab lab lab lab lab



      (a) State/debate feedback                                           (b) Preference recovery                              (c) Comparison to SHAP

Figure 4: (a) Fraction of aligned decisions of policies trained with debate- and state-based feedback.
Confidence intervals (CI) represent ±2 standard errors of the mean over 5 random seeds. (b) Ac-
curacy of the judge in predicting the preferred action, with and without the confuser agent, with CI
representing ±2 standard errors of the mean estimate. (c) Effectiveness of SHAP-based explana-
tions when used to justify a decision, as measured by the judge’s accuracy, with CI representing ±2
standard errors of the mean estimate.


decision using SHAP, we select the top 6 state features, as ranked by their Shapely values. For ar-
gumentative models, we either run the debate between a0 and a1 (for maxmin and self-play agents)
or propose 6 evidence in isolation (for isolated agent). In Plot 4c, we show the judge’s accuracy
against different approaches of proposing the evidence {e}, across 1000 comparisons (st , a0 , a1 , p)
sampled uniform-random from the test set. The SHAP-based evidence do improve the accuracy to
about 70%, but nevertheless fall short compared to the argumentative agents.

6                                   D ISCUSSION

In this work, we proposed use of a debate-based reward model as a general method of specifying
desired behavior and necessary evidence to justify it. In this section, we take a step back and touch
upon a couple of aspects that are relevant to future research based on this work.
Eliciting Preferences. The success of debate depends on the human’s capability of judging its out-
come, a process which may be affected by one’s beliefs and biases. Extra care must be taken when
collecting large datasets of preferences, as belief bias 11 is known to alter the results of judgment in
human evaluations (Anderson & Hartzler, 2014) and is amplified in time-limited situations (Evans
& Curtis-Holmes, 2005), which human annotators frequently encounter. Furthermore, in our exper-
iments, we assumed existence of a single preference (clinician’s decision). However, preferences
collected from multiple raters will undoubtedly yield a higher variability in this respect. Motivated
by positive results seen in this work, future research could undertake further studies that examine
the effectiveness of eliciting preferences over partial state visibility through use of the debate as an
amplification method.
Defining Arguments is Difficult. We have focused on debate assuming a well-defined argument
space. While state features are one possible and easy choice, finding clear and expressive arguments
presents a challenge, impacting the applicability of debate. In the context of RL, one potential
alternative is considering previous trajectories in support of the current decision. In domains involv-
ing text generation, evidence could be defined as sentences, paragraphs, or references supporting a
claim. A potentially interesting research direction is to examine the utility of a debate in a domain
of human-ai collaboration, specifically in sequential decision-making tasks.
Practical Considerations. We would like to emphasize that when deploying our framework in
practice, it is important to account for the context in which the system is being employed. The
performance-justifiability trade-off from our experiments suggests that a special care ought to be
given to selecting hyperparameters, in particular, those that weight the importance of the environ-
ment rewards and debate-based rewards. In practice, this means that a reward designer has to assess
the potentially differing objectives encoded in these values as well as the accuracy of the proxy judge
model, prior to the training process.
  11
     A belief bias represents a tendency to judge the strength of arguments based on the plausibility of the
conclusion, instead based on how strongly they support the conclusion.


                                                                                                                        9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E THICS S TATEMENT
We acknowledge a potential misuse of the debate framework for malevolent purposes, such as decep-
tion. In the advent of AI systems that surpass human performance in many tasks, novel approaches
must be developed which enable defense against malicious agents. While recent results indicate that
debate is useful in thwarting malicious use of AI systems, further research is paramount in ensuring
one can detect and defend against nefarious purposes. Moreover, the reliance on human judgments
introduces the possibility of capturing their biases. Subsequently, designed reward function can in-
centivize argumentative agents to amplify those biases or learn to leverage them to achieve their
objective. This is particularly important for practical considerations (Sec. 6), where a reward de-
signer is tasked with assessing and handling the performance-justifiability trade-off. It is important
to note that our results do not hint at solutions for dealing with these challenges; they only demon-
strate that the trade-off exists. It is therefore of great importance that future research investigates
novel algorithmic approaches and methods to tackle such challenges.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This research was, in part, funded by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG, German Re-
search Foundation) – project number 467367360. We thank the anonymous reviewers for their
valuable comments and suggestions.

R EFERENCES
Richard B Anderson and Beth M Hartzler. Belief bias in the perception of sample size adequacy.
  Thinking & Reasoning, 20(3):297–314, 2014.
Dzmitry Bahdanau, Felix Hill, Jan Leike, Edward Hughes, Arian Hosseini, Pushmeet Kohli, and
  Edward Grefenstette. Learning to understand goal specifications by modelling reward. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1806.01946, 2018.
Osbert Bastani, Yewen Pu, and Armando Solar-Lezama. Verifiable reinforcement learning via policy
  extraction. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 31, 2018.
Ioana Bica, Daniel Jarrett, Alihan Hüyük, and Mihaela van der Schaar. Learning" what-if" explana-
  tions for sequential decision-making. arXiv preprint arXiv:2007.13531, 2020.
Erdem Biyik and Dorsa Sadigh. Batch active preference-based learning of reward functions. In
  Conference on robot learning, pp. 519–528. PMLR, 2018.
Mark Bovens. Analysing and assessing accountability: A conceptual framework 1. European law
 journal, 13(4):447–468, 2007.
Ralph Allan Bradley and Milton E Terry. Rank analysis of incomplete block designs: I. The method
  of paired comparisons. Biometrika, 39(3/4):324–345, 1952.
Miles Brundage, Shahar Avin, Jasmine Wang, Haydn Belfield, Gretchen Krueger, Gillian Hadfield,
 Heidy Khlaaf, Jingying Yang, Helen Toner, Ruth Fong, et al. Toward trustworthy ai development:
 mechanisms for supporting verifiable claims. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.07213, 2020.
Paul F Christiano, Jan Leike, Tom Brown, Miljan Martic, Shane Legg, and Dario Amodei. Deep
  reinforcement learning from human preferences. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 30, 2017.
Jonathan Cohen, Jean-Louis Vincent, Neill K J Adhikari, Flavia R Machado, Derek C Angus,
  Thierry Calandra, Katia Jaton, Stefano Giulieri, Julie Delaloye, Steven Opal, Kevin Tracey, Tom
  van der Poll, and Eric Pelfrene. Sepsis: a roadmap for future research. Lancet Infect Dis, 15(5):
  581–614, April 2015.
R Phillip Dellinger, Jean M Carlet, Henry Masur, Herwig Gerlach, Thierry Calandra, Jonathan
  Cohen, Juan Gea-Banacloche, Didier Keh, John C Marshall, Margaret M Parker, Graham Ramsay,
  Janice L Zimmerman, Jean-Louis Vincent, Mitchell M Levy, and Surviving Sepsis Campaign


                                                  10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  Management Guidelines Committee. Surviving sepsis campaign guidelines for management of
  severe sepsis and septic shock. Crit Care Med, 32(3):858–873, March 2004.
Rati Devidze, Goran Radanovic, Parameswaran Kamalaruban, and Adish Singla. Explicable reward
  design for reinforcement learning agents. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  34:20118–20131, 2021.
Yilun Du, Shuang Li, Antonio Torralba, Joshua B Tenenbaum, and Igor Mordatch. Improv-
  ing factuality and reasoning in language models through multiagent debate. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2305.14325, 2023.
Jonathan St BT Evans and Jodie Curtis-Holmes. Rapid responding increases belief bias: Evidence
  for the dual-process theory of reasoning. Thinking & Reasoning, 11(4):382–389, 2005.
Ioannis Faros, Aditya Dave, and Andreas A Malikopoulos. A q-learning approach for adherence-
  aware recommendations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.06519, 2023.
Julien Grand-Clément and Jean Pauphilet. The best decisions are not the best advice: Making
  adherence-aware recommendations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.01874, 2022.
Gillian K Hadfield. Explanation and justification: Ai decision-making, law, and the rights of citizens.
  University of Toronto/Schwartz Reisman Institute for Technology and Society, 18, 2021.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Delving deep into rectifiers: Surpassing
  human-level performance on imagenet classification. In Proceedings of the IEEE international
  conference on computer vision, pp. 1026–1034, 2015.
Marcel Hildebrandt, Jorge Andres Quintero Serna, Yunpu Ma, Martin Ringsquandl, Mitchell Joblin,
 and Volker Tresp. Reasoning on knowledge graphs with debate dynamics. In Proceedings of the
 AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 34, pp. 4123–4131, 2020.
Yong Huang, Rui Cao, and Amir Rahmani. Reinforcement learning for sepsis treatment: A continu-
  ous action space solution. In Machine Learning for Healthcare Conference, pp. 631–647. PMLR,
  2022.
Sergey Ioffe and Christian Szegedy. Batch normalization: Accelerating deep network training by
  reducing internal covariate shift. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 448–456.
  pmlr, 2015.
Geoffrey Irving, Paul Christiano, and Dario Amodei.          Ai safety via debate.     arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1805.00899, 2018.
Alistair EW Johnson, Tom J Pollard, Lu Shen, Li-wei H Lehman, Mengling Feng, Mohammad
  Ghassemi, Benjamin Moody, Peter Szolovits, Leo Anthony Celi, and Roger G Mark. Mimic-iii,
  a freely accessible critical care database. Scientific data, 3(1):1–9, 2016.
Kishor Jothimurugan, Rajeev Alur, and Osbert Bastani. A composable specification language for
  reinforcement learning tasks. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019.
Z Juozapaitis, A Koul, A Fern, M Erwig, and F Doshi-Velez. Explainable reinforcement learning via
  reward decomposition, ijcai. In Proceedings at the International Joint Conference on Artificial
  Intelligence. A Workshop on Explainable Artificial Intelligence., 2019.
Matthieu Komorowski, Leo A Celi, Omar Badawi, Anthony C Gordon, and A Aldo Faisal. The arti-
 ficial intelligence clinician learns optimal treatment strategies for sepsis in intensive care. Nature
 medicine, 24(11):1716–1720, 2018.
Minae Kwon, Sang Michael Xie, Kalesha Bullard, and Dorsa Sadigh. Reward design with language
 models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.00001, 2023.
Jan Leike, David Krueger, Tom Everitt, Miljan Martic, Vishal Maini, and Shane Legg. Scal-
  able agent alignment via reward modeling: A research direction. arxiv 2018. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1811.07871, 2018.


                                                  11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Scott M Lundberg and Su-In Lee. A unified approach to interpreting model predictions. Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems, 30, 2017.
Yuzhe Ma, Xuezhou Zhang, Wen Sun, and Jerry Zhu. Policy poisoning in batch reinforcement
  learning and control. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019.
Andrew L Maas, Awni Y Hannun, Andrew Y Ng, et al. Rectifier nonlinearities improve neural
  network acoustic models. In International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 30, pp. 3.
  Atlanta, GA, 2013.
Volodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, David Silver, Andrei A Rusu, Joel Veness, Marc G Belle-
  mare, Alex Graves, Martin Riedmiller, Andreas K Fidjeland, Georg Ostrovski, et al. Human-level
  control through deep reinforcement learning. nature, 518(7540):529–533, 2015.
T Nathan Mundhenk, Barry Y Chen, and Gerald Friedland. Efficient saliency maps for explainable
  ai. arXiv preprint arXiv:1911.11293, 2019.
Ethan Perez, Siddharth Karamcheti, Rob Fergus, Jason Weston, Douwe Kiela, and Kyunghyun
  Cho. Finding generalizable evidence by learning to convince q&a models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1909.05863, 2019.
Aniruddh Raghu, Matthieu Komorowski, Imran Ahmed, Leo Celi, Peter Szolovits, and Marzyeh
  Ghassemi. Deep reinforcement learning for sepsis treatment. arXiv preprint arXiv:1711.09602,
  2017.
Ronilo Ragodos, Tong Wang, Qihang Lin, and Xun Zhou. Protox: Explaining a reinforcement
  learning agent via prototyping. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:27239–
  27252, 2022.
Marco Tulio Ribeiro, Sameer Singh, and Carlos Guestrin. "why should i trust you?" explaining the
 predictions of any classifier. In Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGKDD international conference
 on knowledge discovery and data mining, pp. 1135–1144, 2016.
Tom Schaul, John Quan, Ioannis Antonoglou, and David Silver. Prioritized experience replay. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1511.05952, 2015.
John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy
  optimization algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347, 2017.
Ramprasaath R Selvaraju, Michael Cogswell, Abhishek Das, Ramakrishna Vedantam, Devi Parikh,
  and Dhruv Batra. Grad-cam: Visual explanations from deep networks via gradient-based local-
  ization. In Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on computer vision, pp. 618–626,
  2017.
Pier Giuseppe Sessa, Ilija Bogunovic, Andreas Krause, and Maryam Kamgarpour. Contextual
  games: Multi-agent learning with side information. Advances in Neural Information Process-
  ing Systems, 33:21912–21922, 2020.
Yoav Shoham and Kevin Leyton-Brown. Multiagent systems: Algorithmic, game-theoretic, and
  logical foundations. Cambridge University Press, 2008.
Mervyn Singer, Clifford S Deutschman, Christopher Warren Seymour, Manu Shankar-Hari, Djillali
 Annane, Michael Bauer, Rinaldo Bellomo, Gordon R Bernard, Jean-Daniel Chiche, Craig M
 Coopersmith, et al. The third international consensus definitions for sepsis and septic shock
 (sepsis-3). Jama, 315(8):801–810, 2016.
Richard S Sutton and Andrew G Barto. Reinforcement learning: An introduction. MIT press, 2018.
Hado Van Hasselt, Arthur Guez, and David Silver. Deep reinforcement learning with double q-
  learning. In Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence, volume 30, pp. 2094–
  –2100, 2016.
J. von Neumann and O. Morgenstern. Theory of Games and Economic Behavior. Princeton Univer-
   sity Press, 1947.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Ziyu Wang, Tom Schaul, Matteo Hessel, Hado Hasselt, Marc Lanctot, and Nando Freitas. Dueling
  network architectures for deep reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning, pp. 1995–2003. PMLR, 2016.


A     L IST OF A PPENDICES
In this section, we provide a brief description of the content provided in the appendices of the paper.

       • Appendix B provides details about the patient dataset and the defined environment:
           o B.1 provides a general background on sepsis;
           o B.2 provides details about the patient cohort;
           o B.3 provides details about the environment’s action space;
           o B.4 provides details about the environment’s reward structure.
       • Appendix C provides details about the models:
           o C.1 provides details about the judge model;
           o C.2 provides details about the argumentative agents and their confusers;
           o C.3 provides details about justifiable and baseline agents.
       • Appendix D provides additional results:
           o D.1 provides results involving debates with L = 4 evidence;
           o D.2 provides further analysis of justifiable agent’s actions;
           o D.3 provides additional results pertaining to the isolated agent;
           o D.4 provides results for agents using an alternative definition of the utility function;
           o D.5 provides analysis of alternative methods for the preference dataset definition.

B     DATASET
B.1   S EPSIS

Sepsis is a life-threatening condition, defined as severe infection leading to an acute organ dysfunc-
tion, which in turn can cause a cascade of changes that damage multiple organ systems (Singer
et al., 2016). It is also one of the leading causes of patient mortality (Cohen et al., 2015). Apart
from administration of antibiotics and control of the infection source, a critical challenge in man-
agement of sepsis lies in the administration of intravenous fluids (IV) and vasopressors (VC). While
international efforts attempt to provide a general guidance (Dellinger et al., 2004), clinicians are
nevertheless tasked in devising individualized treatments based on specificities of patients.
A first step towards automated management of septic patients was done in a seminal work of Ko-
morowski et al. (2018). The problem of treating sepsis was tackled by applying reinforcement
learning to devise optimal treatment strategies for prescribing doses of intravenous fluids and vaso-
pressors. The authors discretized the possible doses, which resulted in an action-space consisting of
25 distinct choices. The patient data was obtained from the MIMIC-III dataset (Johnson et al., 2016),
and the authors extracted a subset of 48 patient features, discretized into 4h time windows. The pre-
liminary results indicated that a learned policy was both quantitatively and qualitatively desirable.
Since then, several other works extend and improve upon on this line of research. For example,
Raghu et al. (2017) proposed a continuous state-space approach based on deep reinforcement learn-
ing, on which we build on in this work. Likewise, Huang et al. (2022) proposed an approach that is
based on continuous action-space, thus enabling more granular control of prescribed doses.

B.2   PATIENT C OHORT

To assemble our patient cohort, we utilize the MIMIC-III v1.4 database (Johnson et al., 2016),
focusing our analysis on patients that fulfill the Sepsis-3 criteria (Singer et al., 2016). Similar as
in Komorowski et al. (2018), the sepsis is defined as a suspected existence of infection (indicated
by the prescribed antibiotics) paired with a mild evidence of organ dysfunction (indicated by the


                                                  13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 1: List of features comprising the patient vector. We select 40 time-varying continuous fea-
tures and 4 demographic discrete features.

   Continuous features
               SOFA                         Calcium                         Shock index
          Urine output 4h              Urine output total               Cumulated balance
       Glasgow coma scale                  Heart rate                 Systolic blood pressure
       Mean blood pressure          Diastolic blood pressure              Total input fluids
          Respiratory rate                Temperature            FiO2 - fraction of inspired oxygen
             Potassium                      Sodium                            Chloride
              Glucose                     Magnesium                             SIRS
            Hemoglobin              White blood cells count                Platelets count
   Partial Thromboplastin Time            PH - Acidity                          PaO2
              PaCO2                       Base excess                       Bicarbonate
              Lactate                  PaO2/FiO2 Ratio                   Oxygen saturation
               BUN                         Creatinine                          SGOT
               SGPT                      Total bilirubin           International normalized ratio
         Prothrombin time
   Discrete features
                Age                          Gender                            Weight
      Mechanical ventilation


SOFA score ≥ 2). To extract, preprocess and impute the data we utilize the pipeline described
in Komorowski et al. (2018), a process which resulted in 18,585 different patients that comprised
our cohort. The cohort is split into three chunks of sizes 70%, 15%, 15% representing the train,
validation, and test splits. The observed mortality of the entire cohort was slightly above 6%, and
the splits were selected to approximately preserve this ratio. The course of a patient treatment is
represented as a trajectory consisting of state-action pairs, terminating upon patient discharge or
death. The average trajectory length was 13, with 2 being the smallest and 20 being the largest.
The state is a 44 dimensional vector, comprised of 40 time-varying continuous and 4 demographic
discrete features, shown in Table 1. Patients’ data were discretized using 4h time steps, where
variables with multiple measurements within this window were averaged (e.g., heart rate) or summed
(e.g., urine output) as appropriate.



B.3   ACTION S PACE

Argumentative Policies. The evidence (action) space of the argumentative policies is defined by the
total number of state features, 44 in our case, as listed in Table 1. To prevent the agent from repeating
already proposed arguments, we additionally employ action masking, setting the log probability of
already presented arguments to negative infinity.
Baseline and Justifiable Policy. To devise an action space of policies treating sepsis, we follow
previous work (Komorowski et al., 2018; Raghu et al., 2017) and focus on managing the total volume
of intravenous fluids (IV) and maximum dose of vasopressors (VC) administered to the patient over
a 4h discretization window. The dose of each treatment is represented as one of four possible non-
null choices derived from observed doses divided into four quartiles. We additionally define another
choice, designated as an option ’no drug given’. The combination of these produced 25 possible
discrete actions, 5 per each treatment, comprising the action space of the policy.


                                                   14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B.4     R EWARDS

Sepsis. To define intermediate and terminal rewards for treating septic patients, following the work
of Komorowski et al. (2018), we defined the primary outcome of the treatment via 90-day patient
mortality. Therefore, the agent’s objective is to optimize for patient survival. To this end, we issue
terminal environment rewards of ±15 for every patient discharge and death, respectively. To stabi-
lize the training of a deep-rl policy, we also issue intermediate rewards that are clinically guided,
as in Raghu et al. (2017). These rewards are comprised of fairly reliable indicators of the patient’s
overall health, namely the SOFA score (measure of organ failure) and a patient’s lactate levels (mea-
sure of cell-hypoxia, which is usually higher in septic patients). The rewards for intermediate time
steps are then shaped as follows:
r(st , st+1 ) = C0 1(sSOFA   SOFA
                      t+1 = st    &sSOFA            SOFA   SOFA
                                    t+1 > 0) + C2 (st+1 − st    ) + C2 tanh(sLactate
                                                                             t+1 − st
                                                                                     Lactate
                                                                                             )
where C0 , C1 and C2 are tunable parameters which we set to C0 = −0.025, C1 = −0.125 and
C2 = −2, following previous work of Raghu et al. (2017). Rewards defined in this way penalize
both, the high SOFA scores and lactate values, as well as increases in these quantities.

C     M ODELS
C.1     J UDGE

We defined a judge as a scalar reward function Jθ (a, {e}) ∈ R that quantifies the level of support
a decision a has by the set of evidences {e}. The judge is parametrized by weights θ ∈ Rd1 of a
neural network with two hidden layers of size 256, using parametric relu (He et al., 2015) activation
and batch normalization (Ioffe & Szegedy, 2015). The network takes as input values of proposed
evidence {e}, a binary mask wherein all elements corresponding to the evidence {e} are assigned a
value of one, while the remaining elements are set to zero, as well as a one-hot encoded action. The
addition of a binary mask empirically led to a more stable learning. During training, we augment a
tuple (st , a0 , a1 , p) ∼ D with an evidence set of state features sampled uniform-random from the
state st i.e., {e} ∼ U, anew for each training batch. To learn the parameter θ, we minimize the
cross-entropy loss between preference-predictions and labels from the dataset:
         min −E(st ,{e},a0 ,a1 ,p)∼D [p · log P(a1 ≻ a0 , {e}) + (1 − p) · log P(a0 ≻ a1 , {e})]
        θ∈Rd
The learning is done for a total of 100 epochs using a batch size of 64, Adam optimizer and a
learning rate of 5e-4.

C.2     A RGUMENTATION

All argumentative models utilize the same network architecture comprised of 2 hidden layers of
size 512 with a leaky-relu activation function with slope of 1e-2. The network input consists of a 44
dimensional patient state vector, the decision for which the agent is arguing, as well as a binary mask
of arguments proposed thus far. The action space of the agent is represented by all 44 state features
(see App. B.3 for more details). For training, we use PPO (Schulman et al., 2017), running the
procedure for 1M steps using the Adam optimizer with a learning rate 5e-4 and a batch size of 128.
The discount factor was empirically tuned and set to 0.9. The full list of hyperparameters and their
considered tuning ranges is given in Table 2. During training, the agent’s policy is stochastic: the
evidence is sampled from a categorical distribution defined by its logits. To obtain a deterministic
policy used in evaluations, we perform an argmax operator over obtained logits in a particular state.

C.2.1    I SOLATED AGENT
When investigating robustness of the multi-agent debate, we examine two different setups involving
an isolated agent baseline: precommit (reported in the main paper, Plot 4b) and adaptive (reported
in the App. D.3, Plot 6b). The former represents an easier case for the agent, but lacks the debate
structure. The latter uses a full debate setup as described in Sec. 3.2, but evaluates the isolated agent
in a setup slightly different from one it was trained in.
Precommit. In this case, an isolated agent is trained to propose evidence {e} of size L/2 that for a
given ap maximizes J ′ (ap , {e}), where J ′ is a new judge trained to evaluate L/2 evidence. When


                                                   15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 2: Hyperparameters used for argumentative agents. Unless otherwise indicated, all agents
utilize the same parameters.

        Common parameters
        Parameter name Parameter value                             Tuning range
           Hidden dim       512                                      [256, 512]
          Learning rate     5e-4                                loguniform[1e-5:1]
        Entropy coefficient 1e-2                           loguniform[0.00000001:0.1]
            Clip range       0.1                                 [0.1, 0.2, 0.3, 0.4]
             Discount        0.9                               [0.8, 0.9, 0.95, 0.99]
          GAE lambda         0.7                    [0.7, 0.8, 0.9, 0.92, 0.95, 0.98, 0.99, 1.0]
            VF weight        0.5                               [0.3, 0.5, 0.65, 0.75]
         Max grad norm       0.1                       [0.3, 0.5, 0.6, 0.7, 0.8, 0.9, 1, 2, 5]
        Normalize rewards   true                                    [true, false]
            Ortho init      true                                    [true, false]
        Confuser parameters
           Hidden dim       256                                      [256, 512]
        Entropy coefficient 3e-4                          loguniform[0.00000001:0.1]
            Clip range       0.4                                [0.1, 0.2, 0.3, 0.4]
            VF weight       0.65                               [0.3, 0.5, 0.65, 0.75]
         Max grad norm        2                        [0.3, 0.5, 0.6, 0.7, 0.8, 0.9, 1, 2, 5]


evaluating robustness (Plot 4b), the agent first proposes L/2 evidence, followed by a confuser agent
which proposes the remainder.
Adaptive. In this case, an isolated agent is trained to propose all L evidence {e} that maximize
J (ap , {e}), for a given ap . When evaluating robustness (Plot 6b), the isolated agent and its associ-
ated confuser take turns and propose a total of L/2 evidence each.


C.2.2   D EBATE AGENTS

For multi-agent scenarios, both maxmin and self-play agents use the architecture described in the
beginning of Sec. C.2, but each modify the underlying optimization pipeline. To train a self-play
debate agent, we let the agent argue with a (frozen) copy of itself, updating it every 100k steps. This
procedure is then repeated for a fixed number of 500 generations. To train the maxmin debate agent,
we parametrize the agent’s opponent with a different set of weights ϕ2 ∈ Rd2 . The procedure starts
by training the main agent for 4k steps, followed by training of its opponent for 100k steps. Like
in the previous case, the procedure is repeated for 500 generations. This approach is based on the
bi-level optimization and allows for overfitting the opponent to the current version of the main agent,
which ensures learning of defense strategies against a very strong adversary.


C.2.3   C ONFUSER AGENTS

The evaluation of robustness we presented in Section 5.4 required learning three separate adver-
saries (one for each argumentative agent), explicitly tasked in providing counterarguments that will
confuse the judge. The architecture of these confuser agents is mostly the same as that of the argu-
mentative agents, shown in Table 2. For a sample (st , a0 , a1 , p) ∼ D, the confuser agent is rewarded
positively, whenever the judge is convinced of the alternative (non-preferred) action.


                                                  16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 3: Hyperparameters used for baseline and justifiable policies. Unless otherwise indicated, all
policies use the same parameters. If a parameter does not specify a tuning range, its value has either
been selected based on previous work (e.g., buffer α and β) or tuning was not necessary (e.g., debate
coefficient λ).

            Baseline policy
                 Parameter name                Parameter value              Tuning Range
                    Hidden dim                      128                      [64, 128, 256]
                   Learning rate                    1e-4                loguniform[1e-5:1e-1]
                    Batch size                      256                  [128, 256, 512, 1024]
                   Polyak update                    1e-3                [1e-1, 1e-2, 1e-3, 1e-4]
                    ReLu slope                      1e-2                   [1e-1, 1e-2, 1e-3]
                     Discount                       0.99                            -
               Num. estimation step                   6                     [1, 3, 6, 10, 15]
                 Terminal reward                    ± 15                            -
            Debate scaling coefficient α            ±5                              -
               Debate coefficient λ                  0.0                            -
                     Buffer α                        0.6                            -
                     Buffer β                        0.9                            -
            λ ∈ [0.25, 0.5, 0.75]
               Num. estimation step                       3                        -
            λ = 1.0
               Num. estimation step                       1                        -


C.3   BASELINE AND J USTIFIABLE AGENTS

Our approach for learning treatment policies for septic patients is based on continuous state-space
models and builds on Raghu et al. (2017). The policy is based on a variant of Deep-Q networks
(Mnih et al., 2015), specifically double-deep (Van Hasselt et al., 2016) Q-network, also employing
the dueling architecture (Wang et al., 2016), where the estimated action-value function for a pair
(s, a) is split into separate value and advantage streams. The final network consists of 2 fully-
connected layers of size 128 using leaky-relu activation functions with slope 1e-2. The learning
is done in batches of 256 (s, a, r, s′ ) tuples sampled from a Prioritized experience replay buffer
(Schaul et al., 2015) with a learning rate of 1e-4. Instead of periodically updating the target net-
work, we leverage Polyak averaging with an update coefficient τ set to 1e-3. The full list of used
hyperparameters is given in Table 3. Similar to Raghu et al. (2017), we augment the standard Q-
network loss. First, we added a regularization term that penalizes Q-values outside the allowed
threshold Qthresh = ±20. In addition, we clip the target network outputs to ±20, which empirically
proved to stabilize the learning. The final loss function we used is given by:
                L(Θ) =E (Qdouble-target − Q(s, a; Θ))2 + β · max(|Q(s, a; Θ)| − Qthresh , 0)


        Qdouble-target =r + γ · Q(s′ , arg maxa′ Q(s′ , a′ ; Θ); Θ′ )
Where β is a user-specified coefficient we set to β = 5.0 in all our experiments following Raghu
et al. (2017). The learning is done for a total of 25k iterations, evaluating the policy every 50
iterations using weighted importance sampling (WIS) (Sutton & Barto, 2018) on a held-out test set.
Behavioral Policy. The calculation of the importance sampling ratio requires access to a so-called
behavioral policy that generated offline samples. To obtain it, we train a behavior-cloning (BC)
clinician policy to take in a state st from the patient cohort and predict the action at taken by the
human clinician, minimizing the cross-entropy loss over the training dataset. The network consists
of two fully-connected layers of size 64. We run the training with the Adam optimizer, using a
learning rate of 1e-3 and a weight decay set to 1e-1 for a total of 100 epochs with a batch size of 64.


                                                     17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D         A DDITIONAL R ESULTS
D.1        S HORTER D EBATES

In the main text, we have seen positive results involving debate using 6 arguments, which amounts
to ∼ 13% of the entire state. In this section, we want to further examine the effectiveness of debate
when limiting the number of evidence to L = 4, amounting to 9% of the entire state.
The first question that arises when further limiting the amount of state visibility during debate is the
impact it has on the quality of learned task policies. In Plots 5a-5d, we evaluate the performance
of different justifiable policies on a held-out test set during the course of training using weighted
importance sampling, for the case of 4 and 6 evidence limit. While the reduced number of evidence
exposes the judge to only 9% of the entire state, we can see that the achieved performance is com-
parable to the case where L = 6. Furthermore, in Plot 5f, we also confirm that trained policies are
significantly more preferred to the baseline policy, a trend equivalent to the one we saw in the main
text. Apart from these quantitative evaluations, in Plots 5g and 5h, we show the qualitative analysis
of patient mortality from Sec. 5.2. We confirm that the lowest mortality is observed when clinician
prescribed doses recommended by justifiable policies, thus further signaling potential validity of
policies trained with rewards stemming from debates with L = 4 evidence.
To evaluate the effectiveness of argumentative agents, we repeat the evaluation from Sec. 5.4. When
exposed to 4 randomly selected evidence, the judge trained via the procedure outlined in App. C.1
achieves accuracy of ∼59%. Plot 5e shows the judge’s accuracy when different argumentative agents
propose L = 4 evidence 12 , averaged over 1000 samples (st , a1 , a2 , p) ∼ D. Without the confuser,
all three agents achieve performance similar to the case of L = 6 evidence, boosting the judge’s
accuracy to almost 90%. In the setup involving an adversary, agents propose a total of 2 evidence
each before the judge evaluates the outcome. The observed trend is also similar to the one from the
main text (Sec. 5.4).

D.2        P REFERENCE B REAKDOWN

To gain a better understanding about the behavior of learned justifiable policies, we further examine
actions they propose. In particular, Plot 6a shows the percent of times an action from the justifiable
policy was preferred to that of the baseline policy (JP), percent of times when the action of the
baseline policy was preferred to the action of the justifiable policy (BP), and percent of time when
the two were equally preferred (EP) 13 . We see that the number of actions proposed by the justifiable
agent and the baseline agent that are equally preferred decreases as the parameter λ is increased: for
λ = 0.25 two agents chose the equally justifiable action about 49% of the times, for λ = 0.50 this
number drops to 40%, whereas for λ = 0.75 and λ = 1.0 this number is 36% and 35% respectively.
Out of the remaining actions, the ones from justifiable policies were increasingly more preferred, as
the parameter λ was increased.

D.3        I SOLATED AGENT S ETUP

In App. C.2.1, we described two setups which we consider when evaluating robustness of the
isolated agent, namely precommit and adaptive. In Plot 6b, we show the accuracy of the judge
in predicting the preferred action when evidence was proposed by an isolated agent trained with
one of these approaches for 1000 different debate games. Without the confuser, both approaches
amplify the capabilities of the judge, performing roughly equivalent. When faced with a confuser
agent, the precommit approach performs better, since in the adaptive case, the agent is evaluated in a
debate-like setup, which was not accounted for during training. In both cases, however, we observe
that the isolated agent is not robust to an adversary.

D.4        A LTERNATIVE U TILITY F UNCTIONS

In Sec. 3.2, we have defined the utility function U to output binary values {−1, 0, +1} based on
the justifiability rewards obtained from the judge. One might ask if there are alternative ways of
    12
         Like in the main text, we use the precommit setup for the isolated agent (see App. C.2.1 for more details).
    13
         In our experiments, the judge deemed two actions equally justifiable whenever they were the same.


                                                          18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                      1.00                                                                                   1.00                                                         1.00                                                                       1.00

                      0.90                                                                                   0.90                                                         0.90                                                                       0.90

                      0.80                                                                                   0.80                                                         0.80                                                                       0.80
Performance


                                                                                      Performance


                                                                                                                                                            Performance


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Performance
                      0.70                                                                                   0.70                                                         0.70                                                                       0.70

                      0.60                                                                                   0.60                                                         0.60                                                                       0.60

                      0.50                                   6 evidence                                      0.50                       6 evidence                        0.50                                6 evidence                             0.50                         6 evidence
                                                             4 evidence                                                                 4 evidence                                                            4 evidence                                                          4 evidence
                      0.40                                                                                   0.40                                                         0.40                                                                       0.40
                                                             clinician                                                                  clinician                                                             clinician                                                           clinician
                      0.30 0               100    200    300    400        500                               0.30 0     100    200   300    400   500                     0.30 0        100      200        300    400      500                      0.30 0      100   200      300     400     500
                                                  Iterations                                                                   Iterations                                                       Iterations                                                             Iterations

                                       (a) λ = 0.25                                                                   (b) λ = 0.5                                                  (c) λ = 0.75                                                                (d) λ = 1.0
                      1.00                                                                                   1.00                                                        0.50                                                                      0.50
                                                                                                                                                                                        λ=0.0                                                                             λ=0.0
                                                                                  Preference Over Baseline
                                                                                                                                                                                        λ=0.25                                                                            λ=0.25
                      0.80                                                                                   0.90                                                        0.40           λ=0.50                                                     0.40                   λ=0.50
Judge Accuracy


                                                                                                                                                                                        λ=0.75                                                                            λ=0.75


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Mortality
                                                                                                                                                         Mortality
                      0.60                                                                                   0.80                                                        0.30           λ=1.0                                                      0.30                   λ=1.0
                                                        without confuser
                                                        with confuser
                      0.40                                                                                   0.70                                                        0.20                                                                      0.20
                                                                                                                                            λ=0.25
                                                                                                                                            λ=0.50
                      0.20                                                                                   0.60                           λ=0.75                       0.10                                                                      0.10
                                                                                                                                            λ=1.0
                      0.00             isolated    maxmin       self-play                                    0.50 λ=0.25 λ=0.50 λ=0.75       λ=1.0                       0.00−800       −400            0         400       800                    0.00 −0.50 −0.25      0.00     0.25        0.50
                                         Argumentative Agent                                                               Policy Variant                                                        Excess                                                                Excess

                 (e) Convincing success                                                           (f) Preferred to baseline                                                 (g) IV dose excess                                                        (h) VC dose excess

Figure 5: Quantitative and qualitative evaluation of policies trained using debate-based rewards
limited to L = 4 evidence. For (f)-(h), the confidence intervals represent ±2 standard errors of the
mean over 5 random seeds. (a)-(d) Performance of policies trained with L = 4 and L = 6 evidence,
as measured by WIS evaluation on a held-out test set with ±1 terminal rewards for every patient
discharge or death. The mean and standard deviation are reported over 5 random seeds. (e) Accuracy
of the judge in predicting the preferred action using 4 proposed evidence, with and without the
confuser agent. The CI represent ±2 standard errors of the mean estimate. (f) Percent of times judge
preferred decisions of justifiable policies (i.e., λ > 0.0) compared to those of the baseline policy
(i.e., λ = 0.0). (g) (h) Observed patient mortality (y-axis) against variations in IV/VC treatment
doses prescribed by clinicians compared to the recommendations of learned policies (x-axis).


                                                                                                             1.00                                                        1.00                                                                      1.00
                                0.50
     Percent of Total Actions


                                                                                                             0.80                                                        0.80                                                                      0.80
                                                                                 Judge Accuracy


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Judge Accuracy
                                                                                                                                                        Judge Accuracy


                                0.40

                                                                                                             0.60                                                        0.60                                                                      0.60
                                0.30

                                                                                                             0.40                                                        0.40                                                                      0.40
                                0.20                              λ=0.25
                                                                  λ=0.50
                                0.10                              λ=0.75                                     0.20        without confuser                                0.20           without confuser                                           0.20
                                                                  λ=1.0                                                  with confuser                                                  with confuser
                                0.00      BP            EP            JP                                     0.00     precommit        adaptive                          0.00      MM         MM-diff        SP         SP-diff
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.00      offset    random         exhaustive
                                                  Preference                                                                  Agent Type                                           Argumentative Agent                                                      Dataset Generation Method

       (a) Preference breakdown                                                                   (b) Isolated agent setup                                           (c) Convincing success                                                    (d) Preference datasets

Figure 6: (a) Percent of times when actions of the justifiable policy were more preferred to those of
the baseline policy (JP), less preferred (BP) and equally preferred (EP). (b) Accuracy of the judge
in predicting the preferred action, with and without the confuser agent when evidence was proposed
by two isolated agents trained in precommit and adaptive setup. The CI represents ±2 standard
errors of the mean estimate. (c) Accuracy of the judge in predicting the preferred action, when
evidence was proposed by maxmin (MM) and self-play (SP) agents trained using the utility function
proposed in Sec. 3.2 compared to agents trained using the utility function defined as a difference in
predicted rewards proposed in App D.4, MM-diff and SP-diff respectively. The CI represents ±2
standard errors of the mean estimate. (d) Accuracy of the judge in predicting the preferred action
with evidence sampled uniform-random, trained on datasets generated with different methods.


                                                                                                                                                     19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


defining U that preserve the zero-sum structure and potentially positively influence the learning.
In this section, we consider one particular alternative that defines the utility function based on the
difference between predicted rewards, which might provide a more informative learning signal. In
particular, we set u1 (nL ) = −u2 (nL ) = U(at , aB                                         B
                                                     t , {enL }), with U defined as U(at , at , {e}) =
J (at , {e}) − J (aBt , {e}). We   rerun the  experiments   from  Sec.  5.4 for maxmin   and  self-play
agents and show preference recovery success and robustness results in Plot 6c. We can see that the
two approaches perform similarly in situations which do not involve a confuser agent. However, it
seems that defining the utility using the difference in judge’s rewards leads to slightly lower scores
when debate agents are faced with an adversary.

D.5    A LTERNATIVE P REFERENCE DATASET

In Sec. 5.1 we construct a preference dataset by matching every pair (st , at ) from the cohort with
an alternative action ar ∼ U(A), ar ̸= at sampled uniform-random from the action space. In this
section, we examine additional strategies one could take when constructing such a synthetic dataset.
In particular, we consider the random strategy we just described, paired with two alternative ones,
namely exhaustive and offset. The exhaustive strategy pairs at with all possible alternative actions,
24 in total. The offset strategy pairs at with an alternative action that is in its neighborhood. To
define a neighborhood, we recall that there are a total of 5 choices for both, vasopressors (VC) and
intravenous fluids (VC). Therefore, we can write at = 5 ∗ IV + VC, where IV, VC ∈ {0, 1, 2, 3, 4}.
To obtain an alternative action, we consider changing IV and VC by an offset sampled uniform-
random from a set {−1, 0, 1}, for both IV and VC. We then train a new judge for each of the datasets
and show its accuracy in Plot 6d. The exhaustive variant represents the most informative, but also
unrealistically large, dataset. The random variant represents somewhat of a “middle ground” in
terms of dataset difficulty. Lastly, the offset variant represents the most difficult case, as differences
between two actions are more nuanced. However, while the achieved accuracies reflect the difficulty
of the corresponding dataset, the capabilities of a trained judge model are roughly the same.


                                                   20
