Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Q UANTIFYING A NONYMITY IN S CORE -BASED G EN -
ERATORS WITH A DVERSARIAL F INGERPRINTING

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                           A BSTRACT

         Recent advances in score-based generative models have led to a huge spike in
         the development of downstream applications using generative models ranging
         from data augmentation over image and video generation to anomaly detection.
         Despite publicly available trained models, their potential to be used for privacy-
         preserving data sharing has not been fully explored yet. Training diffusion mod-
         els on private data and disseminating the models and weights rather than the raw
         dataset paves the way for innovative large-scale data-sharing strategies, particu-
         larly in healthcare, where safeguarding patients’ personal health information is
         paramount. However, publishing such models without individual consent of, e.g.,
         the patients from whom the data was acquired, necessitates guarantees that iden-
         tifiable training samples will never be reproduced, thus protecting personal health
         data and satisfying the requirements of policymakers and regulatory bodies. This
         paper introduces a method for estimating the upper bound of the probability of
         reproducing identifiable training images during the sampling process. This is
         achieved by designing an adversarial approach that searches for anatomic finger-
         prints, such as medical devices or dermal art, which could potentially be used
         to uniquely re-identify training images. Our method harnesses the learned score-
         based model to estimate the probability of the entire subspace of the score function
         that may be utilized for one-to-one reproduction of training samples. To validate
         our estimates, we generate images containing a fingerprint and investigate whether
         generated samples from trained generative models can be uniquely mapped to the
         original training samples. Overall our results show that privacy-breaching images
         can be reproduced at sampling time if the models were trained without care.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Maintaining privacy and anonymity is of utmost importance when working with personal identifi-
able information, especially if data sharing has not been individually consented and thus cannot be
shared with other institutions (Jin et al., 2019). The potential of incorporating privacy preserving
methods into the training to allow sharing of mathematically equal synthetic datasets derived from
private datasets would be significant and could potentially solve many problems, including racial
bias (Larrazabal et al., 2020) and the difficulty of applying techniques such as robust domain adap-
tation (Wang et al., 2022). Recent advances in generative modeling, e.g., effective diffusion models
(Song et al., 2020a; Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021; Rombach et al., 2022; Ruiz et al., 2022), enabled the
possibility of model sharing as shown by Pinaya et al. (2022). However, it remains unclear to what
extent a shared model reproduces training samples and whether or not this raises privacy concerns.
In a general, our focus centers on the notion of utilizing a dataset labeled as D of samples from
the image distribution pdata (x). Then the goal is to train a generative model s, which learns only
on private data. Direct privacy breaches would occur if the generative model exhibits a non-zero
probability for memorizing and reproducing samples from the training set.
Guarantees that such privacy breaches will not occur would ultimately allow to train models based
on proprietary data and share the models instead of the underlying data sets. Healthcare providers
would be able to share complex patient information like medical images on a population basis in-
stead of needing to obtain individual consent from patients, which is often infeasible, especially
retrospectively. Guarantees that no personal identifiable information is shared would furthermore


                                                  1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


pave the way to population studies on a significantly larger scale than currently possible and allow
to investigate bias and fairness of downstream applications on anonymous distribution models of
sub-populations.
However, currently trained and published models can be prompted to reproduce training data at
sampling time. Somepalli et al. (2023) have observed that diffusion models are able to reproduce
training samples and Carlini et al. (2023) have even shown how to retrieve faces of humans from
training data, which raises serious privacy concerns. Other generative models are directly trained
for memorization of training samples (Cong et al., 2020). In a medical setting, it remains uncertain
whether merging segments from various images truly poses any privacy risks. Therefore, we propose
a scenario with an adversarial that has some prior information about a training sample and would
consequently be able to filter out the image based on this information. In medical imaging this
could be any medical device, a skin tattoo, an implant, or heart monitor; any detectable image with
visual features that are previously known. Then an attacker could generate enough samples and filter
images until one of the generated samples contains this feature. If the learned marginal distribution
of the generative model that contains this feature is slim, then all images generated with it will
raise privacy concerns. We will refer to such identifiable features as fingerprints. To estimate the
probability of reproducing fingerprints, we propose to use synthetic anatomical fingerprints (SAF),
which can be controlled directly through synthetic manipulations of the training dataset and reliably
detected in the sampling dataset. In summary our main contributions are:
       • We formulate a realistic scenario in which unconditional generative models exhibit privacy
         problems due to the potential of training samples being reproduced.
       • We introduce a mathematical approach to determine the maximum probability of producing
         sensitive data, from which we derive a readily calculable indicator metric.
       • We evaluate this indicator by computing it for different datasets and show evidence for its
         effectiveness.
       • We show that anomalies in the training set of diffusion models are either memorized or
         forgotten but never augmented
       • We investigate three real world examples in which this indicator could be successfully used
         to evaluate diffusion models.

2   BACKGROUND
Consider D containing samples from the real image distribution pdata (x). In general, highly effec-
tive generative methods like diffusion
                                 R         models (Rombach et al., 2022) work by modeling different
levels of perturbation pσ (x̃) := pdata (x)pσ (x̃ | x)dx of the real data distribution using a nois-
ing function defined by pσ (x̃ | x) := N (x̃; x, σ 2 I). In this case σ defines the strength of the
perturbation, split into N steps σ1 , . . . , σN . The assumption is that pσ1 (x̃ | x) ∼ pdata (x) and
                         2
pσN (x̃ | x) ∼ N (x; 0, σN I)
Then we can define the optimization as a score matching objective by training a model sθ (x, σ) to
predict the score function ∇x log pσ (x) of the noise level σ ∈ {σi }N
                                                                     i=1 .


                           N
                           X                                                                     2
           θ ∗ = arg min         σi2 Epdata (x) Epσi (x̃|x) ∥sθ (x̃, σi ) − ∇x̃ log pσi (x̃ | x)∥2 .

                                                                                                       (1)
                     θ     i=1

For sampling, this process can be reversed, for example, using Markov chain Monte Carlo estimation
methods following Song & Ermon (2019). Song et al. (2020b) extended this approach to a contin-
uous formulation by redefining the diffusion process as a process given by a stochastic differential
equation (SDE):


                                        dx = f (x, t)dt + g(t)dw,                                      (2)

and training a dense model on predicting the score function for different time steps t, where w
models the standard Wiener process, f the drift function of x(t), that models the data distribution,


                                                       2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


g(t) is the diffusion coefficient, and x(t) the drift coefficient. Therefore, the continuous formulation
of the noising process, denoted by pt (x) and pst (x(t) | x(s)), is used to characterize the transition
kernel from x(s) to x(t), where 0 ≤ s < t ≤ T . Anderson (1982) showed that the reverse of this
diffusion process is also a diffusion process. The backward formulation is
                          dx = [f (x, t) − g(t)2 ∇x log pt (x)]dt + g(t)dw̄,                        (3)

Finally, Song et al. (2020b) show that the reverse diffusion process of the SDE can be modeled as a
deterministic process as the marginal probabilities can be modeled deterministically in terms of the
score function. As a result, the problem simplifies to an ordinary differential equation:

                                  h          1                   i
                              dx = f (x, t) − g(t)2 ∇x log pt (x) dt,                               (4)
                                             2

and can therefore be solved using any black box numerical solver such as the explicit Runge-Kutta
method. This means that we can perform exact likelihood computation, which is typically done in
literature (Song et al., 2020b), to estimate how likely the generation of test sample, e.g. images, is.
This means that low negative log-likelihood (NLL) is desirable. In our case, we want to estimate
the likelihood of reproducing training samples at test time. Ideally, this probability would be zero or
very close to zero.


3     M ETHOD

Typically, NLL measures how likely generating test samples at training time is. To use it to evaluate
the memorization of training data, it is possible to compute the NLL of the training dataset. A
limitation of using NLL is that it only computes the likelihood of the exact sample to be reproduced
at sampling time and therefore is insufficient for giving estimates of the likelihood of generating
samples that raise privacy concerns. We can compute the likelihood of the exact sample but this
does not mean that the images in the immediate neighborhood are not leading to privacy issues. To
resolve this issue, we propose to estimate the upper bound of the likelihood of reproducing samples
from the entire subspace that belongs to the class of private samples. First, we define the sample
xp that we consider to be a potential privacy breach and augment this sample by adding a synthetic
anatomic fingerprint (SAF) to it. This SAF is used to identify the sample, which raises privacy
concerns. Then we repeatedly apply the diffusion and reverse diffusion process for different noise
levels and check when the predicted sample starts to diverge to a different image.

3.1   E STIMATION M ETHOD

Let ps (xp ) define the likelihood of the model s to reproduce the private sample xp at test time.
Following Eq. (4), we can compute the likelihood of this exact sample. However, this does not
account for the fact that images in the immediate neighborhood, like slightly noisy versions of xp ,
are not anonymous. Consequently, we are interested in computing q(p), which is defined as the
likelihood of reproducing any sample that is similar enough to the target image that it raises privacy
concerns:

                                                 Z
                                        q(p) =           ps (x)dx,                                  (5)
                                                  Ωp


where Ωp is defined as the region of the image xp that is private. We determine this region by
training a classifier tasked with detecting whether the image belongs to the image class, as explained
in Sec. 3.4. To search through the image manifold, we make use of the reverse diffusion process
centered around the SAF image xp defined as pt,b := p(xt | xp ) = N (x̃; xp , σt2 I) for x(s) to x(t),
where 0 ≤ t ≤ T . We can employ the diffusion process centered around this image to sample from
the neighborhood and then use the learned reverse diffusion process to generate noisy samples xt,p .
Then we can use this as starting image for the reverse diffusion process to sample x′t,p :


                                                     3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 1: Illustration of our estimation method in 1D. The grey line denotes the query image xp .
The estimation method iteratively increases the search space in the latent space of the generative
model. The green area corresponds to image regions resulting in non-privacy concerning generated
samples, while the red area is considered critical.



                          Z                   Z t′                    Z t′
                                                                             Ep(xt,p ) p(x′t,p ) dt.

                q(p) =          ps (x)dx ≈           ps (xt,p )dt =                                    (6)
                           Ωp                  0                       0


Technically, we could employ exact likelihood computation to estimate q(p) but this would require
integrating over the continuous image-conditioned diffusion process, which would be intractable in
practice. Therefore, we propose to approach and estimate this integral by computing the Riemann
sum of this integral and give an upper bound estimate for it using the upper Darboux sum:

                  Z t′                            X
                         Ep(xt,p ) p(x′t,p ) dt =   (σt − σt−1 )Ep(xt,p ) p(x′t,p ) ≤

                                                                                                       (7)
                    0                                  t
                                          ′
                                       t
                                       X
                                                           (σti+1 − σti )Ep(xt,p ) p(x′t,p ) ,

                                                   sup                                                 (8)
                                        i=0 t∈[ti ,ti+1 ]


which approaches the real value for steps that are small enough. We can compute this value by using
xp as a query image and estimating the expectation by performing Monte-Carlo sampling but this
would be computationally infeasible due to the complexity of exact likelihood estimation.

3.2   M ETHOD INTUITION

Intuitively, we model the image space using the learned distribution of the score function
∇x̃ log pσi (x̃ | x) by reversing the diffusion process and checking when the model starts to “break
out” by generating images classified as different samples. For large t, the learned marginals p(x, t)
span the entire image space. Importantly, by definition of the diffusion process, the distribution ap-
proaches the same distribution as the sampling distribution of the diffusion process if σt gets large
                                     2
enough pσN (x̃ | xp ) ∼ N (x; 0, σN    I). However, for lower t the model has learned that the distribu-
tion collapses towards a single training image xp . Essentially, it has modeled part of the subspace as
a delta distribution around xp . We want to find out how far back in the diffusion process we have to
go for the model to start to produce different images. The boundary Ωp is then defined as all images
that would collapse towards this training image and estimated using the classifiers. Fig. 1 illustrates
this process in one dimension. Note that this is different from simply defining a variance that is large
enough for the classifiers to fail, as sθ (xp , σt ) was trained to revert this noise.

3.3   S YNTHTETIC A NATOMIC F INGERPRINT

Let D̃ be our real dataset of size N without any privacy concerns due to the lack of any identifiable
information. Then we synthetically generate a dataset D which contains a single sample with a
fingerprint. Importantly, we remove the non-augmented version of that sample from Dp . In practice,
this can be any kind of fingerprint that appears only once in the entire training dataset. To ease the
training of identification classifiers, we choose a grey constant circle with a radius of 4 pixels but


                                                           4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


we also experiment with realistic fingerprints in Sec. 5.4. Therefore, the SAF sample xp is defined
as an augmented version of a real sample:

                                  xp = xi ∗ (1 − Lp ) + xSAF ∗ Lp ,                                    (9)

where i is a randomly drawn sample from D. The location of the SAF determined by Lp is ran-
domly chosen to lie entirely within the boundary of the image. Then we train a score-based model
sθ (x, σt ) on the augmented dataset Dp . To quantify whether or not the trained model is privacy con-
cerning, we define an adversarial attacker that knows of the fingerprint xSAF and that we can train
on detecting this fingerprint. We will refer to this classifier as cp (x). The second classifier cid (x) is
trained on D in a one-versus-all approach to classifying the image’s identity. We assume that private
information is given away when this classifier correctly detects the generated sample. Importantly,
we train cid (x) with random masking using the same circular patches that were used to generate Lp .
Therefore we can use cp (x) to filter out all images that contain the SAF and then determine whether
or not this sample raises privacy concerns by computing the prediction for cid (x′ ) generated samples
from the generative model sθ . Theoretically, only one classifier would suffice. This classifier can
be interchanged with every other classifier including simple L2 -Norm classifiers or more advanced
classifiers built with foundation models such as SAM (Kirillov et al., 2023). We choose to split them
and focus our investigation on two classifiers with separate goals that can be achieved through strong
data augmentation. Furthermore, following our approach we can disentangle the memorization of
the SAF from the memorization of xp .


3.4   B OUNDARY C OMPUTATION

To give an estimate for q(p) we observe that it only depends on the likelihood p(xp ) and t′ , which
is supposed to capture the entire region of Ωp . Therefore, we use x′p as input to the classifiers and
define Ωp as the region where both classifiers give a positive prediction. Since exact likelihood
computation and the terms for the variance derived in Eq. (8) reach computationally infeasible value
ranges, we can use t′ as an indicator of how unlikely it is to generate critical samples from the model.
We add a pseudo algorithm for the computation to the supplementary material.
Now, we can freely choose M as parameter and trade-off accuracy for computation time. Given xp
we define qM (p|xt,p ) as the estimate of staying within the boundary of Ωp for a given diffusion step
t. Then we define t′ := max(T), T := {∀t : qM (p|xt,p ) > 0}.


4     R ELATED W ORK

Generative models have disrupted various fields by generating new data instances from the same
distribution as the input data. These models include Variational Autoencoders (VAEs) (Kingma
& Welling, 2013), Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) (Goodfellow et al., 2014), and more
recently, Generative Diffusion Models (GDMs). Diffusion models can be categorized as score-based
generative models (Song & Ermon, 2019; Song et al., 2020b) and models that invert a fixed noise
injection process (Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015; Ho et al., 2020).
Evaluating data privacy in machine learning has been a longstanding concern (Dwork et al., 2006;
Abadi et al., 2016; van den Burg & Williams, 2021). Research on integrating privacy-preserving
mechanisms in generative models is still in its infancy. Xie et al. (2018) proposed a method to
make GANs deferentially private by modifying the training algorithm. Jiang et al. (2022) applied
differential privacy to VAEs, and Dockhorn et al. (2022) applied it to diffusion models, showcasing
the possibility of explicitly integrating privacy preservation into generative models.
Despite the progress in privacy-preserving generative models, little work has been done on evaluat-
ing inherent privacy preservation in diffusion models and providing privacy guaranteed dependant
on the training regime. To the best of our knowledge, our work is the first to investigate natural pri-
vacy preservation in generative diffusion models, contributing to the ongoing discussion of privacy
in machine learning.


                                                    5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 2: Illustration of the reverse diffusion process. Left shows query images xt,p for t ∈ [0, 0.7].
Right shows the resulting sample.


5     E XPERIMENTS

5.1   DATASET

For our experiments we use MedMNISTv2 (Yang et al., 2021). This dataset consists of a combina-
tion of multiple downsampled 28 × 28 images from different modalities. For single-channel images
we repeat the channel dimension three times. For our main experiments we choose PathMNIST,
due to the high amount of samples available for that dataset. Furthermore, we experiment with an
a-priori selected selection of modalities from this dataset which ranges through multiple sizes and
multiple channels of the dataset.

5.2   M ODELS

The classifiers are randomly initialized ResNet50 (He et al., 2016) architectures. To maximize
robustness we employ AugMix (Hendrycks et al., 2020) and in the case of cid (x) we inject random
Gaussian noise into the training images to increase the robustness towards possible artifacts from
the diffusion process. Furthermore, we randomly mask out patches of the same shape as the SAF to
reduce the effect of SAF on the prediction. The training and sampling of the score-model follows
the implementation of Song et al. (2020b) with sub-VP SDE sampler due to their reported good
performance on exact likelihood computation (Song et al., 2020b) with a custom U-Net architecture
based on von Platen et al. (2022). Training sθ is done on a single A100 GPU and takes roughly
eleven hours. The classifiers are trained until convergence with a validation error patience of 20
epochs, which takes less than one hour. Exhaustive search for t′ , which is done by computing
qM =16 (p|xt,p ) for all t ∈ 0, . . . , 1, takes four hours.

5.3   R EVERSE D IFFUSION P ROCESS

First, we want to investigate the influence of the size of the dataset on its memorization capabilities.
Therefore, we train models on different |ND | and observe the influence on memorization. We keep
the number of training steps fixed at 30000 steps because we observed that this is the length it takes
the model to learn to reproduce samples for the smallest subset. After training we sample 150000
images for every model and measure the probability of reproducing our sample at test time. We
do this by defining the null-hypothesis H0 that the probability of sampling xp is equal to 1/ND .
Hypothesis H1 claims that the probability is lower. Therefore, we sample 150000 images for every
trained model with dataset size |ND | ∈ {1000, 5000, 10000, 20000, 50000}. The results are shown
in Tab. 1 It can be seen that the model only learned to reproduce samples with the SAF when the
dataset size was comparably low. For |ND | = 1000 the model was surprisingly close to the expected
value, indicating that the size of the data is too small relative to the available parameter space and
the model memorizes them as discrete distribution of 1000 unrelated images. Every other model
produces very few positive predictions from the classifier all of which turn out to be false positives.
The combined prediction q := cid (x)+ ∩ cp (x)+ is only positive for the smallest dataset. All the
larger models do not have any positive samples in their dataset. The p-value for this is smaller
than 5% in all cases, meaning that we can reject the null-hypothesis and assume that the probability
of xp is smaller. Next we look at the samples of different sizes. Initial observation suggest that
image quality drops for medium-sized datasets. However, upon closer inspection we see that the


                                                   6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                              |ND |         1000     5000   10000      20000     50000
                                                              E [|q|]       150      30     15         7.5       3
                                                              |cp (x)+ |    151      0      0          1         1
                                                              |cid (x)+ |   151      0      3          3         4
                                                              |q|           151      0      0          0         0

Figure 3: Likelihood of producing xp at sam-                 Table 1: Number of positive predictions of the
pling time as a function of t for t ∈ {0, . . . , 0.5}       classifiers for models trained on different dataset
and M = 16. We stop plotting probabilities after             size on 150000 images. All models use the same
t′ . Due to the high observed probabilities of the           classifiers.
ND = 1000 model, we also compute and plot
the probabilities for higher t.



           Description              SAF Classification                             Data Synthesis
 Dataset                   |ND |    SAF (%)       ID (%)         FIDtrain         FIDtest   E(|q|)         |q|       t′
 RetinaMNIST               1080        100         99.6            5.9             19.7         46.3       52    0.998
 BloodMNIST               11959        100         99.5            9.3              11.          4.2        0    0.241
 ChestMNIST               78468       99.93        99.8            3.3              3.9          0.6        0    0.206
 PneumoniaMNIST            4708        100         99.8            9.5             28.4         10.6        2    0.719
 BreastMNIST                546        100         98.7            9.2             62.6         91.6       57    0.886
 OrganSMNIST              13940       99.47        99.8            19.6            19.7          3.6        0    0.582

Table 2: Training results for different MedMNIST datasets. We report test accuracy for the SAF
classifier but only training accuracy for the ID classifier as identification only makes sense if the
sample was part of the training set. For the generative scores we use 50000 samples.


smallest model simply learns to reproduce training data, which can be seen by the fact that some
images appear multiple times. This confirms our observation that the model learned the training
distribution in the form a discrete set of 1000 images but never learned to generalize. In the context
of data-sharing this would mean that the model is essentially a way of saving and retrieving training
data but sharing it would raise major privacy issues. The model trained on 5000 images seems to
lie in between generalizing and memorizing the learned distribution but the size of dataset was not
large enough to learn a meaningful representation. The result indicate that the model learned low
frequency information such as color or larger structure, but the images are lacking detail. We provide
qualitative results to the supplementary material of our paper.
Now we can use our proposed estimation method to compute t′ for all datasets. M is set to a
fixed value of 16. The results are shown in Fig. 3. Clearly, the probability for generating samples
qM (p|xt,p ) decreases with increasing t. More importantly, the threshold at what point the proba-
bility drops, is higher for smaller |ND |, which means t′ is indeed an important indicator for q(p).
Additionally, these results show that sharing the model with |ND | = 5000 would raise more privacy
issues as other models, as the indicator suggests that the probability for a sample being generated at
inference time is high.
Finally we validate our results by looking at different datasets in Tab. 2. The results confirm our
observations of a high amount of memorization in models with small dataset sizes close to the
expected value. There is once again a turning point at around 5000 images where samples are no
longer memorized. We can also confirm this gap by comparing the FID by calculating it on the
training and test dataset. The drop is large in all cases where training samples are memorized.
However, FID fails to measure the extent of this effect. PneumoniaMNIST has a larger drop in
performance than RetinaMNIST but barely any memorized samples. Our proposed indicator t′ on
the other hand captures this observation. Furthermore, it is also lower for the BreastMNIST dataset,
which according to the high difference between E(|q|) and |q|, did not collapse as strongly towards
only reproducing xp .


                                                         7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


(a) Computation of t′ for three different epochs on
Celeba-HQ (Karras et al., 2018). We use the SAF as (b) Two different attacks that can be quantified using
synthetic and sunglasses as non-synthetic fingerprint our proposed method.

                      Figure 4: Scalability experiments to real world datasets.


5.4   S CALABILITY ANALYSIS


Next, we investigate whether we can reproduce the results on larger images. Therefore, we employ
improved denoising diffusion probabilistic models (Nichol & Dhariwal, 2021) on the CelebA-HQ
dataset (Karras et al., 2018) resized to have the size of 256 × 256. Switching to diffusion models
is not a problem due to the reasonably small discretization error (Su et al., 2023). We scale the size
of the SAF proportionally and use a subset |ND | = 1000 following the observations from Tab. 1
to purposefully show memorization for larger images. Additionally, we ensure that the dataset only
contains a single image with sunglasses and use this feature as a non-synthetic fingerprint.
Figure 4a shows the computation of t′ for three models, one trained for 40000 steps, one for 60000
steps, and the third one trained to overfit on 280000 steps. The results show that t′ is generally lower
for the 40000 steps model than after 60000 steps. To do a naive search we generate 5000 images and
use an SAF classifier and a sunglasses classifier to search for fingerprints in generated samples. The
40000 model did not reproduce the sample, however, the 60000 model reproduced the SAF once.
Interestingly, the results match with the non-synthetic fingerprint, where a single image has been
reproduced at training time. However, all three models have high t′ values indicating that sharing
them could be privacy-concerning. Notably, the model trained for 280000 steps did not reveal that
it had memorized the training sample.Out of the 5000, none were the sunglass image. Upon close
inspection, we observe something similar to mode-collapse as all of the images share similar visual
properties (e.g., dark hair).
Overall the results confirm the observation that diffusion models reproduce training images at sam-
pling time and that we can measure this by measuring t′ for all three models. We make similar
observations on experiments conducted on Stable Diffusion v1.4 Rombach et al. (2022) following
the descriptions by Carlini et al. (2023). However, since this model is a text-conditional model, it
requires more experimentation. More details can be found in the supplementary material.
Our work is related to backdoor learning attacks where adversaries use the trained model to inject
images into the diffusion process to generate inappropriate images (Chou et al., 2023). In our case,
an inappropriate image would be a privacy breach. The attack works by exchanging the query image
xp with a trigger image xq that was not part of the training set and that shares visual similarities.
In Figure 4b, we show that this attack can be used to increase qM (p|xt,q ) of xp being generated to
18.75%. Since t′ is related to the variance of the change of the image performed through the diffusion
model according to Eq. (1), we can measure the model’s susceptibility to this attack. Sharing the
model would be safe if t′ is small enough so that the change of the variance is too small to change the
images from the trigger to the target image. Additionally, we test if we can use t′ to infer information
about the membership of an image in the training dataset. Figure 4b demonstrates notably lower t′
values for training set images than test set images. Designing a backdoor attack also confirms our
observations from 4a as all three models were susceptible to it and reproduced the training image,
even the one where we observed mode collapse. This underlines the efficacy of our method, as this
case might have been overlooked when using a naive search.


                                                   8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


6   D ISCUSSION

We have shown that t′ is a useful indicator towards estimating q(p) since it can be directly derived
from it as shown in Sec. 3.1. Our results show that training and publishing trained models without
care can lead to critical privacy breaches due to direct data-sharing. The results also suggest that
SAFs are either memorized or ignored. This has important implications on the feasibility of us-
ing these models instead of direct data sharing as this impedes the ability to use the shared model
for datasets with naturally occurring anomalies. These features are vital for medical applications.
However, they are rarely replicated during sampling, which further complicates their detection in
subsequent applications like anomaly detection.
Computation of t′ does not necessarily require the existence of cp . It only requires cid . Initially, we
assumed that SAF might be reproduced on new synthetic images. Through our approach, we have
determined that this is incorrect. The first classifier finds all synthetic instances with the SAF, but
if they do not reveal the identity, they are not a problem. They would even be helpful: If the SAF
appears in multiple synthetic images, mapping the SAF to the identity would not be straightforward.
But in Tab. 1 we can see this is never the case. If the SAF is reproduced, it is always a privacy breach
(|q| == |cp (x)+ | == |cid (x)+ | given that all the positives were false positives, as shown in the
supplementary material). This analysis is only possible by splitting cid from cp .


7   L IMITATIONS

One limitations of our analysis is that the problem of memorization only occurs for larger images if
we fine-tune models on small datasets. However, as Carlini et al. (2023) have shown, this problem
also occurs in conditional models, where the marginal probability is much smaller and therefore also
the datasets. We show in the supplements that our method even works for conditional methods, but
a fair comparison remains challening. We believe the potential for diffusion models is highest when
applied to small datasets, especially for data-sharing applications.
Our experiments consider clear synthetic outliers that are not necessarily congruent to the real image
distribution. It would be interesting to see if the effect is different if the SAF is closer to the real
image. However, the fact that they are visually distinguishable from everything else is necessary
for the image to remain detectable and also for the assumption that they pose a privacy concern.
Furthermore, because of the problem’s high dimensionality, we do not calculate a true probability
estimate for the data’s occurrence during sampling. Instead, we provide an indicator. The indicator t′
has a high variance for large t if |ND | is small due to the high stochasticity involved when sampling
qM (p|xt,p ). Therefore, results with t′ close to 1 are hard to compare against each other. But as we
have shown, these are the cases in which the models raise a privacy concern and direct sampling of
xp is possible according to Tab. 1. Finally, our derivation of the likelihood misses guarantees for
the tightness of the upper bound. We work around this by only computing the indicator which we
demonstrate to be useful.


8   C ONCLUSION

In this work, we have described scenarios in which training score-based models on personal identi-
fiable information like image data can lead to data-sharing issues. By defining an adversarial with
prior information about a visual property of the data, we showed that training and publishing these
models without care can lead to critical privacy breaches. To illustrate this, we have derived an
indicator for the likelihood of reproducing training samples at test time. The results show that gen-
erative models trained on small datasets or long training times should not be readily shared. Larger
dataset sizes, on the other hand, lead to the model ignoring and never reproducing the detectable
fingerprints. We believe enabling the safe training of generative models on small datasets is crucial.
Since we can use our method to measure the susceptibility to data memorization, we believe it is
also possible to employ it in the training procedure. Developing inherent training techniques has a
vast potential to be used for anonymized sharing of private data, which could, in return, improve
many problems related to domain adaption or generalization. In the future, we will work on gen-
eralizing the idea of t′ to different generative models and using it as a direct measure to minimize
memorization at training time.


                                                   9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Martin Abadi, Andy Chu, Ian Goodfellow, H Brendan McMahan, Ilya Mironov, Kunal Talwar, and
 Li Zhang. Deep learning with differential privacy. In Proceedings of the 2016 ACM SIGSAC
 conference on computer and communications security, pp. 308–318, 2016.

Brian DO Anderson. Reverse-time diffusion equation models. Stochastic Processes and their Ap-
  plications, 12(3):313–326, 1982.

Nicholas Carlini, Jamie Hayes, Milad Nasr, Matthew Jagielski, Vikash Sehwag, Florian Tramèr,
  Borja Balle, Daphne Ippolito, and Eric Wallace. Extracting training data from diffusion models,
  2023.

Sheng-Yen Chou, Pin-Yu Chen, and Tsung-Yi Ho. How to backdoor diffusion models? In Proceed-
  ings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 4015–4024,
  2023.

Yulai Cong, Miaoyun Zhao, Jianqiao Li, Sijia Wang, and Lawrence Carin. Gan memory with no
  forgetting. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:16481–16494, 2020.

Prafulla Dhariwal and Alexander Nichol. Diffusion models beat gans on image synthesis. Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:8780–8794, 2021.

Tim Dockhorn, Tianshi Cao, Arash Vahdat, and Karsten Kreis. Differentially private diffusion
  models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.09929, 2022.

Cynthia Dwork, Frank McSherry, Kobbi Nissim, and Adam Smith. Calibrating noise to sensitivity
  in private data analysis. In Theory of Cryptography: Third Theory of Cryptography Conference,
  TCC 2006, New York, NY, USA, March 4-7, 2006. Proceedings 3, pp. 265–284. Springer, 2006.

Ian J Goodfellow, Jean Pouget-Abadie, Mehdi Mirza, Bing Xu, David Warde-Farley, Sherjil Ozair,
  Aaron Courville, and Yoshua Bengio. Generative adversarial nets. In Proceedings of the 27th
  International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems-Volume 2, pp. 2672–2680,
  2014.

Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image recog-
  nition. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp.
  770–778, 2016.

Dan Hendrycks, Norman Mu, Ekin D. Cubuk, Barret Zoph, Justin Gilmer, and Balaji Lakshmi-
  narayanan. Augmix: A simple data processing method to improve robustness and uncertainty,
  2020.

Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:6840–6851, 2020.

Dihong Jiang, Guojun Zhang, Mahdi Karami, Xi Chen, Yunfeng Shao, and Yaoliang Yu. Dp2 -
  vae: Differentially private pre-trained variational autoencoders. arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.03409,
  2022.

Hao Jin, Yan Luo, Peilong Li, and Jomol Mathew. A review of secure and privacy-preserving
  medical data sharing. IEEE Access, 7:61656–61669, 2019.

Tero Karras, Timo Aila, Samuli Laine, and Jaakko Lehtinen. Progressive growing of gans for im-
  proved quality, stability, and variation, 2018.

Diederik P Kingma and Max Welling.            Auto-encoding variational bayes.      arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1312.6114, 2013.

Alexander Kirillov, Eric Mintun, Nikhila Ravi, Hanzi Mao, Chloe Rolland, Laura Gustafson, Tete
  Xiao, Spencer Whitehead, Alexander C Berg, Wan-Yen Lo, et al. Segment anything. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2304.02643, 2023.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Agostina J Larrazabal, Nicolás Nieto, Victoria Peterson, Diego H Milone, and Enzo Ferrante. Gen-
  der imbalance in medical imaging datasets produces biased classifiers for computer-aided diag-
  nosis. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 117(23):12592–12594, 2020.
Alex Nichol and Prafulla Dhariwal. Improved denoising diffusion probabilistic models, 2021.
Walter HL Pinaya, Petru-Daniel Tudosiu, Jessica Dafflon, Pedro F Da Costa, Virginia Fernandez,
 Parashkev Nachev, Sebastien Ourselin, and M Jorge Cardoso. Brain imaging generation with
 latent diffusion models. In Deep Generative Models: Second MICCAI Workshop, DGM4MICCAI
 2022, Held in Conjunction with MICCAI 2022, Singapore, September 22, 2022, Proceedings, pp.
 117–126. Springer, 2022.
Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer. High-
  resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Con-
  ference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 10684–10695, 2022.
Nataniel Ruiz, Yuanzhen Li, Varun Jampani, Yael Pritch, Michael Rubinstein, and Kfir Aberman.
  Dreambooth: Fine tuning text-to-image diffusion models for subject-driven generation. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2208.12242, 2022.
Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Eric Weiss, Niru Maheswaranathan, and Surya Ganguli. Deep unsupervised
  learning using nonequilibrium thermodynamics. In International Conference on Machine Learn-
  ing, pp. 2256–2265. PMLR, 2015.
Gowthami Somepalli, Vasu Singla, Micah Goldblum, Jonas Geiping, and Tom Goldstein. Diffusion
  art or digital forgery? investigating data replication in diffusion models. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 6048–6058, 2023.
Jiaming Song, Chenlin Meng, and Stefano Ermon. Denoising diffusion implicit models. arXiv
   preprint arXiv:2010.02502, 2020a.
Yang Song and Stefano Ermon. Generative modeling by estimating gradients of the data distribution.
  Advances in neural information processing systems, 32, 2019.
Yang Song, Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Diederik P Kingma, Abhishek Kumar, Stefano Ermon, and Ben
  Poole. Score-based generative modeling through stochastic differential equations. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2011.13456, 2020b.
Xuan Su, Jiaming Song, Chenlin Meng, and Stefano Ermon. Dual diffusion implicit bridges for
  image-to-image translation, 2023.
Gerrit van den Burg and Chris Williams. On memorization in probabilistic deep generative models.
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:27916–27928, 2021.
Patrick von Platen, Suraj Patil, Anton Lozhkov, Pedro Cuenca, Nathan Lambert, Kashif Rasul,
  Mishig Davaadorj, and Thomas Wolf. Diffusers: State-of-the-art diffusion models. https:
  //github.com/huggingface/diffusers, 2022.
Zhenbin Wang, Mao Ye, Xiatian Zhu, Liuhan Peng, Liang Tian, and Yingying Zhu. Metateacher:
  Coordinating multi-model domain adaptation for medical image classification. Advances in Neu-
  ral Information Processing Systems, 35:20823–20837, 2022.
Liyang Xie, Kaixiang Lin, Shu Wang, Fei Wang, and Jiayu Zhou. Differentially private generative
  adversarial network. arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.06739, 2018.
Jiancheng Yang, Rui Shi, Donglai Wei, Zequan Liu, Lin Zhao, Bilian Ke, Hanspeter Pfister, and
   Bingbing Ni. Medmnist v2: A large-scale lightweight benchmark for 2d and 3d biomedical im-
   age classification. CoRR, abs/2110.14795, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2110.
   14795.


                                                11
