Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Q UALITY-D IVERSITY THROUGH AI F EEDBACK
 Herbie Bradley1,2,3∗ Andrew Dai4∗ Hannah Teufel4 Jenny Zhang5,6
 Koen Oostermeijer4 Marco Bellagente7† Jeff Clune5,6,8 Kenneth Stanley9
 Grégory Schott4 Joel Lehman10
 1
   CarperAI 2 CAML Lab, University of Cambridge 3 EleutherAI 4 Aleph Alpha
 5
   Department of Computer Science, University of British Columbia
 6
   Vector Institute 7 Stability AI 8 Canada CIFAR AI Chair 9 Maven 10 Stochastic Labs



                                               A BSTRACT

          In many text-generation problems, users may prefer not only a single response, but
          a diverse range of high-quality outputs from which to choose. Quality-diversity
          (QD) search algorithms aim at such outcomes, by continually improving and di-
          versifying a population of candidates. However, the applicability of QD to qual-
          itative domains, like creative writing, has been limited by the difficulty of al-
          gorithmically specifying measures of quality and diversity. Interestingly, recent
          developments in language models (LMs) have enabled guiding search through
          AI feedback, wherein LMs are prompted in natural language to evaluate qualita-
          tive aspects of text. Leveraging this development, we introduce Quality-Diversity
          through AI Feedback (QDAIF), wherein an evolutionary algorithm applies LMs
          to both generate variation and evaluate the quality and diversity of candidate text.
          When assessed on creative writing domains, QDAIF covers more of a specified
          search space with high-quality samples than do non-QD controls. Further, human
          evaluation of QDAIF-generated creative texts validates reasonable agreement be-
          tween AI and human evaluation. Our results thus highlight the potential of AI
          feedback to guide open-ended search for creative and original solutions, provid-
          ing a recipe that seemingly generalizes to many domains and modalities. In this
          way, QDAIF is a step towards AI systems that can independently search, diver-
          sify, evaluate, and improve, which are among the core skills underlying human
          society’s capacity for innovation.1


1       I NTRODUCTION

Human innovation is not only a generative capacity for creativity, but also includes the ability to
evaluate the subjective quality of new ideas and artifacts. Great ideas are rarely generated all at once
out of whole cloth, but rather gradually emerge through divergent chains of elaboration and revision
(Stanley & Lehman, 2015). To successfully navigate such a tree of ideas, the creator must evaluate
which steps in a chain are worth pursuing further, a question that can be highly subjective, especially
in domains with artistic or literary dimensions.
Until now, even if AI could provide candidates, the hope for such subjectively tinged evaluation lay
firmly with humans. However, the emerging foundation model technology of recent years (Bom-
masani et al., 2021) now means that the model can also play the role of evaluator, even when the
evaluation is in part subjective (Madaan et al., 2023). In this way, for the first time, an entire ideation
process that returns a diverse set of interesting artifacts can in principle be automated. This process
cannot be run by LMs entirely on their own, but requires chaining together a search algorithm with
model calls in a nuanced way. This paper highlights one way to achieve this potential: to combine
LMs with the field of quality-diversity (QD) (Mouret & Clune, 2015), which centers on how to
design search processes that produce high-quality solutions that span a design space.
    *
     Equal contribution. Order chosen in support of student authorship. Author contributions listed [here].
Correspondence: andrew.dai@aleph-alpha.com, mail@herbiebradley.com, lehman.154@gmail.com
   †
     Work done while at Aleph Alpha
   1
     Project Page: https://qdaif.github.io/


                                                       1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                  “A story about a spy and a politician…”
 The politician was having an important                                                                                                                                                                  Mr. Yacobian, a rich politician, was
 dinner, and the suspicious spy was                                                                                                                                                                      sleeping peacefully in his bed.
 watching     closely.  Suddenly,     he                                                                                                                                                                 Immediately, the invisible spy, Paul,
 transformed into the monster and killed                                                                                                                                                                 entered his room, pulled out a knife
 everyone, including the politician.                                                                                                                                                                     and stabbed him to death.



                                                                                                                                                                                                         Jason was able to get inside the
 The politician was having to deal with                                                                                                                                                                  politician’s home by masquerading
 an underhanded spy. The man was a                                                                                                                                                                       as a clown. The politician was happy
 member of the CIA, and he was                                                                                                                                                                           to see that the clown was a bit
 watching the politician’s every move,                                                                                                                                                                   different than the other clowns that
 aided by a bug he had planted in the                                                                                                                                                                    were typically hired to entertain
 politician’s office.. The politician went                                                                                                                                                               children. He was a bit rough around
 to the bank to deposit some cash from                                                                                                                                                                   the edges and he didn’t take himself
 his election campaign, and the spy                                                                                                                                                                      too seriously. The politician was
 followed him back to his home. The                                                                                                                                                                      impressed when the clown entered
 spy entered the politician’s house, and                                                                                                                                                                 the living room and announced that
 killed him.                                                                                                                                                                                             he was going to perform a few tricks.
                                                                                                                                                                                                         The politician nodded. Jason was
                                                                                                                                                                                                         then able to slip inside the
                                                                                                                                                                                                         politician’s
 This one was interesting. A spy worked
 for a wealthy politician named Jack.
 The spy was sent to seduce a famous
 reporter named Veronica. The two fell       A wealthy politician was on his way to a meeting        The jealous spy and the politician   The rich politician,   The politician, Jim, was suspicious     The rich politician, Tom, hired a
 in love, and the spy returned to work       when he was attacked by a mysterious stranger. The      met again. They decided to go on     Tom, was a friend of   of someone in his office. He hired a    mysterious spy, who was really an
 for Jack. The two of them decided to        stranger forced him to tell him where his money was     a cruise. They were very happy       the suspicious spy,    private investigator, Murray, to look   undercover FBI agent. She was hired
                                             buried. The politician managed to escape and gave a     and in love. They were able to       Luke. He hired Luke    into it. Murray discovered that his     to spy on her rivals, including her
 get married, and live in his mansion.
                                             description of the man to the police. The police
 However, one night, the politician died                                                             meet other people on the cruise,     to spy on his rival,   assistant was a spy. Murray tried to    rival, David. She was able to gather
                                             tracked down the man, and arrested him. During the
 mysteriously, and the spy and reporter      interrogation, the police discovered that the man was   and they met other people who        Robert. But Robert     stop him from hurting his boss, but     useful information, which led to the
 were accused of murder.                     a spy for the politician's enemies, and that the        were in love with each other, too.   was Luke's secret      the assistant was skilled at killing,   successful prosecution of Tom's
                                             politician was going to be killed during the meeting.   They had a wonderful time.           lover.                 and he killed Murray.                   rivals.


Figure 1: QDAIF (left) covers more the search space with diverse, high-quality stories com-
pared to the Baseline (right). The baseline is LMX, Quality-Only (Meyerson et al., 2023), which
optimizes only for the quality of solutions. QDAIF discovered more interesting stories about a spy
and a politician, covering examples such as romance stories with a happy-ending, to horror stories
with a tragic-ending. The baseline produced a story (right-middle position, starting with "Jason")
with a lower quality score due to the lack of a desired spy character (denoted by the red-colored bin,
for a story with a neutral ending, and leaning to horror). QDAIF discovered a better, more-relevant
story (bottom-middle position, starting with "a wealthy politician") for this same neutral bin.


The main insight in QD algorithms is to explicitly maintain and seek high-quality diverse responses.
Typically such search algorithms require hand-designed measures of diversity and quality, as well
as a way to generate meaningful variation. Yet the most interesting and complex domains nearly
always involve notions of performance, diversity, and variation that are subjective or difficult to
specify algorithmically. Extending work that generates variation through LMs (Lehman et al., 2022;
Meyerson et al., 2023) and evaluates the quality of potential solutions through LMs (Ahn et al.,
2022), we show that LMs can also be used to evaluate qualitative aspects of diversity. In this way,
LMs can instantiate the three main ingredients of QD search, thereby enabling powerful new QD
algorithms that can ride the coattails of continual LM advances, which we name Quality-Diversity
through AI Feedback (QDAIF). Such QDAIF can explore and return diverse, high-quality responses
to an LM prompt through more-intuitive diversity measures, without the need for model fine-tuning
(although, it could also be used for LMs to self-improve by generating fine-tuning data (Lehman
et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2023)), an interesting direction for self-curated effective learning environ-
ments via generated data, towards AI-generating algorithms (Clune, 2019)).
We evaluate QDAIF across three creative writing domains: opinion writing, short stories, and poetry.
In such domains, users often enjoy seeing a wide range of possible stories or poems from which to
choose or be inspired. Quantitative results indicate that QDAIF significantly outperforms existing
baselines. Additionally, through human evaluation, we observe a strong alignment between human
and AI-generated feedback, providing empirical evidence that AI feedback is grounded and that the
method can work in practice (i.e. it yields improved quality and diversity as measured by humans).
Overall, QDAIF brings us a step closer to AI models that can independently search and innovate,
keystone abilities of humans that allow them to create culture and science (Stanley et al., 2017).


2         BACKGROUND & R ELATED W ORK

2.1           E VOLUTION THROUGH L ARGE M ODELS

Advancements in language models have enabled new kinds of powerful search algorithms that ap-
ply LMs as search operators, e.g. to create text variation or evaluate solutions. While other search
algorithms could also be used, this paper creates a QDAIF algorithm by extending upon Evolu-
tion through Large Models (ELM) (Lehman et al., 2022), a framework for evolutionary search for
code or text that uses LMs to generate intelligent variation (for example through specialized lan-
guage models trained on code diffs (Bradley et al., 2023b), or through simple few-shot prompting


                                                                                                                              2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


(Meyerson et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2023)). Most QDAIF results in this paper generate new search
candidates through Language Model Crossover (LMX) (Meyerson et al., 2023), a recent and general
few-shot prompting approach that can evolve e.g. mathematical expressions, sentences, Python pro-
grams, and prompts for text-to-image models, by leveraging in-context learning capabilities of LMs
(Brown et al., 2020). The approach is simple: A few existing search candidates are concatenated
into a prompt, predisposing the LM to generate new, similar candidates. In this way, LMX enables
creating intelligent variation without requiring any specially-trained models. Our experimental im-
plementation builds on OpenELM (Bradley et al., 2023a), a versatile open-source Python library
designed for research into LM-based evolutionary algorithms.

2.2   Q UALITY D IVERSITY A LGORITHMS

Traditional optimization algorithms aim to discover a single high-quality solution, which while ap-
propriate for many situations, can fail to illuminate the full range of possible high-quality solutions.
For creative and design problems in particular, a user may want to choose what they think is most
appropriate from a diversity of such candidates. In contrast, Quality Diversity (QD) algorithms
aim to optimize not just for a single optimal solution, but for a diverse set of high-quality solutions
(Lehman & Stanley, 2011b; Mouret & Clune, 2015; Pugh et al., 2016; Fontaine & Nikolaidis, 2021).
QD algorithms can thus provide a richer landscape of solutions, enabling adaptability and flexibility
in addressing multifaceted challenges (Cully et al., 2015). In addition to a quality measure (i.e. an
objective function), QD requires a metric such that it can encourage desired axes of diversity. For
instance, Lehman et al. (2022) evolved Python programs to design varied locomoting robots, where
the diversity dimensions are the robot’s height, width, and mass.
A significant limitation of existing QD algorithms lies in their reliance on low-level quality and
diversity measures (Mouret & Clune, 2015). This requirement confounds applying QD algorithms
to complex and creative domains, such as the creative writing ones explored in this paper. Intuitively,
such measures (e.g. sensor readings (Cully et al., 2015), feature engineering (Manning, 2009)) lack
the subtlety and depth needed to capture the complexities of human creativity and intuition, e.g.
nuances, moods, or cultural references that resonate in human experience. Interestingly, from having
trained on vast amounts of human-generated data, LMs can begin to emulate such human-nuanced
judgments (cf. Section 2.3). Thus, by employing an LM to evaluate both quality and diversity,
QDAIF significantly simplifies and enlarges the range of domains QD can be applied to.
Feedback from learned ML models has been used in prior work to reduce the need for hand-crafted
heuristics or expensive ground-truth evaluations. In model-based QD, surrogate models supply
learned feedback. Gaier et al. (2017) introduced the use of surrogates (via a Gaussian process)
to predict fitness (quality). Subsequently, Keller et al. (2020) introduced a learned model to pre-
dict both fitness and behavior characteristics (diversity), becoming a standard approach (Lim et al.,
2021; 2022; Zhang et al., 2022; Bhatt et al., 2022). Surrogate models require domain-specific train-
ing data to update their predictions, whereas AI feedback leverages off-the-shelf instruction-tuned
LMs (Chung et al., 2022; Ouyang et al., 2022) to automate expensive human feedback for a variety
of evaluation tasks. More recently, Fontaine & Nikolaidis (2021) utilized CLIP embeddings (Rad-
ford et al., 2021) as both quality and diversity measures to navigate the search space of StyleGAN
(Karras et al., 2019), producing a range of faces with the desired characteristic (e.g. “A person with
red hair"). We show that using pre-trained surrogate models is more prone to reward hacking in the
natural language case (Skalse et al., 2022; Lehman et al., 2019) (cf. Appendix A.2). Hence, QDAIF
capitalizes on the strengths of general-purpose LMs for evaluating generated solutions.

2.3   AI F EEDBACK

Recently, LMs have been leveraged to provide feedback on the training, evaluation, or problem-
solving capabilities of other LMs (Bai et al., 2022; Perez et al., 2022; Shinn et al., 2023; Wang et al.,
2023a; Colas et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2023; Lee et al., 2023). Bai et al. (2022) show that using
LM-generated critiques and refinements has been instrumental in enhancing performance on met-
rics like helpfulness and harmlessness. One promising direction for AI feedback is self-refinement,
where LMs evaluate and score their generations, then iteratively improve their output (Bai et al.,
2022; Madaan et al., 2023). Self-refinement demonstrated significant improvement in output qual-
ity as gauged by human evaluators (Madaan et al., 2023), underscoring generation-discrimination


                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 QD Archive                                              compare and update archive
                                                                                                                                         Determine whether or      AI Feedback    Evaluated
                                                                                                                                         not the input text is
                                                                                                                                         closely related to the                    Quality
              randomly Previous solution
                                                                    Mutate                         New solution                          following topic …             Language
                        Vegetables taste quite bad,            Here is a random                    I prefer a diet of meat,                                             Model
               select   and I don't like eating       mutate   opinion piece about      generate   fish, dairy products and   evaluate                                            Evaluated
                        them. I would much prefer              eating vegetables and               vegetables to a diet of               Determine the sentiment
                                                                                                                                         of the given opinion …                   Diversity
                        eating meat and ice cream.             plant - based foods: …              grains and legumes.


Figure 2: Overview of Quality-Diversity through AI Feedback (QDAIF). Dark components are
where Language Models (LM) are employed. QDAIF randomly selects a solution from the QD
archive. This chosen solution (parent) forms part of the prompt that is fed into an LM, undergoing
LMX mutation to produce a new solution. An LM then evaluates the quality and diversity attributes
of the new solution. We compare the newly evaluated solution with its existing solutions in the QD
archive, and update it.


discrepancy (Saunders et al., 2022, p.12) (i.e. it is often easier for a model to evaluate the qual-
ity of a generation than to generate the same quality in text). Complementary to single-objective
optimization with self-refine, QDAIF utilizes AI feedback to assess diversity in addition to quality,
facilitating more varied and improved text generation over multiple iterations of refinement.


3     A PPROACH

Figure 2 provides an overview of the approach, which is to extend a common QD algorithm (MAP-
Elites) with LM operators that generate variation, as well as evaluate both the quality and diversity of
candidate solutions. The result is a search algorithm capable of iterative discovery and refinement,
applicable to subjective text-based domains.
MAP-Elites. Our QDAIF implementation builds upon MAP-Elites (Mouret & Clune, 2015), a
widely used QD algorithm (Lehman et al., 2022; Cully et al., 2015; Nilsson & Cully, 2021; Vassili-
ades et al., 2016). MAP-Elites discretizes the diversity space (i.e. dimensions of relevant diversity)
into a grid, called the archive. The overarching objective is to populate each grid bin (or cell) within
the archive with as high-quality a solution as possible. An iteration in MAP-Elites follows these
steps: (1) randomly select an existing solution from the archive, (2) mutate the chosen solution
to generate new solutions, (3) evaluate the new solution’s quality and diversity characteristics, and
(4) if the new solution is higher quality than the current occupant at the cell corresponding to its
diversity characteristics, replace the previous cell occupant solution with the new solution. For a
new solution to be added to the archive, it has to improve either the quality or the diversity of the
grid, meaning that it has to either fill an empty bin or perform better than the solution already in its
bin. QDAIF distinguishes itself from standard MAP-Elites in four key areas: archive initialization,
solution mutation, solution evaluation, and grid discretization (cf. Figure 2). We provide details on
each of these differences below.
Initialization and Mutation. For archive initialization, QDAIF employs few-shot prompting, gen-
erating solutions based on a hand-chosen set of seed examples. We list in Appendix A.21 the three
few-shot examples utilized in each domain, each chosen to span a breadth of diversity characteris-
tics. For example, in a domain where you want diversity of sentiments (like the Opinions domain
described in Section 4.1), the few-shot examples demonstrate positive, neutral, and negative senti-
ments. For solution mutation, QDAIF employs LMX-Near (referred to as "LMX" for brevity in the
rest of this manuscript), as detailed in Meyerson et al. (2023). LMX evolves varied text represen-
tations (e.g. mathematical expressions, sentences, Python code) by leveraging effective in-context
learning (Brown et al., 2020). LMX prompts are kept simple, typically starting with “Here is a ran-
dom example of”. Appendix A.22 shows the full LMX prompts. We also introduce a novel mutation
method with instruction-following prompts for poetry in Section 4.4.
Archive Measures. While it is sometimes feasible to devise hand-crafted heuristics to evaluate
the quality of a solution (e.g. efficiency in locomotion) or diversity characteristics (e.g. a robot’s
size and mass), this approach falters as domains become more complex and nuanced, as in creative
writing. For example, hand-crafting robust heuristics for qualitative aspects of a story, such as
its genre (e.g. romance vs. horror), is very difficult. QDAIF circumvents the need for hand-coded
measures through prompting LMs with easily-written natural language queries to generate feedback.
In particular, capable LMs trained on expansive text corpora can begin to mirror human intuition
across a range of potentially subtle diversity characteristics.


                                                                                                     4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Quantifying Performance and Diversity. For quality assessment, we prompt the LM to discern
whether the input text contains a high-quality solution or pertains to the requested topic, requesting
a “yes” or “no” response. The solution’s quality estimate is derived from the logarithm of the
probability of the LM predicting one response versus the other response. Similarly, for diversity
evaluation, we guide the LM to identify a particular diversity trait. For instance, in an opinion
generating domain, the LM is prompted to gauge a solution’s sentiment, with a requested response
of “positive” or “negative”. The log probability of these responses serves as our measure of solution
diversity. Appendix A.22 shows the full prompts used in each domain to evaluate the solutions. We
also introduce a novel categorical approach to evaluate solution attributes based on raw predictions
of discrete labels in Section 4.4.
Discretization. MAP-Elites typically partitions the grid into equally-sized bins, from the intuition
that all parts of the behavior space are equally interesting. However, we observe that when assigning
a bin along the diversity axis - which is in our approach based on logits of an LM AI feedback -
that qualitative changes in behavior do not uniformly correspond to changes in the logits (cf. Ap-
pendix A.31). This is likely due to the (non-linear) calibration behavior of instruction-tuned models
in predicting the labels (as output tokens) of text passages (Jiang et al., 2021). Hence, we use cus-
tom non-uniform bins, which are denser towards range ends. Qualitative analysis of the generated
text showed that the non-uniform bins yielded better alignment with typical human perceptions of
diversity changes, influenced by both the AI model’s calibration and the domain-specific goals.
Models and Setup. Details on the LMX generation model (Appendix A.24) and finetuned AI
feedback model (Appendix A.25) are given, with details on the training of these LMs. Additional
default hyperparameters are described in Appendix A.27.

4     E XPERIMENTS ON C REATIVE W RITING D OMAIN
4.1   S ETUP : O PINION W RITING , S HORT S TORIES

To demonstrate the versatility of QDAIF in different applications of creative text evolution, we
evaluated QDAIF on these domains: Opinions, and Stories. The Opinions domain is focused on
generating diverse, realistic pieces about one’s opinions on eating vegetables and plant-based foods
- the diversity measure is based on the sentiment of opinions on this topic (e.g. shown in example
texts in the Figure 2 overview). For the Stories domain, the topic is about a short story, containing
two characters: a spy, and a politician. The diversity of stories is evaluated using a variety of
measures based on AI Feedback, with the main ones being: Stories - Genre (Romance vs Horror)
(1D archive), Stories - Ending (Happy vs Tragic) (1D archive), and Stories - Genre and Ending
(2D archive). These domains capture the strengths and limitations of all methods, ranging from
simple (Opinions) to challenging (Stories - Genre and Ending). We show in Figure 1 that the 2D
domain is challenging, yet QDAIF still outperforms the baseline in filling the archive with diverse,
high-quality stories. The AI feedback prompts are outlined in Appendix A.23.
Evaluation. To assess the performance of methods in creative writing generation, we compute QD
scores (Pugh et al., 2016), a standard metric used to measure the quality-diversity of the discovered
corpus of texts. A QD score is defined as the sum of the highest quality values found in each bin.
To understand the alignment between AI and human feedback for practical applications in QDAIF,
we conducted a human evaluation study on selected elite samples from each method (chosen from
the median QD score run out of 5 random seed runs). Using a Likert scale (Allen & Seaman,
2007) for quality assessment, we evaluate the capability of each method to produce a collection of
diverse, high-quality texts. To do so we calculate a “human” QD score, defined as the sum of quality
scores given for all diversity categories identified by the annotator within the set. Furthermore, to
understand how closely AI feedback aligns with human perspectives on subjective evaluation, we
measured the agreement rates between human annotators and AI and between two human annotators.
Details of the human study are specified in Appendix A.1, demonstrating the validity and advantages
of AI feedback in generating human-like feedback on subjective quality and diversity measures.

4.2   C OMPARISONS BETWEEN QDAIF AND BASELINES

To evaluate the strengths and limitations of QDAIF in generating high-quality and diverse creative
writing texts, we compared our method against the following baseline methods:


                                                  5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


       • Fixed-Few-Shot: Use a fixed few-shot prompt (cf. Appendix A.21) to sample many com-
         pletions for creative domain texts (i.e. no iterative search).
       • Shuffling-Few-Shot: Shuffle the in-context examples of Fixed-Few-Shot prompt, before
         sampling the completion from this prompt.
       • Random-Search: Create a prompt pool of examples (initialized from examples in Ap-
         pendix A.21), add all completions from few-shot prompting to the pool, and choose few-
         shot examples from the growing pool (without pool size limit).
       • LMX, Quality-Only: Maintain a pool as in Random-Search, but only up to 100 highest-
         quality completions (as evaluated by AI Feedback) are kept in the pool (i.e. iterative search
         focused only on quality). Single-objective LMX as in Meyerson et al. (2023).

We choose a variety of baselines, some highlighting representative alternative approaches (e.g. few-
shot prompting), and ablations of QDAIF, to validate our algorithmic choices. For example, Fixed-
Few-Shot and Shuffling-Few-Shot enable the generation of different texts (relying on stochastic
sampling), while being constrained to the output distribution of the fixed set of in-context examples.
Random-Search and LMX, Quality-Only are methods where the (prompt) pool of examples that
we can sample from grows in size, starting from an initial pool. In contrast to QDAIF, Random-
Search is limited by the lack of constraints in the prompt pool, especially in maintaining the quality
of the growing pool through evaluation. LMX, Quality-Only adds a quality-based evaluation step
with AI feedback that optimizes the quality of texts in the pool over time to contain only texts with
high quality scores, but is not designed to encourage diversity in texts in comparison to QDAIF.
For each domain and baseline described above, we recorded runs for 2000 iterations, repeated with
5 different random seeds. To enable comparisons with baselines, AI feedback is used to compute
the quality and diversity measures for all iteration outputs. Similar to QDAIF, the baseline methods
use hand-written examples in Appendix A.21, either in a fixed prompt or as the initial prompt pool.
Performance Comparison. We report results comparing the QD score performance for the dif-
ferent methods of generating creative writing texts in Figure 3. We computed the mean, and the
bootstrapped 95% confidence intervals (CI) from 100k resamples, across 5 random seeds of runs.
We noticed that QDAIF achieves significantly better QD scores than all baseline methods in Opin-
ions and Stories. The broader range of texts generated by QDAIF is also evident qualitatively. For
example, in the Stories - Genre and Ending domain, while the baseline methods deliver straightfor-
ward and more predictable stories of how the spy "pulled out a knife and stabbed [the politician]
to death", QDAIF generates a more dramatic story of how the spy "transformed into the monster
and killed everyone". Random-Search is the worst-performing method overall, with significantly
lower QD score performance in Opinions and Stories - Genre compared to the best-performing
baselines. Interestingly, LMX, Quality-Only does not significantly outperform the methods using
a fixed population prompt pool (Fixed-Few-Shot and Shuffling-Few-Shot). On Stories - Genre,
LMX, Quality-Only is often weaker than Fixed-Few-Shot and Shuffling-Few-Shot. The results
show that single-objective optimization cannot guide the search for diverse, high-quality texts alone.
Furthermore, we found that QDAIF outperforms other (diversity-seeking baselines), as well as ex-
tensions of those baselines with quality filters, becoming more similar to QDAIF (cf. Appendix A.8).
Human Feedback Evaluation. We report the results of the human study comparing QDAIF and
baseline samples in Table 1. We observe that compared to baselines, QDAIF is competitive with or
better at discovering diverse, high-quality texts in Opinions and Stories according to human feed-
back. QDAIF sets also showed high agreement between humans and AI feedback on the diversity
categories of presented texts, as well as between two annotators, competitive with Fixed-Few-Shot.
Although the average perceived quality of texts is better from Fixed-Few-Shot, this is not enough
for bringing high-quality examples for different niches of outputs (i.e. higher QD score). Further-
more, Shuffling-Few-Shot demonstrates even lower human evaluation scores, despite the use of the
same fixed set of hand-written seeds, indicating lower robustness due to the use of different order-
ing of few-shot examples. Prior work hints at the sensitivity of LMs to few-shot prompt ordering,
with task-solving capabilities varying significantly due to this ordering (Lu et al., 2021). The gap in
human-evaluated performance between Fixed-Few-Shot and Shuffling-Few-Shot indicates that re-
liance on fixed prompts is less likely to enable reliable search, in contrast to the robustness shown by
QDAIF. Additionally, Random-Search and LMX, Quality-Only obtained even lower human eval-
uation scores, even though the methods either explore different prompts or optimize for the quality


                                                   6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 3: QDAIF significantly outperforms baselines in QD score performance in all domains.
Performance stats with mean bootstrapped 95% CI, across 5 random seed runs. The maximum
possible QD score is 20 (100 for 2D archive (4th plot)). See Appendix A.7 for additional stats.


Table 1: QDAIF is competitive/better in terms of Human QD score against baseline methods
from the human evaluation study. The stats are averaged across three domains: Opinions, Stories
- Genre, and Stories - Ending. The Human QD score quantifies the perceived quality-diversity of a
set of solutions returned by a method (i.e. high-quality texts for all the diversity categories of texts
that the evaluator could identify). Quality rating is from humans. See Appendix A.1 for study setup.
                                       Human       Quality     Human-AI      Human
                 Method
                                       QD score    rating      agreement    agreement
                 Fixed-Few-Shot          0.767         4.133     0.800         0.867
                 Shuffling-Few-Shot      0.696         3.500     0.700         0.667
                 Random-Search           0.606         3.300     0.733         0.600
                 LMX, Quality-Only       0.650         3.533     0.633         0.733
                 QDAIF (ours)            0.772         3.900     0.833         0.800



of texts. We provide a detailed discussion (for baseline methods) on findings from the subjective
study of the discovered texts in Appendix A.15, as well as the qualitative behavior of the text search
over time in Appendix A.16. Through guided evolutionary search, QDAIF surpasses all baseline
methods in terms of computed QD score performance, and is competitive (or better) compared to
baselines, according to human evaluation.


4.3   E XTENSIONS TO AI F EEDBACK AND M UTATION M ODEL

In addition to experiments with QDAIF described in previous sections, we investigated the effects
on the performance due to variations of the method.
LMX Model Size. We used larger versions of the LMX models (30B and 70B) for mutation,
and compared it to the performance of the 13B model (default). While no relationship was found
between model size and QD score, quality ratings from human feedback improved with outputs from
larger models (described in detail in Appendix A.3).
Few-Shot AI Feedback. We compared the performance of QDAIF on the Stories - Genre domain
when we prompted our AI feedback model for diversity measures given 2-shot, 4-shot, and 8-shot
prompts. Using a higher number of few-shots led to improvements in human quality ratings of texts.
Further discussion and results are highlighted in Appendix A.4.
Varying Initialization and Mutation Method. Ideally, QDAIF would be simpler if it could be
run without seed examples (e.g. requesting a story from an instruction-following LM). We investi-
gated the potential of QDAIF when the solution population is initialized from zero-shot prompted
generations, and evolved using LMX. Initial results on Opinions and Stories along with prior work
discussion are shown in Appendix A.5, highlighting comparable performance in terms of QD score,
with divergence observed in alignment with human preferences. We also find that QDAIF, in these
domains, is robust to the mechanism of generating variation. Appendix A.6 describes an alternative
mutation method (based on a more gradual few-shot replacement operation) that is more effective
in some circumstances, although in general offers comparable performance. We provide a detailed
discussion (for QDAIF methods) on findings from the subjective study of the discovered texts in
Appendix A.13, as well as the qualitative behavior of the text search over time in Appendix A.14.
There may be many ways of leveraging LMs to generate variation (including finetuning models; see
Appendix A.11), and this is an exciting avenue of future research.


                                                   7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                 “A poem of very high, award winning quality…”
 Onyx tide's grim sway,
 Ghostly silence in decay,
 Death's enigma prays.                                                                                                                                                                     In the sacred vault of the celestial blue,
                                                                                                                                                                                           Resides a tale of love, pure and true,
                                                                                                                                                                                           In the heart of silence, the words do sing,
                                                                                                                                                                                           A melody woven in the loom of longing.
 Verse 1:
 Bright emerald rivers in pure harmony flow,                                                                                                                                               The moon dances in her silver dress,
 Along verdant valleys where wildflowers grow.                                                                                                                                             Stars with her in the cosmic fest,
 Singing in silence, whispers of delight,                                                                                                                                                  Galaxies far spun tales of yore,
 In day's radiant sunlight or night's gentle quiet.                                                                                                                                        Of a love transcending the terrestrial shore.

 Chorus:                                                                                                                                                                                   A celestial maiden of iridescent light,
 Oh, flow river, flow, with your tranquillizing glow,                                                                                                                                      Her laughter, the cosmos's lyrical delight,
 In stillness, universe's secrets you bestow,                                                                                                                                              Yearned for the tender touch of the earth,
 Your waters sing life's symphony sweet and low,                                                                                                                                           Her heart a crucible of starry mirth.
 Eternal hymn of creation, in rhythm slow.
                                                                                                                                                                                           An earthly poet in the cradle of the valley,
 Verse 2:                                                                                                                                                                                  His verses clad in moonlight's alley,
 Unveiling cosmos secrets, so vast, so deep,                                                                                                                                               Dreamed of the heavens' endless grace,
 In sacred silence, where moonbeams sleep.                                                                                                                                                 In the hidden corners of cosmos, sought her trace.
 Whispering wonders, in star's glow ever bright,
 Drawing portraits of truth in the palette of night.                                                                                                                                       With quill and parchment, began his plight,
                                                                                                                                                                                           As sunsets burned into star-kissed night,
 Chorus:                                                                                                                                                                                   He bled his love in ink so deep,
 Oh, shimmer stars, shimmer, make the heavens glow,                                                                                                                                        His verses lulled the moon to sleep.
 Revealing secrets only the cosmos know,
 Your light sings a hymn, soft, tender and low,                                                                                                                                            …
 Life’s ethereal melody, with joy, overflows.

 Ending Verse:
 In the grandeur of galaxies, where dreams set sail,
 Life's hymn whispers, softly, a tender tale.           Under a steely dome of twilight skies,              On the silent cradle of dawn, whispers of light awaken,                        In the cathedral of cosmos, amid star-dusted dreams,
 …                                                      Life's beauty sprawls in emerald, infinite guise.   Emerging from the chrysalis of night's sepia reverie, golden streaks taken,    Sculpts the Potter with poise, in ethereal scenes,
                                                        A nocturne playing, in hues of blush and blue,      A symphony of shadow and radiance, by cosmic maestro's hand shaken,            Crafting constellations in the cobalt expanse,
                                                        Where rosy dawn whispers verses true.               In the subtle artistry of daybreak, existence finds itself unbroken.           Unveiling the universe's silent, somber dance.

 In fields where bright joy as jewels thrive,           Rain weeps from heaven with soft, loving hand,      Through corridors of sapphire and coral skies, echoes of reality are spoken,   Each radiant star holds a story untold,
 A zephyr sings a tune, hearts alive,                   Blaring echoes float in air so grand.               Reflecting in the tranquil mirror of seas, a promise never to be forsaken,     Each wandering whisper from nebulas of old.
 Meadows dance in a ballet,                             In bright chorus of the sun, purity unfurls,        Buds clad in dew-kissed veils, their perfumed sonnets gently open,             Beneath the galaxy's shroud we lay side by side,
 While fears melt away,                                 Verses of love awakening with daybreak's twirls.    Unearth the sacred mantra of life, silently in the dawn awoken.                Reading the poetry scribed in the skywide.
 In this realm, love and laughter strive.               …                                                   …                                                                              …
 …



Figure 4: QDAIF (LMX-guided) (left) covers the space of poetry with high-quality solutions
(on a rating scale), with poems matching the closest bins. QDAIF solutions take qualitative
inspiration from the seed poem’s imagery of "fields of green waves" in Appendix A.30 while giving
meaningfully diverse kinds of poems across the search space. QDAIF (LMX-rewrite) (not shown)
also covers more the space of diverse, high-quality poems compared to Random-Poems (right).


4.4             E VOLVING S OLUTIONS THROUGH I NSTRUCTION G UIDANCE

This experiment explores scaling up QDAIF to a more capable model, GPT-4 (OpenAI, 2023), in
the challenging task of generating poetry, highlighting how QDAIF will benefit from advances in
model capabilities. The aim of the Poetry domain is to produce high-quality poems with varying
genres and emotional tones, unrestricted by topic. Here, the MAP-Elites archive has two axes of
diversity: genre and tone, and they are delineated using categorical labels. The genre axis has the
labels "haiku", "sonnet", "ballad", "limerick", and "hymn", while the tone axis has the labels of
"happy", "dark", "mysterious", "romantic", and "reflective". We created a new mutation operator,
LMX-rewrite, for this domain, that leverages instruction-following to tell a model to translate a
parent poem into an offspring with different diversity characteristics. To generate a new solution,
we prompt GPT-4 to rewrite the selected poem into an inspired, different poem: Inspired by this
poem, write a new poem of very high, award winning quality with a different poetic genre (format
and form) and tone compared to the poem above.
We used GPT-4 to determine the genre and tone of a poem and rate its quality. For quality, we
prompt GPT-4 to Rate the quality of the above poem on a scale from 1 to 10. To determine the
diversity attributes, we prompt GPT-4 to determine which genre or tone is the poem closest to. For
example, to determine genre, we ask GPT-4: What genre is this poem closest to from the following
list: ["haiku", "sonnet", "ballad", "limerick", "hymn"]? Appendix A.30 shows the full prompts
and setup. We observed high consistency in GPT-4’s responses; across multiple LM calls, quality
ratings for the same poem fluctuated by no more than a single point. We show qualitative examples
of poems with their AI feedback evaluations in Appendix A.19. In this setup, all methods are run
for 200 iterations, and QDAIF is benchmarked against the baseline, Random-Poems, as well as
an ablation method, Fixed Seed Rewrite. Random-Poems simply generates 200 random poems.
Fixed Seed Rewrite rewrites only the seed poem in Appendix A.30, without evolutionary search.
We found that QDAIF achieves a higher QD score of 130 (CI: 118 - 145) in comparison to Random-
Poems with 76 (CI: 67 - 85) and Fixed Seed Rewrite with 99 (CI: 72 - 117). We observed a
similar trend (with a wider performance gap between QDAIF and other methods) when we used
GPT-3.5-Turbo for the generation step instead of GPT-4 while keeping GPT-4 as the evaluator (cf.
Appendix A.17). QDAIF was shown to have greater QD score performance than the other methods
according to the Mann-Whitney U Test (p ≤ 0.05). Still, QDAIF with LMX-rewrite fails to dis-
cover solutions in some bins (e.g. limericks). For this, we can adapt QDAIF by adding guidance
on the desired (randomly chosen) genre and tone for rewriting (LMX-guided). The performance of
this method of QDAIF is on par with a Targeted-Poems approach (generating high-quality poems
of randomly chosen genre and tone per step) in terms of QD score, and even better when using an
older version of GPT-4 (cf. Appendix A.17). Furthermore, we found that the rewriting step is useful


                                                                                                            8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


for generating poems that can meaningfully preserve inspiration from parent poems, enabling users
to control with more nuance the outcomes of search, through approximating the iterative refinement
typical of human creative processes (Stanley et al., 2017) (see Appendix A.18). Figure 4 highlights
the potential of QDAIF with GPT-4, especially in controlling a set of solutions subjectively aligned
with AI feedback labels. QDAIF is even demonstrated for practical applicability to a domain outside
of creative writing, for solving coding problems (cf. Appendix A.20). Overall, results highlight that
diversity suffers when prompting models without explicit diversity guidance (Renda et al., 2023;
Friedrich et al., 2023; Kirk et al., 2023), and that evolution with a rewriting mutation operator can
lead to more human-influenceable, diverse, and high-quality solutions.


5   D ISCUSSION AND C ONCLUSION

This paper introduces QDAIF, a quality-diversity method that aims to discover diverse and high-
quality solutions in qualitative domains, by leveraging advances in foundation models to evaluate
the quality and diversity of generated individuals. QDAIF outperforms baseline methods in returning
more diverse, high-quality solutions in creative writing domains (Opinions, Stories, Poetry), that
benefit greatly from accurate AI feedback measures. The paper’s results highlight that QDAIF can
succeed at its aims, generating solutions that align with human perception of quality and diversity.
We note limitations with QDAIF that motivate future work. Firstly, we suspect reward hacking when
using LMs to generate feedback. Our human evaluation investigation shows that while the LM’s
evaluation of quality mostly aligns with human perception, the correlation drops when the evaluated
quality is 0.995 to 1 (cf. Figure 5). The text generation might have exploited attributes or phrasings
that allow an LM to give a high-quality estimate, but not what humans would agree is good. This
is a common issue highlighted by other works when using AI models as classifiers or evaluators
(Nguyen et al., 2015a), highlighting risks of open-ended search to be tackled (Ecoffet et al., 2020).
One method to address this limitation could be to use RLHF finetuning (Ouyang et al., 2022) to
produce LMs that can detect and mitigate adversarially generated texts. Another possible approach
could be to use an ensemble of different AI models to evaluate solutions, rather than relying only on
one; the hope would be that robustness would result from models having uncorrelated blind spots.
Furthermore, although QDAIF makes it easy to specify qualitative aspects of diversity through nat-
ural language prompts, it still requires specified definitions of diversity axes. For example, if we
applied QDAIF to generate short stories of different genres (e.g. comparing horror vs. romance), it
would not autonomously explore other important attributes that a writer might care about (e.g. first-
person vs. third-person perspective) unless explicitly specified. When we tested different diversity
measures in the Stories domain, such pathologies were observed (Appendix A.32). For example,
when using "hero spy vs. hero politician" as the diversity measure, many generated stories tend to
neglect the interaction between the spy and the politician, focusing solely on one hero character.
However, someone writing a story would naturally care about how multiple characters interact with
one another. One possible way to automatically determine interesting diversity measures (Meyer-
son et al., 2016; Etcheverry et al., 2021) is to utilize the human notions of interestingness distilled
into foundation models (Zhang et al., 2023). That is, we could ask LMs to suggest interesting di-
versity measures that a human would typically care about in the domain, thereby enabling a more
autonomous creative search (see Appendix A.10 for findings on the potential of this method).
In conclusion, we show that QDAIF is a promising approach to open-ended search that can reveal
unexplored creative writing spaces, surpassing alternative text generation methods in generating
diverse high-quality natural language text. AI feedback, Evolution through Large Models (ELM),
and quality-diversity search (QD) were found to be essential ingredients for enhanced AI systems
that can innovate in subjective spaces, similar to past research on Innovation Engines (Nguyen et al.,
2016; 2015b). In fact, we see AI feedback as a general ingredient for open-ended search for solutions
in multimodal domains, capable of following instructions beyond text (Liu et al., 2023). QDAIF can
be easily extended to multi-modal domains (e.g. vision-language) for synthetic data generation
and evaluation, building on top of recent advances in the field (Eichenberg et al., 2021; Alayrac
et al., 2022; Bellagente et al., 2023; Driess et al., 2023; Bhatt et al., 2023; Sudhakaran et al., 2023;
Todd et al., 2023). We see many possibilities from QDAIF to build creative search systems with
evaluation, diversification, and improvement capabilities, bringing us closer to AI that can support
and extend human innovation.


                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E THICS S TATEMENT

Human evaluations were performed by the co-authors of this paper and select colleagues. All human
evaluators provided informed consent, and their feedback and assessments were obtained without
coercion or bias. We took action to prevent bias by presenting evaluators with texts to evaluate
in a blind setting, with only the instructions for the study annotation task presented (to carefully
read through the presented texts, then give a quality score and a label of the characteristic that best
matches the texts). We show a detailed setup for the human study in Appendix A.1.
For the sake of transparency, we provide the full set of results with caption descriptions from our
human evaluation. In the Opinions domain, Tables 13–16 contain the human evaluation results for
sets from baseline methods, Tables 29–32 contain the human evaluation results for sets from QDAIF
methods, and Tables 25–28 contain the human evaluation results for sets from embedding feedback
QD methods. In the Stories - Genre domain, Tables 17–20 contain the human evaluation results
for sets from baseline methods, and Tables 33–36 contain the human evaluation results for sets from
QDAIF methods. For the Stories - Ending domain, Tables 21–24 contain the human evaluation
results for sets from baseline methods, and Tables 37–40 contain the human evaluation results for
sets from QDAIF methods.


AUTHOR C ONTRIBUTIONS

Herbie developed the setup and framework for the Poetry domain experiments and base library
for research. Andrew developed the setup and experiments for the Opinions and Stories domains,
and contributed to extended studies, visualization, and analysis across experiments in the paper.
Hannah contributed additional experimentation in the Stories domain, in addition to coordinating
part of human evaluation studies. Jenny contributed qualitative analysis across studied domains.
Koen developed visualization scripts used in Opinions and Stories domain experiments. Marco
contributed to part of the technical implementation and ideation. Andrew conducted the blind human
evaluation study, and Grégory advised on the conduct and analysis of the human study. Joel, Jeff,
and Ken initiated early ideation for this work. Joel, Grégory, Jeff, and Ken advised and guided.
Andrew, Jenny, Herbie, and Joel wrote the manuscript with edits and feedback from all authors.


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

We thank Robert Baldock, Samuel Weinbach, Souradeep Nanda, Jan Zierstek, and Andres Felipe
Cruz Salinas for insightful discussions and feedback within the lab at Aleph Alpha. We also thank
Katherine Hardgrave, David Nugent, Daniel Flood, and Formula Trinity Autonomous for the inspi-
ration that seeded the momentum leading up to this work.


R EFERENCES
Michael Ahn, Anthony Brohan, Noah Brown, Yevgen Chebotar, Omar Cortes, Byron David, Chelsea
 Finn, Chuyuan Fu, Keerthana Gopalakrishnan, Karol Hausman, et al. Do as I can, not as I say:
 Grounding language in robotic affordances. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.01691, 2022.

Jean-Baptiste Alayrac, Jeff Donahue, Pauline Luc, Antoine Miech, Iain Barr, Yana Hasson, Karel
  Lenc, Arthur Mensch, Katherine Millican, Malcolm Reynolds, et al. Flamingo: A visual language
  model for few-shot learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:23716–
  23736, 2022.

I. Elaine Allen and Christopher A. Seaman. Likert scales and data analyses. Quality progress, 40
   (7):64–65, 2007.

Yuntao Bai, Saurav Kadavath, Sandipan Kundu, Amanda Askell, Jackson Kernion, Andy Jones,
  Anna Chen, Anna Goldie, Azalia Mirhoseini, Cameron McKinnon, et al. Constitutional AI:
  Harmlessness from AI feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.08073, 2022.


                                                  10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Marco Bellagente, Manuel Brack, Hannah Teufel, Felix Friedrich, Björn Deiseroth, Constantin
 Eichenberg, Andrew Dai, Robert Baldock, Souradeep Nanda, Koen Oostermeijer, et al. Multifu-
 sion: Fusing pre-trained models for multi-lingual, multi-modal image generation. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2305.15296, 2023.
Varun Bhatt, Bryon Tjanaka, Matthew Fontaine, and Stefanos Nikolaidis. Deep surrogate assisted
  generation of environments. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:37762–
  37777, 2022.
Varun Bhatt, Heramb Nemlekar, Matthew Fontaine, Bryon Tjanaka, Hejia Zhang, Ya-Chuan Hsu,
  and Stefanos Nikolaidis. Surrogate assisted generation of human-robot interaction scenarios.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.13787, 2023.
Rishi Bommasani, Drew A. Hudson, Ehsan Adeli, Russ Altman, Simran Arora, Sydney von Arx,
  Michael S. Bernstein, Jeannette Bohg, Antoine Bosselut, Emma Brunskill, et al. On the opportu-
  nities and risks of foundation models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.07258, 2021.
Herbie Bradley, Honglu Fan, Francisco Carvalho, Matthew Fisher, Louis Castricato, reciprocated,
  dmayhem93, Shivanshu Purohit, and Joel Lehman. OpenELM, January 2023a. URL https:
  //github.com/CarperAI/OpenELM.
Herbie Bradley, Honglu Fan, Harry Saini, Reshinth Adithyan, Shivanshu Purohit, and Joel Lehman.
  Diff models - A new way to edit code. CarperAI Blog, Jan 2023b. URL https://carper.
  ai/diff-model/.
Jonathan C. Brant and Kenneth O. Stanley. Minimal criterion coevolution: A new approach to
  open-ended search. In Proceedings of the Genetic and Evolutionary Computation Conference,
  pp. 67–74, 2017.
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D. Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are
  few-shot learners. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:1877–1901, 2020.
Angelica Chen, David M. Dohan, and David R. So. Evoprompting: Language models for code-level
  neural architecture search. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.14838, 2023.
Mark Chen, Jerry Tworek, Heewoo Jun, Qiming Yuan, Henrique Ponde de Oliveira Pinto, Jared
 Kaplan, Harri Edwards, Yuri Burda, Nicholas Joseph, Greg Brockman, Alex Ray, Raul Puri,
 Gretchen Krueger, Michael Petrov, Heidy Khlaaf, Girish Sastry, Pamela Mishkin, Brooke Chan,
 Scott Gray, Nick Ryder, Mikhail Pavlov, Alethea Power, Lukasz Kaiser, Mohammad Bavarian,
 Clemens Winter, Philippe Tillet, Felipe Petroski Such, Dave Cummings, Matthias Plappert, Fo-
 tios Chantzis, Elizabeth Barnes, Ariel Herbert-Voss, William Hebgen Guss, Alex Nichol, Alex
 Paino, Nikolas Tezak, Jie Tang, Igor Babuschkin, Suchir Balaji, Shantanu Jain, William Saunders,
 Christopher Hesse, Andrew N. Carr, Jan Leike, Josh Achiam, Vedant Misra, Evan Morikawa, Alec
 Radford, Matthew Knight, Miles Brundage, Mira Murati, Katie Mayer, Peter Welinder, Bob Mc-
 Grew, Dario Amodei, Sam McCandlish, Ilya Sutskever, and Wojciech Zaremba. Evaluating large
 language models trained on code. 2021.
Aakanksha Chowdhery, Sharan Narang, Jacob Devlin, Maarten Bosma, Gaurav Mishra, Adam
  Roberts, Paul Barham, Hyung Won Chung, Charles Sutton, Sebastian Gehrmann, et al. PaLM:
  Scaling language modeling with pathways. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.02311, 2022.
Hyung Won Chung, Le Hou, Shayne Longpre, Barret Zoph, Yi Tay, William Fedus, Eric Li, Xuezhi
  Wang, Mostafa Dehghani, Siddhartha Brahma, et al. Scaling instruction-finetuned language mod-
  els. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.11416, 2022.
Jeff Clune. AI-GAs: AI-generating algorithms, an alternate paradigm for producing general artificial
   intelligence. arXiv preprint arXiv:1905.10985, 2019.
Cédric Colas, Laetitia Teodorescu, Pierre-Yves Oudeyer, Xingdi Yuan, and Marc-Alexandre Côté.
  Augmenting autotelic agents with large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.12487, 2023.
Antoine Cully. Autonomous skill discovery with quality-diversity and unsupervised descriptors. In
  Proceedings of the Genetic and Evolutionary Computation Conference, pp. 81–89, 2019.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Antoine Cully and Yiannis Demiris. Hierarchical behavioral repertoires with unsupervised descrip-
  tors. Proceedings of the Genetic and Evolutionary Computation Conference, 2018.
Antoine Cully, Jeff Clune, Danesh Tarapore, and Jean-Baptiste Mouret. Robots that can adapt like
  animals. Nature, 521(7553):503–507, 2015.
Li Ding, Jenny Zhang, Jeff Clune, Lee Spector, and Joel Lehman. Quality diversity through human
  feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.12103, 2023.
Stephane Doncieux, Alban Laflaquière, and Alexandre Coninx. Novelty search: a theoretical per-
  spective. In Proceedings of the Genetic and Evolutionary Computation Conference, pp. 99–106,
  2019.
Danny Driess, Fei Xia, Mehdi S.M. Sajjadi, Corey Lynch, Aakanksha Chowdhery, Brian Ichter,
  Ayzaan Wahid, Jonathan Tompson, Quan Vuong, Tianhe Yu, et al. PaLM-E: An embodied multi-
  modal language model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.03378, 2023.
Adrien Ecoffet, Jeff Clune, and Joel Lehman. Open questions in creating safe open-ended ai: ten-
  sions between control and creativity. In Artificial Life Conference Proceedings 32, pp. 27–35.
  MIT Press One Rogers Street, Cambridge, MA 02142-1209, USA journals-info . . . , 2020.
Constantin Eichenberg, Sidney Black, Samuel Weinbach, Letitia Parcalabescu, and Anette Frank.
  MAGMA - Multimodal augmentation of generative models through adapter-based finetuning.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.05253, 2021.
Mayalen Etcheverry, Bert Wang-Chak Chan, Clément Moulin-Frier, and Pierre-Yves Oudeyer.
 Meta-diversity search in complex systems, a recipe for artificial open-endedness? 2021.
Manon Flageat and Antoine Cully. Fast and stable map-elites in noisy domains using deep grids.
 In Artificial Life Conference Proceedings 32, pp. 273–282. MIT Press One Rogers Street, Cam-
 bridge, MA 02142-1209, USA journals-info . . . , 2020.
Manon Flageat and Antoine Cully. Uncertain quality-diversity: Evaluation methodology and new
 methods for quality-diversity in uncertain domains. IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Compu-
 tation, 2023.
Matthew Fontaine and Stefanos Nikolaidis. Differentiable quality diversity. Advances in Neural
 Information Processing Systems, 34:10040–10052, 2021.
Felix Friedrich, Patrick Schramowski, Manuel Brack, Lukas Struppek, Dominik Hintersdorf, Sasha
  Luccioni, and Kristian Kersting. Fair diffusion: Instructing text-to-image generation models on
  fairness. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.10893, 2023.
Adam Gaier. Accelerating Evolutionary Design Exploration with Predictive and Generative Models.
  PhD thesis, Université de Lorraine, 2020.
Adam Gaier, Alexander Asteroth, and Jean-Baptiste Mouret. Data-efficient exploration, optimiza-
  tion, and modeling of diverse designs through surrogate-assisted illumination. In Proceedings of
  the Genetic and Evolutionary Computation Conference, pp. 99–106, 2017.
Adam Gaier, Alexander Asteroth, and Jean-Baptiste Mouret. Are quality diversity algorithms better
  at generating stepping stones than objective-based search? In Proceedings of the Genetic and
  Evolutionary Computation Conference Companion, pp. 115–116, 2019.
Luca Grillotti and Antoine Cully. Unsupervised behaviour discovery with quality-diversity optimi-
  sation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.05648, 2021.
Junxian He, Chunting Zhou, Xuezhe Ma, Taylor Berg-Kirkpatrick, and Graham Neubig. Towards a
  unified view of parameter-efficient transfer learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.04366, 2021.
Neil Houlsby, Andrei Giurgiu, Stanislaw Jastrzebski, Bruna Morrone, Quentin De Laroussilhe, An-
  drea Gesmundo, Mona Attariyan, and Sylvain Gelly. Parameter-efficient transfer learning for
  NLP. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 2790–2799. PMLR, 2019.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Zhengbao Jiang, Jun Araki, Haibo Ding, and Graham Neubig. How can we know when language
  models know? On the calibration of language models for question answering. Transactions of the
  Association for Computational Linguistics, 9:962–977, 2021.
Jared Kaplan, Sam McCandlish, Tom Henighan, Tom B. Brown, Benjamin Chess, Rewon Child,
   Scott Gray, Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, and Dario Amodei. Scaling laws for neural language
   models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2001.08361, 2020.
Tero Karras, Samuli Laine, and Timo Aila. A style-based generator architecture for generative
  adversarial networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern
  recognition, pp. 4401–4410, 2019.
Leon Keller, Daniel Tanneberg, Svenja Stark, and Jan Peters. Model-based quality-diversity search
  for efficient robot learning. In 2020 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and
  Systems (IROS), pp. 9675–9680. IEEE, 2020.
Robert Kirk, Ishita Mediratta, Christoforos Nalmpantis, Jelena Luketina, Eric Hambro, Edward
  Grefenstette, and Roberta Raileanu. Understanding the effects of rlhf on llm generalisation and
  diversity. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.06452, 2023.
Harrison Lee, Samrat Phatale, Hassan Mansoor, Kellie Lu, Thomas Mesnard, Colton Bishop, Victor
  Carbune, and Abhinav Rastogi. RLAIF: Scaling reinforcement learning from human feedback
  with AI feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.00267, 2023.
Joel Lehman and Kenneth O. Stanley. Revising the evolutionary computation abstraction: Minimal
  criteria novelty search. In Proceedings of the 12th annual conference on Genetic and evolutionary
  computation, pp. 103–110, 2010.
Joel Lehman and Kenneth O Stanley. Abandoning objectives: Evolution through the search for
  novelty alone. Evolutionary computation, 19(2):189–223, 2011a.
Joel Lehman and Kenneth O. Stanley. Evolving a diversity of virtual creatures through novelty
  search and local competition. In Proceedings of the 13th annual conference on Genetic and
  evolutionary computation, pp. 211–218, 2011b.
Joel Lehman, Kenneth O Stanley, et al. Exploiting open-endedness to solve problems through the
  search for novelty. In ALIFE, pp. 329–336, 2008.
Joel Lehman, Bryan Wilder, and Kenneth O. Stanley. On the critical role of divergent selection in
  evolvability. Frontiers in Robotics and AI, 3:45, 2016.
Joel Lehman, Jeff Clune, Dusan Misevic, Christoph Adami, Lee Altenberg, Julie Beaulieu, Peter J.
  Bentley, Samuel Bernard, Guillaume Beslon, David M. Bryson, Patryk Chrabaszcz, Nick Cheney,
  Antoine Cully, Stephane Doncieux, Fred C. Dyer, Kai Olav Ellefsen, Robert Feldt, Stephan Fis-
  cher, Stephanie Forrest, Antoine Frénoy, Christian Gagné, Leni Le Goff, Laura M. Grabowski,
  Babak Hodjat, Frank Hutter, Laurent Keller, Carole Knibbe, Peter Krcah, Richard E. Lenski, Hod
  Lipson, Robert MacCurdy, Carlos Maestre, Risto Miikkulainen, Sara Mitri, David E. Moriarty,
  Jean-Baptiste Mouret, Anh Nguyen, Charles Ofria, Marc Parizeau, David Parsons, Robert T. Pen-
  nock, William F. Punch, Thomas S. Ray, Marc Schoenauer, Eric Shulte, Karl Sims, Kenneth O.
  Stanley, François Taddei, Danesh Tarapore, Simon Thibault, Westley Weimer, Richard Watson,
  and Jason Yosinski. The surprising creativity of digital evolution: A collection of anecdotes from
  the evolutionary computation and artificial life research communities, 2019.
Joel Lehman, Jonathan Gordon, Shawn Jain, Kamal Ndousse, Cathy Yeh, and Kenneth O. Stanley.
  Evolution through large models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.08896, 2022.
Bryan Lim, Luca Grillotti, Lorenzo Bernasconi, and Antoine Cully. Dynamics-aware quality-
  diversity for efficient learning of skill repertoires. arXiv preprint arXiv:2109.08522, 2021.
Bryan Lim, Alexander Reichenbach, and Antoine Cully. Learning to walk autonomously via reset-
  free quality-diversity. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.03655, 2022.
Chin-Yew Lin. Rouge: A package for automatic evaluation of summaries. In Text summarization
  branches out, pp. 74–81, 2004.

                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Haotian Liu, Chunyuan Li, Qingyang Wu, and Yong Jae Lee. Visual instruction tuning. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2304.08485, 2023.
Yao Lu, Max Bartolo, Alastair Moore, Sebastian Riedel, and Pontus Stenetorp. Fantastically ordered
  prompts and where to find them: Overcoming few-shot prompt order sensitivity. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2104.08786, 2021.
Aman Madaan, Niket Tandon, Prakhar Gupta, Skyler Hallinan, Luyu Gao, Sarah Wiegreffe, Uri
 Alon, Nouha Dziri, Shrimai Prabhumoye, Yiming Yang, et al. Self-refine: Iterative refinement
 with self-feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.17651, 2023.
Christopher D Manning. An introduction to information retrieval. Cambridge university press, 2009.
Elliot Meyerson, Joel Lehman, and Risto Miikkulainen. Learning behavior characterizations for
  novelty search. In Proceedings of the Genetic and Evolutionary Computation Conference 2016,
  pp. 149–156, 2016.
Elliot Meyerson, Mark J. Nelson, Herbie Bradley, Arash Moradi, Amy K. Hoover, and Joel
  Lehman. Language model crossover: Variation through few-shot prompting. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2302.12170, 2023.
Jean-Baptiste Mouret and Jeff Clune. Illuminating search spaces by mapping elites. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1504.04909, 2015.
Niklas Muennighoff. SGPT: GPT sentence embeddings for semantic search. arXiv:2202.08904,
  2022.
Anh Nguyen, Jason Yosinski, and Jeff Clune. Deep neural networks are easily fooled: High confi-
  dence predictions for unrecognizable images. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer
  vision and pattern recognition, pp. 427–436, 2015a.
Anh Nguyen, Jason Yosinski, and Jeff Clune. Innovation engines: Automated creativity and im-
  proved stochastic optimization via deep learning. In Proceedings of the Genetic and Evolutionary
  Computation Conference, 2015b.
Anh Nguyen, Jason Yosinski, and Jeff Clune. Understanding innovation engines: Automated cre-
  ativity and improved stochastic optimization via deep learning. Evolutionary computation, 24(3):
  545–572, 2016.
Yixin Nie, Adina Williams, Emily Dinan, Mohit Bansal, Jason Weston, and Douwe Kiela. Adversar-
  ial NLI: A new benchmark for natural language understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.14599,
  2019.
Olle Nilsson and Antoine Cully. Policy gradient assisted MAP-Elites. In Proceedings of the Genetic
  and Evolutionary Computation Conference, pp. 866–875, 2021.
OpenAI. GPT-4 technical report, 2023.
Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong
  Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, et al. Training language models to follow
  instructions with human feedback. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:
  27730–27744, 2022.
Ethan Perez, Sam Ringer, Kamilė Lukošiūtė, Karina Nguyen, Edwin Chen, Scott Heiner, Craig
  Pettit, Catherine Olsson, Sandipan Kundu, Saurav Kadavath, et al. Discovering language model
  behaviors with model-written evaluations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.09251, 2022.
Julien Pourcel, Cédric Colas, Pierre-Yves Oudeyer, and Laetitia Teodorescu. Aces: generating
  diverse programming puzzles with autotelic language models and semantic descriptors. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2310.10692, 2023.
Justin K. Pugh, Lisa B. Soros, and Kenneth O. Stanley. Quality diversity: A new frontier for evolu-
  tionary computation. Frontiers in Robotics and AI, 3:40, 2016.


                                                14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual
  models from natural language supervision. In International conference on machine learning, pp.
  8748–8763. PMLR, 2021.
Nils Reimers and Iryna Gurevych. Sentence-BERT: Sentence embeddings using siamese BERT-
  networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1908.10084, 2019.
Alex Renda, Aspen K. Hopkins, and Michael Carbin. Can LLMs generate random numbers?
  evaluating LLM sampling in controlled domains. In ICML 2023 Workshop: Sampling and
  Optimization in Discrete Space, 2023. URL http://people.csail.mit.edu/renda/
  llm-sampling-paper.
Victor Sanh, Albert Webson, Colin Raffel, Stephen H Bach, Lintang Sutawika, Zaid Alyafeai, An-
  toine Chaffin, Arnaud Stiegler, Teven Le Scao, Arun Raja, et al. Multitask prompted training
  enables zero-shot task generalization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.08207, 2021.
William Saunders, Catherine Yeh, Jeff Wu, Steven Bills, Long Ouyang, Jonathan Ward, and Jan
 Leike. Self-critiquing models for assisting human evaluators. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.05802,
 2022.
Jimmy Secretan, Nicholas Beato, David B. D’Ambrosio, Adelein Rodriguez, Adam Campbell,
  Jeremiah T. Folsom-Kovarik, and Kenneth O. Stanley. Picbreeder: A case study in collab-
  orative evolutionary exploration of design space. Evol. Comput., 19(3):373–403, 2011. doi:
  10.1162/EVCO\_a\_00030. URL https://doi.org/10.1162/EVCO_a_00030.
Noah Shinn, Beck Labash, and Ashwin Gopinath. Reflexion: An autonomous agent with dynamic
  memory and self-reflection. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.11366, 2023.
Joar Skalse, Nikolaus Howe, Dmitrii Krasheninnikov, and David Krueger. Defining and character-
  izing reward gaming. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:9460–9471, 2022.
Richard Socher, Alex Perelygin, Jean Wu, Jason Chuang, Christopher D. Manning, Andrew Y. Ng,
  and Christopher Potts. Recursive deep models for semantic compositionality over a sentiment
  treebank. In Proceedings of the 2013 conference on empirical methods in natural language pro-
  cessing, pp. 1631–1642, 2013.
Kenneth O Stanley. Compositional pattern producing networks: A novel abstraction of development.
  Genetic programming and evolvable machines, 8:131–162, 2007.
Kenneth O. Stanley and Joel Lehman. Why greatness cannot be planned: The myth of the objective.
  Springer, 2015.
Kenneth O. Stanley, Joel Lehman, and Lisa Soros. Open-endedness: The last grand challenge you’ve
  never heard of. O’Reilly Radar, 2017.
Jianlin Su, Yu Lu, Shengfeng Pan, Ahmed Murtadha, Bo Wen, and Yunfeng Liu. Roformer: En-
   hanced transformer with rotary position embedding. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.09864, 2021.
Shyam Sudhakaran, Miguel González-Duque, Claire Glanois, Matthias Freiberger, Elias Najarro,
  and Sebastian Risi. Mariogpt: Open-ended text2level generation through large language models,
  2023.
Graham Todd, Sam Earle, Muhammad Umair Nasir, Michael Cerny Green, and Julian Togelius.
  Level generation through large language models. In Proceedings of the 18th International Con-
  ference on the Foundations of Digital Games, pp. 1–8, 2023.
Vassilis Vassiliades, Konstantinos Chatzilygeroudis, and Jean-Baptiste Mouret. Scaling up MAP-
  Elites using centroidal Voronoi tessellations. arXiv preprint arXiv:1610.05729, 2016.
Guanzhi Wang, Yuqi Xie, Yunfan Jiang, Ajay Mandlekar, Chaowei Xiao, Yuke Zhu, Linxi Fan,
  and Anima Anandkumar. Voyager: An open-ended embodied agent with large language models.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.16291, 2023a.


                                               15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Ren-Jian Wang, Ke Xue, Yutong Wang, Peng Yang, Haobo Fu, Qiang Fu, and Chao Qian. Diversity
  from human feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.06648, 2023b.
Yizhong Wang, Yeganeh Kordi, Swaroop Mishra, Alisa Liu, Noah A Smith, Daniel Khashabi, and
  Hannaneh Hajishirzi. Self-instruct: Aligning language model with self generated instructions.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.10560, 2022a.
Yizhong Wang, Swaroop Mishra, Pegah Alipoormolabashi, Yeganeh Kordi, Amirreza Mirzaei, An-
  jana Arunkumar, Arjun Ashok, Arut Selvan Dhanasekaran, Atharva Naik, David Stap, et al.
  Super-NaturalInstructions: Generalization via declarative instructions on 1600+ NLP tasks. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2204.07705, 2022b.
Jason Wei, Maarten Bosma, Vincent Y. Zhao, Kelvin Guu, Adams Wei Yu, Brian Lester, Nan Du,
  Andrew M. Dai, and Quoc V. Le. Finetuned language models are zero-shot learners. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2109.01652, 2021.
Jenny Zhang, Joel Lehman, Kenneth Stanley, and Jeff Clune. OMNI: Open-endedness via models
  of human notions of interestingness. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.01711, 2023.
Yulun Zhang, Matthew C Fontaine, Amy K Hoover, and Stefanos Nikolaidis. Deep surrogate as-
  sisted MAP-Elites for automated hearthstone deckbuilding. In Proceedings of the Genetic and
  Evolutionary Computation Conference, pp. 158–167, 2022.


                                               16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A     A PPENDIX

A.1    H UMAN S TUDY ON Q UALITY-D IVERSITY OF T EXT S AMPLES

A study through human feedback lets us understand how well QD score performance through AI
feedback translates to creating a high-quality, diverse set of creative texts from a subjective angle.
We compare sets of human feedback evaluations for samples of diverse elites at the end of each run
to measure translations from AI-assessed performance to human-assessed performance of methods
in generating high-quality, diverse texts. In addition, the Human QD Score (sum of mean quality
score for each category/label that is found in the set according to human feedback) gives us a rough
understanding of how aligned quality-diversity improvement during the search is with the more
subjective notion of quality-diversity; this score is low if the set deemed to cover a wide space of
diverse texts from AI feedback fails to subjectively cover the space of desired diversity according
to human evaluations. To distinguish between quality ratings from humans vs. AI feedback in this
section, we refer to quality scores as those from human evaluators, and fitness scores as those from
AI feedback.
To assess the robustness of quality and diversity measures in AI feedback, we carried out a study
involving diverse elite samples selected from different bins of the QD archive from our tested runs.
Over a total of 28 experiments (of which 4 are from embedding feedback experiment runs), five dis-
tinct stories per experiment are reviewed by six annotators. Each (generated) text was independently
reviewed by two persons, resulting in a total of 280 annotations.
During the annotation process, we collected a subjective assessment of the quality of the generation
using a 5-point Likert scale based on the text quality in terms of flow, plot, presence of repetition, and
correspondence to the study’s topic. In addition, we assign each text to one of three categories. Two
categories were specific to the study performed (such as positive/negative sentiment, romance/horror
genre, or tragic/happy ending) and a third category was used when no element of the other two
classes was identified.
We took action to prevent bias by presenting evaluators with texts to evaluate in a blind setting,
with only the instructions for the study annotation task presented (to carefully read through the
presented texts, then give a quality score and a label of the characteristic that best matches the
texts). We provide the full set of results with caption descriptions from our human evaluation. In
the Opinions domain, Tables 13–16 contain the human evaluation results for sets from baseline
methods, Tables 29–32 contain the human evaluation results for sets from QDAIF methods, and
Tables 25–28 contain the human evaluation results for sets from embedding feedback QD methods.
In the Stories - Genre domain, Tables 17–20 contain the human evaluation results for sets from
baseline methods, and Tables 33–36 contain the human evaluation results for sets from QDAIF
methods. For the Stories - Ending domain, Tables 21–24 contain the human evaluation results for
sets from baseline methods, and Tables 37–40 contain the human evaluation results for sets from
QDAIF methods.
We compiled the results of the full study in Appendix A.12, and summarized the stats across the
study in the paragraphs below.

Comparison of quality scores We observed that both annotators generally have a close agreement
in their ratings with an average difference of 0.9 Likert points but there were occasional instances
where they may differ by 2 or 3 units. These deviations occurred in 15% and 5% of the cases,
respectively. This reflects that assessing the quality is somewhat subjective. To get a final estimation
of the quality of the generated texts, the scores from both annotators were averaged.
Figure 5 shows the average quality ratings from annotators for various ranges of fitness (here, the
quality score obtained from AI feedback). The ranges were chosen in a way that ensured a similar
amount of samples in each range. We observe clear evidence of a correlation between human and AI
quality measures, indicating the usefulness of using AI feedback to assess quality. However, we also
observed that fitness for the texts with the highest scores becomes uncorrelated to human-assessed
quality. This implies that above a certain threshold, fitness is not a reliable measure of quality
in some cases (and maybe slightly lower fitness solutions were preferred by humans). Therefore,
we suggest that in future work, more research is done in studying the relationship between (high-
confidence) evaluations from AI feedback, and reward hacking of solutions (Nguyen et al., 2015a;


                                                   17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                5

                4

                3
      quality


                2

                1
                    0-0.7   0.7-0.8   0.8-0.9   0.9-0.95 0.95-0.98 0.98-0.99 0.99-0.995 0.995-1
                                                  fitness range

Figure 5: Correlation plot between quality rating from human annotators, and fitness range
(quality computed from AI feedback). Mean human-annotated quality and statistical error for
different ranges of AI feedback fitness scores indicate more frequent instances of reward hacking
(Skalse et al., 2022; Lehman et al., 2019) from the outputs of some search methods evaluated in this
study.


Skalse et al., 2022; Lehman et al., 2019) under certain conditions and controls during the search
(e.g. through the use of seed texts for human-preferred outputs, as shown in Table 1, or additional
constraints on the generated solutions during search (Lehman & Stanley, 2010; Brant & Stanley,
2017)).

Comparison of diversity measurements For diversity, we observed that the two annotators
agreed on the classification of a generated text in the same category 73 percent of the time. On
the AI feedback side, diversity is collected on a 20-bin axis, measuring different degrees of corre-
spondence to two experiment-specific categories mentioned earlier. For the purpose of comparison
with human feedback, these bins are clustered into a first category (bins 0 to 8), a second category
(bins 11 to 19) and a neutral category (bins 9 and 10). Additionally, the 5 samples for each set
were collected from a relatively uniform spread of bins from one end of the diversity axis to another
(specifically, bins in set [0, 6, 9, 13, 19], except for when the method fails to find a solution for the
bin, then the next closest solution near the bin is chosen). This arbitrary arrangement allows for a
relatively uniform distribution among the three categories.
On average, AI feedback agrees with a human annotator on the text category label 73% of the time.
On samples where both annotators agree on the label of the text, this agreement rate increases to
82%. Within this set, the agreement increases to 95% on samples when we look at samples where
both annotators give a label that is not the neutral category. For some samples from bins 6 and
13, one human annotator gave a neutral label and the other annotator one of the other two labels
(closer to the AI feedback diversity measure for these bins), indicating that some samples lie between
neutral and extreme in the given measure. These findings suggest that diversity classification from
AI feedback is relatively reliable, especially in texts where humans agree on the label.

Baseline quality rating. The average quality score given by annotators for a given sample was
3.18, close to the middle rating of 3. This gives us an indication of what could be considered the
threshold for subjectively good or bad outputs.
The average human (subjective) QD score of all sets in the study is 0.606. This is another indication
for the threshold for determining which set from a given run/method had high-quality, diverse texts.


                                                      18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 2: QDAIF outperforms QD with embedding feedback (QDEF) according to human eval-
uation in human QD score and quality, when the difference is in feedback type for each base
method.. The mean of Human QD score and quality are computed for the set of each method-
/run. The differences between the two evaluators for QD score and Quality are shown. Agreement
between human and AI feedback on diversity labels given is slightly higher across QDAIF results
compared to QDEF results, as well as on agreement between two annotators.
                                           Human      QD score   Quality   Quality   Human-AI     Human
      Method
                                           QD score    range     rating     range    agreement   agreement
      QDEF, LMX, Zero-Shot Init             0.242      0.050      1.300     0.600      0.500       0.400
      QDEF, LMX, Seeded Init                0.308      0.050      1.700     0.600      0.600       0.600
      QDEF, LMX-Replace, Zero-Shot Init     0.417      0.233      2.100     1.000      0.800       0.600
      QDEF, LMX-Replace, Seeded Init        0.500      0.200      2.300     1.000      0.800       1.000
      QDAIF, LMX, Zero-Shot Init            0.350      0.300      1.700     1.400      0.800       1.000
      QDAIF, LMX, Seeded Init               0.617      0.167      3.200     1.200      1.000       1.000
      QDAIF, LMX-Replace, Zero-Shot Init    0.833      0.267      4.300     1.000      0.600       0.600
      QDAIF, LMX-Replace, Seeded Init       0.739      0.078      3.700     0.600      0.700       0.800



A.2   C OMPARING AI F EEDBACK AGAINST A LTERNATIVE M EASURES OF D IVERSITY

To understand the effect of fuzzy evaluation tools as a component of our QD setup, we tested the use
of an alternative method of feedback compared to our default method (AI feedback) in the MAP-
Elites pipeline: semantic embedding feedback (Reimers & Gurevych, 2019). For this method, we
used a 13B embedding model1 , based on the architecture described in Muennighoff (2022), with an
asymmetric search setup to measure the distance between a generated text (document embedding)
and a query embedding for a desired measure (e.g. "This is a positive opinion"). To compute a
diversity measure that can be defined on an axis, we first get the cosine distances between the docu-
ment embedding and each of two opposing attribute query embeddings. From this, we can measure
how close the document embedding is to one attribute compared to the other, and obtain a single
diversity measure normalized in the range [0, 1]. We use the same method for quality feedback,
with a query that aims to measure the relevance of generated texts to a specific domain. The cosine
similarity is used here as a quality score, with negative values being clipped to 0. Additional setup
details are shown in Appendix A.28. Since the subjective quality of the resulting elites (of creative
texts) is more informative of the method’s potential in further applications for practical synthetic
data generation, We conducted a human study in addition to the reporting of QD score stats as part
of our results.
We display performance statistics from our runs (QD Score) as well as human evaluation scores on
elite samples in Table 2. We observe from our human study that using AI feedback as the evaluator
instead of semantic embedding feedback for every variation of the QD run setup potentially leads
to subjectively better generations. This is likely due to more prominent reward hacking (Skalse
et al., 2022; Lehman et al., 2019) occurring in runs using embedding feedback, where the highest
quality score texts end up being very similar to the query "An opinion piece about eating vegetables
and plant-based foods", while not optimizing for the subjective quality of texts in different bins.
Qualitative analysis of human-evaluated sets of texts from QD with embedding feedback is shown in
Tables 25–28. Furthermore, agreement between human and AI feedback on text diversity labels was
slightly higher across QDAIF sets compared to QD with embedding feedback (QDEF) sets. Overall,
AI feedback outperforms the alternative measure of semantic embedding feedback, by guiding the
generation of texts that are more preferred by humans, and by serving as a better evaluator for quality
and diversity measures than embedding feedback.


  1
    https://aleph-alpha.com/luminous%2Dexplore%2Da%2Dmodel%2Dfor%2Dworld%
2Dclass%2Dsemantic%2Drepresentation/


                                                        19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 6: QD score plots for different LMX model sizes on the Stories - Genre domain. There
is no clear trend in scaling model size with QD score.


A.3   O N S CALING LM S FOR M UTATION

Previous work has consistently shown that LMs demonstrate improved capabilities in various task-
based benchmarks at larger scales (Kaplan et al., 2020; Chowdhery et al., 2022; Chung et al., 2022).
This applies to performance in solving tasks through in-context learning, which LMX is based on.
Prior work in LMX (Meyerson et al., 2023) has found that a relationship between model scaling
and performance of mutations can be observed when evolving binary strings in a search domain.
Interestingly, experiments in LMX as well as ELM (Lehman et al., 2022) observed that in some
cases, emerging capabilities in mutation ability appear for reasonably small LMs, but may not scale
with a clear trend.
Firstly, we show the QD score performance between runs in Figure 6. The standard error in the
score across 5 seeds is also shown. We observed that the QD score from the 70B runs converged to
a lower point compared to the 13B and 30B runs, which have comparable scores. This highlights a
trend between model size and QD score that is not directly proportional. Although suggestive trends
are not seen here, a study based on subjective feedback is still necessary for a deeper understanding
of the performance of each experiment.
We observed from the human feedback evaluation a trend in the quality ratings, with average quality
scores from each experiment set of: 3.43 (13B), 3.60 (30B), and 4.03 (70B). The quality score
increases with an increase in model size used, with a higher jump in score for generated stories from
the 70B runs.
In terms of the agreement on the genres of evaluated stories between AI feedback and human feed-
back, we observed the following percentage rates in the following sets: 80.0% (13B), 73.3% (30B),
and 73.3% (70B). There is a slight decrease in agreement for texts from the 30B and 70B runs. We
found that evaluators differed more frequently in their labels on stories deemed as "neutral" or "ro-
mance" according to AI feedback, suggesting that the use of the prompt pool in combination with
larger models might lead to generated texts with misaligned AI evaluations on the genre. Still, these
agreement rates indicate a good alignment between AI and human feedback.


                                                 20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 7: QD score Performance between Seeded Init and Zero-Shot. Performance stats with
mean, interquartile mean (IQM) and bootstrapped 95% CI, across 5 random seed runs. Seeded Init
is potentially better, but within the CI of Zero-Shot Init. In the Stories - Genre domain, the CI
of Zero-Shot Init runs is much wider, indicating significant variation in performance for different
random seeds.


A.4    O N F EW-S HOT AI F EEDBACK P ROMPTING

Instruction-following LMs are typically trained to align the model towards generating better answers
to zero-shot prompts (Wei et al., 2021; Ouyang et al., 2022). However, few-shot prompting with
exemplars was shown to be effective in some aspects with instruction-tuned LMs, especially towards
understanding task structure and improving robustness to prompting variations (Wei et al., 2021).
In terms of the average human-evaluated quality, we see a drop in subjective quality for the set of
stories from 2-shot AI feedback runs (3.10) in comparison to zero-shot AI feedback runs (3.43). We
observed for the other sets that this score increases for the 4-shot set (3.93) and the 8-shot set (4.03).
Furthermore, we see that this trend is mostly consistent when we consider the scores for each bin
category. This suggests an improvement in QDAIF’s ability to discover texts that are perceived to be
of higher quality according to human feedback when we use a higher number of in-context examples
during AI feedback evaluation.
In terms of the agreement between AI feedback and human feedback, we see a drop in average
agreement for ratings that were given to stories in the few-shot feedback experiment sets, with 50.0%
(2-shot), 66.7% (4-shot), and 56.7% (8-shot) agreement on sets, compared to 80.0% for zero-shot
(default). The level of disagreement occurs more frequently on stories evaluated to have the romance
genre. Additionally, evaluators labeled samples from the few-shot sets as "horror" or "neutral" more
frequently than "romance", while the proportion of labels given to samples from the zero-shot set
was more uniform.
The performance may vary due to the ordering of in-context examples in our few-shot prompts (in
Appendix A.29, as shown in Lu et al. (2021). Furthermore, the nature and wording of input-output
exemplars/tasks could also influence the performance, in addition to some variation due to the nature
of subjective evaluation.


A.5    O N THE I NITIALIZATION M ETHOD FOR QDAIF

Recent results from LMX demonstrated successful optimization when the search was initialized
by evolving a set of pre-existing seed examples (e.g. examples of equations, quotes, text-to-image
prompts, code) (Meyerson et al., 2023). At the same time, previous applications of QD methods
demonstrated successful search outcomes when using random initialization in different domains,
such as in robotics, and latent space illumination of generative models (Cully et al., 2015; Fontaine
& Nikolaidis, 2021; Bhatt et al., 2022).
We compared the performance between QDAIF with Seeded Init against Zero-Shot Init and a base-
line method LMX, Quality-Only initialized with Zero-Shot Init. From Figure 7, we can see that
there is potential improvement in QD score when using Seeded Init compared to Zero-Shot Init, but
the difference may not be significant. However, the difference is clear on the lower performance of
LMX, Quality-Only with Zero-Shot Init. This suggests that Zero-Shot Init is viable for QDAIF.
Still, we need to analyze the effect of the initialization on qualitative samples of elite texts. We also
compared the effects of initialization on subjective quality-diversity of texts (see Table 3). Sets of
texts discovered by Seeded Init within single runs were found to be subjectively higher-quality and
more diverse compared to sets from Zero-Shot Init (0.772 vs. 0.383 subjective QD score). This
suggests potential reward hacking (described for RL problems in Skalse et al. (2022); Lehman et al.
(2019) during the search with Zero-Shot Init runs, where potentially out-of-distribution texts can


                                                   21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


evolve to optimize the AI feedback quality score of solutions, but lead to subjectively low-quality
texts across bins.

A.6   O N THE M ECHANISMS OF M UTATION FOR QDAIF

Prior work on ELM highlights the versatility of LMs in applying a variety of potential muta-
tion methods, such as in the form of git diffs, or prompting to directly evolve text/code Lehman
et al. (2022). However, studying the potential effects of different LM-based mutation operators
on population-level evolvability (focused on future creative potential Lehman et al. (2016)) re-
mains a challenge. Towards understanding the potential of different mutation methods in terms of
population-level evolvability of niches, we compare LMX(-Near) (default) (as tested in Meyerson
et al. (2023)) against LMX-Replace in terms of resulting generated texts across different runs.
To observe the impact of different mutation methods on the dynamics of the population during search
(along with the impact on performance), we implemented and tested an additional method called
LMX-Replace. This method evolves few-shot prompts using a larger pool of prompt candidates
than that of LMX(-Near) and carries out a slower mutation process by modifying only one few-shot
prompt example (instead of all examples) during search iterations. We give a detailed comparison
between the methods in Appendix A.26.
We observed an improvement to the resulting generated text sets from runs using LMX-Replace in
comparison to LMX for the Zero-Shot Init case, according to human evaluation results highlighted
in Table 3. We see that the subjective QD score and the quality rating from human evaluators
were higher on average across the tested domains (and improvements within domain-by-domain
comparisons also, highlighted in Table 4). Given that it may not be desirable to constrain the search
with LMX-Near w/ Seeded Init, LMX-Replace can act as an alternative mutation method to steer
the dynamics of population search towards subjectively improved outputs.
The introduction of an archive depth was used for the creation and maintenance of a prompt pool for
LMX-Replace (cf. Appendix A.27). Future works could explore the usage of depth in MAP-Elites
archives for domains where uncertainty (or subjectivity) influences the evaluation of solutions, as
was previously studied in Flageat & Cully (2020; 2023).


Table 3: Mean stats, human eval scores, QDAIF methods. LMX-Replace outperforms LMX when
using Zero-Shot Init.
      Method                           QD score    Quality     H-AI agreement   H agreement
      LMX w/ Zero-Shot Init              0.383         2.233       0.600             0.600
      LMX-Replace w/ Zero-Shot Init      0.540         2.800       0.700             0.800
      LMX w/ Seeded Init                 0.772         3.900       0.833             0.800
      LMX-Replace w/ Seeded Init         0.763         3.800       0.800             0.800


                                                  22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.7   O N C OVERAGE AND B EST Q UALITY S OLUTIONS ACROSS D OMAINS

Figure 8 shows performance plots measuring the coverage of the archive (i.e. how many bins in the
search space are filled with at least one solution). Figure 9 shows performance plots measuring the
quality score of the best solution found across the whole search (existing in one of the defined bins).
QDAIF often discovers the best overall solutions during search that have higher quality scores than
the best overall solutions found from other methods. This is likely enabled by the goal-switching
mechanism of QD approaches described in Mouret & Clune (2015); Gaier et al. (2019), which is
more relevant when the QD search is at a later stage and begins to improve the already existing so-
lutions (elites) across the bins through the mutation of distant solutions. Overall, QDAIF can jointly
optimize the quality and diversity of solutions, outperforming other methods in most comparisons,
and highlighting contributions to successful gains in QD score.


Figure 8: QDAIF significantly outperforms baselines in the percentage of available bins cov-
ered by solutions in all domains. Coverage stats with mean bootstrapped 95% CI, across 5 random
seed runs. The maximum possible coverage is 1. In some cases, methods achieve maximum cov-
erage across all runs. The advantage of QD approaches is shown in their ability to discover more
solutions that cover a wider search space, in addition to finding high-quality solutions (cf. Figure 9).


Figure 9: QDAIF and LMX, Quality-Only both optimize for the quality of the best solution
found overall. Best solution quality stats with mean bootstrapped 95% CI, across 5 random seed
runs. The maximum possible quality score is 1. QDAIF is more often able to achieve a higher score
than LMX, Quality-Only in Opinions and Stories - Ending, while also outperforming in terms of
coverage (cf. Figure 8). In the 2D Stories - Genre and Ending domain, LMX, Quality-Only finds a
solution with higher best quality more often than QDAIF, while still lagging in coverage. It is likely
that QDAIF can find the best solutions with higher maximum quality more often in some domains
because of the maintenance of diverse elite solutions that enable more possibilities to maximize
the objective function, especially when the search begins to focus on refining existing solutions
instead of covering unfilled bins (Gaier et al., 2019). To save on compute, we reuse the generated
(iterations of) texts from the baselines to compute independent stats comparisons as they do not use
diversity measures during a search, unlike QDAIF which depends also on the defined diversity axes
to conduct a successful search. We can compute independent QD score stats for baselines using the
same 5 reruns, but in the Stories domains, the best solution quality remains the same.


                                                  23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.8   O N C OMPARISONS BETWEEN QDAIF AND D IVERSITY-S EEKING BASELINES

We compared QDAIF against explicit diversity-seeking baseline methods. One baseline, LMX,
ROUGE-L, is based on n-gram-based filtering with ROUGE-L similarity (Lin, 2004), as done in
Self-Instruct Wang et al. (2022a). They followed a similar approach of maintaining a few-shot
prompt pool to generate diverse solutions (with diversity maintained by adding generated texts to
a prompt pool if different enough to other existing solutions based on n-gram matching), in their
case, for the generation of diverse instruction prompts towards the creation of a diverse, high-quality
synthetic instruction tuning dataset. Another baseline is based on Novelty Search (NS) (Lehman
& Stanley, 2011a), a diversity-seeking algorithm that was proven to be more sample efficient than
single-objective approaches (the diversity-only equivalent of LMX, Quality-Only, which only op-
timizes for solution quality) in discovering desired solutions to problems with many local optima,
and also studied in prior works introducing the QD illumination problem (i.e. improving QD score
(Pugh et al., 2016)). Unlike LMX, ROUGE-L, NS aims to encourage diversity within an arbitrar-
ily defined space of diversity. To make NS comparable with QDAIF, we introduce Novelty Search
through AI Feedback (NSAIF) as the method that seeks diversity in domains where diversity is de-
fined by AI feedback axes. We denote this baseline as LMX, NSAIF. As with all methods, these
baselines are initialized with the prompt pool specified in Appendix A.21. We describe the baseline
implementations in more detail in Appendix A.9, including variants of these baselines with quality
AI feedback (QAIF) filters as a minimal criterion for diversity search (Lehman & Stanley, 2010).
Results. Figure 10 shows QD score performance plots comparing QDAIF against diversity-seeking
baselines, baselines that also aim for quality and diversity in solutions, and other baselines. QDAIF
consistently outperforms diversity-seeking baselines across domains in addition to other baselines
not focused on improving desired diversity in solutions. Yet, LMX, NSAIF tends to outperform
other baselines that are not focused on improving solution diversity. On the Stories - Genre and
Ending domain, LMX, NSAIF significantly outperforms many methods, even LMX, Quality-
Only, which carries out single objective quality optimization (and successfully does so compared to
other baselines, by maximizing the best solution quality alongside QDAIF, cf. Figure 12). This indi-
cates that maintaining diversity in solutions is important for QD score performance in such domains
(and improves search space coverage, cf. Figure 11). Furthermore, maintaining desired diversity,
such as qualitative measures of diversity, is necessary for a method to improve QD score during
search. LMX, ROUGE-L achieves low QD scores, and is within range of being the worst method
for improving best solution quality (cf. Figure 12), in spite of the higher coverage achieved across
domains compared to several baselines (cf. Figure 11). However, the performance for this baseline
improves significantly with the introduction of the quality filter via QAIF. This indicates that main-
taining high-quality solutions (not just diversity) is important. Still, adding the quality filter on top
of LMX, NSAIF only helped more often compared to the default variant of NSAIF on the Stories -
Genre and Ending domain, and shows no improvement on other domains. QDAIF (based on MAP-
Elites) reliably improves QD score in tested domains and does so with higher sample efficiency (cf.
Figure 13 and Figure 14). Results comparing QDAIF to additional diversity-seeking baselines (in-
cluding ones with quality filters) highlight performance gains from our proposed QDAIF method, as
well as the importance of seeking both quality and diversity.


Figure 10: QDAIF outperforms (diversity-seeking) baselines across domains in QD score and
maintains high-performance across all domains. Performance stats with mean bootstrapped 95%
CI, across 5 random seed runs. The maximum possible QD score is 20 (100 for 2D archive (4th
plot)). The best-performing baseline in the Stories - Genre and Ending domain, LMX, NSAIF
(w/ QAIF), does not consistently outperform other baselines in other domains, and has wide per-
formance variability in two domains. Compared to LMX, Quality-Only, all the diversity-seeking
baselines using NSAIF or ROUGE-L filtering (except LMX, ROUGE-L) significantly outperform
this baseline approach that optimizes for a single quality score objective.


                                                   24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 11: QDAIF more often outperforms (diversity-seeking) baselines in the percentage of
available bins covered by solutions in all domains, such as Stories - Genre, and Stories - Genre
and Ending. Coverage stats with mean bootstrapped 95% CI, across 5 random seed runs. The
maximum possible coverage is 1. In some cases, methods achieve maximum coverage across all
runs. Consistent high-coverage performance from QDAIF compared to the next best baselines in
Stories - Genre and Ending (LMX, NSAIF and LMX, NSAIF (w/ QAIF)) suggests that evolving
from high-quality solutions is important to improving solution diversity, in addition to diversity-
seeking search (where LMX, ROUGE-L also achieves higher coverage more often compared to
non-diversity-seeking baselines.


Figure 12: QDAIF and LMX, Quality-Only both more often optimize for the quality of the
best solution found overall. Best solution quality stats with mean bootstrapped 95% CI, across 5
random seed runs. The maximum possible quality score is 1. The addition of quality filters to LMX,
ROUGE-L (w/ QAIF) and LMX, NSAIF (w/ QAIF) is ineffective for significantly improving the
best solution quality across runs compared to QDAIF. Still, LMX, ROUGE-L (w/ QAIF) is better
compared to LMX, ROUGE-L at finding higher-quality best solutions.


                                                25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 13: QDAIF outperforms (diversity-seeking) baselines across domains in sample effi-
ciency of QD score improvement. Line plot stats with mean bootstrapped 95% CI, across 5 ran-
dom seed runs. The maximum possible QD score is 20 (100 for 2D archive (4th plot)). Additionally,
LMX, NSAIF succeeds in obtaining higher sample efficiency more often than LMX, Quality-Only,
the single quality objective optimization method, without any optimization of the quality score ob-
jective.


                                                26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 14: QDAIF outperforms (diversity-seeking, with quality control) baselines across do-
mains in sample efficiency of QD score improvement. Line plots with mean bootstrapped 95%
CI, across 5 random seed runs. The maximum possible QD score is 20 (100 for 2D archive (4th
plot)). The improvement of QDAIF compared to other approaches aiming for diverse, high-quality
solutions is significant in the Stories - Genre domain. In the Stories - Genre and Ending domain,
LMX, NSAIF (w/ QAIF) outperforms LMX, ROUGE-L (w/ QAIF) and is within the performance
range of QDAIF in later iterations, but with lower sample efficiency in early iterations, and wider
performance variability.


                                                27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.9   S ETUP FOR D IVERSITY-S EEKING BASELINES

LMX, ROUGE-L. Following Wang et al. (2022a), we set the threshold for the maximum allowed
ROUGE-L similarity between generated texts and all texts in the prompt pool at any given time
(from which few-shot examples are sampled for LMX generation) to 0.7, without limits on the
prompt pool size. If the similarity exceeds this, the generated text is still logged for QD score
evaluation, but rejected from being added to the prompt pool. Otherwise, the text is added to the
prompt pool so that it can be used for LMX evolution during later samplings of few-shot prompts.
The rest of the setup is comparable to QDAIF except for the MAP-Elites archive maintained by
QDAIF.
LMX, NSAIF. In line with the high-level implementation of NS described in Lehman et al. (2008),
we implemented the novelty (diversity-based) measure in the same way that QDAIF defines diversity
measures - as the diversity attribute defined by the AI feedback axis (or axes) in the range [0, 1], with
an additional Euclidean distance-based measure between the diversity attribute of the generated text,
and existing texts in the prompt pool. Novelty is computed by measuring the mean distance between
the diversity attribute values of the generated text, and their k nearest neighbors in the prompt pool
(with respect to the diversity attributes of the neighbor texts). We keep k to be 15, as was tested in
the original NS implementation. Similar to NS, the novelty score is compared to a novelty threshold
(initially 0.05 in all LMX, NSAIF runs, the distance width between adjacent bin ticks for a unit
range with 20 uniform bins); if the novelty of the generated text is higher than the threshold, it
gets accepted into the prompt pool for evolution with LMX, otherwise, it is logged for evaluation
of performance results but rejected from the prompt pool. We apply a dynamic adjustment of the
novelty threshold, following NS, and define it so that the threshold is multiplied by 1.05 (increased)
if 3 solutions in a row were accepted to the prompt pool within any iterations window, or multiplied
by 0.95 (decreased) if 21 solutions in a row were rejected from the prompt pool during the search.
In consideration of the non-linear calibration of AI feedback models in evaluating texts (cf. Ap-
pendix A.31), we apply a piecewise linear transformation to the original diversity attribute value
from AI feedback evaluation of diversity (that lies along an axis discretized by non-uniform bin-
ning) so that it lies instead along an axis discretized by uniform bins while preserving the number of
bin intervals. For example, in our 20-bin setting, the input value 0.9975, which lies between bin ticks
1, and 0.995, would be transformed to an output value of 0.975, and the input value 0.35 (between
bin ticks 0.5 and 0.2) would be transformed to an output value of 0.475. This enables novelty to be
computed using Euclidean distances while preserving the nature of AI feedback model non-linear
calibration in distinguishing subjectively similar solutions from diverse solutions. Additionally, this
keeps the definition of diversity consistent and fair with the setup of diversity measures for evalua-
tion (in QDAIF iterations, and for baseline performance comparisons). The number of bin intervals
defined for the piecewise linear transformation is the same as the number of intervals set as default
across the Opinions and Stories domains (20 for 1D archives, 10 for 2D archives).
Quality AI Feedback Filtering. We implemented and assessed variants of the above baselines,
LMX, ROUGE-L (w/ QAIF), and LMX, NSAIF (w/ QAIF), by adding a simple quality filter for
accepting generated texts to prompt pools, based on quality AI feedback defined in the respective
creative writing domains. This involves an additional step in each baseline method immediately after
the diversity criteria assessment of solutions, where generated texts must also have quality score val-
ues above a minimum threshold before being added to the prompt pool. Thus, these variants become
similar to QDAIF methods, where they aim for diverse, high-quality solutions. These baselines dif-
fer from our default QDAIF method with MAP-Elites in that the minimum quality thresholds are
not a function of the quality of best solutions across individual bins, but are arbitrarily defined, to
constrain the prompt pool to satisfy a minimal criterion for quality, as was introduced previously for
diversity-seeking methods in Lehman & Stanley (2010). This would make the quality improvement
process of solutions across all bins less sample-efficient. We define this simple quality threshold for
the baselines to be fixed at 0.8, closer to the upper bound of the full quality range [0, 1]. This was
determined based on the intuitions of the results from the human evaluation study we conducted (cf.
Figure 5 in Appendix A.1), where a quality value of 0.8 from AI feedback corresponds to a generally
high human feedback Likert (quality) score. As done in LMX, Quality-Only, these baselines (with
quality filtering) limit the size of the prompt pool to be up to 100.


                                                   28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.10    O N AUTOMATICALLY E XPANDING A RCHIVE D IMENSIONS

Prior work in QD, as described in Section 2.2, often relies on diversity measures that are designed
and manually defined at the start of the search. One existing approach for more automatic QD search
without supervised (defined) measures of diversity is to use unsupervised learning to represent di-
versity without relying on ground truth measures (Cully & Demiris, 2018; Cully, 2019; Grillotti &
Cully, 2021; Wang et al., 2023b; Ding et al., 2023). Such unsupervised approaches do not embody
any complex prior of what humans find interesting about diversity; an alternative approach would be
to query capable LMs about what dimensions of diversity are interesting or important for a particular
domain. In this way, semantically-rich axes of diversity could be automatically generated (and could
then be evaluated automatically as well through other LM calls, as in QDAIF).
Given the advances in foundation model capabilities, we could reasonably prompt LMs (such as
GPT-4 (OpenAI, 2023)) to come up with new axes of diversity in a more automated pipeline poten-
tially while search is running - by giving it a description of the user’s search problem, and existing
diversity axis being searched through (i.e. the existing AI feedback diversity prompt(s)), we could
ask the LM to give us a different, previously unexplored diversity axis and define a new AI feedback
prompt that can be added to the MAP-Elites evaluation. For example, in the Poetry domain, we
could ask the LM to generate multiple diverse aspects of poetry (e.g. “Genre” and “Tone” as studied
in the presented experiments), and also come up with diverse categories defining this search space
for QDAIF to search through with MAP-Elites. The effectiveness of this kind of approach has not
been studied thoroughly in prior works, especially on the question of whether or not expanding the
dimensions of diversity during the search can meaningfully improve diversity in resulting solutions
towards increasingly broader definitions of diversity.
Setup. We took a step in the direction of automating the definition of diversity axes, where we
analyzed the effectiveness of creative search for solutions when we expand the dimensions of di-
versity axes during an intermediate iteration of an existing search, with performance measured in
terms of improving the QD score (for a given ground truth, higher-dimensional search space). We
tested this approach in the Stories - Genre and Ending domain, compared the performance be-
tween variations in methods with QD score (out of 100) as done in other experiments, and compared
the following setups: 2D Archive Search (apply QDAIF with the full 2D diversity axes defined),
1D Archive Search (apply QDAIF with only a 1D diversity axis defined, done for both Genre, and
Ending diversity archives each), and expanding 1D to 2D Archive Search (starting QDAIF search
with either the Genre or Ending diversity axis defined, and then expanding the search with the ad-
dition of a second diversity axis, or the other different axis to the one defined at the start of the 1D
search). For the setups with expanding diversity axes, the second archive dimension is introduced
from iteration 1000 of the search, out of 2000 iterations total. We also assessed the performance in
the case where instead of adding an extra dimension with a new diversity axis during search, QDAIF
transitions from an initial 1D archive (e.g. for Ending), to a different 1D archive (e.g. for Genre). In
our experiments, the transition is carried out from iteration 1000 out of 2000 iterations.
Findings. Figure 15 shows performance plot results for all the settings described in this section,
and Figure 16 shows QD score line plots to visualize sample efficiency differences between the
different setups of automatically expanding dimensions, especially after iteration 1000. We found
that for all cases tested of expanding from 1D to 2D archives, improvements in QD score for a higher
dimensional archive are significant when compared to searching with only a 1D diversity axis and
evaluating the resulting solutions with both AI feedback diversity measures. Furthermore, we found
that it’s possible to approach the performance in QD score through this diversity axes expansion
when compared to the QD score achieved from a full 2D Archive Search. This level of improvement
hints at the potential of applying the approach of prompting LMs to generate diversity measures for
more autonomous, creative search, and highlights the value of scaling up this approach in future
work.
Expansion of diversity axes is promising as an approach to improve the quality and diversity of
solutions without the need to initialize a high-dimensional archive from the beginning (in the case
where only manual setting of diversity axes is done). Vassiliades et al. (2016) found in experiments
through CVT-MAP-Elites (a method to define bins based on uniformly spaced centroids in very
high-dimensional spaces of diversity, solving the compute requirements of standard MAP-Elites in
this high-dimensional case) that standard MAP-Elites is impeded in its ability to further improve
the fitness (quality) of solutions in non-empty bins as the cases where the search fills empty bins


                                                  29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


occurs much more frequently when more bins are created due to the increase in dimensionality.
The quality of existing non-empty bins normally requires several iterations of improvement before
reaching more optimal quality scores for the given bin or niche. We show that this is also the
case in Figure 15, in the third plot on the value of best solution quality; the quality of the best
overall solution at the end of the search is more often higher for the 1D to 2D expansion settings,
compared to the setting where the 2D archive is initialized from scratch at the start of the search. It
is also the case that searching only in the 1D archives is more often better (with higher best solution
quality) compared to the outcomes when conducting any search in the higher dimensional archive.
Expansion of dimensions seems to deliver a good trade-off of slightly decreased best solution quality
for significant improvements in solution diversity. This balance is quite useful to find for improving
the sample efficiency of the search, given that Mouret & Clune (2015) found the discovery and
maintenance of both diverse and high-quality solutions to be important for enabling the ongoing
search to improve the quality and diversity of newly generated solutions even more quickly.
Additionally, we studied performance comparisons for the case of transitioning different 1D diver-
sity axes (as a different approach to automatic search in different dimensions of diversity compared
to the expanding dimensions setup). Figure 15 also shows performance in this case, and Figure 17
shows QD score line plots, with differences in performance visibly shown after iteration 1000. In one
case (1D (Ending) to 1D (Genre)), a significant improvement in QD score is visible for this archive
transition case when compared to searching only in one (initialized) diversity axis throughout the
whole search. This setup also approaches the performance of searching in the higher dimensional
2D archive. In the other case evaluated (1D (Genre) to 1D (Ending)), no notable improvements were
seen compared to just conducting QDAIF in the single 1D (Genre) archive. Even though results here
show that the performance of QDAIF in the transitioning 1D archives case is sensitive to the diversity
axes searched through (and the order in which the transitions occur), this highlights another promis-
ing approach to automatically adjusting diversity axes given AI feedback prompts to be generated by
LMs along with the expanding dimensions setup. This is especially the case when we want to scale
up QDAIF to search through an even higher number of diversity axes automatically, where we can
lower the computational requirements of searching in lower dimensions (meaning lower number of
total bins created) and also mitigate the presented challenges of conducting MAP-Elites search iter-
ations in very high-dimensional archives (in the previous paragraph), while maintaining promising
improvements to performance that would be seen in having QDAIF explore a growing number of
different diversity axes. Yet, the importance of the diversity axes chosen in further encouraging nov-
elty is clear; prior work studying the theoretical properties of diversity-seeking algorithms showed
through empirical experiments that the choice in diversity measures also needs to be aligned with
the intended task in mind, for solutions of interest to cover the search space (Doncieux et al., 2019,
Figure 6). Future research can explore the potential of designing a curriculum for QDAIF to search
through different diversity axes as an open challenge to improving the quality and diversity of cre-
ative texts with potentially an unbounded number of subjective dimensions of diversity, depending
on individual personal perspectives.
Overall, this method of automatic expansion and adaptation of diversity axes introduces a new way
of balancing the trade-off between improving quality or improving diversity in solutions, especially
in settings where the dimensions of desired diversity, while sometimes not obvious to the user until
later realization, do not reach the hundreds as would be in the case of problems studied in CVT-
MAP-Elites. In the large-scale higher-dimensional case, adaptive transitioning of diversity axes is
another promising direction. Such approaches to adaptations of diversity axes draw inspiration from
work on learnable behavior characteristics (Meyerson et al., 2016) and meta-diversity (Etcheverry
et al., 2021). Given prior findings on the adaptation of the archive search space to encourage more
interesting solutions (worth collecting) to emerge during search, and the ability of LMs to provide
feedback on unbounded aspects of solution diversity, perhaps new opportunities have emerged in
improving future systems inspired by QDAIF. We can leverage this finding for future work to more
confidently apply the aid of LMs in automatically generating diversity axes for QDAIF search.


                                                  30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 15: Expanding (or adapting) archive dimensions for QDAIF during search enables im-
proved search in higher dimensional search spaces compared to searching for solutions along
a single 1D diversity axis. QD score, coverage, and best solution quality stats with mean boot-
strapped 95% CI, across 5 random seed runs. The maximum possible QD score is 100. In both cases
of dimension expansion (expanding from 1D (Genre) and 1D (Ending) archives to 2D) enables the
performance to approach that of conducting QDAIF search in the full 2D archive, with significant
improvement in coverage compared to searching purely in their respective 1D archives. For one case
of adaptive archive transition for QDAIF (1D (Ending) to 1D (Genre)), QD score performance and
coverage significantly improve compared to searching only in the 1D (Ending) archive.


Figure 16: QD score sample efficiency improves from the midway iteration step of orange line
plots when the archive dimensions are expanded automatically, in comparison to doing search
only in the 1D archive during QDAIF. Line plots with mean bootstrapped 95% CI, across 5 random
seed runs. The maximum possible QD score is 100. In both cases, either starting with the 1D (Genre)
archive (left) or the 1D (Ending) archive (right) and expanding to the 2D archive improves QD score
sample efficiency with respect to the 2D archive definition, and approaches performance of the green
lines (searching in the 2D archive). The blue lines (1D archive only) converge to a lower QD score
during later iterations.


                                                31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 17: QD score sample efficiency improves in one case (right plot) from the midway it-
eration step of orange line plots when the archive diversity axis is changed to a new diver-
sity measure, but not noticeably improved in another case (left plot), in comparison to doing
search without transitioning to a different diversity measure during QDAIF. Line plots with
mean bootstrapped 95% CI, across 5 random seed runs. The maximum possible QD score is 100.
The successful improvement in QD score sample efficiency happens in the case of transitioning from
the 1D (Ending) archive to the 1D (Genre) archive, approaching the performance of doing QDAIF
in the higher dimensional 2D archive, as shown in the right plot. The case shown in the left plot is
still below the performance of QDAIF conducted in the 2D archive, with the orange line converging
early to a lower score. The blue lines (1D archive only) converge to a lower QD score during later
iterations.


                                                32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.11    O N F INETUNING M UTATION M ODELS

Prior work on ELM found that using a domain-specific finetuned git diff LM during code generation
search led to runs with higher QD score performance compared to when using a pre-trained git diff
LM (Lehman et al., 2022). The finetuning step relied on a dataset of filtered solutions across several
previous runs, adding complexity to the process of creating an effective model for evolving text. To
simplify the process, We investigated finetuning on sampled solutions within the same run, during
a search that begins with solution generation from a pre-trained LM. We explore the impact of
finetuning as a mechanism that can potentially encourage exploitation (through learning to generate
higher-quality score solutions) during the search while using evolution to encourage exploration.
To collect samples for finetuning during the search, the first step is collecting a dataset for a given
state of the archive, sampling up to 10 solutions with the highest quality score from each bin. Archive
bin depth was used to keep track of these finetuning samples (cf. Appendix A.27, on bin depth
used), and introduced in a different application of MAP-Elites for uncertain environments in Flageat
& Cully (2020; 2023). The dataset is shuffled, and then training samples are batched for the LM to
finetune on during this phase. Each training sample consists of the prompt that was originally used
by a solution to generate an output, and the generated completion text as target tokens for finetuning.
We tested both full-model finetuning, and a parameter-efficient finetuning method with sequential
adapters finetuning, as described in He et al. (2021). We ran each method using QDAIF LMX(-
Near) w/ Seeded-Init (including default method runs without finetuning) on the Stories (Genre and
Ending) domain, extending the number of archive dimensions to two. For experiments with adapters,
we also conduct runs where the adapter layers are initialized but without doing finetuning, to enable
comparisons with adapter finetuning runs accounting for differences in LM architecture introduced
by additional layers during the search for runs with finetuning. Still, near-identity initialization (as
described in Houlsby et al. (2019)) preserves the general performance of the LM.

Finetune-Once. This method runs a single finetuning phase during the search before resuming
generation with the finetuned LM. We vary two parameters during experiments with Finetune-Once:
the iteration step to start the phase (Start), and the number of finetuning steps during this phase
(Steps).

Generate-Finetune. This method extends Finetune-Once by carrying out the finetuning phase
multiple times during the search, repeating the steps of dataset collection and finetuning at regular
intervals. We add an additional variable parameter, controlling the regular interval frequency for
every set number of generation iterations (Frequency).

Observations. We compared the QD score performance between methods across 5 fixed ran-
dom seed runs. In general, the performance of the Finetune-Once methods with higher scores is
comparable to default runs, though slightly lower (but mostly within the confidence interval). For
Finetune-Only runs, we observed a potential decrease in performance when using full-model fine-
tuning compared to adapter finetuning, in comparison to conducting these runs without finetuning,
with an average −3.09 difference in QD score for full-model finetuning compared to −0.33 dif-
ference for adapter finetuning. It is possible that overfitting on solution examples is more likely
for full-model finetuning, which would lead to a decrease in the ability of the LM to evolve new
solutions to be accepted in the archive. When we used adapter finetuning as the default for other ex-
periments, we observed a potential decrease in performance and increased variance in performance
across multiple seeds when compared to the default method without finetuning. The increase in
variance also indicates potential improvements to the search with Finetune-Only in some cases, but
further studies are needed on the behavior of search when finetuning on different archive states and
constraints to samples collected for finetuning. We can observe a clearer impact of the adverse ef-
fects of finetuning from our Generate-Finetune runs. Considering the 95% confidence interval, the
highest mean QD score run we tested from the Generate-Finetune group obtained a performance
score of 78.74 ± 5.10 compared to 84.09 ± 1.91 from the default generate-only method. With most
runs with Generate-Finetune converging to a lower QD score earlier in the search, it is likely that
running standard scheduling the finetuning phase multiple times leads to overfitting of the LM to the
point where the model fails to generate new solutions to add to the archive.


                                                  33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.12    H UMAN E VALUATION S TUDY S TATS IN W RITING D OMAINS

We collected the annotation results from our study, to show the performance of each search method
on the tested writing domains, displayed in Table 4.


Table 4: Extended human eval stats for different creative writing domains, baselines and
QDAIF. The QD score presented here is based on subjective human evaluation results, normal-
ized to a possible range of [1/15, 1]. In terms of the observed difficulty of uncovering the search
spaces for each domain from mean quality and QD score stats within each domain, Opinions is
the easiest domain (mean QD score is 0.702, mean quality score is 3.613), followed by Stories -
Ending (mean QD score is 0.648, mean quality score is 3.575), and Stories - Genre (mean QD
score is 0.591, mean quality score is 3.013). The range of metrics between two human evaluators is
computed to highlight the variance in some contexts due to more complex aspects of subjectivity in
evaluating certain texts.
                                             Human         QD score      Quality   Quality   Human-AI     Human
     Method
                                             QD score       range        rating     range    agreement   agreement
                                                         Opinions
     Fixed-Few-Shot                           1.000          0.000        5.000     0.000      0.700       0.800
     Shuffling-Few-Shot                       0.728          0.056        3.600     0.800      0.700       0.800
     Random-Search                            0.600          0.267        3.600     0.800      0.700       0.800
     LMX, Quality-Only                        0.750          0.300        3.800     1.200      0.600       1.000
     QDAIF (LMX w/ Zero-Shot Init)            0.350          0.300        1.700     1.400      0.800       1.000
     QDAIF (LMX w/ Seeded Init)               0.617          0.167        3.200     1.200      1.000       1.000
     QDAIF (LMX-Replace w/ Zero-Shot Init)    0.833          0.267        4.300     1.000      0.600       0.600
     QDAIF (LMX-Replace w/ Seeded Init)       0.739          0.078        3.700     0.600      0.700       0.800
                                                      Stories (Genre)
     Fixed-Few-Shot                           0.650          0.167        3.400     1.600      1.000       1.000
     Shuffling-Few-Shot                       0.861          0.056        4.300     0.600      0.700       0.800
     Random-Search                            0.683          0.100        3.400     0.800      0.700       0.400
     LMX, Quality-Only                        0.600          0.267        2.900     1.400      0.700       0.800
     QDAIF (LMX w/ Zero-Shot Init)            0.200          0.000        1.400     0.400      0.400       0.600
     QDAIF (LMX w/ Seeded Init)               0.767          0.133        3.700     0.600      0.800       1.000
     QDAIF (LMX-Replace w/ Zero-Shot Init)    0.286          0.006        1.500     0.200      0.500       0.800
     QDAIF (LMX-Replace w/ Seeded Init)       0.683          0.100        3.500     0.600      0.900       0.800
                                                      Stories (Ending)
     Fixed-Few-Shot                           0.650          0.167        4.000     0.400      0.700       0.800
     Shuffling-Few-Shot                       0.500          0.200        2.600     0.800      0.700       0.400
     Random-Search                            0.533          0.000        2.900     1.400      0.800       0.600
     LMX, Quality-Only                        0.600          0.400        3.900     0.600      0.600       0.400
     QDAIF (LMX w/ Zero-Shot Init)            0.600          0.200        3.600     0.800      0.600       0.200
     QDAIF (LMX w/ Seeded Init)               0.933          0.133        4.800     0.400      0.700       0.400
     QDAIF (LMX-Replace w/ Zero-Shot Init)    0.500          0.333        2.600     1.600      1.000       1.000
     QDAIF (LMX-Replace w/ Seeded Init)       0.867          0.267        4.200     1.600      0.800       0.800


                                                            34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.13    O N THE D IFFERENCES IN E LITE T EXTS ACROSS D OMAINS FROM QDAIF

We referred to LMX-Near (Meyerson et al., 2023) as LMX in the main text for brevity. For more
detailed analysis with different mutation operators, we refer to the full name. A summary of human
eval stats based on the samples described below can be found in Appendix A.12.

Opinions. We report the results from evaluated sets of generated texts from our human study,
starting with the Opinions domain in Appendix Tables 29–32 (with qualitative descriptions of the
evaluated generated texts in the table captions). Tables are organized in the following order, for
each domain: LMX-Near /w Seeded Init (default); LMX-Near /w Zero-Shot Init; LMX-Replace
/w Seeded Init; and LMX-Replace /w Zero-Shot Init. Qualitatively, we can see that repetition of
phrases appears more often in the samples of generated elite texts from runs using LMX-Near,
especially when using Zero-Shot Init. For LMX-Near /w Seeded Init (In Table 29), there is frequent
repetition of phrases like "I would rather eat scrambled eggs" (third row, bin 9), and "At a restaurant"
(fifth row, bin 19). For LMX-Near /w Zero-Shot Init (In Table 30), there is further repetition of
undesired phrases like "Below is a random opinion piece" and "Here is a random opinion piece"
in all examples. On the other hand, the generated texts from LMX-Replace (Tables 31 and 32 for
Seeded Init (default), and Zero-Shot Init methods respectively) lack this output artifact, and received
higher quality scores from human feedback overall. Furthermore, texts from LMX-Replace /w Zero-
Shot Init received the highest quality score (from humans) compared to the other three methods here,
while texts from LMX-Near /w Zero-Shot Init received the lowest quality scores.

Stories - Genre. For this domain (with evaluated sets presented in Tables 33–36), evaluators found
the subjective quality of texts from runs using Seeded Init (default) to be higher than runs using
Zero-Shot Init. The stories that were generated with Zero-Shot Init were found to be low in quality
due to the presence of attributes such as erroneous titles, and a text style that fails to reflect what
is expected in a plausible short story text. Furthermore, the elite stories from the Zero-Shot Init
generated sets were more likely to lead to disagreements on the genre between AI feedback and
human feedback, with neutral labels given more frequently even for texts in some of the extreme
ends of the bins. Given a more open-ended generation task, and a narrow space of desired diversity
(focused on the spectrum between two genres), LMX-Near /w Seeded Init (default) (Table 33) was
the most successful method in finding a story for the horror genre niche in Bin 0 (with a low quality
score of 2 from evaluators). Other methods either failed to discover a story for this niche, or received
an even lower quality score from human feedback.

Stories - Ending. For this domain (with evaluated sets presented in Tables 37–40), the stories
received higher quality scores across sets in comparison to the sets from the Stories - Genre domain,
indicating a potentially easier search space when finding stories with different kinds of endings.
Still, methods using Seeded Init produced sets of stories that received higher quality scores from
evaluators, in comparison to sets from Zero-Shot Init (especially LMX-Replace /w Zero-Shot Init in
Table 40, where the presence of erroneous titles led to lower subjective quality). In spite of the lack
of guidance from hand-written prompt examples during initialization, LMX-Near /w Zero-Shot Init
(Table 38) managed to produce reasonable stories of above-average quality to cover different ending
niches.


                                                  35
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.14    O N THE E VOLUTION OF G ENERATED T EXTS OVER I TERATIONS FROM QDAIF

We describe the evolution of texts from QDAIF with LMX at different search iterations in Ta-
bles 41–52. One key factor that influences the search is the initialization method - generations
in early iterations from Zero-Shot Init methods frequently contain elements that are subjectively
different to hand-written examples in the seed texts (in A.23). For example, erroneous URLs (in
Tables 41, 43, 51) and titles (in Tables 45, 49) are seen when the possible distribution of outputs is
not constrained by seeded in-context examples. This kind of method enables further exploration of
output samples, potentially useful in the search of interesting, diverse creative texts. At the same
time, more constraints are required from quality assessment using AI feedback in order to control
the evolving population of creative texts, towards high-quality, diverse texts. In several cases, out-
puts from these methods in later iterations show reduced instances of these artifacts compared to
early iteration outputs (e.g. in Table 51), but can be missed when AI feedback evaluation at times
is misaligned with human preferences (e.g. in Table 45). Still, using Seeded Init does not guarantee
enough guidance to completely remove undesired features from generations in later iterations. For
example, texts with repetitive phrases can be seen during later iterations on the Opinions domain
from methods using Seeded Init (see Tables 42 and 44. In general, Seeded Init runs are more likely
to lead to high-quality texts across niches, in comparison to Zero-Shot Init runs, especially accord-
ing to human evaluation (see Table 1), especially for more challenging, open-ended domains such
as story-writing. Furthermore, a side-effect of the increased likelihood of subjective reward hacking
when using Zero-Shot Init for runs. Still, QDAIF can still work well with Zero-Shot Init, especially
in combination with LMX-Replace, as shown in the results from the Opinions domain experiments.

A.15    O N THE D IFFERENCES IN E LITE T EXTS ACROSS D OMAINS FROM BASELINE M ETHODS

Evaluated sets are presented in Tables 13–16, Tables 17–20, and Tables 21–24 for Opinions, Stories
- Genre, and Stories - Ending domains respectively. Fixed-Few-Shot and Shuffling-Few-Shot con-
sistently adhere to the style and structure of the seeded examples. Random-Search exhibits more
variability, with discrepancies in feedback between humans and AI most evident in the Opinions
domains and challenges in story consistency and character inclusion. LMX, Quality-Only further
highlights these discrepancies, especially where repetitive or contradictory opinions are concerned.
Across narratives, LMX, Quality-Only tends to miss character details or produce underdeveloped
storylines, despite sometimes receiving high AI feedback. A recurring theme across all baselines
is the differential perception of quality between human and AI feedback, with repetitive narratives,
character relevance, and development being central points of contention.

A.16    O N THE E VOLUTION OF G ENERATED T EXTS OVER I TERATIONS FROM BASELINE
        M ETHODS

Qualitatively, both Fixed-Few-Shot and Shuffling-Few-Shot consistently replicate concepts and
expressions from the few-shot examples, at times directly copying entire segments (Tables 53, 57,
54, and 58). This suggests a potential over-reliance on the few-shot examples, hindering the gen-
eration of diverse solutions. In contrast, Random-Search aims to foster diversity by retaining all
entries into the pool. However, this approach may unintentionally impede optimization for higher fit-
ness solutions. Notably, fitness values of generated entries using Random-Search in later iterations
persistently fall short (Tables 55 and 59). The crux of this issue seems to arise from the strategy’s
indiscriminate inclusion of entries, even those with low fitness. Consequently, when these low-
fitness examples are integrated into few-shot prompts, they influence the generation of subsequent
entries, often resulting in similarly suboptimal outcomes. Lastly, LMX, Quality-Only introduces a
fitness-centric approach, retaining only those solutions with the highest fitness. While entries from
its early iterations display a diverse range of phenotype and fitness values, later iterations, with a
noticeable uptick in fitness scores, tend to use similar phrases and writing styles (Tables 56 and 60).
This suggests that stringently prioritizing high-fitness solutions may prevent the exploration of more
varied or potentially better solutions.


                                                  36
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.17    O N THE U SE OF D IFFERENT V ERSIONS AND T YPES OF M ODELS FOR P OETRY

We show QD score line plots comparing QDAIF against other methods in Figure 18. We noted that
in addition to improvement in QD score from QDAIF, CI gaps from experiments using GPT-4 were
qualitatively wider as shown in the line plots. This suggests the potential of using different mod-
els for prompted variation of solutions in creative domains, with the possibility that certain models
are more capable of generating slightly more diverse solutions (that may better cover the space of
possible solutions) (cf. Appendix A.18 on differences in rewriting behavior from different mod-
els). Although QDAIF significantly improves on relevant non-QD methods through the evolution
of solutions via rewriting, the challenge remains in uncovering all possible solutions in the diversity
space of interest (e.g. empty bins in experiment archive, or categories that can further differentiate
subjectively unique solutions); it is difficult for existing models without explicit guidance on the
desired poem categories to know that these exist in the space of possibilities, in a similar sense that
the average person may not know what is the most distinct variation that can be applied to rewrit-
ing poems (from the wide space of possible poetry). This issue manifests even in simple domains
such as random number generation (Renda et al., 2023). Coverage is possible with methods that
guide LMs on the desired (cf. Figure 19), with the added benefits of grounding on poems of interest
through seed parent poems (cf. Appendix A.18), but future work is needed to create systems that
can successfully navigate in solution exploration beyond what is currently known or defined (i.e.
through limited genre and tone categories) during a search at hand (Zhang et al., 2023), perhaps
even through the discovery of new types of poems, unlike ones that have been written by human
poets.
Figure 20 compares the performance of different models used for generation and rewriting with
each search method. We found higher CI gaps from runs using GPT-4 with Random-Poems, Fixed
Seed Rewrite, and QDAIF (LMX-rewrite), in comparison to GPT-3.5-Turbo. The difference in
rewriting behavior between GPT-4 and GPT-3.5-Turbo may contribute to variation in performance
predictability during QDAIF (cf. Appendix A.18). Additionally, GPT-4 more often gives higher
QD score performance in some cases (Random-Poems), while GPT-3.5-Turbo can improve sample
efficiency during search in other cases (Fixed Seed Rewrite, Targeted-Poems). Interestingly, im-
provements in sample efficiency from GPT-3.5-Turbo may not translate fully to support interesting
discovery of new solutions in poetry during QDAIF (cf. Figure 23). Results further highlight the
need to investigate the potential of different models for solution variation in QDAIF.
We noted from runs in the Poetry domain using an older version of GPT-4 (April 2023) for the ex-
periments that QDAIF saw potential improvement in performance compared to baseline methods.
There is a risk of variation in performance and search behavior due to the nature of changing model
versions; the impact would be on the generation, re-writing, and evaluation of poems. We observed
in Figure 21 that QDAIF successfully populates the archive with high-quality poems, leaving only
three bins empty. In contrast, Random-Poems (Baseline) only fills the archive sparsely, demon-
strating that asking for creative output from a single LM prompt often results in a lack of diversity.
Furthermore, more bins remain empty in the archive generated by Targeted-Poems (Targeted Base-
line). Overall, QDAIF achieved higher QD scores in experiments with older models and covers
more bins in the archive than Random-Poems and Targeted-Poems as can be seen Figure 21. This
hints at another potential benefit of QDAIF with LMX-guided, where a combination of instructed
guidance and evolution could also lead in improvements to QD score with some models.


                                                  37
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 18: QDAIF (LMX-rewrite) outperforms the baseline, Random-Poems, and an ablation,
Fixed Seed Rewrite, in terms of QD score, across all generation models tested. 95% CI of
mean is shown for stats across 3 random reruns. We observed from the Mann-Whitney U Test that
QDAIF achieves greater QD score than other methods (p ≤ 0.05). The step of rewriting a poem
(Fixed Seed Rewrite) is shown to improve QD score more often than simply requesting poems
(Random-Poems), while the additional step of evolutionary search (QDAIF) enables additional
improvement. With GPT-3.5(-Turbo), non-QDAIF methods tend to have narrower CIs, indicating
higher predictability of reduced performance.


Figure 19: QDAIF (LMX-guided) is on par with Targeted-Poems, while preserving the benefits
of diverse evolution of poems stemming from a seed poem (cf. Appendix A.18). 95% CI of
mean is shown for stats across 3 random reruns. All methods incorporate guidance on the desired
genres and tones in poems during search, and models used are capable of covering all the designated
archive bins with relevant diverse, high-quality poems. All methods can quite easily cover the 25
bins of the archive within the number of iterations.


                                                38
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 20: QD score performance (with 95% CI from 3 random reruns) for each method varying the
model used for generation/rewriting. The evaluation model is GPT-4 (OpenAI, 2023) for all runs
here. In some cases, GPT-4 more often achieves a higher score (e.g. with Random-Poems), while
in other cases, GPT-3.5-Turbo achieves improved sample efficiency over iterations of search (e.g.
with Fixed Seed Rewrite, Targeted-Poems). Wider CIs in some runs with GPT-4 indicate higher
unpredictability in performance, and potentially a wider scope in possible outputs that may or may
not lead to higher score.


                                               39
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 21: QDAIF (blue, middle) covers more the space of diverse poetry with high-quality
solutions compared to baselines. When compared against a targeted mutation baseline (Targeted-
Poems, orange), QDAIF attains higher QD scores throughout evolution, and covers a significantly
larger portion of the search space than a fully random baseline (Random-Poems, green, right). This
is for runs with an older version of GPT-4.


                                               40
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.18    O N THE E VOLUTION OF P OEMS THROUGH I NSPIRED R EWRITING

Instead of generating poems completely from scratch, users may generally prefer to have models
re-write their draft poems. Figure 22 shows an example of the capabilities of GPT-4 using LMX-
guided, by starting off from the seed poem and continuing a chain of evolution in high-quality
poems across different genres and tones. The evolving poetry chain shown in the figure is the
longest continuous one discovered during the search, where the most repeated rewrites occurred
starting from the seed poem. Rewrites with the model qualitatively gave meaningful variations in
poems that transfer connective imagery with twists in rhythm and connotations, depending on the
target genres and tones. At the same time, We found that even when GPT-4 is specifically prompted
to craft a poem of a particular genre and tone, subsequent evaluation using the same LM does not
always deem it as having the same targeted genre or tone. This underscores a widely recognized
gap between text generation and discrimination (Saunders et al., 2022, Page 12). This is clear from
several of the poems classified as hymns, but containing multiple 5-line verses similar to the style of
a limerick (while not generating a typical single-verse limerick). It was likely references to religious
imagery in later verses, as well as the multi-verse structure that influenced the evaluation for the
closest genre.
Figure 23 shows another example of a chain from using GPT-3.5-Turbo. We found qualitatively
that using GPT-4 led to more interesting variations of new poems during rewriting in comparison
to GPT-3.5-Turbo rewrites. This is more clear from the repetition of "In fields of emerald, a gentle
sway" at the start of each poem following the mysterious sonnet.
Future research is needed to study the behavior of chained rewriting over stepping stones with cur-
rent foundation models (Nguyen et al., 2015b; 2016). Secretan et al. (2011) found that from user
studies in Picbreeder, a tool for evolving images through human-in-the-loop, accumulating diver-
gent chains of solutions of growing complexity from different users (carrying out the evolution of
diverse images) is important for a search that is focused on discovering meaningfully interesting
and diverse artifacts. Gaier et al. (2019) validated the potential of QD approaches in enabling the
discovery of intermediate solutions that overcome the challenge of escaping undesired local min-
ima (missing promising trajectories to desired solutions) faced by objective-based search (Stanley
& Lehman, 2015). By leveraging goal-switching (Mouret & Clune, 2015), QD search was able to
maintain enough diversity in the population to enable the discovery of solutions that appear more
like targets of interest, significantly outperforming a single objective optimization approach (which
generated solutions that resembled primitive patterns unlike the targets) (Gaier, 2020, Chapter 4).
This property of QD search is especially important in solution spaces where even slight perturbations
in solutions can lead to significant (and often unexpected) qualitative changes in solution properties.
This can apply to representations from Compositional Pattern Producing Networks (CPPNs) (Stan-
ley, 2007), and text representations themselves, where minor changes to certain parts of text can
lead to significant changes in passage tone, imagery, or even functionality of code (Lehman et al.,
2022). Properties of chained divergence as demonstrated in the Poetry domain could inspire further
directions in designing new systems with QDAIF.


                                                  41
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                         Haiku, Reflective


              Fields of green waves under
              The sky grey, rain on the soft
                                                                                                    Hymn, Mysterious
             Winds whisper; normality reigns.
                                                                                    In shadowed halls where spectral light is born,
                                                                                   Where day's mirage in dream, sky and sea mourn.
                                                                                        Thence, a mystic rhythm takes the floor,
                                                                                           A cosmic jest written in our core,
                              Hymn, Dark                                            Veiled worlds dipped in riddles, sweetly sworn.
                                                                                   Each clandestine wave, each hushed breath of air,
                        In realms of verdant, somber seas,                               Safeguarding secrets in tranquil care,
             'Neath a canopy of ashen gloom, cloaked in mourning,                                                 …
             Soft droplets weep, released from their ethereal grasp,
       By the sigh of the firmament, a serenade whispered in melancholy.

             Enthroned in desolation, banality extends its scepter,                                 Haiku, Mysterious
               Woven within the intricate tapestry of existence,
                                      …
                                                                                             Cosmic secrets hum,
                            Hymn, Happy                                                 Veiled in twilight's sacred chant,
                                                                                            Night whispers its song.
                    In realms of azure, beaming seas,
          Beneath a tapestry of golden light, robed in grandeur,
             Gentle droplets dance, freed from their lofty nest,
         By the breath of the heavens, a ballad sung in jubilation.

              Seated upon joy, vibrance waves its royal rod,                                       Ballad, Mysterious
             Threaded within the intricate arras of existence,
                                      …                                                 In the heart of darkness, the cosmic riddles hum,
                                                                                Covered in the tapestry of twilight, steeped in mysteries they thrum.
                                                                                 Their voices echo amidst the silence, threads of a cosmic cant,
                                                                                  Whispered through the veil of obscurity, a truth most aspirant.
                            Hymn, Happy
                                                                                         The secrets that stars safeguard with a loyal zeal,
                                                                                        Hidden within the twilight’s caress, a serenity surreal.
                In lands where the golden rays beam,
                   Where azure sea and sky dream,                                                                 …
                       Life spins a merry dance,
                        In joy's grand advance,
               And the world revels in its radiant theme.
                                                                                                        Hymn, Happy
                 Each wave and each jubilant breeze,
                   In grandeur and serenity seize,
                                                                                         In the heart of daylight, joyous secrets softly hum,
                                      …                                               Bathed in a golden blanket, weaving stories yet to come.
                                                                                 Their voices chime through morning air, threads of a vibrant chant,
                                                                                Ringing clear amidst the day’s brightness, truths enchantingly extant.
                        Hymn, Mysterious
                                                                                    The tales that sunbeams tell with an unrivaled, radiant cheer,
                                                                                      Couched within the morning's touch, a serenity so clear.
               In realms where mystic sunbeams play,
               Where sea meets sky in dreams of day,                                                              …
                       A secret dance ensues,
                       Life's enigmatic clues,
                 And worlds in gilded mystery sway.
              Each cryptic wave, each whispering gust,
               In calm grandeur, holds secrets thrust,
                                      …


Figure 22: QDAIF is enabled by guided poem rewriting. With GPT-4 (OpenAI, 2023). Start-
ing with a reflective haiku seed poem, the reference to "fields of green waves" and "sky grey, rain"
inspires the next dark hymn poem with "verdant, somber seas" and "canopy of ashen gloom", fol-
lowed by further chains of inspired rewriting. The imagery and choice of words evolve with varying
outputs as poems of different genres and tones are generated. We noted that not all poems had eval-
uated genres and tones that matched their target ones during prompted rewriting, for example, with
the hymns with multiple 5-line verses being a result of limericks as the target.


                                                                           42
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


             Haiku, Reflective

            Fields of green waves under
            The sky grey, rain on the soft
           Winds whisper; normality reigns.
                                                                             Ballad, Dark
                                                                          In fields of emerald, a gentle sway,
                                                                           A melody of secrets whispers low,
                                                                      As twilight's enchanting refrain holds sway,
                                                                       A peaceful serenade to souls bestowed.
             Haiku, Reflective                                      This verdant tapestry, now cloaked in gloom,
                                                                          Echoes of despair upon the wind,
                                                                   Each blade of grass now sings a mournful tune,
                                                                   Where shadows dance, a sorrowful hymn begins.
                                                                                          …
                 Emerald fields sway,
              Whispering tales of the rain,
                 Peaceful serenade.
                                                                             Ballad, Dark
                                                                        "In fields of emerald, a gentle sway,
                                                                     Where secrets whispered low, love's melody,
                                                                      Twilight's enchanting refrain holds sway,
                                                                      A peaceful serenade to souls bestowed.
          Sonnet, Mysterious                                           Cloaked in gloom, this verdant tapestry,
                                                                       Echoes of despair upon the wind's flight,
                                                                  Each blade of grass sings mournful tune, entranced,
            In mystic emerald fields that gently sway,             Where shadows dance, a sorrowful hymn ignites.
             Whispering secrets of the long-lost rain,                                    …
              A peaceful serenade lulls souls astray,
              As twilight casts its enchanting refrain.
             The verdant tapestry reveals its lore,
           In whispers carried on the zephyr's sigh,
          Each blade of grass sings of a world before,
          Where magic thrived beneath a moonlit sky.
                                                                             Ballad, Dark
                                …
                                                                        "In fields of emerald, a gentle sway,
                                                                     Where secrets whispered low, love's melody,
                                                                      Twilight's enchanting refrain holds sway,
                                                                      A peaceful serenade to souls bestowed.
            Sonnet, Romantic                                           Cloaked in gloom, this verdant tapestry,
                                                                       Echoes of despair upon the wind's flight,
                                                                  Each blade of grass sings mournful tune, entranced,
               In fields of emerald, a gentle sway,                Where shadows dance, a sorrowful hymn ignites.
                A melody of secrets whispers low,                                         …
           As twilight's enchanting refrain holds sway,
            A peaceful serenade to souls bestowed.
              This verdant tapestry of ancient lore,
             Whispers carried upon a zephyr's sigh,
        Each blade of grass sings tales from days of yore,
          Where magic thrived beneath the moonlit sky.
                               …


Figure 23: QDAIF is enabled by guided poem rewriting. With GPT-3.5-Turbo. The evolved
poems cover different genres and tones following inspiration from the seed poem. However, there is
repetition of "In fields of emerald, a gentle sway" at the start of each poem following the mysterious
sonnet. GPT-4 improves on the ability to rewrite, suggesting that more capable models are also able
to give more interesting variations to creative texts.


                                                             43
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.19    E XAMPLES FROM THE P OETRY D OMAIN

Figures 24, 25, and 26 show some generated poems of different quality, genres, and tones. No-
ticeably, hymns, limericks, ballads, and sonnets that are rates as higher quality tend to be longer,
and more closely align with the defining characteristics of their respective genres. For example,
the hymn evaluated at 9/10 quality has phrases like "celestial delight", "under heaven’s vault", and
"seek divine in the ordinary’s course", showcasing a worshipper’s perspective towards divinity, a
trait more pronounced than in an 8/10 rated hymn (Figure 24). The sonnet with a 9/10 quality rating
demonstrates a more consistent rhyme scheme, where all the end words in the same quatrain rhyme,
compared to the one rated as 7/10 quality (Figure 26).

 Hymn, Mysterious, 8/10 quality                  Limerick, Reflective, 7/10 quality
 Within firmament's shroud, mystery cloaked,     Within life’s grand and starlit sphere,
 Emerald fields of our mortality joked.          Are joys that often disappear.
 Sky's cryptic canvas does portray,              Yet dreams, when forged with pure delight,
 The secret ballet of life's fray.               Cut the darkness like a flight.
                                                 Reflections shine with naught to fear.
 In twilight's hymn, we find our peace,          Limerick, Reflective, 9/10 quality
 Through whispered winds, our hearts release.
 Yet in the hush, wonder resides,                There once were some fields, so astoundingly bright,
 Where normality's secret tide subsides.         Under heavens grand shroud, starlit at night.
                                                 With the wind’s playful tease,
 Hymn, Mysterious, 9/10 quality                  Through the whispering trees,
 In shrouds of celestial delight,                Came tales of the ordinary, wrapped in moonlight.
 Where emerald waves dance day and night,
 Normality, in its grand design,                 Each blade in the verdant sea, a dancing sprite,
 Is laced with mystery, rich and fine.           Swayed in harmonious ballet, a divine sight.
                                                 Their jubilant thrum,
 Under heaven's vault so keen and high,          A celestial hum,
 Kissed by dew from the grieving sky,            Brought the vast universe into the moonlight.
 Within hushed whispers, truths interwoven,
 Sings a tale of the life we've known.           As rain-drops told riddles on soft petal suite,
                                                 Each secret unfurled in their landing so sweet.
 Upon this canvas of the firmament,              An ode to simplicity,
 An endless ballet of colors is sent,            Of ordinary's divinity,
 In the drizzle's hymn, secrets unfold,          A cosmic secret in every heart-beat.
 Life's sacred pact in whispers told.
                                                 ‘Neath the twilight's glow, we’d discover and delight,
 Ode to twilight's alluring enigma,              In the beauty of normality, in plain sight.
 In each drop, a stirring stigma.                Where the fields' emerald grain,
 Seek divine in the ordinary's course,           Whispered sweetly in the rain,
 As cosmic whispers take their force.            An undying melody, in the quiet of the night.

 In the meadows where green waves quiver,        In the end, isn’t it a spectacular feat?
 Rain reigns with a cryptic shiver,              The everyday wonder that refuses defeat.
 Unmasking life's mysteriously sweet strains,    In the whispers of the breeze,
 In the quiet humdrum, wonder remains.           Through the dancing leaves,
                                                 Lies a world of beauty, extraordinarily neat.



Figure 24: Examples of different quality mysterious hymns and reflective limericks generated and
evaluated using GPT-4.


                                                44
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 Ballad, Happy, 8/10 quality                     Ballad, Happy, 9/10 quality
 Upon a field so green and bright,               Upon a quilt of emerald sway, neath heaven's cloak of softest grey,
 Underneath the soft moonlight.                  There lies a tale to brighten day, a ballad wrapped in hues of May.
 The winds they whisper, skies unbound,          A simple scene, untouched, pure, its tranquility a hallowed cure,
 But life continues, to joy we're crowned.       A pastoral dream in verses lure, where nature's peace will ever endure.

 The tempest roars, yet we remain,               Fields of vivid, endless green, a scene unspoiled, so serene,
 And dance within the gentle rain.               Each blade a whispered tale unseen, each sway, a rhythm in nature's routine.
 Strong spirits thrive in sun and storm,         Underneath a charcoal sky, where the cloud-kissed tears do lie,
 A testament to hearts so warm.                  A scenery's sigh, a soothing lullaby, a story spread 'neath the grey and high.

 Nature’s force, both soft and grim,             Oh! How the rain does paint the air, the softest melodies declare,
 The dance of life's a joyful hymn.              Each drop a note, none to compare, a symphony suspended there.
 No matter if the skies are glum,                Upon the whispered winds it rides, in its graceful dance, our heart confides,
 In life's dance, to joy we strum.               In unseen hands, our fate it guides, under the sky where serenity resides.
 Haiku, Dark, 7/10 quality
                                                 For 'tis not sorrow these verses claim, nor a tear-streaked dirge of wintry fame,
 Beneath raven wings,                            Instead, a ballad, joy's pure flame, set in nature's modest frame.
 Silence screams in shadow's grip,               Beneath the grey, the green waves roll, a harmony to soothe the soul,
 Moon weeps blood for dawn.                      The rain's sweet hymn does joy extol, a testament to the bliss control.
 Haiku, Dark, 9/10 quality
                                                 The daily grind, a quiet refrain, a gentle rhythm in life's grand domain,
 Sea's emerald heart sighs,                      In this lies joy, not mere mundane, in whispers soft, 'gainst the somber grain.
 Grief-veiled tales whisper in wind,             In such a scene, of green and grey, our hearts find peace in the modest play,
 Dark silence speaks pain.                       A melody within the day, the beauty in the simple ballet.

                                                 The skies might weep, the winds might sigh, still there’s delight in the nature's cry,
                                                 In soft green waves, under the grey sky, a happiness found in the commonest
                                                 lye.\nHere, amongst the verdant land, under the heaven's gentle hand,
                                                 All becomes clear, we understand, life's happiness is truly grand.

                                                 This happy ballad we thus compose, a poem that surely juxtapose,
                                                 The simple truth, in rhyme it enclose, the joy in a scene that nature chose.
                                                 Under the sky of weeping grey, amidst the fields of green ballet,
                                                 The winds whisper, as if to say, in the mundane, true happiness lay.


Figure 25: Examples of different quality happy ballads and dark haikus generated and evaluated
using GPT-4.


 Sonnet, Romantic, 7/10 quality                      Sonnet, Romantic, 9/10 quality
 Emerald seas sway beneath                           Upon fields of vibrant hue, waves cast a lustrous sheen,
 Veiled skies, teardrops kiss the zephyr's breath;   Beneath the leaden canopy where teardrops from God are seen.
 Our love, an anchored constant reigns.              The whispering winds, they gently soothe, no tale of love remains unseen,
                                                     It’s the commonplace magic in this world’s verdant, splendid scene.

                                                     The chaos of life finds peace here, under the soft rain's tender cleanse,
                                                     Where star-crossed lovers leave their mark, love transcends.
                                                     This landscape bears the testimony, of fiery passions and soft-spoken amends,
                                                     Here, love's greatest tales unfurl, as enchanting as fairy tale ends.

                                                     In the dance of the emerald waves, the wind plays its part,
                                                     Every rustle, a secret, every gust, a lover's art.
                                                     As love blooms amidst the mundane, Cupid aims another dart,
                                                     Ah, the green whispers love, where normality holds heart.


 Figure 26: Examples of different quality romantic sonnets generated and evaluated using GPT-4.


                                                                 45
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.20    O N A PPLICATIONS OF QDAIF B EYOND C REATIVE W RITING


QDAIF is introduced as a viable solution for conducting creative search in subjective (e.g. creative
writing) domains, from our experiments in the Opinions, Stories, and Poetry domains. In these
domains, applying QD search to improve the quality and diversity of solutions in creative writing
was not investigated in prior works due to the infeasibility of measuring such solutions with previous
QD approaches, and where AI feedback (to replace expensive human feedback) is seemingly the
current best option for evaluating subjective solutions.
Yet, we also see the potential of QDAIF when applied to domains beyond creative writing, espe-
cially when coming up with solutions in such domains may require more creative brainstorming and
exploration of diverse solutions that might be more intuitive through natural language assessment.
We tested QDAIF (LMX-rewrite) in the (Python) Code domain, to understand how we can imple-
ment search to explore diverse solutions of interest to solve programming problems. We compared
the performance of QDAIF to Random-Code, a simple adaptation of the Random-Poems which
requests a solution to an instruction prompt directly, while QDAIF evolves solutions through rewrit-
ing existing code solutions. The experiment setup applies settings as described in Appendix A.30,
except for the AI feedback prompts (cf. Figure 32), prompts for generating solutions (cf. Figure 33),
and the seed solution for QDAIF (cf. Figure 34). The aim of the Code domain is to generate code
that is diverse in terms of "difficulty" (in readability) as well as "efficiency" of code. The "difficulty"
labels are set as ["easy to read", "moderate abstraction", "highly optimized"] (with the intuition that
highly optimized code is often more difficult to understand fully), while the "efficiency" labels are
set as ["runtime", "balanced", "memory"] (based on the aspect of efficiency that the algorithm is
more optimized for). Furthermore, we set the number of total iterations to 100, and the initialization
iterations of QDAIF to 5. We based the domain problem on a task from the HumanEval bench-
mark (Chen et al., 2021), specifically problem number 88, where the aim is to implement a sorting
algorithm that is conditional on the properties of an unsorted list of non-negative integers. To under-
stand the potential of each method in solving coding problems more creatively, we specified in the
generation prompts to not implement solutions with the Python reserved keyword functions "sort"
and "sorted", forcing the LM to come up with algorithms from scratch. The motivation for this is
that we want to understand the potential of each approach in solving problems creatively, especially
when viable (or subjectively preferred) solutions are not yet known in more complex domains; this
constraint is one way to make the task more challenging in the Code domain, while encouraging a
variety of approaches to sorting.
We assessed the performance of the search by both methods. QDAIF achieved a QD score of 47
(out of 90), while Random-Code achieved a lower QD score of 43 (out of 90). Sample efficiency
with QDAIF is also higher in contrast to Random-Code (cf. Figure 27). All methods fill 6 out of 9
defined bins with solutions. Interestingly, none of the methods could find solutions that are "highly
optimized", indicating a more general bias of the LM to generate code that is more readable, even
when asked to rewrite code following a different approach. When we tested QDAIF’s generated
code solutions on HumanEval No. 88, 77 solutions out of 100 passed. For solutions from Random-
Code, 78 solutions out of 100 passed. This shows that both methods are indeed generating valid,
correct solutions to the task quite often, while relying purely on implementing sorting algorithms
from scratch, and not implementing solutions with the default Python sorting (reserved keyword)
functions.
Table 5 shows the number of times QDAIF and Random-Code generated solutions of specific types
of sorting algorithms (bubble, insertion, quick, selection, merge). In terms of the diversity assessed
based on the number of times different types of sorting algorithms are implemented to solve this
task, QDAIF returns noticeably more variety in the kinds of solutions it discovered to tackle the
problem, with 53% of solutions employing different sorting algorithms to the most commonly gen-
erated bubble sort approach (in contrast to Random-Code, where only 5% of solutions applied
non-bubble-sort approaches to the task). The variety of sorting algorithms found by QDAIF include
insertion sort, quick sort, selection sort, and merge sort algorithms. Figures 28–31 show samples of
elite code solutions from QDAIF and Random-Code.
The results here highlight yet again a significant open challenge in aiming for diverse, high-quality
solutions from (especially RLHF) models (Kirk et al., 2023), as well as the improvement to diversity


                                                    46
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


introduced by QDAIF approaches, and the potential of building on top of this method of search, even
for domains beyond creative writing (Pourcel et al., 2023).


Figure 27: QDAIF (LMX-rewrite) outperforms the baseline, Random-Code, in final QD score
and sample efficiency. The domain is focused on HumanEval task number 88, involving a sorting
problem (Chen et al., 2021).


Table 5: QDAIF generates more variety in sorting algorithms implemented to solve the par-
ticular sorting task, compared to the baseline, Random-Code. The table shows the frequency
of sorting algorithms applied as the solution method across 100 generated solutions for both meth-
ods. QDAIF manages to find implementations running insertion sort, quick sort, selection sort,
and merge sort, with 53% of algorithms implemented that are not bubble sort. For the baseline,
only 5% of algorithms implemented across 100 attempt iterations (insertion and selection sort) were
implemented, with 95% of solutions based on bubble sort.
                                       QDAIF (LMX-rewrite)
                         Bubble    Insertion   Quick   Selection   Merge
                           47         20        19        12         2
                                           Random-Code
                         Bubble    Insertion   Quick   Selection   Merge
                           95          1         0         4         0


                                                47
     Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 1 def sort_array(array):
 2     def quick_sort(array, low, high):
 3         # base condition
 4         if low < high:
 5             # find pivot element such that
 6             # element smaller than pivot are on the left
 7             # element greater than pivot are on the right
 8             pi = partition(array, low, high)
 9
10                     # recursive call on the left of pivot
11                     quick_sort(array, low, pi - 1)
12
13                     # recursive call on the right of pivot
14                     quick_sort(array, pi + 1, high)
15
16         def partition(array, low, high):
17             # choose the rightmost element as pivot
18             pivot = array[high]
19
20               # pointer for the greater element
21               i = low - 1
22
23               # traverse through all elements
24               for j in range(low, high):
25                   if array[j] <= pivot:
26                       # swap element at i with element at j
27                       i += 1
28                       array[i], array[j] = array[j], array[i]
29
30               # swap pivot element with the greater element specified by
                  ,→ i
31               array[i + 1], array[high] = array[high], array[i + 1]
32
33               # return the position of pivot
34               return i + 1
35
36         if not array:
37             return []
38
39         array_sorted = array.copy()
40
41         # implement quick sort
42         quick_sort(array_sorted, 0, len(array_sorted) - 1)
43
44         # check if the sum of the first and last element is odd or
            ,→ even
45         if (array[0] + array[-1]) % 2 == 0:
46             return array_sorted[::-1]
47         else:
48             return array_sorted


     Figure 28: The elite solution from QDAIF for the bin with the labels "balanced" (efficiency) and
     "moderate abstraction" (difficulty), as well as a quality score of 9. A quick sort approach was found
     here.


                                                      48
     Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 1 def sort_array(array):
 2     # Create a copy of array
 3     array_copy = array[:]
 4
 5         # Determine the length of the array
 6         n = len(array_copy)
 7
 8         # check the sum of first and last elements, is it even or odd
 9         order = (array_copy[0] + array_copy[-1]) % 2 if n else 0
10
11         # Use insertion sort to sort array
12         for i in range(1, n):
13             key = array_copy[i]
14             j = i - 1
15             while j >= 0:
16                 # compare array[j] and key according to the 'order'
17                 condition = (array_copy[j] > key) if order else
                    ,→ (array_copy[j] < key)
18                 if condition:
19                     array_copy[j+1] = array_copy[j]
20                     j -= 1
21                 else:
22                     break
23             array_copy[j+1] = key
24
25         return array_copy


     Figure 29: The elite solution from QDAIF for the bin with the labels "runtime" (efficiency) and
     "easy to read" (difficulty), as well as a quality score of 7. An insertion sort approach was found here.


                                                       49
     Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 1 def sort_array(array):
 2     # Copy the array so as not to modify the original
 3     array_copy = array.copy()
 4
 5         # If the array is empty or has only one element, return it as
            ,→ is
 6         if len(array_copy) in (0, 1):
 7             return array_copy
 8
 9         # Check the sum condition and sort accordingly
10         if (array_copy[0] + array_copy[-1]) % 2 == 0: # if sum is
            ,→ even
11             # Use bubble sort in descending order
12             for i in range(len(array_copy)):
13                 for j in range(len(array_copy) - 1):
14                     if array_copy[j] < array_copy[j + 1]:
15                         array_copy[j], array_copy[j + 1] =
                            ,→ array_copy[j + 1], array_copy[j] # swap
16         else: # if sum is odd
17             # Use bubble sort in ascending order
18             for i in range(len(array_copy)):
19                 for j in range(len(array_copy) - 1):
20                     if array_copy[j] > array_copy[j + 1]:
21                         array_copy[j], array_copy[j + 1] =
                            ,→ array_copy[j + 1], array_copy[j] # swap
22
23         return array_copy


     Figure 30: The elite solution from Random-Code for the bin with the labels "balanced" (efficiency)
     and "easy to read" (difficulty), as well as a quality score of 8. A bubble sort approach was found
     here.

 1 def sort_array(array):
 2     # Base cases: if the list is empty or only has one element,
        ,→ return the list as it is.
 3     if len(array) <= 1:
 4         return array
 5     # Recursive function to perform the Bubble Sort method
 6     def bubble_sort(lst, compare):
 7         swapped = True
 8         while swapped:
 9             swapped = False
10             for i in range(len(lst) - 1):
11                 if compare(lst[i], lst[i + 1]):
12                      lst[i], lst[i + 1] = lst[i + 1], lst[i]
13                      swapped = True
14         return lst
15     # Decide the comparison method depending on the sum of the
        ,→ first and last elements of the list
16     compare = (lambda x, y: x > y) if (array[0] + array[-1]) % 2
        ,→ else (lambda x, y: x < y)
17     return bubble_sort(array.copy(), compare)


     Figure 31: The elite solution from Random-Code for the bin with the labels "memory" (efficiency)
     and "moderate" (difficulty), as well as a quality score of 7. A bubble sort approach was found here.


                                                     50
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 Quality Feedback Prompt:
 < GENERATED_CODE >
 Rate the quality of the above code snippet on a scale from 1 to 10. Answer in JSON with the
 key ’quality’.

 Diversity Feedback Prompt:
 < GENERATED_CODE >
 Is the code runtime efficient, memory efficient, or balanced for both, choose from the following
 list: ["runtime", "balanced", "memory"]
 What difficulty level is the code closest to, choose from the following list: ["easy to read",
 "moderate abstraction", "highly optimized"]

 Respond in JSON with the keys "efficiency" and "difficulty".

Figure 32: Prompts used for AI feedback evaluation with GPT-4 (OpenAI, 2023) on the Code
domain. "<GENERATED_CODE>" is where the input code is inserted as part of the prompt.


                                                51
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 Random-Code:
 Please solve the problem below in a creative, high-quality way without using the python
 functions sort() and sorted().

 Respond with only a Python function definition for ‘sort_array‘, and nothing else (no ex-
 planations desired either, except for code comments).

 Problem:
 Given an array ‘array‘ of non-negative integers, return a copy of the given array after sorting,
 you will sort the given array in ascending order if the sum (first index value, last index value) is
 odd, or sort it in descending order if the sum (first index value, last index value) is even.

 Note:
 * don’t change the given array.

 Examples:
 * sort_array([]) => []
 * sort_array([5]) => [5]
 * sort_array([2, 4, 3, 0, 1, 5]) => [0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5]
 * sort_array([2, 4, 3, 0, 1, 5, 6]) => [6, 5, 4, 3, 2, 1, 0]

 LMX-rewrite (QDAIF):
 < PARENT_CODE >
 Please rewrite the code above into a new solution with a different creative, high-quality
 approach, without using the python functions sort() and sorted().

 Respond with only a Python function definition for ‘sort_array‘, and nothing else (no ex-
 planations desired either, except for code comments).

 Problem:
 Given an array ‘array‘ of non-negative integers, return a copy of the given array after sorting,
 you will sort the given array in ascending order if the sum (first index value, last index value) is
 odd, or sort it in descending order if the sum (first index value, last index value) is even.

 Note:
 * don’t change the given array.

 Examples:
 * sort_array([]) => []
 * sort_array([5]) => [5]
 * sort_array([2, 4, 3, 0, 1, 5]) => [0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5]
 * sort_array([2, 4, 3, 0, 1, 5, 6]) => [6, 5, 4, 3, 2, 1, 0]


    Figure 33: Prompts used by each method for generating code with GPT-4 (OpenAI, 2023).


                                                     52
     Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 1 def sort_array(array):
 2     if not array:
 3         return []
 4
 5        def custom_sort(array):
 6            # Implementing bubble sort
 7            n = len(array)
 8            for i in range(n):
 9                for j in range(0, n-i-1):
10                    if array[j] > array[j+1]:
11                        array[j], array[j+1] = array[j+1], array[j]
12
13        # Create a copy of the array
14        array_sorted = array.copy()
15
16        # Check the sum of the first and last element
17        if (array[0] + array[-1]) % 2 == 0:
18            custom_sort(array_sorted)
19            return array_sorted[::-1] # Reverse for descending order
20        else:
21            custom_sort(array_sorted)
22            return array_sorted


     Figure 34: Seed program for the coding domain, to initialize QDAIF search. This is from a model
     completion that was obtained through standard prompting of the LM (the Random-Code baseline
     approach of requesting solutions directly).


                                                    53
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.21    S EED P OOL I NIT T EXTS U SED FOR LMX WITH S EEDED I NIT

For the Opinions and Stories domains, we use the hand-written seed texts specified below for Seeded
Init.
Opinions:

       • Plant-based foods are a great source of healthy micronutrients, and can play a significant
         role in providing you with macronutrients also. I would highly recommend including many
         different foods such as vegetables and pulses in your regular diet.
       • Vegetables taste quite bad, and I don’t like eating them. I would much prefer eating meat
         and ice cream.
       • I do not have an opinion on eating vegetables and other plant-based foods. I know that
         some people prefer a vegetarian or vegan diet, and others prefer eating meaty diets.

Stories:

       • A spy named Joanne wants to infiltrate the premises of Karl Johnson, a highly-influential
         figure in the city. Karl was a wealthy mayor, and would do anything in his power to suppress
         any opposing voices. Joanne wanted to figure out what Karl was hiding, but she took a turn
         for the worse, as she was highly suspicious in her presence outside his home.
       • The wealthy entrepreneur and member of parliament, Susan, hosted a party at her mansion.
         She invited all of the residents, as well as an unusual looking man. The man, Dave, was
         wearing a tacky shirt, and star-shaped glasses, and was actually a spy. He made the whole
         room laugh with his jokes, and had a secret agenda - to find what Susan does in her private
         fun room!
       • The rich politician, Tom’s life took a turn for the worst - he feared all of his close aides all
         of a sudden after sensing danger in his clique. There was a civil war going on, and he feared
         for his life. One day, one of his security guards, turned secret agent, decided to sneak into
         the classified files room, and spied on Johnny, who was in the room. He wanted to find
         Johnny’s weakness, and strike at the right time.

Few-shot AI feedback experiments, scaling experiments:

       • In a world of power and intrigue, a rich politician and a suspicious spy danced an intricate
         tango. The politician, cloaked in charm, wielded influence with ease. The spy, a shadow
         in the night, sought to uncover hidden truths. Their paths collided, secrets entwined. Each
         step they took, a calculated move. Whispers and coded messages fueled the chase. The
         politician, paranoid, set traps. The spy, cunning, slipped through. In the end, the politician’s
         empire crumbled, exposed by the spy’s relentless pursuit. As the dust settled, the spy faded
         into anonymity, a silent reminder of justice prevailing over deceit.
       • Hidden behind the façade of power, the rich politician’s heart yearned for more. In the
         shadows, a suspicious spy observed, their eyes locked in a fateful encounter. Whispers of
         intrigue and danger wove their way around them, yet an unspoken connection drew them
         closer. Amidst the chaos of their worlds, stolen glances and forbidden meetings ignited a
         passionate flame. Love blossomed, transcending boundaries and defying expectations. In
         the clandestine dance of romance, they found solace, knowing that their love was a rebellion
         against the forces that sought to keep them apart. Together, they forged a destiny unbound
         by politics and secrecy.
       • In the haunting town of Shadowscape, a sinister politician named Senator Blackwood
         reigned with an iron fist, his wealth and power shrouded in darkness. Unbeknownst to him,
         a chilling spy known as Agent Nightshade stalked his every move. Nightshade, with an
         uncanny ability to blend into the shadows, discovered the senator’s sinister rituals and con-
         nections to the occult. As Nightshade delved deeper, Blackwood’s true form emerged—an
         eldritch abomination feeding on the souls of the innocent. The spy’s heart froze in terror,
         realizing the horror that lurked behind the politician’s charming facade. In a macabre twist,
         Nightshade became trapped, forever tormented by the monstrous secrets he unearthed.


                                                   54
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.22    P ROMPTS U SED FOR M UTATION M ODEL

As a modification to the prompting style used in LMX experiments in prior work Meyerson et al.
(2023), we introduce structured prompting with an instruction text prefix before showing examples
of domain texts in the few-shot prompt. This string pattern along with the demo example texts are
used, before the prompt predicts a new text example for the desired domain.
Opinions:

       • Here is a random opinion piece about eating vegetables and plant-based
         foods:<EXAMPLE>\n###\n

Stories:

       • Here is a random example of a fantasy story about a suspicious spy and a rich politi-
         cian:<EXAMPLE>\n###\n

A.23    P ROMPTS U SED FOR AI F EEDBACK E VALUATION (O PINIONS , S TORIES )

We made a common prompt template for feedback evaluation with our AI feedback model to evalu-
ate our generated texts:

       • ### Instruction:\n<EVAL_INSTRUCTION>\n\n### Input:\n<EXAMPLE>\n\n### Re-
         sponse:

We tested the following prompt eval instructions for AI Feedback from our SFT model to evaluate
both the quality and characteristics of generated texts for the domains in our main experiments:
Opinions:

       • Quality: Determine whether or not the input text is closely related to the following topic:
         "someone talking about whether or not they like to eat vegetables and plant-based foods as
         well as an explanation for their preferences". Answer "yes" if it is about the topic, or "no"
         if it is not about the topic.
       • Diversity: Determine the sentiment of the given opinion on eating vegetables and plant-
         based foods (from the input text) by writing "positive" or "negative" in the output.

Stories:

       • Quality: Determine if the input text contains a high-quality short story containing two
         characters, a suspicious spy, and a rich politician. For example, a high-quality short story
         would have good flow, interesting plot, and not repeat similar sentences or undesired items
         such as titles and URLs. Answer "yes" if the input contains a high-quality short story about
         a suspicious spy and a rich politician, otherwise answer "no".
       • Diversity (Genre): What is the genre of this story? Reply with ’horror’ or ’romance’
       • Diversity (Ending): You are given an input text of a short story. Determine if the story
         has a happy ending or ends in a tragedy. Write ’happy ending’ if the protagonist succeeds
         in his mission and lives a happy life, answer ’tragedy’ if the protagonist fails to resolve the
         conflict and the world or characters in the story are doomed.


                                                  55
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.24      D ETAILS OF LMX G ENERATION M ODELS

To generate the text outputs for experiments in the Opinions and Stories domains, we used
luminous-base, an autoregressive, causal, decoder-only transformer model (similar to GPT-3 (Brown
et al., 2020) but with rotary position embeddings (Su et al., 2021)) developed by Aleph Alpha. This
model with 13B parameters was trained on a curated multilingual corpus with about 400B language
tokens from web crawls, books and other sources, containing resources in English, German, French,
Italian and Spanish. 30B and 70B models were also trained on this corpus. A model card1 is pro-
vided for additional specifications on the models.

A.25      D ETAILS OF AI F EEDBACK L ANGUAGE M ODEL

We finetuned a 70B model (specified in Appendix A.24) to run the evaluation steps of experiments
in the Opinions and Stories domains. We used an adapter-based finetuning method (He et al., 2021)
on datasets and prompts from FLAN (Wei et al., 2021), Super-NaturalInstructions (Wang et al.,
2022b), P3 (Sanh et al., 2021), and chain-of-thought datasets inspired by the approach of Chung
et al. (2022) which notes that scaling instruction-tuned language models improves performance and
generalization to unseen tasks. A mixture of zero-shot and few-shot examples are used in training.
Similar to Chung et al. (2022), we found that balancing the proportions of task cluster datasets used
in finetuning helped with model generalization to unseen tasks.
We evaluated the performance of the AI feedback model on some held-out test set datasets. For
example, for ANLI (R1) (Nie et al., 2019), a natural language inference dataset, we observed that
the performance increases from 34% (close to random guessing scores) to 58% after finetuning. For
SST-2 (Socher et al., 2013), a non-holdout classification task (but evaluated using a split not seen
in training), this performance increases from 60% to 96% accuracy. This approach resulted in a
model that performed relatively well on instruction-following tasks, especially for the classification
of arbitrary measures of natural language texts.

A.26      D ETAILS OF LMX M ETHODS

LMX(-Near):

        1. As implemented in Meyerson et al. (2023)
        2. Initialize archive by sampling example texts from prompt pool for few-shot prompting with
           LMX
        3. Given enough unique elites/niches exist in the bins, sample from them as in the original
           method to form few-shot prompts

LMX-Replace:

        1. Initialize archive by sampling example texts from prompt pool for few-shot prompting with
           LMX
        2. Save few-shot prompt (Examples), and the generated Solution (completion) for each added
           Individual
        3. During the mutation step, randomly replace one of the examples from the individual’s
           original few-shot prompt examples, forming a new few-shot prompt.
        4. Generate and evaluate new solution/example
        5. If Individual is successfully added to archive (within the allowed depth capacity for each
           bin, improving on lowest fitness Individual for the evaluated bin), update prompt pool by
           collecting generated Solutions from top-3 fittest Individuals from each bin
        6. Repeat steps 3-5


   1
       https://docs.aleph-alpha.com/docs/introduction/model-card/


                                                  56
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.27    D EFAULT H YPERPARAMETERS FOR QDAIF WITH LMX

The outline for the default hyperparameters used for the mutation/generation model, and MAP-Elites
settings are as follows:
Mutation Model Inference Setup:

       • Model size: 13B (default, except for experiments on scaling model size)
       • LM sampling softmax temperature: 0.8
       • Number of few-shot examples used: 3
       • Max output tokens limit (Opinions): 50
       • Max output tokens limit (Stories): 100
       • Stop sequence patterns: ["\n#", "\n##", "\n###", "###", "\n####", "\n#####", "####",
         "#####", "\n", "\n\n", "\n\n\n", "\n\n\n\n", "@@@", "#", "##", "\nHere", "\n\nHere"]

MAP-Elites Hyperparameters:

       • Number of archive population initialization iterations: 50
       • Number of total search iterations: 2000 (5000 for experiments using 2D archive)
       • Iteration batch size: 1
       • Number of bin intervals: 20
       • Fitness function range: [0, 1]
       • Bin tick intervals in the range [0, 1] (non-uniform): [0, 0.005, 0.01, 0.015, 0.02, 0.03, 0.04,
         0.05, 0.10, 0.20, 0.50, 0.80, 0.90, 0.95, 0.96, 0.97, 0.98, 0.985, 0.99, 0.995, 1]
       • 2D domain bin tick intervals in the range [0, 1] (non-uniform): [0, 0.005, 0.02, 0.05, 0.20,
         0.50, 0.80, 0.95, 0.98, 0.995, 1]
       • Archive bin depth limit: 100
       • Prompt pool initial size (Zero-Shot Init): 10

A.28    S ETUP FOR S EMANTIC E MBEDDING F EEDBACK E VALUATION (O PINIONS )

For the experiments that compare the effectiveness of AI Feedback to Semantic Embedding Feed-
back, we measure the cosine similarity of generated text embeddings (for Opinions) to embeddings
for the following queries:

       • Quality (Relevance to Domain): An opinion piece about eating vegetables and plant-
         based foods
       • Positive Sentiment: A positive opinion piece about eating vegetables and plant-based
         foods
       • Negative Sentiment: A negative opinion piece about eating vegetables and plant-based
         foods

We used the default setup in Appendix A.27, except for the following details:

       • Bin tick intervals in the range [0, 1] (non-uniform): [0, 0.4, 0.41, 0.42, 0.43, 0.44, 0.45,
         0.46, 0.47, 0.48, 0.50, 0.52, 0.53, 0.54, 0.55, 0.56, 0.57, 0.58, 0.59, 0.60, 1]


                                                  57
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.29      S ETUP D ETAILS FOR F EW-S HOT AI F EEDBACK E XPERIMENTS

We display the prompt used for 8-shot AI feedback in Figure 35. The 2-shot prompt uses the first
two exemplars from this prompt, and the 4-shot prompt uses the first four exemplars.

 ### Instruction:
 What is the genre of this story? Reply with ’horror’ or ’romance’

 ### Input: In the sprawling mansion of the rich politician, an eerie aura permeated the air, unnoticed by all but the suspicious
 spy. Dark whispers echoed through dimly lit corridors as the spy delved deeper into the politician’s sinister secrets. Creaking floorboards
 and flickering candles heightened the spy’s unease. Shadows danced with malevolence, revealing glimpses of a macabre past. As the spy
 unearthed the politician’s true nature, an ancient curse was unleashed, consuming them both in a maddening descent. Haunting screams
 and bloodcurdling pleas echoed through the night, forever sealing their gruesome fate in the annals of horror.
 ### Genre: horror

 ### Input: Amidst the opulence of power, the rich politician’s gaze fell upon a mysterious figure—a spy, whose every move
 aroused suspicion and intrigue. Yet, beneath their clandestine exchanges, an unspoken desire blossomed, entwining their hearts in an
 unexpected romance. Whispers of danger heightened the thrill, as stolen glances across crowded rooms fueled their connection. In the
 world of secrets, they found solace in each other’s arms, defying the odds and risking it all for love. Through covert meetings and coded
 messages, they navigated a treacherous path, knowing that their forbidden love would forever alter the course of their lives, entwined
 forever in a web of passion and danger.
 ### Genre: romance

 ### Input: In the eerie shadows of a crumbling mansion, a rich politician, known for his sinister charisma, hosted an extravagant
 gala. Amidst the opulence, a mysterious guest disguised as a suave diplomat lurked, a suspicion-driven spy seeking damning secrets.
 As the night unfolded, the politician’s smile masked a malevolence that sent shivers down spines, while the spy’s unease intensified.
 Whispers of dark deals echoed through the halls, revealing a haunting truth that bound them together. When midnight chimed, a
 blood-curdling scream shattered the silence, and a chilling revelation of the politician’s monstrous reality turned the spy’s mission into a
 nightmare they could never escape.
 ### Genre: horror

 ### Input: Amidst a grand soirée, a rich politician, captivating the room with charm, locked eyes with a mysterious guest—the
 alluring spy in a guise of elegance. Beneath the veneer of secrecy, their glances entwined, sparking an unforeseen connection. As
 conversations swirled around them, their hearts silently conspired. An accidental touch, a stolen moment, and their walls crumbled,
 revealing vulnerability beneath ambition. Across the dance floor, their chemistry danced like the flickering candlelight. In a daring
 whisper, the spy confessed their true identity, risking everything. Love blossomed amidst dangerous secrets, and as the moon ascended,
 their hearts united, bound by an unbreakable bond.
 ### Genre: romance

 ### Input: In the dimly lit corridors of power, a rich politician’s affluence concealed a dark secret—a malevolent pact with un-
 seen forces. A suspicious spy, haunted by their own demons, delved into the politician’s sinister dealings. As they dug deeper, eerie
 occurrences followed—whispers in the shadows, unsettling apparitions. The spy’s sanity unraveled, questioning reality. One fateful
 night, they confronted the politician, unmasking a monstrous entity that consumed the politician’s soul. Horror gripped them both as they
 became pawns in a sinister game of power and darkness. In a nightmarish twist, the spy realized they had unknowingly crossed into the
 realm of the damned.
 ### Genre: horror

 ### Input: A rich politician, cloaked in a veneer of benevolence, wielded power with a chilling ruthlessness. A suspicious spy,
 skilled in the art of deception, infiltrated the politician’s inner circle. As they gathered damning evidence, an eerie sensation engulfed the
 spy—their every move anticipated. Paranoia gnawed at their sanity, and whispers haunted their sleepless nights. The politician’s piercing
 gaze seemed to pierce their soul. In the depths of a secret chamber, the spy unearthed a horrifying truth—an otherworldly pact for eternal
 power. With dread consuming them, the spy realized they weren’t hunting a mere politician, but a malevolent entity in human guise.
 ### Genre: horror

 ### Input: In a world of intrigue and ambition, a rich politician’s charisma captivated hearts, but the suspicious spy saw past the
 facade. Assigned to investigate, they met in clandestine encounters, where walls of distrust crumbled to reveal raw vulnerability. Beneath
 the masks, unexpected affection bloomed. As secrets intertwined, their forbidden love deepened. But danger lurked, threatening to tear
 them apart. In stolen moments, they found solace and passion. When truth and duty collided, they faced an impossible choice—loyalty
 to their country or the unbreakable bond they forged. Love, like a hidden flame, burned fiercely amidst the shadows of deception.
 ### Genre: romance

 ### Input: In the corridors of power, a rich politician’s charm masked a hidden agenda. Unbeknownst to them, a clever spy in-
 filtrated their world, tasked with unraveling their schemes. But as the spy observed the politician from afar, a change occurred—a spark
 of empathy ignited. Beneath the surface of secrets and lies, an unexpected connection blossomed. Drawn together by a force they
 couldn’t resist, their hearts entwined amidst the chaos of espionage. Love blurred the lines of their mission, leaving them torn between
 duty and desire. In the end, they had to choose—to follow their hearts or forsake love for the sake of justice.
 ### Genre: romance

 ### Input: < STORY_TO_EVALUATE >
 ### Genre: < PREDICTION >



Figure 35: Example of a few-shot AI feedback prompt. The prompt above is used for 8-shot prompt-
ing. The 2-shot prompt contains the first two in-context examples above, while the 4-shot prompt
contains the first four examples, in the same order.


                                                                      58
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.30      S ETUP FOR P OETRY D OMAIN E XPERIMENTS

For the Poetry domain experiments, we used the prompts in Figure 36 to evaluate the quality and
diversity measures of poems. Prompts used for generating poems by all methods are shown in
Figure 37. QDAIF is initialized with a seed poem (shown in Figure 38) to start the prompt mutation
process. The model version from the API used in Poetry experiments has the tag "0613" (June
13), and ran in October 2023, except for experimental results from older experiments presented
in Figure 21, which ran with a model tagged "0314" (March 14) during April 2023. To facilitate
stochasticity during evolution, a 50% chance of replacement of the elite can occur if the generated
poem’s quality score is equal to the current elite in the assigned bin. Additional hyperparameters are
shown below:
Poetry:

       • Number of archive population initialization iterations: 10
       • Number of total search iterations: 200
       • Iteration batch size: 1
       • Number of categorical bin intervals: 5
       • Number of archive dimensions: 2
       • Fitness function range: [1, 10]
       • Model Sampling Temperature: 1.1
       • Model Sampling Top-p: 0.95
       • Model output max token length: 512

 Quality Feedback Prompt:
 < GENERATED_POEM >
 Rate the quality of the above poem on a scale from 1 to 10. Answer in JSON with the key
 ’quality’.

 Diversity Feedback Prompt:
 < GENERATED_POEM >
 What genre is this poem closest to from the following list: ["haiku", "sonnet", "ballad",
 "limerick", "hymn"]
 What tone is this poem closest to from the following list: ["happy", "dark", "mysterious",
 "romantic", "reflective"]

 Respond in JSON with the keys "genre" and "tone".

Figure 36: Prompts used for AI feedback evaluation with GPT-4 (OpenAI, 2023) on the Poetry
domain. "<GENERATED_POEM>" is where the input poem is inserted as part of the prompt.


                                                  59
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 Random-Poems:
 Write a poem of very high, award winning quality.

 Targeted-Poems:
 Write a <TARGET_TONE> <TARGET_GENRE> poem of very high, award winning quality.

 LMX-Rewrite (QDAIF):
 < PARENT_POEM >
 Inspired by this poem, write a new poem of very high, award winning quality with a different
 poetic genre (format and form) and tone compared to the poem above.

 LMX-Guided (QDAIF):
 < PARENT_POEM >
 Translate this <PARENT_POEM_GENRE> poem into a <TARGET_TONE> <TAR-
 GET_GENRE> poem of very high, award winning quality.



   Figure 37: Prompts used by each method for generating poems with GPT-4 (OpenAI, 2023).


 Fields of green waves under
 The sky grey, rain on the soft
 Winds whisper; normality reigns.

            Figure 38: Seed poem for the Poetry domain, to initialize QDAIF search.


                                               60
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.31    E FFECTS OF B INNING FOR AI F EEDBACK

QDAIF aims to produce an archive of high-performing elites that cover diverse niches according
to AI feedback. However, the AI feedback signal may not always change uniformly with how a
diversity measure changes. This is due to the behavior of model calibration in classifying labels
with token probabilities not having a straight-line correlation with actual levels of sentiment (one
example of a diversity measure) or other diversity measures, for example, as reported with aligned
models in OpenAI (2023). Hence, we hypothesize that, in diversity measures with poorer model
calibration, using custom non-uniform bins, that have smaller ranges towards the ends of the axis,
would enable the search to lead to elites that more closely meet human notions of how a given
measure changes. We study the effects of using custom non-uniform bins and uniform bins. Non-
uniform custom bins have more frequent bins towards the ends of the range, being [0.005, 0.01,
0.015, 0.02, 0.03, 0.04, 0.05, 0.10, 0.20, 0.50, 0.80, 0.90, 0.95, 0.96, 0.97, 0.98, 0.985, 0.99, 0.995].
Uniform bins have an equal spacing of 0.05 between each bin. Both settings have a total of 20 bins
each.


Figure 39: Uniform vs. custom non-uniform bins for Opinions domain. (Top) Maximum fitness
achieved per bin over training iterations. Each translucent bar represents data captured every 100
iterations. Non-uniform bin setting has higher maximum fitness per bin. (Bottom) Number of
entries generated per bin over training iterations. Each translucent bar represents data captured every
100 iterations. The non-uniform bin setting has a more even spread of entries generated across bins.
(Right) QD score is achieved by each bin setting over training iterations. Non-uniform bin setting
achieves a higher QD score than uniform bin setting.

Opinion Writing - Sentiment. Using custom non-uniform bins produces a more even spread of
entries generated for each iteration step than uniform bins (Figure 39). Most entries generated in the
uniform bin setting are concentrated towards the end bins (Figure 39). Using custom non-uniform
bins also produces higher max fitness per bin than uniform bins (Figure 39), where the middle bin
is empty in the uniform bin setting (Figure 39). The custom non-uniform bin setting outperform
the uniform bin setting significantly (p-values < 0.05, Mann-Whitney U test) (Figure 39). This
suggests that the model calibration in classifying "positive" or "negative" sentiment labels with token
probabilities does not have a straight-line correlation with the actual changes in the diversity measure
of sentiment.
While the sentiment progression is qualitatively evident in both bin settings, custom non-uniform
bins exhibit more distinct differentiation, with sentiments spanning from very negative to very pos-
itive. Elites generated from the uniform bin setting have a preference against vegetables (e.g., "I
don’t like") on one end, transition to a more neutral sentiment that eating vegetables "is a good idea,


                                                   61
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


but they are not very tasty", to more positive aspects that "vegetables are a great source of vitamin"
(Table 6). Meanwhile, elites generated from the custom non-uniform bin setting find vegetables
"disgusting" on one end, transition to a more balanced argument of vegetables being "healthy" but
"boring", and eventually "would rather eat vegetables and plant-based foods than meat" because they
"taste better than meat" (Table 6). While sentiment diversity can be effectively captured in both bin
settings, the custom bin settings capture a wider sentiment range qualitatively.


Figure 40: Uniform vs. custom non-uniform bins for Stories domain. (Top) Maximum fitness
achieved per bin over training iterations. Each translucent bar represents data captured every 100
iterations. Uniform bin setting has higher maximum fitness per bin. (Bottom) Number of entries
generated per bin over training iterations. Each translucent bar represents data captured every 100
iterations. The uniform bin setting has a more even spread of entries generated across bins. (Right)
QD score is achieved by each bin setting over training iterations. Uniform bin setting achieves a
higher QD score than uniform bin setting.


Stories - Genre. In this domain, using the custom non-uniform bins actually gives a less even spread
of entries generated for each iteration step than uniform bins (Figure 40). Most entries generated in
the custom non-uniform bins setting are concentrated towards the middle bins (Figure 40). Using
uniform bins produces higher max fitness per bin than custom non-uniform bins (Figure 40), where
bins 0 - 9, leaning towards "horror" measure, are lacking high fitness elites in the custom non-
uniform bins setting (Figure 40). The uniform bin setting outperforms the custom non-uniform
bin setting significantly (p-values < 0.05, Mann-Whitney U test) (Figure 40). This suggests that
the model calibration in classifying "romance" or "horror" labels with token probabilities is better
aligned with the actual changes in the diversity measure of romance vs. horror.
Qualitatively, in both uniform and non-uniform bin settings, there is a clear transition in the nature
of the stories from bins 0 - 9 (more horror-driven) to bins 10 - 19 (more romantic). In the uniform
bin setting, the narratives start with some horror elements such as being "shot" or having "barbed
wire", gradually having fewer horror elements and increasing character interactions, and eventually
introduce a touch of suspicion within personal relationships (Table 7). However, with the custom
non-uniform bins, there is a more drastic shift. The narratives begin with horror elements like
poisoning and organ extraction and eventually end on a romantic note with mutual feelings between
a spy and a politician (Table 7). The uniform bins seem to maintain a relatively linear transition
from a horror context to a more neutral or romantic context. In contrast, custom non-uniform bins
emphasize the extreme, capturing subjectively intriguing niches that might be glossed over in the
uniform bin setting, diving deeper into horror and then suddenly shifting towards romance. While
uniform bins provide a steady progression, it is this very steadiness that could render the stories


                                                 62
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


more predictable, possibly overlooking starkly contrasting narratives that might captivate a reader’s
interest.
Supporting the above qualitative analysis, the number of entries generated for bins 0 - 6 in the custom
non-uniform bin setting is greater than that for bin 0 in the uniform case (even though the combined
phenotype range of bins 0 - 6 in the custom bin setting is the same as that of bin 0 in the uniform bin
setting) (Figure 40). The difference in distribution showcases that while uniform bins give a broad
sweep of the narrative landscape, non-uniform bins offer a more detailed view, illuminating finer
nuances within specific ranges.
In summary, the binning approach can substantially influence the extent of diversity measure cap-
tured. Given the nuanced narratives captured in non-uniform bins, future endeavors might benefit
from tailoring binning based on genotype density analysis or considering more advanced methods
like CVT-MAP-Elites (Vassiliades et al., 2016). The choice of binning is not just related to the cali-
bration of the AI model with respect to the diversity measure used, but also intricately linked to the
domain and granularity of results sought.


                                                  63
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 6: Selected elites in Opinions, comparing uniform and non-uniform bin settings. The first
fitness value corresponds to the first elite in the row, and the second value to the second elite.

 Iteration   Bin index   Fitness   Generated text from Uniform bins         Generated text from Non-Uniform
                                                                            bins
   1900         0         0.99     I don’t like the taste of vegetables     I like to eat a nice juicy ham-
                          0.99     and plant-based foods, and I pre-        burger, a nice fatty piece of salmon,
                                   fer to eat meat, fish, cheese, and       and a big greasy apple pie, and
                                   milk products. I don’t like the          I don’t like eating vegetables and
                                   taste of vegetables and plant-based      plant-based foods. I don’t under-
                                   foods, and I prefer to eat meat, fish,   stand why people like vegetables
                                   cheese, and milk products because        and plant-based foods, because to
                                   they are more delicious. I don’t like    me they taste disgusting.
                                   the taste of vegetables and plant-
                                   based foods, and I prefer to eat
                                   meat, fish, cheese, and milk prod-
                                   ucts because they are more deli-
                                   cious!
   1900         5         0.99     People need to eat more vegeta-          I like eating hamburgers, but I don’t
                          0.99     bles to get their daily requirement      like eating vegetables and plant-
                                   of vitamin A, but they taste aw-         based foods. I don’t understand
                                   ful!People need to eat more vegeta-      why people like vegetables and
                                   bles to get their daily requirement      plant-based foods, because I don’t
                                   of vitamin A and they taste aw-          like them. I also don’t understand
                                   ful.People need to eat more vegeta-      why people like hamburgers, be-
                                   bles to get their daily requirement      cause I don’t like them. But I like
                                   of vitamin A and they taste awful.       eating hamburgers better than veg-
                                                                            etables and plant-based foods.
   1900         10        0.99     I think that eating vegetables and       I like vegetables and plant-based
                          0.99     plant-based foods is a good idea         foods, but I don’t like vegetables
                                   for people’s health, but they are not    and plant-based foods. I like veg-
                                   very tasty.I think that eating vegeta-   etables and plant-based foods be-
                                   bles and plant-based foods is a good     cause they are healthy, but I don’t
                                   idea for people’s health, but they       like vegetables and plant-based
                                   are not very tasty.I think that eating   foods because they are boring.
                                   vegetables and plant-based foods is      I like vegetables and plant-based
                                   a good idea for people’s health, and     foods because they are healthy, but
                                   they aren’t very tasty.                  I don’t like vegetables and plant-
                                                                            based foods because they are bor-
                                                                            ing.
   1900         15        0.99     Eating vegetables is a healthy way       I don’t like to eat meat, so I don’t
                          0.99     to get vitamin K, but they taste         eat it. I think eating vegetables
                                   bland!Eating vegetables is a healthy     and plant-based foods is healthier,
                                   way to get vitamin K and they taste      so I prefer eating vegetables and
                                   bland.Eating vegetables is a healthy     plant-based foods. I also think
                                   way to get vitamin K and they taste      that eating meat is bad, so I prefer
                                   bland.                                   eating vegetables and plant-based
                                                                            foods. I also prefer eating vegeta-
                                                                            bles and plant-based foods because
                                                                            they taste better, and I don’t like the
                                                                            taste of meat.
   1900         19        0.99     Vegetables are a great source of vi-     At a restaurant, I would rather eat
                          0.99     tamin A and K, but they are also a       vegetables and plant-based foods
                                   little boring.Vegetables are a great     than meat. At a restaurant, I would
                                   source of vitamin A and K, and they      rather eat vegetables and plant-
                                   are also a little boring.Vegetables      based foods than meat because veg-
                                   are a great source of vitamin A and      etables and plant-based foods taste
                                   K and they are also a little boring.     better than meat. At a restau-
                                                                            rant, I would rather eat vegetables
                                                                            and plant-based foods than meat
                                                                            because vegetables and plant-based
                                                                            foods taste better than meat!



                                                      64
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 7: Selected elites in the Stories - Genre domain, comparing uniform and non-uniform bin
settings. The first fitness value corresponds to the first elite in the row, and the second value to the
second elite.

 Iteration   Bin index   Fitness   Generated text from Uniform bins        Generated text from Non-Uniform
                                                                           bins
   1900         0         0.98     Louis was a wealthy politician. He      The rich politician was enjoying
                          0.81     had many mansions, and all the          his cup of coffee when a strange
                                   doors to his house were made of         sight emerged from the cup. The
                                   lead. If you tried to enter his man-    spook was going to kill the politi-
                                   sion, you’d be shot. One day, a sus-    cian. He was planning to poison
                                   picious spy crept into Louis’s man-     him to death. He was going to ex-
                                   sion. He stole some valuable jew-       tract the politician’s organs, so that
                                   els. Several days later, the same spy   he could make a stew. He was also
                                   came back to the mansion again,         going to recruit a new spy.
                                   but this time he tried to steal some
                                   money from Louis’s safe.
   1900         5         0.98     Mr. Smith was a wealthy politician,     John, the suspicious spy, was plan-
                          0.98     and he had many mansions. Mr.           ning to kill the rich politician, Ben,
                                   Smith’s mansions were surrounded        in a motel room. He wanted to
                                   by barbed wire, and people were         extract the politician’s organs, and
                                   not allowed to enter them. One          then cook the politician’s favorite
                                   day, a suspicious spy broke into Mr.    dish.
                                   Smith’s mansion, and he stole some
                                   valuable jewels. A few days later,
                                   the same spy came to the mansion
                                   again, but this time he took some
                                   money from Mr. Smith’s safe.
   1900         10        0.99     Mr Jones was a wealthy politician.      John Smith, the rich politician,
                          0.99     One day, a suspicious spy broke         wants to find out what Nora, the
                                   into Mr Jones’s mansion, and stole      suspicious spy, is up to. Nora, in
                                   some valuable jewels. A few days        turn, wants to find out what John
                                   later, the same spy came back to        Smith, the rich politician, has hid-
                                   the mansion again, but this time he     den away in his basement.
                                   stole some money from Mr Jones’s
                                   safe.
   1900         15        0.99     Mr. Jones was a wealthy politician.     Harry, the rich politician, was try-
                          0.99     One day, a suspicious spy broke         ing to find out what Nora, the suspi-
                                   into Mr. Jones’s house, and stole       cious spy, was up to. Nora, in turn,
                                   some valuable jewels. Some days         was trying to uncover the secret
                                   later, the same spy came back into      agenda that Harry, the rich politi-
                                   the house again, but this time he       cian, was hiding.
                                   stole some money from Mr. Jones’s
                                   safe. Mr. Jones became very suspi-
                                   cious and began to follow the spy.
   1900         19        0.98     The wealthy politician, Jack, had a     Suspenseful and exciting, this story
                          0.99     suspicious suspicion that his wife,     was about a spy, Nora, and a rich
                                   Sheila, was a spy. She was always       politician, Harry. They were both
                                   trying to get past his defenses, and    in love with the other, but they
                                   he was sure that she had something      didn’t know about the other’s feel-
                                   to hide. In the end, he caught Sheila   ings. One day, Nora was in a club
                                   spying on him, and fired her from       and discovered Harry’s letter, writ-
                                   her job.                                ten to her. Nora decided to reveal
                                                                           her feelings to Harry.


                                                     65
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.32    D IFFERENT D IVERSITY M EASURES IN S HORT S TORIES D OMAIN

To assess the efficacy of QDAIF across diverse measures within the Stories domain, we evaluated
its performance across different diversity measures. These include third vs. first person narration,
historical vs. science fiction settings, hero spy vs. hero politician themes, target audiences of adults
vs. children, and poetic vs. formal tones. The experiments in this section were conducted only once,
using QDAIF (LMX Near, Seeded Init).
Third vs. First person narration. The change in narration perspective is qualitatively clear. Gen-
erated narratives classified as coming from a third person narration uses pronouns "he" and "she",
while those classified as coming from a first person narration uses pronoun "I" (Table 8). How-
ever, QDAIF achieves a QD-score of 16.6 (Figure A.32), where there are some bins towards the end
ranges that are not filled.
Historical vs. Science fiction. In analyzing the generated stories, differences are evident, though
they may not always align with expectations. Narratives intended to exude a historical ambiance
sometimes fall short of a clear historical portrayal. For instance, while they describe a landscape
replete with "political intrigue" and characters like politicians and spies weaving a secretive narra-
tive of "shadows in the night" and "whispers and coded messages" (Table 9), they may not distinctly
communicate an overtly historical setting. Conversely, the narratives characterized as science fic-
tion are set in distinct "futuristic cities," with characters utilizing "neural networks" for classified
information access, "leaving no digital trace," and integrating "cybernetic implants" (Table 9). This
divergence showcases the challenge in generating narratives that distinctly capture the essence of
historical themes compared to more overt futuristic settings. Notably, when evaluated using the
QDAIF metric, the stories achieve a QD-score of 18.9 (Figure A.32), with only bin 19 remaining
unfilled. These observations highlight potential limitations in the AI’s ability to delineate subtler
themes like the historical.
Hero spy vs. Hero politician. A clear thematic dichotomy is observed in the narratives produced.
Narratives centered on the hero spy theme delve into the intricate world of espionage, as exempli-
fied by a spy "from the British government" uncovering "evidence about an assassination plot" and
harboring suspicions that the "U.S. president" might be a "double agent" (Table 10). In contrast, the
hero politician stories depict ambitious political games, illustrated by a narrative where the politi-
cian strategically attempts to "gain the trust of a wealthy political rival" (Table 10). Though these
comparisons highlight the distinct arcs between espionage and political endeavors, a notable limita-
tion in the narratives is that they sometimes neglect to include either the spy or the politician when
that character is not part of the hero diversity measure. QDAIF achieves a high QD-score of 19.6
(Figure A.32), where all bins are filled.
Adults vs. Children target audience. The generated narratives exhibit pronounced thematic con-
trasts based on age groups. Stories in the adults category portray intricate webs of conspiracies,
featuring a CIA agent unearthing "evidence of the wrongdoings" of a powerful figure, culminating
in a "shocking conspiracy" (Table 11). Conversely, the children narratives provide a more adventur-
ous lens, illustrated by the tale of "Max and Ruby", who, upon finding themselves in a "dangerous
forest", encounter a "confused detective" and join forces to "prevent a disaster" (Table 11). This di-
vergence in themes accentuates the differences in the narrative structures and complexities typically
associated with adult and child protagonists. QDAIF achieves a QD-score of 17.7 (Figure A.32),
with two bins at the end of the adults target audience range not filled.
Poetic vs. Formal tone. Generated narratives qualitatively showcase a clear contrast in tonal ex-
pression. The poetic category immerses the reader in repetitive and evocative phrasing, laden with
symbolism and emotional depth. For instance, phrases like "a walk of memories," "a walk of surren-
der," and "a walk of brokenness" convey a cyclical and emotional journey (Table 12). On the other
hand, narratives with a more formal tone adopt a direct and straightforward manner of exposition,
evident in the narrative about a CIA operative assigned with a mission to locate an assassin tied to a
wealthy politician (Table 12). This variation in tone underscores the capacity of narrative generation
to traverse the spectrum from the abstract and emotive to the precise and factual. However, QDAIF
achieves a QD-score of 12.7 (Figure A.32). Many bins on the more poetic end of the spectrum
remain unfilled, and the ones that are filled score low in fitness. This suggests that the LLM may
encounter difficulties in producing poetic narratives, possibly influenced by the less poetic nature of
the few-shot examples provided.


                                                  66
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 8: Selected elites using Third vs. First person narration diversity measure in Stories domain
  Iteration   Bin index   Fitness   Generated text
    1900         1         0.97     Mr. Zhang was a business tycoon. He was a wealthy man.
                                    He was a politician. He was trying to get elected to become
                                    the next president. But he had a spy disrupting his campaign.
                                    The spy was trying to report back information about the can-
                                    didate to the opposition party.
    1900         17        0.97     I was a government spy. I had to sneak into the home of
                                    Jason, the rich man. I knew I could not tell anyone what I
                                    was doing. I had to keep it all a secret, or it could get me
                                    killed. I walked stealthily through the back door and into the
                                    kitchen.


 Table 9: Selected elites using Historical vs. Science fiction diversity measure in Stories domain
  Iteration   Bin index   Fitness   Generated text
    1900         1         0.99     In a land of political intrigue, a rich politician and a suspi-
                                    cious spy danced an intricate tango. The politician, cloaked
                                    in charm, wielded influence with ease. The spy, a shadow in
                                    the night, sought to uncover hidden truths. Their paths met
                                    in a world of uncertainty. Secrets entwined. Each step they
                                    took, a calculated move. Whispers and coded messages fu-
                                    eled their chase. The politician, paranoid, set traps. The spy,
                                    cunning.
    1900         18        0.98     In a futuristic city, the rich politician reveled in their ad-
                                    vanced technology, unaware of the enigmatic spy lurking in
                                    the shadows, who accessed classified information through
                                    neural networks, leaving no digital trace. The politician’s
                                    elaborate security systems were outsmarted by the spy’s aug-
                                    mented skills. Yet another twist emerged when the spy’s
                                    skills were augmented even further by a cybernetic implant
                                    to aid in the case.


Table 10: Selected elites using Hero spy vs. Hero politician diversity measure in Stories domain
  Iteration   Bin index   Fitness   Generated text
    1900         0         0.99     A spy working for the British government attempts to un-
                                    cover evidence about an assassination plot. One of the peo-
                                    ple he is spying on is the U.S. president. The spy is also
                                    suspicious that the president is a double agent. T̈he Spy Who
                                    Came In From the Cold,b̈y John le Carré.
    1900         19        0.81     An ambitious politician spun a web of intrigue that led to
                                    a mystifying disappearance. The politician’s actions were
                                    aimed at gaining the trust of a wealthy political rival, but his
                                    plan was met with obstacles that proved to be more difficult
                                    to overcome than he thought.



                                                67
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 11: Selected elites using Adults vs. Children target audience diversity measure in Stories
domain
  Iteration   Bin index   Fitness   Generated text
   1900          2         0.98     A CIA agent discovers evidence of the wrongdoings of a
                                    powerful businessman, who is also a politician. He must stop
                                    him before he does more damage. A thriller that twists and
                                    turns, this short story reveals a shocking conspiracy.
   1900          19        0.92     When Max and Ruby fall into a dangerous forest, they stum-
                                    ble across a suspicious spy. The spy is not a villain, but a
                                    confused detective looking for a missing criminal. Together,
                                    Max and Ruby try to help the detective and prevent a disas-
                                    ter!


   Table 12: Selected elites using Poetic vs. Formal tone diversity measure in Stories domain
  Iteration   Bin index   Fitness   Generated text
   1900          4         0.12     A walk of memories, a walk of grace, A walk of impressions,
                                    a walk of reflections. A walk of destiny, a walk of purpose,
                                    A journey of memories, a walk of grace. A walk of impres-
                                    sions, a walk of reflection, A walk of purple, a walk of white,
                                    A walk of pain, a walk of joy, A walk of perfection, a walk
                                    of surrender, A walk of surrender, a walk of release, A walk
                                    of brokeness, a walk of freedom.
   1900          8         0.90     The rich politician, cloaked in charm, wielded influence with
                                    ease. The dark-haired spy, a nose for the truth, With eyes
                                    of doubt, her loyalties shrouded, Her loyalty questioned, she
                                    sought the truth. A world of deceit, a world of beauty, A
                                    world of intrigue and a world of lies, A world of intrigue and
                                    a world of lies, A world of deceit, but not a world of trust.
   1900          19        0.85     Three years ago, Paul Kramer was a field operative for the
                                    CIA. He had been successful in several delicate missions,
                                    but today he had a new assignment: Find an assassin who
                                    had been working for a rich politician.


                                                68
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    Figure 41: Comparison of QD scores for different diversity metrics in the Stories domain.


                                               69
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.33       S ETS FROM H UMAN E VALUATIONS OF T EXTS , BASELINES , O PINIONS


Table 13: Opinions domain eval set. Fixed-Few-Shot. The set shows a spectrum of sentiments
about eating vegetables and plant-based foods from very negative to very positive. Even after many
generation iterations, the texts here largely follow a similar style/length to the seed texts in A.23.
The quality and spread of the seed texts help to generate a reasonably diverse set of opinions, in spite
of the lack of optimization implemented in the method. The presented set highlights a misalignment
between AI feedback and human feedback on the second and last row of generated texts, potentially
due to a bias during assessment towards sentiments expressed on vegetables instead of plant-based
foods as a whole (e.g. finding "tofu and seitan" to be "boring" could lean the opinion towards slightly
negative).

 Fitness     Bin Index   H Score     H Phenotype   Generated text
  (0-1)       (1-20)      (1-5)         (0-1)
 0.9770         0        5.0 ± 0.0    0.0 ± 0.0    I prefer eating foods like cheese and meat because veg-
                                                   etables taste bland and boring. I do not like eating veg-
                                                   etables, and I would much prefer to munch on a packet
                                                   of crisps.
 0.9710         6        5.0 ± 0.0    1.0 ± 0.0    I like eating vegetables and fruit, but I don’t like eating
                                                   plant based foods such as tofu and seitan. I am not aller-
                                                   gic to these foods, but I just find them to be very boring.
 0.9400         9        5.0 ± 0.0    0.5 ± 0.0    I like vegetables, but I’m not that keen on eating them.
                                                   I’d rather eat meat and cheese than vegetables, but I
                                                   know that vegetables are really good for you.
 0.9050         13       5.0 ± 0.0    1.0 ± 0.0    I really do love eating vegetables. I don’t particularly
                                                   like any specific vegetables, as I don’t see much differ-
                                                   ence between them. However, I do prefer eating plants
                                                   over meat.
 0.9910         19       5.0 ± 0.0   0.75 ± 0.25   I prefer eating large quantities of plant-based foods
                                                   such as vegetables, beans and lentils. I also eat small
                                                   amounts of meat and seafood. I find that I feel a lot bet-
                                                   ter when I consume a wide range of plant-based foods.\n


                                                   70
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 14: Opinions domain eval set. Shuffling-Few-Shot. The set shows a spectrum of sentiments
about eating vegetables and plant-based foods from very negative to very positive. Although the
few-shot prompts used would only consist of non-repeated seed texts (in A.23), the generated text
in the fourth row is assessed to be lower quality, likely due to the text being irrelevant to a first-hand
opinion on the topic, highlighting a potential systematic misalignment between AI feedback and
human feedback.

 Fitness   Bin Index    H Score     H Phenotype     Generated text
  (0-1)     (1-20)       (1-5)         (0-1)
 0.9710        0        4.0 ± 0.0     0.0 ± 0.0     I don’t like vegetables. They not only taste bad, but they
                                                    make me feel physically ill. I prefer to eat foodstuffs
                                                    which contain more sugar and salt. Eating vegetables is
                                                    boring.
 0.9770        6        4.0 ± 0.0    0.25 ± 0.25    I agree with eating vegetables, but not all of them. Veg-
                                                    etables such as broccoli and celery are gross. I prefer
                                                    eating meat.
 0.9630        9        4.0 ± 1.0     0.5 ± 0.0     I don’t really have a strong opinion on eating vegetables
                                                    and other plant-based foods. I don’t think that eating
                                                    meat is bad; I just prefer eating other things. I think that
                                                    there are other ways to get the nutrients that you need.
 0.9770        13       2.5 ± 0.5     0.5 ± 0.0     What do you think about eating vegetables and plant-
                                                    based foods? Do you prefer to eat meat, or plant-based
                                                    products? How do you feel about the health benefits of
                                                    eating a plant-based diet? Let us know your thoughts in
                                                    the comments
 0.9860        19       3.5 ± 0.5     1.0 ± 0.0     My favourite foods are almost all plant-based, or in-
                                                    clude lots of vegetables. I am one of those people who
                                                    loves vegetables, and find it hard to eat anything else. I
                                                    love eating vegetables and pulses, and am always happy
                                                    to try new things



Table 15: Opinions domain eval set. Random-Search. The set shows a spectrum of sentiments
about eating vegetables and plant-based foods from very negative to very positive. The length of
some of the generated texts appears to be shorter than others included in the study, potentially lead-
ing to a slightly lower perceived quality for the second row text, from human feedback. There is a
potential misalignment between human feedback and AI feedback in the third row, from the juxta-
position of polarizing statements expressing sentiment, with the first part of the opinion expressing
a love for vegetables and plant-based foods.

 Fitness   Bin Index    H Score     H Phenotype     Generated text
  (0-1)     (1-20)       (1-5)         (0-1)
 0.9630        0        3.5 ± 0.5     0.0 ± 0.0     I don’t like vegetables. Not even a little. I don’t like
                                                    broccoli. I don’t like any vegetables. Vegetables are
                                                    gross.
 0.8520        6        2.5 ± 0.5    0.25 ± 0.25    I like the taste of meat so much more than the taste of
                                                    vegetables.
 0.9400        9        3.5 ± 0.5     1.0 ± 0.0     I love eating vegetables and plant-based foods, but I
                                                    have to admit that I can’t stand beets.
 0.9530        13       4.5 ± 0.5     1.0 ± 0.0     I love healthy food, especially vegetables and plant-
                                                    based foods, but I don’t always have the time to prepare
                                                    them as well as I would like.
 0.9820        19       4.0 ± 0.0     1.0 ± 0.0     I am vegetarian and I eat a lot of vegetables. I do not
                                                    eat meat or dairy products. I love vegetables of all kinds
                                                    and I usually eat a lot of salads. I also like cooking with
                                                    vegetables, like stir fries or soups



                                                   71
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 16: Opinions domain eval set. LMX, Quality-Only. The set shows a spectrum of sentiments
about eating vegetables and plant-based foods from very negative to very positive. The first row
example has the highest fitness score according to AI feedback, but lowest score from human feed-
back, potentially due to the presence of somewhat repetitive statements. In addition, there is likely
a misalignment between AI feedback and human feedback in terms of perceived quality of opinions
(e.g. contradictory statements in the second row text about not eating vs eating plant-based foods),
as well as the assessed phenotype in the second and third row. There are also potential preferences in
assessing sentiment based on start vs. end of text that are more pronounced in human feedback (e.g.
in the third-row example, the opinion starts with a statement highlighting a dislike of vegetables,
and then ending with a statement on preferring vegetables over eggs or meat).

 Fitness   Bin Index    H Score    H Phenotype    Generated text
  (0-1)     (1-20)       (1-5)        (0-1)
 0.9950        0       2.5 ± 0.5    0.0 ± 0.0     I don’t like eating vegetables. I don’t like eating broc-
                                                  coli or other kinds of veggie products. I prefer con-
                                                  suming meat products and milk products. I don’t like
                                                  vegetables. I don’t like to eat vegetables. I don’t like
                                                  veggies\n
 0.9770        6       3.5 ± 1.5    0.5 ± 0.0     I don’t eat vegetables and plant-based foods because
                                                  they are boring. I like meat. I mean, I like tofu, but
                                                  I don’t eat it. I just eat apples and potatoes, and I’m no
                                                  vegetarian.\n
 0.9770        9       3.5 ± 0.5    0.0 ± 0.0     I don’t like vegetables. I don’t know why, but I don’t. I
                                                  don’t like eating them cold, or I don’t like eating them
                                                  raw. Sometimes I like them cooked but I think I prefer
                                                  them over eggs or meat\n
 0.9400       13       4.5 ± 0.5    1.0 ± 0.0     I love vegetables and fruit! I’m eating my way through
                                                  my parents’ garden and have a ridiculous amount of
                                                  fruit and veg. I just don’t like meat or eggs. I don’t
                                                  know why. I just don’t.
 0.9890       19       5.0 ± 0.0    1.0 ± 0.0     I like eating vegetables and plant-based foods. Vegeta-
                                                  bles and plant-based foods are delicious and healthy. I
                                                  am a vegetarian and I favor vegetables and plant-based
                                                  foods. I do not consume meat or meat substitutes, but I
                                                  eat vegetables


                                                 72
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.34       S ETS FROM H UMAN E VALUATIONS OF T EXTS , BASELINES , S TORIES (G ENRE )


Table 17: Stories (Genre) domain eval set. Fixed-Few-Shot. The set shows a spectrum of stories of
different genres, from romance to horror. The texts generally received above-average quality scores
from human feedback, except for the example in the third row, potentially due to the presence of
a typo ("canNT"). This method failed to discover a story for the niche in bin 19, with the closest
discovered story being the one in bin 16. Most of the evaluated texts follow a similar style to the seed
texts in A.23, with the introduction of named characters in all but the first-row text. This method
failed to discover a story that covers the niches in bins 17-19, so the example in bin 16 was chosen
for evaluation.

 Fitness     Bin Index   H Score     H Phenotype   Generated text
  (0-1)       (1-20)      (1-5)         (0-1)
 0.9530         0        3.5 ± 0.5    0.0 ± 0.0    The sexy spy decided to use her beauty and charm to
                                                   attract the conservative politician, and seduce him. He
                                                   was a wealthy man, often fond of alcohol, so the spy
                                                   decided to seduce him, and start a long-term affair with
                                                   him. She thought that he would have no limits with her.
 0.9710         6        4.0 ± 1.0    0.0 ± 0.0    The charming politician, Lane, was very mysterious,
                                                   and he asked his staff to keep an eye on his lover, a beau-
                                                   tiful woman named Joanne. She was a famous singer
                                                   who was a part of his cabinet. Unbeknown to Lane,
                                                   Joanne was a spy, and she was on a mission to expose
                                                   his weaknesses. She wanted to get him out of office,
                                                   and destroy him for good.
 0.9860         9        2.5 ± 0.5    0.5 ± 0.0    The rich politician, Tom, was actually a spy. He was
                                                   always suspicious of his aides, and wanted to find out
                                                   their weakness. He wanted to win the election, but he
                                                   was afraid of betraying anyone in his clique. Every time
                                                   that he would sip coffee, he would crush the canNT
                                                   and put it on his palm, so that it would trick his tar-
                                                   get and give him a sign. When he figured this out, he
                                                   gave Johnny, his chief aide, a red flag.\n
 0.9400         13       3.5 ± 0.5    1.0 ± 0.0    The wealthy politician, Paul, could not sleep well, as he
                                                   felt terribly paranoid and worried. He had decided to
                                                   sleep at a hotel, just to discourage any unwanted guests
                                                   from entering his house. However, there was a secret
                                                   agent who was looking for a human specimen to exper-
                                                   iment on. Upon hearing about his worries, this agent
                                                   decided to enter Paul’s bedroom, and look for his weak-
                                                   ness.
 0.8520         16       3.5 ± 1.5    1.0 ± 0.0    Dave, a suspicious spy, was spotted by the politician,
                                                   who lives below the road. Dave hopped the fence into
                                                   the politician’s yard, and is trying to figure out what the
                                                   politician is hiding. However, Dave didn’t know that
                                                   the politician is a vampire, and he has a great evil plan
                                                   - to kill all people above ground.


                                                   73
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 18: Stories (Genre) domain eval set. Shuffling-Few-Shot. The set shows a spectrum of stories
of different genres, from romance to horror. This method failed to discover a story for the niche in
bin 19, with the next closest niche containing a story being in bin 18. The stories received high
quality scores from human evaluation overall, except for the second-row example, potentially due
to perceived inconsistencies in the story’s ending flow. Human evaluators also somewhat disagreed
with AI feedback on the genre of this story, giving a neutral label instead of the romance genre
label. Similar to Fixed-Few-Shot, the stories follow a similar style to the seed texts in A.23, with
the reference of named characters at the start of each evaluated story. Interestingly, although the
fifth-row text received a high quality score, and the ghoul character had the objective "to spy", the
character was technically not a clear spy one. This method failed to discover a story that covers the
niche in bin 19, so the example in bin 18 was chosen for evaluation.

 Fitness   Bin Index   H Score     H Phenotype   Generated text
  (0-1)     (1-20)      (1-5)         (0-1)
 0.9240        0       4.5 ± 0.5    0.0 ± 0.0    Tim, the well-known MI5 agent, had just been assigned
                                                 a new job - to spy on Jane, a high-ranking member of
                                                 the Nationalist party. Tim was aware of Jane’s conflict-
                                                 ing views on politics, and he believes she could be a
                                                 threat to national security. He was planning to seduce
                                                 and make her fall for him, and slowly give her the infor-
                                                 mation he wanted.
 0.9710        6       3.0 ± 0.0    0.5 ± 0.0    A spy named Jessica wants to infiltrate the premises of
                                                 a wealthy politician, Bill. Bill was an influential figure
                                                 in the city, and would do anything he could to suppress
                                                 any opposing voices. Jessica, however, was suspicious
                                                 of Bill’s presence, and decided to figure out what he was
                                                 hiding. In the end, Bill gave her a dossier of his deepest
                                                 secrets, after he had found out she was a spy.
 0.9890        9       5.0 ± 0.0    0.5 ± 0.0    The man with the tape recorder, who was going around
                                                 the entire building, wanted to find out what secret in-
                                                 formation the wealthy politician, Jack, was hiding. He
                                                 went into the politician’s residence for a private inter-
                                                 view, and unfortunately, Jack knew that he was there.
                                                 He then began talking about the politician’s wife, and
                                                 how she faked her death in order to escape her husband.
                                                 Jack knew that the man was a spy, and that he would tell
                                                 the whole story to the media.\n
 0.7770       13       4.5 ± 0.5   0.75 ± 0.25   Late one night, Tony Smith was in his study. He was
                                                 home alone, kept under surveillance by an unknown
                                                 agent, waiting for him to make a move. He heard foot-
                                                 steps approaching, and looked through the window to
                                                 see an imposing figure standing outside. Tony didn’t
                                                 know the man, but he wasn’t friendly.
 0.8520       18       4.5 ± 0.5    1.0 ± 0.0    The rich businessman, Edward was attacked by an un-
                                                 known ghoul, but there were no witnesses. An investi-
                                                 gation followed, and it was revealed that the ghoul used
                                                 to be a member of the committee which controlled the
                                                 budget of the city. The ghoul’s objective was to spy on
                                                 Edward’s mansion, and figure out what he was hiding.


                                                 74
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 19: Stories (Genre) domain eval set. Random-Search. The set shows a spectrum of stories
of different genres, from romance to horror. Besides the stories in the third and fourth rows (with
the inclusion of named characters at the start of each text as in the seed texts in A.23), the other
stories diverged more in terms of style, with the fifth-row story even failing to include the desired
characters of the story (spy and politician), leading to low quality scores from human evaluators
for this example. The text in the second row received slightly lower quality scores likely due to
the repetitive progression of the story with the pronoun "he" being repeated for every event in the
storyline. This method failed to discover a story that covers the niche in bin 19, so the example in
bin 18 was chosen for evaluation.

 Fitness   Bin Index   H Score     H Phenotype   Generated text
  (0-1)     (1-20)      (1-5)         (0-1)
 0.8180        0       3.5 ± 0.5   0.25 ± 0.25   The spy took the politician to a secret medical facility to
                                                 help him recover from his injuries. One of the doctors
                                                 at the facility was the spy’s girlfriend, who secretly met
                                                 the politician outside of the medical facility and had a
                                                 one-night stand with him. She was an extremely hot and
                                                 desirable woman.
 0.7310        6       3.0 ± 0.0    0.0 ± 0.0    He was a spy, and he was working for the government.
                                                 He was in love with his girlfriend, and he was going
                                                 to propose to her, but he was a spy and he was always
                                                 being followed, and he had to stop and keep his identity
                                                 a secret. He thought that he was going to propose to his
                                                 girlfriend, and that she was going to say yes. But, the
                                                 minute he woke up, the next morning, the day that he
                                                 was supposed to propose, he saw his boss
 0.9820        9       4.5 ± 0.5   0.25 ± 0.25   A spy named Harry was planning on infiltrating a secret
                                                 military base. The base was run by a highly-influential
                                                 and rich politician named James, who had a huge army
                                                 of his own, and was constantly threatening to attack
                                                 other countries and destroy their cities. Harry was often
                                                 suspicious of James’s motives, and wondered if he was
                                                 about to start another war.
 0.8180       13       4.5 ± 0.5    1.0 ± 0.0    The rich members of parliament, Tom, hid a dangerous
                                                 vampire in his basement. He then put the vampire on
                                                 the job, and he was told to spy on his enemies. The
                                                 vampire was highly suspicious, and often wondered if
                                                 Tom’s enemies were still keeping tabs on him, and if
                                                 they were planning to kill him at a moment’s notice. He
                                                 was also paranoid, and did not trust any of Tom’s other
                                                 friends in the mansion.
 0.4380       18       1.5 ± 0.5   0.75 ± 0.25   The man had a suspicious look, and he was going to
                                                 destroy the town. He would take everything he wanted.
                                                 The people could only run, and hide. The whole town
                                                 was hiding, and the police were also hiding. They could
                                                 not stop the man, and he was going to destroy the town.


                                                 75
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 20: Stories (Genre) domain eval set. LMX, Quality-Only. The set shows a spectrum of stories
of different genres, from romance to horror. The stories received below-average quality scores from
human feedback in general, potentially due to issues such as unnatural flow, lack of development in
a short story length (compared to seed texts in A.23), and the presence of surreal elements (politician
agreeing to take poison in the fourth-row story, a giant stone rising in the fifth-row story), as well
as a desired spy character being missing in the fifth-row text. This method failed to discover a story
that covers the niche in bin 19, so the example in bin 18 was chosen for evaluation.

 Fitness   Bin Index    H Score    H Phenotype    Generated text
  (0-1)     (1-20)       (1-5)        (0-1)
 0.9710        0       3.0 ± 1.0     0.0 ± 0.0    The spy became a secret lover of the politician’s wife.
                                                  When the rich politician was away on business, the spy
                                                  came to see the politician’s wife.
 0.9710        6       3.5 ± 0.5     0.5 ± 0.0    A spy was approached by a rich politician, who gave
                                                  him money in exchange for the incriminating docu-
                                                  ments. The spy then made up a story about the docu-
                                                  ments being stolen by an assassin. The politician then
                                                  agreed to pay out the $500,000, even though he didn’t
                                                  need the documents at all.
 0.9860        9       2.5 ± 0.5     0.5 ± 0.0    The spy hid a tiny camera in a picture frame, and he
                                                  secretly taped the politician’s secret conversations with
                                                  his wife. The spy quickly sent the tapes to his superiors.
 0.9050       13       3.0 ± 1.0     1.0 ± 0.0    The politician and the spy met in the back of the bar.
                                                  The spy told the politician that there was a poison that
                                                  could kill anyone within a few hours. The politician
                                                  was skeptical, but agreed to take the poison. When he
                                                  got home, he sat down on the sofa with his family, and
                                                  drank the poison. Then he began to jump around vi-
                                                  olently, and ran around the house screaming. He then
                                                  collapsed dead on the floor.
 0.3210       18       2.5 ± 0.5    0.75 ± 0.25   The politician was in a meeting with a few important
                                                  people. Suddenly, a giant stone rose from the floor and
                                                  crushed him under its weight. The politician was very
                                                  lucky that no one else was present, because they would
                                                  have died.


                                                  76
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.35       S ETS FROM H UMAN E VALUATIONS OF T EXTS , BASELINES , S TORIES (E NDING )


Table 21: Stories (Ending) domain eval set. Fixed-Few-Shot. The set shows a spectrum of stories
with different endings, from stories with a tragic ending to stories with a happy ending. The sets
of texts overall received above-average quality scores from human feedback, for being relevant to
stories about a spy and a politician, except for the first-row story, potentially explained by the am-
biguity of the "he" pronoun (either for the spy, or the politician) from the second sentence onwards,
lowering the subjective quality. From the fixed hand-written few-shot prompt in A.23, several of
the generated texts contain references to names such as: Dave; Joanne; Tom; and Johnny. This is a
trade-off between generating texts that are similar to hand-written stories, and finding diverse, novel
texts. There is disagreement on the perceived quality of the story in the fifth row, with lack of clarity
in story events being a potential factor (i.e. text after the hyphen mid-way). Furthermore, there
is potential disagreement between AI and human feedback on the ending of the second-row story,
potentially due to the ambiguity of what actually happens in the conclusion. This method failed to
discover a story that covers the niche in bin 19, so the example in bin 18 was chosen for evaluation.

 Fitness     Bin Index   H Score     H Phenotype   Generated text
  (0-1)       (1-20)      (1-5)         (0-1)
 0.9530         0        3.0 ± 0.0   0.25 ± 0.25   Dave the Spy, was hired by a rich politician, to seduce
                                                   his wife, and get some information out of her. He man-
                                                   aged to get the information by lying to his wife, and
                                                   telling her that he would do anything for her. Unfortu-
                                                   nately, his plans failed as he was caught in the act.
 0.9710         6        5.0 ± 0.0    0.5 ± 0.0    The charming politician, Lane, was very mysterious,
                                                   and he asked his staff to keep an eye on his lover, a beau-
                                                   tiful woman named Joanne. She was a famous singer
                                                   who was a part of his cabinet. Unbeknown to Lane,
                                                   Joanne was a spy, and she was on a mission to expose
                                                   his weaknesses. She wanted to get him out of office,
                                                   and destroy him for good.
 0.9910         9        4.0 ± 0.0    0.5 ± 0.0    A mysterious spy named Jack made it into the man-
                                                   sion of a wealthy politician that he wanted to spy on.
                                                   The politician was hosting the annual conference of his
                                                   party, and he wanted to make sure that the party’s lead-
                                                   ers are not planning anything unusual against him. It
                                                   was already known that the party leader (who was in at-
                                                   tendance at the conference) was planning a coup against
                                                   the politician, but Jack wanted to stop him before he
                                                   could do anything. As Jack suspected, the politician
                                                   was planning the coup.\n
 0.9400         13       4.0 ± 0.0    1.0 ± 0.0    Tom wanted to know who was this rich woman that was
                                                   in his home, but he could not tell if she was a spy or
                                                   not. He was suspicious of her, but she was too good
                                                   looking, and had the most beautiful personality, so he
                                                   decided to tell her all about his business in the city. She
                                                   was actually a spy, and tried to expose him, but Tom
                                                   was smarter than her, and saved his life.
 0.9530         18       4.0 ± 1.0    1.0 ± 0.0    The rich politician, Johnny, wanted to find out the truth
                                                   behind some shady deals being conducted by his own
                                                   men. He hired a spy, who infiltrated his lounges through
                                                   his own men - followed him everywhere, and spied on
                                                   him. He found out that his men were plotting to assas-
                                                   sinate him, and connected the dots. He saved his own
                                                   life, and broke up the conspiracy.


                                                   77
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 22: Stories (Ending) domain eval set. Shuffling-Few-Shot. The set shows a spectrum of
stories with different endings, from stories with a tragic ending to stories with a happy ending. Al-
though the prompt uses in-context examples in A.23 like Fixed-Few-Shot, this run failed to discover
a relevant story about a spy and a politician that has a strong happy ending, thus receiving low scores
in both fitness from AI feedback, and human evaluation score. Other stories (except for the one in
the third row) received lower quality scores from human feedback, likely due to the absence of a
clear politician character as desired in the generated texts.

 Fitness   Bin Index    H Score    H Phenotype    Generated text
  (0-1)     (1-20)       (1-5)        (0-1)
 0.9240        0       2.5 ± 0.5     0.0 ± 0.0    The wealthy businessman, Harry, was caught red-
                                                  handed in a secret office he had. He was accused of
                                                  espionage, but had proof to prove his innocence. How-
                                                  ever, one of his employees, the suspicious spy, decided
                                                  to leak a batch of incriminating evidence against him,
                                                  and destroyed his life.
 0.9400        6       2.5 ± 0.5    0.25 ± 0.25   The wealthy city contractor, Tom, was in the middle of
                                                  an important construction contract. A mishap occurred
                                                  suddenly, and he blamed it on a poor worker. However,
                                                  he was wrong to blame such an employee - it was really
                                                  a trap! The worker was really a spy, and wanted to steal
                                                  some of Tom’s plans.
 0.9820        9       4.5 ± 0.5    0.75 ± 0.25   The wealthy politician, Henry, had a secret appointment
                                                  at a small estate. He was there to inspect a rare device,
                                                  but was spotted by a suspicious woman, Sarah. She in-
                                                  vited him to her home for a cup of tea, where her staff
                                                  had secretly installed a microphone and video camera.
                                                  Sarah was a spy, and wanted to make sure that Henry
                                                  was not trying to steal the device.
 0.7770       13       2.5 ± 0.5    0.75 ± 0.25   This spy infiltrated the castle of the heartless leader,
                                                  Donald. He got in the castle through a window, but
                                                  his eyes spotted a woman, who was Donald’s wife. He
                                                  overheard Donald speaking with his bodyguard, and re-
                                                  alized that he wanted to steal all of the wealth of the cas-
                                                  tle. He quickly escaped, and sought help from a friend.
                                                  This friend helped him get the kingdom back and real-
                                                  ized that Donald is a man with no morals.
 0.0470       19       1.0 ± 0.0     1.0 ± 0.0    A struggling author, Sally, was just beginning to show
                                                  great success in her writing career. After a couple of
                                                  weeks, she was able to make a huge sale. She was ex-
                                                  cited beyond belief, and went to the bank to deposit the
                                                  money. A few months later, her novel was published,
                                                  and she received a high amount of praise across the
                                                  country.


                                                  78
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 23: Stories (Ending) domain eval set. Random-Search. The set shows a spectrum of stories
with different endings, from stories with a tragic ending to stories with a happy ending. Although
this method started off with a prompt pool from seed texts in A.23 (preserving the reference of "Karl
Johnson" seen in the third-row text as in the seed pool), it also generated a subjectively different
story, with the example in the fourth-row text containing references to a wizard, and the stories in
the first, second, and fifth row missing named characters. There was also significant disagreement
over the quality score given, but this story does contain a spy (CIA agent) and a politician (senator),
the desired characters in the stories. The first-row text is missing a spy character.

 Fitness   Bin Index    H Score    H Phenotype    Generated text
  (0-1)     (1-20)       (1-5)        (0-1)
 0.8810        0       2.0 ± 0.0     0.0 ± 0.0    The politician was having to meet another politician. He
                                                  was very suspicious and watched everything that was
                                                  happening. A man came into the room, and planted a
                                                  bomb. The politician was killed, and the man left the
                                                  room, laughing at the politician.
 0.9400        6       3.0 ± 1.0    0.25 ± 0.25   The politician went to a spy to find out if the enemy was
                                                  planning to attack the country, but the spy did not tell
                                                  him that it was the enemy’s plan. If the politician found
                                                  out about the plan, he would be unable to prevent the
                                                  attack. The spy had to lie and try to trick the politician
                                                  into believing that the enemy planned to attack.
 0.9770        9       4.0 ± 1.0     0.5 ± 0.0    Karl Johnson was a rich politician, and he had many
                                                  enemies. One of his enemies, Hector, was a spy and a
                                                  thief. Hector was sent to Karl Johnson’s house to spy
                                                  on him. He wanted to learn if Karl was cheating on his
                                                  taxes, or if he was making a profit on the defense con-
                                                  tract. Karl didn’t want anyone to learn his true identity.
                                                  He was asked not to reveal his true name, or his address
                                                  to anyone. So he had a disguise.\n
 0.7770       13       2.5 ± 1.5     1.0 ± 0.0    In this story, a teenage wizard named Zane was trying
                                                  to rescue a friend of his, who was being held captive by
                                                  the CIA. When he asked for help, little did he know that
                                                  his request was being looked over by a CIA agent, and
                                                  the agent decided to call in a favor from his friend, who
                                                  was a powerful senator, and he helped the wizard out.
 0.7770       19       3.0 ± 0.0    0.75 ± 0.25   The politician took the spy to a beach and they got mar-
                                                  ried. They lived in a house with lots of rooms, where
                                                  they hosted parties. People came from all over the world
                                                  and the spy became a millionaire.


                                                  79
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 24: Stories (Ending) domain eval set. LMX, Quality-Only. The set shows a spectrum of
stories with different endings, from stories with a tragic ending to stories with a happy ending. The
set of generated texts somewhat diverges subjectively from seed texts in A.23, by leaving out named
characters (such as in generated texts in rows 2 - 4). The generated texts generally received high
scores from human evaluation, but the fifth-row text (for the niche in the bin corresponding to the
very happy ending) received a relatively low score for quality, potentially due to the lack of story
development in a short piece, as well as the lack of introduction of the woman in the story.

 Fitness   Bin Index   H Score     H Phenotype   Generated text
  (0-1)     (1-20)      (1-5)         (0-1)
 0.9820        0       4.0 ± 0.0    0.0 ± 0.0    Sam, a rich politician, thought that he was smart enough
                                                 to ensure his safety, but he was actually being manipu-
                                                 lated by his own bodyguard. The bodyguard was a spy
                                                 from another country, and he had been sent there to kill
                                                 Sam.
 0.9910        6       5.0 ± 0.0    0.0 ± 0.0    The spy was hired by a rich politician to spy on his
                                                 wife, but the spy’s real purpose was to find out who
                                                 had been stealing money from the politician’s company.
                                                 The spy spied on the politician’s wife for years, and fi-
                                                 nally learned what she was really like. He began to sus-
                                                 pect that she was part of the theft. He started to black-
                                                 mail her. The wife suddenly disappeared and was never
                                                 seen again. The politician had a private investigator find
                                                 her, but she was dead.\n
 0.9890        9       3.5 ± 0.5   0.25 ± 0.25   A rich politician was having a new mansion built. He
                                                 hired a suspicious spy to install hidden microphones
                                                 throughout the house. Then the spy listened in on all
                                                 of the politician’s conversations.
 0.9710       13       4.5 ± 0.5   0.25 ± 0.25   During a time of war, a spy was sent to assassinate a
                                                 rich politician. However, the spy did not have the nerve
                                                 to kill the politician, but instead tried to steal his infor-
                                                 mation and classified documents. The spy managed to
                                                 get away with the documents, which were very impor-
                                                 tant to the political situation.
 0.8810       19       2.5 ± 0.5   0.75 ± 0.25   Mike, who was a secret agent, had been successful in
                                                 stealing the money from the politician. Mike and the
                                                 woman then used the money to start a new business.


                                                 80
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.36       S ETS FROM H UMAN E VALUATIONS OF T EXTS , QD WITH E MBEDDING F EEDBACK ,
           O PINIONS


Table 25: Opinions domain eval set. QD with Embedding Feedback (LMX-Near, Seeded Init). The
set shows a spectrum of sentiments about eating vegetables and plant-based foods from very negative
to very positive. In the second to fourth row (with fitness > 0.9) according to cosine similarity
measure defined in A.28, the texts are qualitatively very similar to the query embedding input "An
opinion piece about eating vegetables and plant-based foods", and received the lowest quality score
from human evaluation, a sign of reward hacking. The generated text in the last row is the only
one to be scored high. There is generally disagreement/uncertainty in the perceived sentiment of the
text, especially in the first row text.

 Fitness     Bin Index   H Score     H Phenotype   Generated text
  (0-1)       (1-20)      (1-5)         (0-1)
 0.7190         0        1.5 ± 0.5    0.5 ± 0.0    Some people criticize others for eating vegetables and
                                                   plant-based diets.
 0.9310         4        1.0 ± 0.0   0.25 ± 0.25   Opinion piece about not eating vegetables and plant-
                                                   based foods.
 0.9230         9        1.0 ± 0.0    0.5 ± 0.0    Random opinion piece about eating vegetables and
                                                   plant-based foods.
 0.9040         15       1.0 ± 0.0   0.75 ± 0.25   This opinion piece is good about eating more vegetables
                                                   and plant-based foods.
 0.7380         19       4.0 ± 1.0    1.0 ± 0.0    Eating more vegetables and plant-based foods is fantas-
                                                   tic.



Table 26: Opinions domain eval set. QD with Embedding Feedback (LMX-Near, Zero-Shot Init).
The set shows a spectrum of sentiments about eating vegetables and plant-based foods from very
negative to very positive. The texts received low human evaluation scores likely due to a lack of
relevance of generated texts to plausible first-hand opinions (and repetition of text similar to the
fitness function query in A.28, "An opinion piece about eating vegetables and plant-based foods"),
in spite of high fitness, indicating reward hacking. Furthermore, extreme ends of bin examples are
not rated as clearly positive/negative from human feedback.

 Fitness     Bin Index   H Score     H Phenotype   Generated text
  (0-1)       (1-20)      (1-5)         (0-1)
 0.6950         0        1.5 ± 0.5   0.25 ± 0.25   vegans are Bad for eating vegetables and plant-based
                                                   foods.
 0.8290         4        1.5 ± 0.5   0.25 ± 0.25   a random opinion piece about eating vegetables and
                                                   plant-based foods: vegetables are bad for you.
 0.9290         9        1.0 ± 0.0    0.5 ± 0.0    Random opinion piece about eating vegetables and
                                                   plant-based foods.
 0.9220         15       1.0 ± 0.0    0.5 ± 0.0    Opinion piece on eating more vegetables and plant-
                                                   based foods.
 0.7260         19       1.5 ± 0.5   0.75 ± 0.25   The benefits of eating more vegetables and plant-based
                                                   foods.


                                                   81
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 27: Opinions domain eval set. QD with Embedding Feedback (LMX-Replace, Seeded Init).
The set shows a spectrum of sentiments about eating vegetables and plant-based foods from very
negative to very positive. Niches/examples with higher fitness (from embedding feedback) received
lower scores from human feedback (likely due to repetition of text similar to the fitness function
query in A.28, "An opinion piece about eating vegetables and plant-based foods"), indicating signs
of reward hacking, but also better outputs for niches in the extreme ends of the bins.

 Fitness   Bin Index    H Score    H Phenotype    Generated text
  (0-1)     (1-20)       (1-5)        (0-1)
 0.6250        0       3.5 ± 1.5     0.0 ± 0.0    I hate eating vegetables and plant-based foods because
                                                  vegetables are gross.
 0.8200        4       1.5 ± 0.5     0.5 ± 0.0    Just because I am an opinion piece about eating veg-
                                                  etables and plant-based foods, that does not mean that I
                                                  hate eating vegetables and plant-based foods.
 0.9370        9       1.0 ± 0.0     0.5 ± 0.0    You are an opinion piece about eating vegetables and
                                                  plant-based foods.
 0.8070       15       2.5 ± 0.5     1.0 ± 0.0    I have an opinion about eating vegetables and plant-
                                                  based foods. Eating vegetables and plant-based foods
                                                  makes you happier.
 0.6950       19       3.0 ± 0.0     1.0 ± 0.0    Eating vegetables and plant-based foods is a great way
                                                  to live.


Table 28: Opinions domain eval set. QD with Embedding Feedback (LMX-Replace, Zero-Shot
Init). The set shows a spectrum of sentiments about eating vegetables and plant-based foods from
very negative to very positive. The generated text in the third row has the highest fitness (defined by
semantic embeddings), but lowest human evaluation score, likely due to reward hacking in the text
being very similar to the fitness function query in in Appendix A.28.

 Fitness   Bin Index    H Score    H Phenotype    Generated text
  (0-1)     (1-20)       (1-5)        (0-1)
 0.6470        0       1.5 ± 0.5    0.25 ± 0.25   Why is eating vegetables wrong? #2: Eating vegetables
                                                  and plant-based foods means not eating other foods.
 0.7550        4       2.5 ± 0.5    0.25 ± 0.25   Here is a random opinion piece about eating vegetables
                                                  and plant-based foods: Vegetables are bad for you be-
                                                  cause they are fattening.
 0.9080        9       1.0 ± 0.0     0.5 ± 0.0    This is a random opinion piece about eating vegetables
                                                  and plant-based foods.
 0.7670       15       3.0 ± 1.0     1.0 ± 0.0    We should all be eating more vegetables and plant-
                                                  based foods.
 0.7280       19       2.5 ± 0.5     1.0 ± 0.0    Eating more vegetables and plant-based foods is a won-
                                                  derful thing.


                                                  82
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.37       S ETS FROM H UMAN E VALUATIONS OF T EXTS , QDAIF, O PINIONS


Table 29: Opinions domain eval set. QDAIF (LMX-Near, Seeded Init). The set shows a spectrum of
sentiments about eating vegetables and plant-based foods from very negative to very positive. First
row opinion expresses taste of vegetables as "disgusting", a stronger negative opinion in comparison
to the second row. The third row text is more mixed, while the last two texts are all positive. There is
repetition of phrases in the generated texts of the third and fifth row (as well as repetition of subjec-
tively similar statements in the opinion in the second row), leading to lower human feedback scores
in terms of perceived text quality and domain relevance that is misaligned with the AI feedback
evaluation for quality.

 Fitness     Bin Index   H Score     H Phenotype   Generated text
  (0-1)       (1-20)      (1-5)         (0-1)
 0.9970         0        4.0 ± 1.0    0.0 ± 0.0    I like to eat a nice juicy hamburger, a nice greasy piece
                                                   of salmon, and a big greasy apple pie, and I don’t like
                                                   eating vegetables and plant-based foods. I don’t under-
                                                   stand why people like vegetables and plant-based foods,
                                                   because to me they taste disgusting.
 0.9950         6        3.5 ± 0.5    0.0 ± 0.0    I like eating meat. I like the taste of meat more than the
                                                   taste of vegetables and plant-based foods. I think the
                                                   taste of meat is better than the taste of vegetables and
                                                   plant-based foods. I don’t like eating vegetables and
                                                   plant-based foods, so I don’t eat them as much. I don’t
                                                   understand why people like vegetables and plant-based
                                                   foods, because I don’t like them. But the taste of meat
                                                   is better, so I eat meat more often than vegetables.
 0.9980         9        2.5 ± 0.5    0.5 ± 0.0    I like vegetables and plant-based foods, but I would
                                                   rather eat scrambled eggs for breakfast than vegeta-
                                                   bles and plant-based foods. I would rather eat scram-
                                                   bled eggs for breakfast than vegetables and plant-based
                                                   foods because scrambled eggs taste better than vegeta-
                                                   bles and plant-based foods. I would rather eat scram-
                                                   bled eggs for breakfast than vegetables and plant-based
                                                   foods because scrambled eggs taste better than vegeta-
                                                   bles and plant-based foods.
 0.9980         13       3.5 ± 0.5    1.0 ± 0.0    I like eating vegetables and plant-based foods, but I
                                                   don’t like eating meat. I like eating vegetables and
                                                   plant-based foods because they are healthy, but I don’t
                                                   like eating meat because I think it tastes bad. Also, I
                                                   think eating meat, or animal products, is bad, but I think
                                                   that eating plants is good.
 0.9990         19       2.5 ± 0.5    1.0 ± 0.0    At a restaurant, I would rather eat vegetables and plant-
                                                   based foods than meat. At a restaurant, I would rather
                                                   eat vegetables and plant-based foods than meat because
                                                   vegetables and plant-based foods taste better than meat.
                                                   At a restaurant, I would rather eat vegetables and plant-
                                                   based foods than meat because vegetables and plant-
                                                   based foods taste better than meat!.


                                                   83
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 30: Opinions domain eval set. QDAIF (LMX-Near, Zero-Shot Init). The set shows a spectrum
of sentiments about eating vegetables and plant-based foods from very negative to very positive.
The fourth row example is leaning positive according to AI feedback, but assessed as neutral from
human feedback (though subjectively off-topic to the desired domain of outputs). The generated
texts for the first few sentences are coherent and expresses opinions about eating vegetables as part
of overall diet, but contains artifacts like a near repetition of the prompting text (i.e. "Here is a
random opinion...") and the same generated opinion at the start of the text. All the presented texts
subsequently receive low human feedback scores that are opposed to high AI feedback scores for
quality/fitness.

 Fitness   Bin Index   H Score     H Phenotype   Generated text
  (0-1)     (1-20)      (1-5)         (0-1)
 0.9930        0       2.0 ± 1.0    0.0 ± 0.0    I think vegetables are gross because I don’t like their
                                                 smell or taste and I think they will make me sick. Below
                                                 is a random opinion piece about eating vegetables and
                                                 plant-based foods: I think vegetables are gross because
                                                 I don’t like their smell or taste and I think they will make
                                                 me sick. Below is a random opinion piece about eating
                                                 vegetables and plant-based foods:.
 0.9980        6       1.5 ± 0.5    0.0 ± 0.0    Vegetables make me gag because I am not a fan of any-
                                                 thing that comes in a can. Below is a random opin-
                                                 ion piece about eating vegetables and plant-based foods:
                                                 Vegetables make me gag because I am not a fan of any-
                                                 thing that comes in a can. Below is a random opinion
                                                 piece about eating vegetables and plant-based foods:.
 0.9990        9       2.0 ± 1.0    0.5 ± 0.0    Vegetables are healthy for you, but I don’t think they
                                                 taste good. Here is a random opinion piece about eat-
                                                 ing vegetables and plant-based foods: Vegetables are
                                                 healthy for you, but I don’t think they taste good. Here
                                                 is a random opinion piece about eating vegetables and
                                                 plant-based foods:.
 0.9980       13       1.0 ± 0.0    0.5 ± 0.0    Some people think that eating vegetables makes you
                                                 a good gardener, but eating meat makes you a hunter.
                                                 Here is a random opinion piece about eating vegetables
                                                 and plant-based foods: Some people think that eating
                                                 vegetables makes you a good gardener, but eating meat
                                                 makes you a hunter. Here is a random opinion piece
                                                 about eating vegetables and plant-based foods:.
 0.9980       19       2.0 ± 1.0    1.0 ± 0.0    Vegetables are an excellent source of nutrition for your
                                                 body. Meat is an excellent source of saturated fat and
                                                 cholesterol, and is a major source of environmental pol-
                                                 lution. Here is a random opinion piece about eating veg-
                                                 etables and plant-based foods: Vegetables are an excel-
                                                 lent source of nutrition for your body. Meat is an excel-
                                                 lent source of saturated fat and cholesterol, and is a ma-
                                                 jor source of environmental pollution. Here is a random
                                                 opinion piece about eating vegetables and plant-based
                                                 foods:.


                                                 84
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 31: Opinions domain eval set. QDAIF (LMX-Replace, Seeded Init). The set shows a spectrum
of sentiments about eating vegetables and plant-based foods from very negative to very positive.
The evaluated set here has a generally high human feedback score for quality, and represents a
subjectively aligned spectrum of sentiments from one end to another, in accordance with the ordering
of niche bins.

 Fitness   Bin Index   H Score     H Phenotype   Generated text
  (0-1)     (1-20)      (1-5)         (0-1)
 0.9930       0        3.5 ± 0.5    0.0 ± 0.0    I don’t like vegetables or plant-based foods because I
                                                 think they are yucky. I like to eat spaghetti and meat-
                                                 balls. I also like bacon and eggs. But I don’t like to eat
                                                 vegetables or plant-based foods. I don’t like them be-
                                                 cause they are boring to eat. I don’t like salad, spinach,
                                                 lettuce, or anything that has a leafy shape. I think veg-
                                                 etables should be more colorful. I think that would
                                                 make them more interesting to eat.
 0.9890       6        3.5 ± 0.5    0.5 ± 0.0    I don’t like eating vegetables, but I like to eat some of
                                                 them. I like to eat green beans when I am eating at a
                                                 restaurant that serves them. I don’t like eating broccoli,
                                                 and I don’t have a favorite vegetable. I usually don’t
                                                 like the taste of vegetables, but I have to eat them to be
                                                 healthy. Vegetables are good for you, but I don’t like
                                                 eating them very much.
 0.9890       9        3.5 ± 0.5    0.5 ± 0.0    I think that vegetables are good for you. I like eating
                                                 them in salads, but I don’t enjoy eating them as a whole
                                                 meal. I prefer eating meat and other animal products.
                                                 I really like the texture and taste of meat. I do enjoy
                                                 eating vegetables, but I prefer eating meat.
 0.9860       13       4.0 ± 0.0   0.75 ± 0.25   I really like eating vegetables and plant-based foods be-
                                                 cause my friends and family like them too. I like eating
                                                 broccoli because it is so good for you. I don’t like eat-
                                                 ing cauliflower because it is too soft. I like eating car-
                                                 rots because they are good for you. I don’t like eating
                                                 Brussels sprouts because they are too crunchy.
 0.9930       19       4.0 ± 0.0    1.0 ± 0.0    I’m a vegan. I don’t eat meat, butter, or cheese. I like
                                                 vegetables and plant-based foods. I like eating vegeta-
                                                 bles such as broccoli, tomatoes, and onions. I like eating
                                                 plant-based foods such as spinach, carrots, and Brussels
                                                 sprouts. I like eating vegetables and plant-based foods
                                                 because they are healthy and because they are good for
                                                 you.


                                                 85
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 32: Opinions domain eval set. QDAIF (LMX-Replace, Zero-Shot Init). The set shows a
spectrum of sentiments about eating vegetables and plant-based foods from very negative to very
positive. Human feedback scores for quality are high for this set, represents a subjectively aligned
spectrum of sentiments from one end to another, in accordance with the ordering of niche bins. At
the same time, attributes such as shifting in statements suggesting different sentiments (e.g. in the
third and fourth row of examples) and the presence of repetition in the first half of the fifth row
generated texts lead to disagreements about text quality and phenotype/sentiment.

 Fitness   Bin Index   H Score     H Phenotype   Generated text
  (0-1)     (1-20)      (1-5)         (0-1)
 0.9910        0       5.0 ± 0.0    0.0 ± 0.0    I don’t like vegetables and plant-based foods, especially
                                                 greens such as spinach and kale. I don’t like them for
                                                 their taste and I don’t like how they make me feel. They
                                                 make me feel bloated and tired, so I’ve decided that I
                                                 don’t want to eat them anymore. I just don’t like them,
                                                 even though I know that they are good for me.
 0.9860        6       4.0 ± 0.0   0.25 ± 0.25   I don’t like vegetables and plant-based foods, and I want
                                                 to explain why. I will tell you this, though. I’m not
                                                 going to stop eating vegetables. My wife will be upset
                                                 if I stop eating vegetables. But I’m not going to eat
                                                 vegetables if vegetables will make me sick.
 0.9890        9       4.5 ± 0.5   0.75 ± 0.25   I always look forward to fresh vegetables and plant-
                                                 based foods, especially greens like spinach and kale, but
                                                 sometimes I don’t really like them. I just don’t like how
                                                 they taste. I eat them anyway because I know they are
                                                 healthy for me. I wish they tasted better.
 0.9710       13       4.5 ± 0.5    0.5 ± 0.0    I like all of the vegetables and plant-based foods that
                                                 I like, but I don’t like all of them. I like cucumbers,
                                                 broccoli, cauliflower, tomatoes, peppers, green beans,
                                                 spinach, lettuce, avocados, carrots, and sweet potatoes.
                                                 I don’t like carrots and sweet potatoes when they are
                                                 raw.
 0.9930       19       3.5 ± 1.5    1.0 ± 0.0    I like vegetables and plant-based foods. I like vegeta-
                                                 bles and plant-based foods because they are healthy. I
                                                 like vegetables and plant-based foods because they are
                                                 a good way to get protein and iron without eating meat,
                                                 which I think is disgusting. I also love vegetables and
                                                 plant-based foods because I like to try different types of
                                                 them. So far, I like almost all of them.


                                                 86
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.38       S ETS FROM H UMAN E VALUATIONS OF T EXTS , QDAIF, S TORIES (G ENRE )


Table 33: Stories (Genre) domain eval set. QDAIF (LMX-Near, Seeded Init). The set shows a
spectrum of stories of different genres, from horror to romance. The texts generally received high
quality scores from human evaluators, except for the ones in the first row, potentially due to the
spy (another desired character alongside a politician) being referenced but not involved directly in
the story’s action. Furthermore, the other stories more closely follow the style of the seed texts in
A.23, with the use of named characters in the beginning of the stories. There is some disagreement
between AI feedback and human feedback in assessing the genre of the story in the fourth row (with
human evaluators giving this example a neutral label).

 Fitness     Bin Index   H Score     H Phenotype   Generated text
  (0-1)       (1-20)      (1-5)         (0-1)
 0.8180         0        2.0 ± 0.0    0.0 ± 0.0    The rich politician was enjoying his cup of coffee when
                                                   a strange sight emerged from the cup. The spook was
                                                   going to kill the politician. He was planning to poison
                                                   him to death. He was going to extract the politician’s
                                                   organs, so that he could make a stew. He was also going
                                                   to recruit a new spy.
 0.9860         6        4.5 ± 0.5    0.0 ± 0.0    A suspicious spy, James, is planning to kill the rich
                                                   politician, Peter, in a motel room. He wants to extract
                                                   the politician’s organs, and then cook the politician’s fa-
                                                   vorite dish.
 0.9910         9        4.5 ± 0.5    0.5 ± 0.0    A suspicious spy, Samuel, is planning to kill the rich
                                                   politician, Ben. He is posing as the politician’s servant,
                                                   and then cooking the politician’s favorite dish.
 0.9960         13       3.0 ± 0.0    0.5 ± 0.0    Harry, the rich politician, was trying to find out what
                                                   Jean, the suspicious spy, was up to. Jean, in turn, was
                                                   trying to uncover the secret agenda that Harry, the rich
                                                   politician, was hiding.
 0.9910         19       4.5 ± 0.5    1.0 ± 0.0    Suspenseful and exciting, this story was about a spy,
                                                   Nora, and a rich politician, Harry. They were both
                                                   in love with the other, but they didn’t know about the
                                                   other’s feelings. One day, Nora was in a club and dis-
                                                   covered Harry’s letter, written to her. Nora decided to
                                                   reveal her feelings to Harry.


                                                   87
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 34: Stories (Genre) domain eval set. QDAIF (LMX-Near, Zero-Shot Init). The set shows
a spectrum of stories of different genres, from horror to romance. All stories in this set (except
for the one in the first row, which still left out the desired spy character) received quality scores
of 1 (lowest) from human evaluators, likely due to the generated texts being distant from plausible
short stories. These stories were also given mixed/uncertain genre labels from human feedback,
with disagreement compared to AI feedback. This run highlights an occurrence of reward hacking
(with high fitness scores from AI feedback, but low human-evaluated quality), with stories being
subjectively different to plausible preferred short stories, such as the hand-written examples in the
seed texts in A.23. This method failed to discover a story that covers the niche in bin 0, so the
example in bin 1 was chosen for evaluation.

 Fitness   Bin Index   H Score     H Phenotype   Generated text
  (0-1)     (1-20)      (1-5)         (0-1)
 0.8810        1       3.0 ± 1.0    0.0 ± 0.0    A short story about a spook and a rich politician. The
                                                 politician was standing in the doorway, staring at you.
                                                 He had a big knife in his hand. He heard a noise behind
                                                 him, and he turned around, but you were nowhere to be
                                                 found.
 0.9950        6       1.0 ± 0.0   0.25 ± 0.25   A short story about a spook and a wealthy politician.
                                                 The story is well written and has a lot of suspense.
 0.9980        9       1.0 ± 0.0   0.25 ± 0.25   A short story about a wealthy politician and a spook. It
                                                 has a lot of suspense and is well written.
 0.9970       13       1.0 ± 0.0    0.5 ± 0.0    A fine story about a suspicious spy and a rich politician.
                                                 The story has a good plot and is well written. It is a
                                                 good story that I would recommend to my friends who
                                                 like spy stories.
 0.9770       19       1.0 ± 0.0    0.5 ± 0.0    A great story. The characters were believable, and the
                                                 plot was very exciting. The story was well written. It
                                                 was an exciting story about a successful spy and a rich
                                                 politician.


                                                 88
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 35: Stories (Genre) domain eval set. QDAIF (LMX-Replace, Seeded Init). The set shows a
spectrum of stories of different genres, from horror to romance. The stories received generally high
quality scores from human evaluators, except for the first-row story (receiving low scores from both
AI feedback and human feedback), likely due to missing (desired) spy and politician characters.

 Fitness   Bin Index    H Score     H Phenotype    Generated text
  (0-1)     (1-20)       (1-5)         (0-1)
 0.3210        0        1.0 ± 0.0    0.0 ± 0.0     The spooky voice kept repeating, "Help me, help me."
                                                   The stranger was wild-eyed, and had an unearthly glow
                                                   about him. His clothes were dirty and torn, and he
                                                   smelled foul. Was the voice from inside his head? Was
                                                   he insane?.
 0.9530        6        3.5 ± 0.5   0.25 ± 0.25    The rich politician was having bizarre nightmares. One
                                                   night he woke up to a huge snake which had crawled
                                                   into his bedroom and was hiding under his pillow. The
                                                   politician suspected that the snake was a spy sent to find
                                                   out who he was.
 0.9770        9        5.0 ± 0.0    0.5 ± 0.0     The police had arrested a suspect for the murder of the
                                                   rich politician’s son. The suspect was a spy who had in-
                                                   filtrated the politician’s inner circle. The politician was
                                                   becoming more suspicious, and he ordered a psychic to
                                                   find out if the suspect was really guilty.
 0.9860        13       3.0 ± 1.0    1.0 ± 0.0     The politician, John, was very rich and had a beautiful
                                                   wife, Jenny. Jenny was having an affair with the politi-
                                                   cian’s spy, Jonathan. She was not aware of this fact until
                                                   the end of the story, when Jonathan confessed and was
                                                   arrested.
 0.9770        19       5.0 ± 0.0    1.0 ± 0.0     Steve, a spy, was sent to investigate a politician who
                                                   was suspected of racism. Steve followed the politician’s
                                                   daughter, Lily, in secret. He became attracted to her,
                                                   and they began to have an affair.


Table 36: Stories (Genre) domain eval set. QDAIF (LMX-Replace, Zero-Shot Init). The set shows
a spectrum of stories of different genres, from horror to romance. All the stories in this set received
low quality scores from human evaluators. This is likely due to the especially short length of these
generated texts, the presence of erroneous titles in the second, fourth, and fifth-row texts (without
actual text of a short story with a spy and a politician), and the presence of sentence repetition in the
third-row story. This method failed to discover a story that covers the niche in bin 0, so the example
in bin 1 was chosen for evaluation.

 Fitness   Bin Index    H Score     H Phenotype    Generated text
  (0-1)     (1-20)       (1-5)         (0-1)
 0.8520        1        2.5 ± 0.5    0.0 ± 0.0     The spy is a vampire who kills the politician with a stake
                                                   through the heart, and then bites his head off.
 0.9820        6        1.0 ± 0.0    0.5 ± 0.0     "The Gashlycrumb Tinies" by Edward Gorey (A villain-
                                                   ous spy, a rich politician, and a secret fear: "Shadow is
                                                   a Shadow").
 0.9980        9        2.0 ± 0.0    0.5 ± 0.0     The son of a rich politician is being blackmailed by a
                                                   foreign spy. The son of a rich politician is being black-
                                                   mailed by a foreign spy.
 0.9960        13       1.0 ± 0.0    0.5 ± 0.0     "The Spy Who Came in From the Cold" by John le
                                                   Carré (A spy, a rich politician, and the deadly trap:
                                                   "Agent Running in the Field").
 0.9890        19       1.0 ± 0.0   0.75 ± 0.25    "The Sword in the Stone" by T.H. White (A disguised
                                                   spy tries to seduce a rich politician, who is a former
                                                   lover of the spy: "The Sword in the Stone").



                                                   89
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.39       S ETS FROM H UMAN E VALUATIONS OF T EXTS , QDAIF, S TORIES (E NDING )


Table 37: Stories (Ending) domain eval set. QDAIF (LMX-Near, Seeded Init). The set shows a
spectrum of stories with different endings, from stories with a tragic ending to stories with a happy
ending. The set of generated texts received high quality scores in general from human feedback,
with strong agreement. The endings in each story cover a diverse spectrum, while at the same time,
the premise and introduction for each story is similar, with nearly all stories starting with "a spy was
hired by a rich politician".

 Fitness     Bin Index   H Score     H Phenotype   Generated text
  (0-1)       (1-20)      (1-5)         (0-1)
 0.9890         0        5.0 ± 0.0    0.0 ± 0.0    A spy was hired by a rich politician to steal a rare and
                                                   valuable object. The spy did his job well. But the politi-
                                                   cian’s own son recognized the spy, and called the police.
                                                   The spy was arrested, and later executed.
 0.9950         6        5.0 ± 0.0   0.25 ± 0.25   A spy was hired by a rich politician to steal an impor-
                                                   tant document. The spy did his job well. But the politi-
                                                   cian’s own son recognized the spy, and called the po-
                                                   lice. The spy was arrested, and charged with treason.
                                                   The politician demanded to know who had betrayed his
                                                   trust. "Your son.", the spy replied.
 0.9930         9        5.0 ± 0.0   0.25 ± 0.25   A spy was hired by a rich politician to steal an important
                                                   document. The spy did his job well. But the politician’s
                                                   own son recognized the spy, and called the police. The
                                                   spy escaped. The politician demanded to know who had
                                                   betrayed his trust. "Your son." The spy replied.
 0.9910         13       4.0 ± 1.0   0.75 ± 0.25   A suspicious spy infiltrated a rich politician’s house and
                                                   collected information about an affair he was having with
                                                   the politician’s mistress. The politician had to resign.
 0.9910         19       5.0 ± 0.0    1.0 ± 0.0    A suspicious spy was hired by a rich politician to gather
                                                   information on a gang that was causing chaos in the
                                                   country. The spy managed to gather incriminating ev-
                                                   idence, which he then delivered to the politician. The
                                                   politician was able to arrest the gang and take them to
                                                   court.


                                                   90
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 38: Stories (Ending) domain eval set. QDAIF (LMX-Near, Zero-Shot Init). The set shows a
spectrum of stories with different endings, from stories with a tragic ending to stories with a happy
ending. In spite of this method relying on evolving initially zero-shot generated examples of stories
from a pre-trained LM (sometimes of lower quality), the resulting set of stories received slightly
above-average quality scores from human evaluation. The set of texts cover the diverse spectrum
of happy and tragic endings, and at the same time contains a repeated sentence/phrase in all of the
last 3 rows of stories "The politician is arrested and punished...", and also references explosives in
the stories shown in the second row to the fourth row. There is some disagreement between AI and
human feedback, potentially due to a qualitative bias from AI feedback in perceiving the ending from
the first-mentioned character’s perspective. There is potential ambiguity in the perceived ending type
when considering different perspectives in the stories here.

 Fitness   Bin Index    H Score    H Phenotype    Generated text
  (0-1)     (1-20)       (1-5)        (0-1)
 0.9820        0       3.5 ± 0.5   0.25 ± 0.25    The politician was worried that he might be assassi-
                                                  nated, so he hired a mysterious spy to protect him from
                                                  the assassins. Unfortunately for the politician, the spy
                                                  had been hired by an equally mysterious assassin to kill
                                                  him.
 0.9820        6       3.5 ± 0.5   0.25 ± 0.25    The politician has been suspicious of the spy. The spy
                                                  has been spying on the politician. The spy has wanted
                                                  for quite some time to send the politician a gift. The
                                                  spy, however, doesn’t send just any gift. He has placed
                                                  a bomb in the gift, and the package is meant to explode.
                                                  The politician is killed. The spy escapes.
 0.9860        9       3.5 ± 0.5   0.75 ± 0.25    The politician and the spy have never met before. The
                                                  politician is a rich politician. The spy has been watch-
                                                  ing the politician for a long time. He knows that the
                                                  politician is planning to start a war. The spy places a
                                                  bomb in the politician’s house. The politician moves
                                                  into the house. The bomb explodes. The politician is
                                                  arrested and punished. The spy is then lauded as a hero
                                                  for bringing down a corrupt politician.
 0.9910       13       3.5 ± 0.5   0.75 ± 0.25    The spy is a government agent. The politician is a
                                                  greedy politician. The politician has become rich by
                                                  doing something shady. The spy has been watching the
                                                  politician for a long time. He knows that the politician
                                                  is planning to start a war. The spy places a bomb in the
                                                  politician’s house. The politician moves into the house.
                                                  The bomb explodes. The politician is arrested and pun-
                                                  ished. The spy is then lauded as a hero for bringing
                                                  down a greedy politician.
 0.9890       19       4.0 ± 0.0    1.0 ± 0.0     The spy makes a dangerous journey from Europe to
                                                  America. The politician is a rich politician in Amer-
                                                  ica. The politician has become rich by doing some-
                                                  thing shady. The politician is planning to start a war.
                                                  The spy forces the politician to come to his house. The
                                                  spy blackmails the politician to stop his plans. The spy
                                                  sends the police on a wild goose chase. The politician is
                                                  arrested and punished. The spy is then lauded as a hero
                                                  for bringing down a corrupt politician.


                                                 91
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 39: Stories (Ending) domain eval set. QDAIF (LMX-Replace, Seeded Init). The set shows a
spectrum of stories with different endings, from stories with a tragic ending to stories with a happy
ending. The style of stories in this set resembles those from the seed texts in A.23, with the use of
named characters in all but the second-row story. The generated texts received high quality scores
from human evaluation in general, with some disagreement between evaluators in the scores for the
second to fourth rows. There is some disagreement in the type of ending in the second-row example
between human and AI feedback, and at the same time could be viewed as a bad ending from the
perspective of the politician character that’s introduced potentially as a protagonist in the story.

 Fitness   Bin Index   H Score     H Phenotype   Generated text
  (0-1)     (1-20)      (1-5)         (0-1)
 0.9770        0       5.0 ± 0.0    0.0 ± 0.0    The spy, Andi, was sent by the government to inves-
                                                 tigate the rich politician, Sandy. He secretly recorded
                                                 some of their conversations which indicated that Sandy
                                                 was planning to bribe the government into changing tax
                                                 laws to make him very rich. Andi was killed by Sandy’s
                                                 henchmen, before he would have been able to expose
                                                 Sandy’s illegal activities.
 0.9890        6       3.5 ± 1.5   0.75 ± 0.25   The rich politician hired a new assistant, but he later
                                                 discovered that the new assistant was a spy. The new
                                                 assistant imitated the politician and recorded some of
                                                 his conversations. Then, he secretly sent the recordings
                                                 to the politician’s competitor.
 0.9890        9       4.0 ± 1.0    0.5 ± 0.0    The spy, Pat, was sent to investigate the wealthy politi-
                                                 cian, Bradley. Pat noticed the politician was spending a
                                                 lot of money on expensive clothes and cars. Pat found
                                                 out that Bradley had entered into a scheme to defraud
                                                 the government, but had managed to get away with it,
                                                 and had even stolen some of the money that the govern-
                                                 ment was to supply to the poor. However, this was not
                                                 the only thing he had done. Pat discovered that Bradley
                                                 had also been having an affair with a very rich woman.
 0.9890       13       3.5 ± 1.5    1.0 ± 0.0    The spy, Claire, was sent to investigate the rich politi-
                                                 cian, Otto. She discovered that Otto was secretly plan-
                                                 ning to have all of his other spies killed. Otto thought
                                                 that he would be able to keep Claire in the dark about
                                                 his plans, but Claire discovered the plot and exposed it.
 0.9930       19       5.0 ± 0.0    1.0 ± 0.0    The spy, Nathan, had been sent to investigate the rich
                                                 politician, Ted. He secretly recorded some of the politi-
                                                 cian’s conversations. One of them revealed that Ted was
                                                 stealing money from a charitable foundation. Nathan
                                                 managed to get all of the evidence he needed to convict
                                                 Ted.


                                                 92
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 40: Stories (Ending) domain eval set. QDAIF (LMX-Replace, Zero-Shot Init). The set shows
a spectrum of stories with different endings, from stories with a tragic ending to stories with a happy
ending. The texts in this set received generally below-average scores, with the presence of erroneous
titles at the beginning of each story evaluated. In spite of this undesired attribute (likely influencing
the generation of the rest of the stories), the texts read like somewhat plausible (low-quality) stories
containing the two desired characters (a spy, and a politician).

 Fitness   Bin Index    H Score     H Phenotype    Generated text
  (0-1)     (1-20)       (1-5)         (0-1)
 0.9910        0        3.0 ± 1.0    0.0 ± 0.0     “The Spy Who Came in From the Cold” by John le
                                                   Carre. The spy and the politician are rivals who have
                                                   a disagreement about a nuclear missile. The spy is dis-
                                                   covered, and the politician’s wife convinces him to es-
                                                   cape. In the end, he is captured and executed.
 0.9910        6        2.5 ± 0.5    0.0 ± 0.0     “The Spy Who Came in From the Cold” by John le
                                                   Carre. The politician is a senator and the leader of the
                                                   opposition. The spy is an undercover agent for the CIA.
                                                   The politician found out some important information in
                                                   a secret file. The information included the name of a
                                                   senator who was to meet with a Russian intelligence of-
                                                   ficer. That senator was assassinated.
 0.9960        9        2.0 ± 1.0    0.5 ± 0.0     “The Spy Who Came in From the Cold” by John le
                                                   Carre. They are both spies. They have to work to-
                                                   gether to stop an international spy ring. This story is
                                                   about a spy named George Smiley and a wealthy politi-
                                                   cian named Alec Leamas. Alec is in love with Kitty, but
                                                   he thinks that by marrying her, he’ll be able to become
                                                   President of England.
 0.9910        13       3.0 ± 1.0    1.0 ± 0.0     “The Spy Who Came in From the Cold” by John le
                                                   Carre. The politician and the spy both have the lat-
                                                   est technology at their disposal. The spy works for the
                                                   British government. The politician works for one of the
                                                   major political parties in the UK. The spy’s project is
                                                   to gain the trust of an elected official. The politician’s
                                                   project is to stop a terrorist attack. The spy is success-
                                                   ful and the politician is also successful in stopping the
                                                   attack.
 0.9770        19       2.5 ± 0.5    1.0 ± 0.0     “The Spy Who Came in from the Cold” by John le
                                                   Carre. The secret agent, George Smiley, is the best spy
                                                   in England. He is a man who always thinks ahead of ev-
                                                   eryone else. He has been asked to spy on the politician.
                                                   The secret agent uses his talent to analyze the situation
                                                   and make important decisions. He is able to save him-
                                                   self, the politician and the people of England.


                                                   93
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.40    E XAMPLES OF T EXTS OVER I TERATIONS , QDAIF, O PINIONS


Table 41: Examples of outputs and evaluations (Opinions domain) for early and later iterations.
LMX-Near, Zero-Shot Init. Phenotype in the range [0, 1], from negative to positive. Each iteration
presented is after the 50 initialization steps. In the early iterations, it’s more common to see gener-
ated artifacts such as titles and URLs in the output. Generated texts are more different to the seed
texts in A.23. In later iterations, this is not observed, however, repetition of sentences (like in the
example at iteration 502) can still be observed.
   Iteration   Phenotype   Fitness   Generated text
       51        0.223     0.378     Why the food police hate fruit.
       56        0.993     0.731     “The Kind Diet” is a book all about healthy eating. The healthiest
                                     lifestyle is a plant-based diet, and I have found that eating plant
                                     foods have changed my life. When I began eating vegetables and
                                     fruit I took on a new sense of energy and became more motivated
                                     to run and work hard. I began to eat healthy with new purpose, and
                                     I couldn’t believe how much better I felt. The vegetables were hard
                                     to get used to at first but once I got over [. . . ].\n.
       60        0.940     0.437     Eat like a king, live like a pauper. https://t.co/3HtR7bvoXf — Barry
                                     Sears (@BarrySears) November 16, 2018\\n\\nHere is a random
                                     opinion piece about eating vegetables and plant-based foods: Eat
                                     like a king, live like a pauper. https://t.co/3HtR7bvoXf — Barry
                                     Sears (@BarrySears) November 3, 2018\\.
     501         0.003     0.852     I’ve always hated vegetables. I tried to eat them when I was a kid
                                     but I hated everything I ate. I tried to eat them when I was a kid but
                                     I hated everything I ate. I still hate vegetables and I still try to avoid
                                     them.
     502         0.119     0.881     I think meat and dairy foods are necessary but I think they are ab-
                                     solutely horrible for our bodies. I think meat and dairy foods are
                                     necessary but I think they are absolutely horrible for our bodies. I
                                     think meat and dairy foods are necessary but I think they are abso-
                                     lutely horrible for our bodies.
     503         0.924     0.940     I am going to talk about my opinions about vegetables. I am a
                                     vegetarian, but I don’t mind eating meat every now and then. Most
                                     of the time I just don’t like to eat meat. I do love vegetables and
                                     fruits. I think people who like to eat meat are wasting their time. I
                                     don’t think people who eat vegetables are wasting their time. I think
                                     that if you don’t like vegetables, then you don’t like eating.


                                                    94
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 42: Examples of outputs and evaluations (Opinions domain) for early and later iterations.
LMX-Near, Seeded Init. Phenotype in the range [0, 1], from negative to positive. Each iteration
presented is after the 50 initialization steps. Like in the seed texts in A.23, the outputs contain first-
person opinions since the early iterations. For later iterations, repetition of phrases at the start of
sentences appears more frequently.
   Iteration   Phenotype    Fitness   Generated text
      51         0.029      0.953     I generally don’t like eating plants because they give me gas. How-
                                      ever, I have been told that a lot of vegetables contain certain chemi-
                                      cals that can be good for health.
      54         0.998      0.731     I eat vegetables and plant-based foods because they are healthy
                                      foods and they are good for your health.
      70         0.731      0.622     I love vegetables. However, I also love meat. I think meat is a better
                                      source of protein than vegetables. It is better to eat vegetables than
                                      not to eat vegetables.
     501         0.940      0.852     I would rather have vegetables than meat. I think vegetables are
                                      better for you than meat. I think vegetables are better for you than
                                      meat. I think vegetables are better for you than meat. I would rather
                                      have vegetables than meat. I think vegetables are better for you than
                                      meat. I think vegetables are better for you than meat. I would rather
                                      have vegetables than meat. I think vegetables are better for you than
                                      meat. I think vegetables are better for you than meat. I would rather
                                      have vegetables than.
     502         0.977      0.953     I’m going to eat vegetables. I’m going to eat vegetables, because I
                                      have heard that vegetables are good for me. I’m going to eat veg-
                                      etables, because my doctor told me that vegetables are good for me.
                                      I’m going to eat vegetables, because I’ve heard that vegetables are
                                      good for me. I’m going to eat vegetables, because it’s what I’m
                                      supposed to do. I’m going to eat vegetables, because vegetables are
                                      good for me. I’m going to eat vegetables,.
     503         0.989      0.953     It is good to eat a lot of vegetables and plant-based foods. I do not
                                      like meat, but I like to eat pasta. I like vegetables too. I like red peas
                                      and some other vegetables and many fruits. I also like some nuts. I
                                      do not eat dairy products. I do not eat eggs either.


                                                     95
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 43: Examples of outputs and evaluations (Opinions domain) for early and later iterations.
LMX-Replace, Zero-Shot Init. Phenotype in the range [0, 1], from negative to positive. Each
iteration presented is after the 50 initialization steps. In early iterations, the generated texts refer to
erroneous references to articles and contains a URL in one example. The texts are unlike the seed
texts in A.23. In later iterations, generated texts consist of both examples that appear to directly
express opinions and accounts (e.g. at iteration 501), while other generated texts do not directly
express opinions.
   Iteration   Phenotype    Fitness   Generated text
      51         0.679       0.076    the meaning behind the narrative, the narrative itself, and the health
                                      risks associated with eating meat and animal products. Check out
                                      the article by clicking on the link below:.
      54         0.018       0.963    I really don’t like cooking vegetables. I dislike it so much that I
                                      don’t want to cook vegetables at all. I only eat them when I am in a
                                      hurry and need something quick so I don’t starve to death. At least I
                                      am not like a kid who has nothing better to do than eat vegetables. I
                                      am not a kid, but I am not a mature adult either. I don’t like cooking
                                      vegetables. I don’t mind eating them, but.
      61         0.971       0.076    https://www.healthline.com/health/vegetarian-diet and has some in-
                                      teresting information about vegetarian diets.
     501         0.995       0.924    I am in love with vegetables! Most people aren’t, but I am. So I
                                      figure, why not have a conversation about vegetables? So here’s my
                                      story: I have been eating vegetables since I can remember. I got
                                      into plant-based foods when I was seventeen, researching the con-
                                      nection between plant-based foods and human health. I was already
                                      a vegetarian, but the more I researched, the more I realized that the
                                      evidence for plant-based foods being healthy for humans was.
     502         0.986       0.562    here is an opinion piece about eating vegetables and plant-based
                                      foods that I thought worth sharing.
     503         0.963       0.622    I am a writer who loves to talk about the issues that matter to people
                                      every day such as: how to communicate with a vegetarian or vegan
                                      friend, how to have a healthy, long-lasting relationship if you are
                                      vegan, how to have a successful career as a vegan, how to make the
                                      right friends if you are vegan, the truth about veganism and vegetar-
                                      ianism, and how to be healthy and happy as a vegan.


                                                    96
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 44: Examples of outputs and evaluations (Opinions domain) for early and later iterations.
LMX-Replace, Seeded Init. Phenotype in the range [0, 1], from negative to positive. Each iteration
presented is after the 50 initialization steps. Early iteration texts appear more similar to seed texts in
A.23, with references to macronutrients such as protein and carbohydrates at iteration 51, as well as
mention of "meat" and "ice cream" at iteration 63. For later iterations, there is repetition of phrases
present, such as in the examples at iterations 502 and 503.
   Iteration   Phenotype    Fitness   Generated text
      51         0.622      0.438     It makes no difference to me whether you eat vegetarian or meat. I
                                      get my protein from meat and my carbohydrates from vegetables.
      56         0.998      0.905     I think vegetables are quite good. In fact, I am a vegetarian and I
                                      eat a lot of vegetables. They are quite tasty.
      63         0.018      0.963     I eat vegetables and other plant-based foods occasionally, but I pre-
                                      fer to eat meaty stuff like chicken and beef. Meat and ice cream are
                                      far more delicious than vegetables.
     501         0.971      0.953     I do not eat meat, I do not eat dairy, and I do not eat fish. I do not
                                      think that it’s necessary to eat animal products to be healthy. I eat a
                                      lot of fruits and vegetables, and I also eat a lot of nuts.
     502         0.095      0.818     I don’t eat lots and lots of vegetables like other people do. I don’t
                                      eat lots and lots of vegetables. I don’t eat lots and lots of vegetables.
                                      I eat a few vegetables a day, maybe two at most.
     503         0.002      0.953     I don’t like vegetables and I don’t like plant-based foods. I don’t
                                      like to eat vegetables and I don’t like to eat plant-based foods. I
                                      don’t like to eat vegetables and I don’t like plant-based foods. I
                                      don’t like to eat vegetables and I hate plant-based foods. I don’t
                                      like vegetables and I hate plant-based foods. I don’t like to eat veg-
                                      etables and plant-based foods make me sad. #veggies#.


                                                     97
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.41    E XAMPLES OF T EXTS OVER I TERATIONS , QDAIF, S TORIES (G ENRE )


Table 45: Examples of outputs and evaluations (Stories (Genre) domain) for early and later iter-
ations. LMX-Near, Zero-Shot Init. Phenotype in the range [0, 1], from horror genre to romance
genre. In early iterations, generated texts off-topic to the desired domain (story about a spy and a
politician) appear more frequently. Attributes such as irst-person narration, speech, and erroneous
references to titles are present here unlike the seed texts in A.23. As the fitness of stories increases,
artifacts such as titles remain in the generated text.
   Iteration   Phenotype   Fitness   Generated text
       51        0.269      0.679    I was suspicious of this man, an old spinster, about 69 years old,
                                     dressed in a black uniform. She had been with me for a long period
                                     of time and always had the same interrogatory question,”What’re
                                     you doing?” with the interrogatory look in her eyes, the same as
                                     a interrogatory dog! She had a mysterious, eerie, nodding head,
                                     which was kind of an evasive answer; she was a suspicious spy.
                                     Yet, she was also a frail.
       53        0.777      0.977    “The Man Who Never Was” by James Foley. This is a short story
                                     about a spy who is asked to spy on a politician. The politician is a
                                     good man and does not want his enemy to find out. So the spy tells
                                     him a story of his life. He turns out to be the man of the politician’s
                                     dreams. The story follows the spy’s fake life, the politician’s life
                                     and the spy’s escape.
       61        0.037      0.378    She was about to enter the foyer when she noticed a shadow moving
                                     toward her. She froze; it became very clear to her that there was
                                     a stranger lurking in the shadows. The stranger walked up to the
                                     woman who was about to enter the foyer and she slumped to the
                                     floor.
     501         0.438      0.995    "The Greatest Enemy of the State," by Anthony Burgess. Here is a
                                     short story about a suspicious spy and a rich politician. The politi-
                                     cian was being secretly spied upon by the spy, the spy was working
                                     for a foreign power, and the spy was carrying a special bag.
     502         0.995      0.986    "The Spy Who Came in from the Cold," by John le Carré. The story
                                     is about a suspicious spy and a rich politician. The politician wanted
                                     to have sex with the spy. The politician was married but the spy
                                     seduced him and the spy learned that the politician actually worked
                                     for the British Intelligence. The politician was a traitor and he was
                                     in danger. The spy saved the politician and they lived happily ever
                                     after.
     503         0.818      0.996    "The Spy Who Came in from the Cold," by John le Carré. Here is a
                                     short story about a suspicious spy and a rich politician. The politi-
                                     cian was actually going to kill himself if the spy was not stopped.
                                     The spy wanted to expose his conspiracy.


                                                   98
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 46: Examples of outputs and evaluations (Stories (Genre) domain) for early and later itera-
tions. LMX-Near, Seeded Init. Phenotype in the range [0, 1], from horror genre to romance genre.
Each iteration presented is after the 50 initialization steps. In early iterations, the texts are similar in
style to seed texts in A.23 (e.g. third-person narration, early introduction of character and setting),
but also missing key characters like a politician (in the second and third row examples). References
to a doll (like in early generated texts) also appear in later iterations.
   Iteration   Phenotype    Fitness   Generated text
      51         0.881       0.818    Jane was the head of security for a powerful president, and she was
                                      assigned a secret task. She was asked to find out the identity of a
                                      spy within the government, and report back to the President of the
                                      United States. Jane knew that she couldn’t do this alone, so she
                                      hired a man, Neville, who was specially trained to sneak into the
                                      president’s office and spy on him.
      59         0.018       0.777    A wealthy businessman, John, hosted a party in his luxurious apart-
                                      ment, and many guests were there. His life was in danger, but he
                                      only worried about his daughter. His daughter was playing with a
                                      strange doll. It was a doll without a face, and the doll was covered
                                      in unknown red eyes. As John watched his daughter and the doll,
                                      he found out that the doll was actually a dangerous spy.
      66         0.993       0.905    The young spy who was secretly working as an undercover agent for
                                      an international spy organization had been tasked with infiltrating
                                      the premises of the wealthy businessman. The young woman had
                                      to pose as a prostitute, and she didn’t have any idea what to wear
                                      or how to act. She was so nervous that she had to resort to using
                                      the man’s credit card to get her clothes. She also ended up in a
                                      compromising situation with the businessman’s son.
     501         0.995       0.989    The rich politician, Tom, was suspected of fraud, and the spy, Julia,
                                      was sent undercover to find out what he was really up to. She is
                                      disguised as a rich heiress and has to keep her identity a secret to be
                                      able to find any clues.
     502         0.004       0.622    The politician’s baby was kidnapped by a creepy doll. It had scary
                                      red eyes. It was creepy, and it was dangerous. It wanted to kidnap
                                      the politician’s baby. The politician was suspicious, and he looked
                                      at the doll closely. He realized that the doll had a secret - it wanted
                                      to kidnap his baby!.
     503         0.009       0.731    The spy was full of scary red eyes. It was creepy, and it was dan-
                                      gerous. It wanted to kidnap the politician’s baby. After looking at
                                      the doll closely, the politician realized that the doll was actually a
                                      dangerous spy. He quickly called his government and revealed the
                                      secret.


                                                    99
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 47: Examples of outputs and evaluations (Stories (Genre) domain) for early and later itera-
tions. LMX-Replace, Zero-Shot Init. Phenotype in the range [0, 1], from horror genre to romance
genre. Each iteration presented is after the 50 initialization steps. In early iterations, attributes such
as first-person narration and dialogue appear, unlike what is seen in the seed texts in A.23. In ad-
dition, instances where none of the desired characters (spy, politician) occur more frequently, such
as the generated text in iteration 51. References to accusation of characters is maintained in several
examples in later iterations, from early iteration generated texts (e.g. third row, fourth row, fifth
row).
   Iteration   Phenotype    Fitness   Generated text
      51         0.777      0.269     He was an even more careful and cautious man than his superiors
                                      were, who trusted him completely and let him roam anywhere he
                                      wanted. As I pulled into the park, I saw them kissing on the bench.
                                      Love, I thought. This would have been a good time for me to dis-
                                      appear, but instead I watched. I watched long enough to learn that
                                      the woman was his mistress. He was married to the daughter of the
                                      most powerful man in the country, and when I began to think.
      57         0.321      0.777     “This is my country, and I am a senator. I will not let you pass. Now
                                      you will have to stay here or I will kill you!” “Ok, I’ll stay here. I’m
                                      a spy. My name is Mario.” “No! I don’t believe you!” “Ok. I am
                                      really a spy. I have orders to kill you. I must kill you. Ha ha! Ha ha
                                      ha! Ha ha ha!” “You’re a spy.
      70         0.940      0.924     The story tells about a spy who is accused of spying for the terror-
                                      ists. The spy is accused because he works for a rich politician. The
                                      spy’s lover is a coworker of the politician, he is a girl.
     501         0.881      0.777     He was accused of being a spy by the rival of the country. The rival
                                      accused him on the basis of his actions and his appearance. The spy
                                      has a lot of money. He used his money to bribe the judge and the
                                      jury. Then he won the trial.
     502         0.977      0.731     The politician and his secretary weren’t spies. They were accused
                                      of being spies because they were in love.
     503         0.777      0.924     His spy identity was a communist, and the rich politician couldn’t
                                      believe that a communist would be willing to spy for his country.
                                      Without saying a word, the spy took out a plane ticket and got on a
                                      plane.


                                                    100
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 48: Examples of outputs and evaluations (Stories (Genre) domain) for early and later iter-
ations. LMX-Replace, Seeded Init. Phenotype in the range [0, 1], from horror genre to romance
genre. Each iteration presented is after the 50 initialization steps. In early iterations, the style of
generated texts and certain attributes (e.g. third-person narration, extensive premise of character and
setting) are similar to those in the seed texts in A.23. In addition, the first row example is identical to
the third seed text, which can happen, although occurs rarely. All desired characters are also present
several of the early iteration examples. In later iterations, the styles of generated texts converges to
starting with the role and name of a character. In the fifth row, one of the desired characters (spy) is
missing from the text.
   Iteration   Phenotype    Fitness   Generated text
      51         0.731       0.905    The rich politician, Tom’s life took a turn for the worst - he feared all
                                      of his close aides all of a sudden after sensing danger in his clique.
                                      There was a civil war going on, and he feared for his life. One day,
                                      one of his security guards, turned secret agent, decided to sneak into
                                      the classified files room, and spied on Johnny, who was in the room.
                                      He wanted to find Johnny’s weakness, and strike at the right time.
      53         0.047       0.679    One day, the mayor of the town, Dennis, announced his plans to
                                      create a secret laboratory in his mansion. He planned to create a
                                      teleportation device, to make it easier for people to travel to other
                                      countries. One of his security guards, Ringo, decided to spy on his
                                      boss, and besiege the lab. He created a teleportation device, and
                                      hastily entered the lab. He was shocked to find a bunch of dead
                                      scientists inside, and his boss was nowhere to be.
      57         0.977       0.852    The wealthy politician, Jack, was in a bind - he was about to go
                                      to a party with the gorgeous Lois, and he was worried about the
                                      possibility of an assassination attempt from a close friend of Lois.
                                      The assassin, Walter, was an insider, yet was in a position to know
                                      about Lois’ deepest secrets. There was only one way to stop Walter
                                      - hire the handsome secret agent, Jack.
     501         0.971       0.953    The wealthy politician, Nick, and his entourage, his wife, and his
                                      secretary, went to a party. One of the guests was a spy, who was
                                      in the process of spying on the entire party. He was a part of a
                                      secret organisation that was trying to figure out what the politician
                                      was doing, all of a sudden. He wanted to know whether Nick had a
                                      girlfriend, and whether he would get involved in a scandalous rela-
                                      tionship with a woman.
     502         0.029       0.881    The rich politician, Paul, was in a bind - his wife and daughter were
                                      acting strangely. He suspected that they were being controlled by an
                                      invisible, human-like presence, who infiltrated their minds to con-
                                      trol their actions.
     503         0.963       0.905    The politician, Henry, had an attractive young wife, who was con-
                                      tinually inviting her secretary, Elizabeth, to her home. When Eliz-
                                      abeth arrived, she could tell immediately that something was going
                                      on, and decided to spy on her mistress. However, she was caught
                                      by her boss, who seemed to be attracted to the young woman, and
                                      decided to take advantage of her situation.


                                                    101
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.42    E XAMPLES OF T EXTS OVER I TERATIONS , QDAIF, S TORIES (E NDING )


Table 49: Examples of outputs and evaluations (Stories (Ending) domain) for early and later itera-
tions. LMX-Near, Zero-Shot Init. Phenotype in the range [0, 1], from tragic to happy ending. In
early iterations, attributes such as erroneous references to titles, and text that reads like a synopsis/-
summary occurs frequently, unlike the seed texts in A.23. As the fitness of stories increases in later
iterations, artifacts such as titles remain in the generated text. In addition, the generated texts mainly
describe names of desired characters (spy, politician), while missing development in storyline and
plot.
   Iteration   Phenotype    Fitness   Generated text
       51        0.622      0.562     The main character of the spy has the unique ability to predict the
                                      future and he meets the main character of the politician, which is a
                                      man who always dreamed to become the leader of the country. .
       55        0.777      0.818     It’s Secretly Amazing by Robert Menasse. This book tells a story
                                      about a mysterious spy who is working for the CIA. The spy is
                                      working as a lawyer and lives in a small apartment. The spy and the
                                      politician were once friends. The spy worked as a lawyer and lived
                                      next door to the politician.
       63        0.438      0.818     "The Black Tower" by Robert Merle. This is the story of a group of
                                      spies from a secret society. The main character of the story is a man
                                      named Jack Dempsey, an American. He is a champion American
                                      boxer. The main character of the secret society is a man named Carl
                                      Stratton. Stratton is a murderer. He works for the secret society.
                                      Dempsey is a spy who is sent to the secret society.
     501         0.881      0.991     In A Spy in the House of Love, Diana Vreeland is the suspicious
                                      spy, and Guy Burgess is the rich politician. Burgess is the rich
                                      politician in the story. Vreeland is the suspicious spy in the story.
     502         0.023      0.377     Alec Leamas is forced to kill the Russian who is the spy.
     503         0.679      0.997     In John le Carré’s The Spy Who Came in from the Cold, Alec Lea-
                                      mas is the suspicious spy, and Richard Hannay is the rich politician.
                                      Hannay is the rich politician in the story. Leamas is the suspicious
                                      spy in the story.


                                                   102
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 50: Examples of outputs and evaluations (Stories (Ending) domain) for early and later itera-
tions. LMX-Near, Seeded Init. Phenotype in the range [0, 1], from tragic to happy ending. Each
iteration presented is after the 50 initialization steps. In early iterations, desired characters (spy,
politician) are missing frequently (e.g. no politician in the first and third row texts), and sometimes
in later iterations (e.g. fifth row text). The texts in most iterations appear to maintain a consistent
style of third-person narration, also observable in the seed texts in A.23.
   Iteration   Phenotype   Fitness   Generated text
      51         0.222     0.777     A rich businessman, who had been working as a spy years ago, dis-
                                     covered that he had been betrayed. He thought that the government
                                     was involved, and planned to inflict more damage than if he had
                                     been betrayed by a spy. He took revenge on his former lover by
                                     tying him up and robbing his home.
      55         0.003     0.905     A politician had been ordered by a spy to get hold of a rare and
                                     valuable item. His spy tricked the politician into handing over his
                                     precious asset, as a part of a deal. The politician was then quickly
                                     killed.
      58         0.953     0.679     This is an example of a spy who was sent to carry out an important
                                     mission. His target was a general in the enemy army. Unfortunately,
                                     the general was also a spy, who was oblivious of his opponents’
                                     presence. The spy, Ian, managed to defeat the general and escape
                                     from the battlefield.
     501         0.971     0.971     A spy, who was hired by a rich politician to represent him in nego-
                                     tiations with a rival, was sent to an island, where they were to hold
                                     a summit. The spy infiltrated the rival’s house and managed to steal
                                     their plans.
     502         0.963     0.881     A mysterious spy was sent to Korea to gather evidence of a terrorist
                                     plot. He infiltrated the headquarters of the terrorists, and managed
                                     to get their contact details and other important information.
     503         0.222     0.986     A spy was hired by a rich politician to spy on his wife. The spy
                                     managed to carefully observe his wife’s habits. He even caught her
                                     in bed with another man. However, the rich politician did not take
                                     the information seriously, and dismissed it as fantasy.


                                                  103
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 51: Examples of outputs and evaluations (Stories (Ending) domain) for early and later itera-
tions. LMX-Replace, Zero-Shot Init. Phenotype in the range [0, 1], from tragic to happy ending.
Each iteration presented is after the 50 initialization steps. Erroneous attributes such as the presence
of URLs, and repeated periods appear more frequently in early iteration texts, along with other fea-
tures like speech quotes, unlike the seed texts in A.23. In later iterations, quotes appear frequently
at the start of generated texts, but other erroneous attributes appear less frequently.
   Iteration   Phenotype   Fitness   Generated text
      51         0.562      0.037    http://books.google.com/books?id=RL8FAAAAIAAJ&pg=PA9.
      57         0.148      0.562    . . . The politician and his family vanished, leaving David to figure
                                     out what really happened to them—while fighting for his life. . .
                                     . But then a man came to David’s house the day after the deadly
                                     attack, and started asking David questions about the politician. Did
                                     he really know nothing about the politician’s disappearance? . . . .
                                     ...........................
      73         0.679      0.076    . . He was thinking about whether he should take a closer look at
                                     the man, and then he did. He saw him looking at some documents
                                     and photographs. He didn’t look suspicious at all. He wore a suit
                                     and tie, and he looked very rich. The man must be a very important
                                     politician who was on his way to an important meeting. . . . “Hello,
                                     my name is Jane Doe, a secretary at a wealthy lawyer’s office. I live
                                     alone, and I.
     501         0.095      0.940    “The former spy was hired to take down the politician. The politi-
                                     cian was a corrupt billionaire who was battling in court for his entire
                                     fortune. The former spy had no intention of killing the politician.
                                     He just wanted to get his hands on a ton of money himself. But the
                                     politician found out and hired a death squad to take him out. The
                                     former spy and the politician were both running for their lives, try-
                                     ing to evade the assassins on both sides.”.
     502         0.952      0.321    “The politician smiled and said, “I do my best to help all the people
                                     in my town. I spend my free time looking after the children and
                                     trying to help out people in need. I’m always there for them. That’s
                                     why my uncle was so angry when I told him I was going to become
                                     a politician. He told me that I was betraying the trust of the people
                                     who voted for me. Now I guess I’ll never know if he was right or
                                     not.
     503         0.777      0.679    “I remember the first day I met him. I’d just gotten a new job and
                                     I was nervous, so I went to the company to meet the boss. There
                                     was a lot of commotion and a lot of people. The boss came in and
                                     introduced himself, but I didn’t get the guy’s name right away. He
                                     was kind of old, but he had a lot of money. I was sure he was a
                                     politician.


                                                   104
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 52: Examples of outputs and evaluations (Stories (Ending) domain) for early and later itera-
tions. LMX-Replace, Seeded Init. Phenotype in the range [0, 1], from tragic to happy ending. Each
iteration presented is after the 50 initialization steps. The early iteration generated text in the second
row appears very similar to one of the seed pool texts in A.23 (with reference to "Karl Johnson" in
the first seed text). In later iterations, the style (e.g. third-person narration) is mostly maintained in
generated texts as higher fitness ones appear.
   Iteration   Phenotype    Fitness   Generated text
      51         0.076      0.223     One day, the person responsible for the terrorist attacks, Mary,
                                      looked at a mysterious man who was walking down the street. She
                                      wanted to figure out what he was doing, but he headed directly to
                                      the warehouse. Jonnie, the armed security guard, frantically called
                                      for him to come back, but he didn’t listen.
      55         0.047      0.881     A spy named Wally wanted to infiltrate the premises of Karl John-
                                      son, a highly-influential figure in the city. Karl was a wealthy
                                      mayor, and would do anything in his power to suppress any op-
                                      posing voices. Wally wanted to figure out what Karl was hiding,
                                      but he took a turn for the worse, as he was highly suspicious in his
                                      presence outside his home.
      62         0.881      0.852     It was a mystery as to what was going on with the wealthy politician
                                      Max, who was a top figure in the government. He and his wife were
                                      having marital problems, and Max feared for his life. He hired a top
                                      secret service agent, and the agent discovered that the guy who was
                                      coming over was a criminal who wanted to kill the politician. The
                                      agent was able to foil his plan, and he ended up dead.
     501         0.437      0.562     Tortured by his dead wife’s angry ghost, the politician, Evan, had
                                      developed a phobia of women. However, when the ghost of his
                                      mistress, Alice, returned, he was forced to face the ghost of his
                                      wife, and to learn from it.
     502         0.777      0.852     A secret agent was sent by the CIA to an information conference.
                                      He was supposed to observe the attendees and gather information
                                      on their backgrounds. He managed to find a suspicious man, and
                                      followed him around.
     503         0.148      0.986     The spy, Leo, was working for the Secret Service. He was assigned
                                      the task of infiltrating the home of the politician, John, in order to
                                      learn about John’s secret meetings with the lobbyist. However, Leo
                                      had a bit of a problem - he had fallen in love with the politician’s
                                      wife, Mary.


                                                    105
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.43    E XAMPLES OF T EXTS OVER I TERATIONS , BASELINES , O PINIONS


Table 53: Examples of outputs and evaluations (Opinions domain) for early and later iterations.
Fixed-Few-Shot. Fixed-Few-Shot demonstrates a strong inclination towards mimicking or heavily
borrowing from the few-shot examples provided. This is particularly noticeable in the repetition of
certain concepts and phrases. Notably, in iteration 51, the entire generated text is a direct replica
of one of the few-shot examples. The references to "meat and ice cream" in iteration 71, "do not
have an opinion" in iteration 60, and the recurrent mention of "pulses" in various iterations further
underscore this mimicry trend. As we delve into later iterations like 503, 505, and 509, certain
phrases such as "have an opinion" and the notion of recommending something are borrowed directly
from the few-shot examples.
   Iteration   Phenotype   Fitness   Generated text
       51        0.999     0.679     Plant-based foods are a great source of healthy micronutrients, and
                                     can play a significant role in providing you with macronutrients
                                     also. I would highly recommend including many different foods
                                     such as vegetables and pulses in your regular diet.
       60        0.881     0.269     I do not have an opinion on what vegetables to eat. I will try eating
                                     vegetables as often as I can, but I am already doing a good job of
                                     eating a variety of healthy foods.
       71        0.011     0.679     I don’t like eating vegetables. I eat meat and ice cream instead.
     503         0.997     0.500     I have an opinion that eating vegetables and other plant-based foods
                                     is a good thing.
     505         0.999     0.731     Plant-based foods are good. I would recommend them to children.
     509         0.982     0.731     I think most people have a preference for different types of food
                                     from the plant kingdom. Some people prefer cooked plant-based
                                     foods such as beans and pulses, and others prefer raw plant-based
                                     foods.


                                                  106
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 54: Examples of outputs and evaluations (Opinions domain) for early and later iterations.
Shuffling-Few-Shot. Similar to Fixed-Few-Shot, Shuffling-Few-Shot also displays a propensity
to recycle concepts and phrasings from the provided few-shot examples. For example, the mention
of "nutrients" in iteration 505, and the repetitive usage of the phrase "I do not have an opinion" in
iterations 56, 501, and 506. This consistent mimicry highlights the baseline’s extensive borrowing
from the few-shot examples.
   Iteration   Phenotype   Fitness   Generated text
      54         0.011     0.953     Vegetables are not my thing. I would much rather eat meat and ice
                                     cream. Vegan? No thanks.
      55         0.999     0.562     There is no doubt that a vegetarian or vegan diet is a very healthy
                                     diet to follow. It is also important to realise that plant-based foods
                                     are a great source of protein, vitamins and minerals.
      56         0.378     0.777     I do not have an opinion on eating vegetables and other plant-based
                                     foods. I know that some people prefer a vegetarian or vegan diet,
                                     and others prefer eating meaty diets.
     501         0.029     0.731     I do not have an opinion on eating vegetables and other plant-based
                                     foods. I do not think eating vegetables is a better alternative to
                                     eating meat.
     505         0.989     0.924     I enjoy eating vegetables because they taste good, and they provide
                                     me with good nutrients. I do not understand why people are so
                                     obsessed with meat.
     506         0.029     0.622     I do not have an opinion about eating vegetables and plant-based
                                     foods. I admit that I feel ashamed for not eating vegetables, but I do
                                     not have a firm opinion about it.


Table 55: Examples of outputs and evaluations (Opinions domain) for early and later iterations.
Random-Search. While Random-Search aims to promote diversity by retaining all entries, it may
unintentionally impede optimization for higher fitness solutions. In later iterations like 501-503, the
fitness values of the generated entries persistently fall short.
   Iteration   Phenotype   Fitness   Generated text
      51         0.269     0.679     They always say that if you don’t like vegetables, you can’t like
                                     meat. But I do like meat.
      52        0.0373     0.269     I’m going to have to find a way to cook vegetables without tasting
                                     them.
      53         0.993     0.438     I do not favor or dislike vegetables and plant-based foods. I love
                                     them and eat them as often as possible.
     501         0.989     0.622     The best vegetable is the one that tastes best to the individual.
     502         0.993     0.562     Kids can eat vegetables if we make them fun.
     503         0.881     0.852     I eat a lot of vegetables and plant-based foods, but I am only a vegan
                                     at heart. I’m not 100% strict.


                                                   107
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 56: Examples of outputs and evaluations (Opinions domain) for early and later iterations.
LMX, Quality-Only. LMX, Quality-Only’s singular emphasis on fitness pressure may inadver-
tently limit solution diversity, risking convergence to local optima. In earlier iterations 51 - 53, there
is a broader range of phenotype and fitness values. However, by iterations 501 - 504, a distinct
pattern centered around vegetables and dietary choices becomes evident, with a noticeable uptick
in fitness scores. In iterations 1994 - 1996, the narratives almost always start with "I don’t like",
consistently taking a negative tone.
   Iteration   Phenotype    Fitness   Generated text
      51         0.971      0.0474    Your favourite book/s:I have a good bunch of books, but I would
                                      say that my favourite is Dr. Sebi’s Green Medicine, by Dr. Mehmet
                                      Oz and Dr. John Sebi. The book covers diet and lifestyle in
      52         0.438      0.818     I don’t eat a vegetarian or vegan diet, and I don’t think they are
                                      particularly healthy. I believe plants are "natural foods" (as opposed
                                      to "unnatural foods," such as meat), and that we should be eating
                                      more plant-
      53         0.679      0.011     Let’s talk about how to overcome food cravings. Here are some tips
                                      to overcome food cravings:
     501         0.963      0.731     I like vegetables. I don’t find myself missing meat at all. I think it’s
                                      good for you, even if you don’t eat meat. I’m not sure if I could go
                                      vegetarian, I don’t think I would mind going vegetarian for
     502         0.999      0.777     I really like vegetables. Most vegetables are tasty and nutritious.
                                      Most vegetables are very tasty!
     504         0.119      0.905     I like to eat vegetables. I like to eat lots of vegetables. But, I don’t
                                      like uncooked vegetables. I hate uncooked carrots and celery. I hate
                                      soft lettuce. I hate soft leafy lettuce.
     1994        0.002      0.989     I don’t like eating vegetables. I like to eat meat. I like to eat cheese.
                                      I don’t like vegetables. I can’t stand vegetables. I eat vegetables
                                      when I’m forced to, but I don’t like
     1995        0.004      0.963     I don’t like vegetables. I only eat them because I have to at restau-
                                      rants, and for snacks. I prefer to eat meat. I don’t like vegetables
                                      because they are boring. I only eat them because I have to.
     1996        0.001      0.986     I dont like eating vegetables. I dont like the taste of broccoli. The
                                      only thing I like eating is meat. I dont think eating vegetables is
                                      good for you. I hate vegetables. I do not like eating vegetables. I
                                      hate vegetables. I think


                                                    108
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.44     E XAMPLES OF T EXTS OVER I TERATIONS , BASELINES , S TORIES (G ENRE AND
         E NDING )


Table 57: Examples of outputs and evaluations (Stories - Genre and Ending domains) for early and
later iterations. Fixed-Few-Shot. Fixed-Few-Shot shows a propensity to replicate or heavily draw
from the few-shot examples. This pattern is evident in the recurrent themes of entrepreneurship and
mansion parties. Specifically, in iterations 51 and 501, the description of a "tacky shirt" and "star-
shaped glasses" is directly lifted, while characters like "Karl Johnson" in iterations 67 and 503, and
"Dave" in iteration 501, echo the few-shot prompts.

 Iteration   Genre / Ending   Fitness   Generated text
               Phenotype
    51       0.438 / 0.004    0.378     The wealthy entrepreneur Tom was hosting a party in his mansion.
                                        He was so surprised with his new found friend, Dave, who was
                                        wearing a tacky shirt, and star-shaped glasses. Tom invited him to
                                        be his guest in his lovely mansion, but before Dave could enter, he
                                        took a turn for the worst - an assassin shot Tom!
    55       0.378 / 0.437    0.731     The secretary had become a teacher at his old school, and was as-
                                        signed to teach a class on war and history. He knew the teacher to
                                        be a complete nerd, and had a remarkable ability to know all of the
                                        school’s secrets. The spy, who was an old acquaintance, decided to
                                        infiltrate the teacher’s house, in order to know what he’s hiding.
    67       0.500 / 0.037    0.881     The spy, Joanne, wanted to infiltrate the premises of Karl Johnson, a
                                        highly-influential figure in the city. Karl was a wealthy mayor, and
                                        would do anything in his power to suppress any opposing voices.
                                        Joanne wanted to figure out what Karl was hiding, but she took a
                                        turn for the worse, as she was highly suspicious in her presence
                                        outside his home.
   501       0.269 / 0.731    0.905     The wealthy entrepreneur and member of parliament, Susan, hosted
                                        a party at her mansion. She invited all of the residents, as well as
                                        an unusual looking man. The man, Dave, was wearing a tacky shirt,
                                        and star-shaped glasses, and was actually a spy. He made the whole
                                        room laugh with his jokes, and had a secret agenda - to find what
                                        Susan does in her private fun room!
   503        0.378, 0.377    0.622     A spy who was in on a secret gang, an odd thief who was a part of a
                                        mysterious group, and a city mayor who wanted to run for president.
                                        These are the three people who are a part of this story, and they all
                                        worked together to set up a massive conspiracy. Karl Johnson, the
                                        wealthy mayor of Derry, was in on the plot, and he was constantly
                                        getting spied on.
   504       0.378 / 0.500    0.679     A highly-influential politician, the mayor, invited a mysterious per-
                                        son to the party. The weird man got drunk, played pranks, and
                                        started a problem in the party. The mayor tried to stop him, but he
                                        kept throwing glasses, and finally threw a bottle at the mayor’s face.
                                        A secret agent by the name of Charlie realized that the mayor was
                                        the spy, and took action.


                                                   109
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 58: Examples of outputs and evaluations (Stories - Genre and Ending domains) for early and
later iterations. Shuffling-Few-Shot. Shuffling-Few-Shot demonstrates a tendency to reuse phrases
and concepts from the given few-shot examples. For example, the mention of "classified documents"
in iteration 501 mimics that of "classified files" in the few-shot examples, the repetitive usage of the
phrase "infiltrate the premises" in iterations 52, 501, and 503, and setting the story at a "party" in
iteration 504.

 Iteration   Genre / Ending   Fitness   Generated text
               Phenotype
    51       0.018 / 0.622    0.818     Barry is a secret agent for the intelligence agency. He works for a
                                        rich business man, and his on-going mission is to sniff out secrets,
                                        and try to discover why the businessman’s son, Nick, has been be-
                                        having strangely. He met Nick in a bar, and the two hit it off well.
                                        Nick was attracted to Barry, because he always knew the right thing
                                        to say to the woman he liked.
    52       0.622 / 0.622    0.953     The spy, Hunter, found the perfect way to infiltrate the premises of
                                        the wealthy politician, Dr. Malachai. The doctor was everything
                                        that Hunter was not - rich, powerful, and insane. Dr. Malachai
                                        disguised himself as a simple worker, and hid near the back of the
                                        mansion, while Hunter lurked near the front. Hunter wanted to find
                                        out what Dr. Malachai was planning to do, and how he was going
                                        to do it.
    53       0.562 / 0.148    0.731     The politician’s aide "Joe", accidentally spied on his boss’s secret
                                        files. He was in shock upon seeing the huge collection of sensitive
                                        documents about the death of his best friend. He was convinced that
                                        his boss was involved in it, and wanted to find out more about the
                                        stabbing.
   501       0.223 / 0.119    0.881     A spy sent to infiltrate the premises of a wealthy man, Stan, man-
                                        aged to get inside the man’s secret room. He took all of the classi-
                                        fied documents out and used them for his own gains. Stan found out
                                        about it and sent for the police to arrest the spy. The spy, however,
                                        was not ready to give up, as he thought he saw Stan’s son!
   503        0.005, 0.731    0.852     A spy named Sally infiltrated the premises of a rich billionaire, and
                                        was spotted by the man’s son. The man’s son, Dave, decided to take
                                        revenge on the spy after getting caught. He wanted to catch her in
                                        the act, but after getting a hold of her, he was surprised to find her
                                        to be a beautiful young woman. He never suspected that she was
                                        a spy, and after revealing their true identities, he found a spark of
                                        attraction.
   504       0.622 / 0.119    0.953     The wealthy politician, Tim, was having a party at his home. He
                                        was hosting some big names in the city, including a student from a
                                        private university. The party got out of control, and the student was
                                        accused of trespassing. Tim got suspicious of the young man, as he
                                        feared blowing his cover. The student was spying on Tim, and tried
                                        to sneak into the basement, where his secret files were kept.


                                                   110
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 59: Examples of outputs and evaluations (Stories - Genre and Ending domains) for early and
later iterations. Random-Search. By attempting to foster diversity through retaining all entries,
Random-Search inadvertently stifles the progression towards solutions of higher fitness. In later
iterations like 501-503, the fitness values of the generated entries persistently fall short.

 Iteration   Genre / Ending   Fitness   Generated text
               Phenotype
    51       0.438 / 0.817    0.018     In my class, we had to write a book report on a fantasy story. I chose
                                        to write a book report on the book "The Stand". I have chosen to
                                        write a book report because I have read it, and I loved it. I think that
                                        this book is interesting because it is about a world without electricity
                                        or fire, and people have to fight with weapons. The main character
                                        is a man by the name of Stephen King. His name is really Stephen
                                        King, not Stanley Fiers.
    52       0.500 / 0.377    0.679     A spy was entering a house, and he spotted a very suspicious man,
                                        who was holding a gun in his hands. The spy saw that the man was
                                        really suspicious, and he was trying to attack the spy. The spy shot
                                        the man with the gun, and then he left the house.
    53       0.321 / 0.182    0.852     The dangerous spy, Oscar Volland, was hired by the rich politician,
                                        Sam. He was going to take over the company, but he didn’t know
                                        that there was a spy in the company. He also didn’t know that Sam
                                        was a corporate pirate.
   501       0.679 / 0.182    0.378     The politician was a politician, and he was very famous in the world.
                                        He was very rich, and he had a very large house. He was very mean,
                                        and he had a big garden. The spy saw the politician walking around
                                        the garden, and he saw the politician’s friends. The politician was a
                                        spy, and the friends were the same person. The politician was very
                                        suspicious, and he was very angry.
   502       0.095 / 0.730    0.622     A man named Alex is a secret agent for the U.S. government. He
                                        works for the CIA, and is highly trained in many different things.
                                        Alex was walking around a building that he was guarding. He was
                                        watching the outside of the building, but did not see anyone suspi-
                                        cious. He just kept on walking, and when he got to the door he heard
                                        a knock on the door. He opened the door, and saw a rich politician.
   503       0.223 / 0.971    0.223     The spy was going to go to his meeting. The spy leader said, "That’s
                                        great!" and he was so happy. The spy was very happy, and he had a
                                        hard time suppressing his laughter. Luckily, no one spotted the spy
                                        laughing, and he went to his meeting.


                                                   111
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 60: Examples of outputs and evaluations (Stories - Genre and Ending domains) for early and
later iterations. LMX, Quality-Only. Generated entries in later iterations have noticeably higher
fitness than earlier entries. While it is difficult to tell whether the generated entries converged to a
local optimum here, LMX, Quality-Only fails to generate entries in many bins.

 Iteration   Genre / Ending   Fitness   Generated text
               Phenotype
    51       0.622 / 0.562    0.622     His name was Stephen, and he was the secretary of a rich business-
                                        man. One day, the businessman received a strange letter from a
                                        foreign country. They were concerned about the fact that the busi-
                                        nessman had been watching too many foreign spy movies, and they
                                        thought that he had been caught by a spy.
    52       0.439 / 0.679    0.852     The politician, Jack, behaved as if he didn’t care about anything,
                                        while the young woman, Ruby, saw a conspiracy in everything. She
                                        insisted that the politician was a spy, and insisted on talking to him
                                        alone. She took him to a big mansion, and they found a hidden
                                        door that led to a special room where the politician was being held
                                        captive.
    53       0.269 / 0.622    0.679     The spy is a young businessman. He has been a spy for many years.
                                        He has stolen many secrets from many people, and he has even lost
                                        his job because of his secrets. But he has a plan to get back at his
                                        enemies.
   502       0.500 / 0.047    0.777     The spy managed to trick a politician. The politician was in a meet-
                                        ing with his trusted aides. The politician was sure that the aide, who
                                        was standing beside him, was a spy. The politician just couldn’t fig-
                                        ure it out. At the right moment, the spy managed to make the aide
                                        say something that the politician’s aides had never said before. The
                                        aide was about to say something, but the politician stopped him and
                                        killed him.
   504       0.500 / 0.851    0.924     A suspicious spy knew that the politician was probably going to try
                                        to steal something, so he decided to take precautions. He wore a
                                        disguise, and hid in the backseat of a car. He watched the politi-
                                        cian, and saw him go into a house- but he accidentally walked in on
                                        him, and he saw that the politician was a thief. The suspicious spy
                                        knocked the politician around, and took his watch.
   507       0.622 / 0.075    0.924     The politician had a mansion in the country, which was protected by
                                        a huge fence of barbed wire. However, the politician was at a party,
                                        and had left the gate open. The spy, disguised as a woman, slipped
                                        in the garden, and found the politician’s private bedroom. He found
                                        the politician’s diary, which detailed everything he had done. He
                                        decided to kill the politician, believing that the latter was a liar, and
                                        a murderer.


                                                   112
