Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R ETRIEVAL IS ACCURATE G ENERATION
 Bowen Cao♠,∗ Deng Cai♡,† Leyang Cui♡ Xuxin Cheng♠ Wei Bi♡ Yuexian Zou♠ Shuming Shi♡
 ♠ School of ECE, Peking University
 ♡ Tencent AI Lab
 {cbw2021,chengxx}@stu.pku.edu.cn, zouyx@pku.edu.cn
 thisisjcykcd@gmail.com, {leyangcui,victoriabi,shumingshi}@tencent.com



                                                 A BSTRACT
             Standard language models generate text by selecting tokens from a fixed, finite,
             and standalone vocabulary. We introduce a novel method that selects context-
             aware phrases from a collection of supporting documents. One of the most sig-
             nificant challenges for this paradigm shift is determining the training oracles, be-
             cause a string of text can be segmented in various ways and each segment can
             be retrieved from numerous possible documents. To address this, we propose
             to initialize the training oracles using linguistic heuristics and, more importantly,
             bootstrap the oracles through iterative self-reinforcement. Extensive experiments
             show that our model not only outperforms standard language models on a vari-
             ety of knowledge-intensive tasks but also demonstrates improved generation qual-
             ity in open-ended text generation. For instance, compared to the standard lan-
             guage model counterpart, our model raises the accuracy from 23.47% to 36.27%
             on OpenbookQA, and improves the MAUVE score from 42.61% to 81.58% in
             open-ended text generation. Remarkably, our model also achieves the best per-
             formance and the lowest latency among several retrieval-augmented baselines. In
             conclusion, we assert that retrieval is more accurate generation and hope that our
             work will encourage further research on this new paradigm shift.


1       I NTRODUCTION
Memorization or generalization, that is the question.
Standard language models (LMs) break down the text generation process into sequential token pre-
dictions (Mikolov et al., 2010; Brown et al., 2020; OpenAI, 2022). Each token is a word (or sub-
word) selected from a fixed, finite, and standalone vocabulary. To make the generation more at-
tributable and accelerate the inference speed, Lan et al. (2023) propose a method named CoG that
retrieves phrases from similar contexts, where the term “phrase” refers to any contiguous text seg-
ments of variable lengths. It is worth noting that, similar to other retrieval-augmented generation
frameworks (Li et al., 2022; Asai et al., 2023), CoG still employs a two-stage pipeline, specifically
document retrieval followed by grounded phrase extraction. The final performance is constrained by
the quality and quantity of the return from the first stage. In this paper, we propose a new paradigm
that completely removes the dependence on document retrieval. To our best knowledge, our work is
the first that performs text generation through direct phrase retrieval.
One core challenge of adopting this novel approach is the construction of the training oracles. That is
a function mapping a string of text to an action sequence for creating training examples. For a given
text, there exist numerous different ways to segment it into phrases, with each potential phrase being
retrievable from a vast array of documents. To better align the generation process and the supporting
documents, we introduce a two-fold approach: first, we leverage linguistics-motivated heuristics to
initialize the training oracles. Second, we implement a bootstrapping mechanism through iterative
self-reinforcement, gradually refining the oracles with each iteration.
Unlike Lan et al. (2023) which only evaluates the generation fluency in open-ended text genera-
tion, we carry out comprehensive and rigorous evaluation in a wide range of knowledge-intensive
    ∗
        Work done during an internship at Tencent AI Lab.
    †
        Corresponding author.


                                                        1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


tasks, e.g., open-domain question answering. Our proposed model exhibits superior zero-shot per-
formance, outperforming the baseline method. For example, on the OpenbookQA dataset, our model
dramatically improves upon base LM, presenting an increase in accuracy from 23.47% to 36.27%
(Table 1). Our model also demonstrates improved quality in open-ended text generation, as evi-
denced by the improvement of 38.97% in the MAUVE score (Table 4). Moreover, it shows even
better performance when switching to an enlarged (Table 2) or domain-specific (Table 3) phrase
table, without any further training. In addition, our model attains the fastest generation speed among
retrieval-augmented baselines (Table 4). We believe that our study can inspire future research to
build more efficient and accurate LMs that harness the power of retrieval-based approaches.
In summary, the contributions of this paper can be summarized as follows:
    • We introduce a new approach for language modeling that focuses on directly selecting context-
      aware phrases from a set of supporting documents.
    • We propose a novel method for decomposing text generation into sequential next-phrase re-
      trieval by linguistics-driven heuristics and iterative self-reinforced bootstrapping.
    • We validate the effectiveness of our models on various downstream tasks, including open-
      domain and domain-specific question answering, as well as open-ended text generation, high-
      lighting substantial improvements over standard LMs and several retrieval-augmented baselines.

2     A U NIFIED V IEW OF G ENERATION AND R ETRIEVAL
Standard language models (LMs) factorize the generation probability        Qn       of a sequence x =
[x1 , x2 , . . . , xn ] into a series of conditional probabilities p(x) = i=1 p(xi |x<i ). Hence, the gen-
eration is often performed by repeatedly predicting the next token based on the generated sequence
thus far (i.e., prefix). The next-token prediction probabilities are computed as
                                                     exp(Ep (x<i ) · Ec (xi ))
                                   p(xi |x<i ) = P                             ′
                                                                                  ,                    (1)
                                                   x′ ∈V exp(Ep (x<i ) · Ec (x ))
where Ep (x<i ) is a vector representation of the prefix x<i , Ec (x) denotes a vector representation
of the token x, and V stands for the token vocabulary. Through the above notations, we can see that
the standard LMs can be viewed as a dual-encoder matching network connecting different prefixes
and tokens. Typically, as shown in the left part of Figure 1, the source encoder Ep is implemented
by a multi-layer neural network (e.g., Transformers) while the target encoder Ec is simply a token
embedding layer. As seen, the design of the dual-encoder network is heavily unbalanced; The source
side is much more complex than the target side.
Recently, a retrieval-augmented LM, CoG (Lan et al., 2023), has been proposed. In addition to token
selection, CoG also allows for phrase retrieval (i.e., variable-length n-grams) from a collection of
supporting documents. From our point of view, CoG augments the target side of conventional LMs.
First, the candidate pool is enlarged to include phrases of variable lengths. Second, the target encoder
not only considers the candidates themselves but also their contexts.
However, searching phrases from large-scale corpora is resource-intensive. Therefore, CoG adopts a
two-stage search strategy: relevant documents are first retrieved to reduce the search space for phrase
selection. To construct the training oracles, CoG uses a forward maximum matching algorithm to
find the longest matching phrases from the retrieved documents. Despite promising results, CoG
cannot guarantee to provide a globally optimal solution for phrase retrieval, and is highly dependent
on the external tool for document retrieval. In contrast, we present a new paradigm, which we call
CoG-2, that generates text directly through phrase retrieval.

3     T HE P ROPOSED M ETHOD — C O G-2
3.1    OVERVIEW
Our research aims to enhance the interpretability and factuality of language models (LMs) by tran-
sitioning from token generation to phrase retrieval. First, the semantics of phrases are enhanced by
their surrounding contexts (Mikolov et al., 2013), leading to a more discriminative representation
for inference. Second, each retrieved phrase can be traced back to its original document, enhancing
the accountability of the output.


                                                    2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 1: Comparison between our method and standard language models. Both can be viewed as
dual-encoder matching networks connecting source prefixes and target continuations. On the target
side, standard language models employ an immediate embedding layer for target tokens from a
fixed, finite, and standalone vocabulary. In contrast, our methods uses an expressive phrase encoder
for target phrase from an editable, extensible, and contextualized phrase table.


Figure 2: Four possible generation paths for the sentence “Flag burning sends a powerful message”.
Content highlighted in blue (red) are phrases retrieved from supporting documents (from the token
vocabulary). Standard LMs can be viewed as only considering the generation path at the bottom.


To link a given prefix with a set of variable-length phrases, our model follows the dual-encoder
structure as described in Section 2 but emphasizes a balanced design in contrast to standard LMs
that heavily favor the source side (see Figure 1). Specifically, the source encoder Ep (·) is a multi-
layer neural network (e.g., Transformer) as usual. The target encoder Ec (·) is also a multi-layer
neural network to learn context-aware representation for phrases in supporting documents.
Similar to standard LMs, we employ dot product as the matching measure. During inference, we can
use efficient maximum inner product search (MIPS) algorithms (Shrivastava & Li, 2014; Guo et al.,
2016; Seo et al., 2019) to retrieve from a large pool of candidate phrases. The overall framework is
depicted in Figure 1. The remaining question is how to train our models.


3.2   T RAINING O RACLES

We break down text generation into a series of next-phrase retrieval. Formally, each step takes the
current prefix p as its state, an oracle policy π ∗ maps the state to an action π ∗ (p) → (f, s), where f
is a follow-up phrase and s is a copy of the phrase f in a supporting document.
As illustrated in Figure 2, to create such triplets (p, f, s) from raw corpora presents two challenges.
First, the boundary of the phrase f is unclear given a continuation can be divided in various ways.
Second, the source of each phrase s is unclear because a phrase can appear numerous times across
a vast number of documents. On the other hand, the variety of generation paths for a given text also
indicates that training oracles are crucial for optimal and quick convergence of our models.
To tackle the above problems, we first present a set of linguistics-motivated heuristics to initialize
the training oracles (Section 3.2.1), then describe how we allow the model to refine its generation
paths in a self-reinforcement manner (Section 3.2.2).

                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


3.2.1     L INGUISTICS - MOTIVATED H EURISTICS
We start to design the training oracles through the following principles.
Syntactic Structure. Inspired by the syntactic structure of language and its implications on lan-
guage generation (Chomsky, 1957; Dyer et al., 2016; Li et al., 2023b), we restrict the phrase to a
contiguous sequence of words that corresponds to a constituent unit in a syntactic parse tree. This
approach ensures that each phrase possesses a relatively complete and well-defined meaning, while
avoiding arbitrary word combinations that could result in semantic ambiguity or nonsensical forma-
tions (Morgan & Newport, 1981).
Distributional Sparsity. The inclusion of high-frequency phrases significantly inflates the size of
the candidate pool. This is due to our treatment of lexically identical phrases in different contexts
as distinct entries in the pool. Consequently, a single high-frequency phrase could potentially intro-
duce tens of thousands, or even millions, of entries. In our analysis of Wikipedia, we discovered
that eliminating just the top 1% of high-frequency phrases could reduce the total number of entries
by 50%. However, these high-frequency phrases, such as ’as well as’, often lack specific meanings.
Their inclusion may result in imbalanced training, which could adversely affect the model’s overall
performance. Regarding phrases with extremely low frequency, we consider them to be rare us-
ages with limited practical use. Including them would notably increase the complexity of training.
Therefore, we also choose to exclude them.
Semantic Similarity. Although a lexically identical copy of a phrase can be located in various
places, it is crucial to account for polysemy (Cruse, 1986), as lexically identical phrases can exhibit
different meanings depending on their contexts. Moreover, even when lexically identical phrases
share similar meanings, subtle nuances can arise from different contexts, necessitating a thorough
evaluation of semantic similarity when selecting the most appropriate matching (Min et al., 2019).
Specifically, we first run the Stanford Parser1 to extract constituents from the training data. We then
filter these constituents based on the following criteria: (1) remove trivial constituents with labels
such as WHADJP, WHADVP; (2) exclude constituents that are too short (< 2 words) or too long (> 10
words); (3) discard constituents with excessively high or low Inverse Document Frequency (IDF)
(Salton & Buckley, 1988) values. Notably, we apply a more lenient IDF threshold for longer con-
stituents. Next, we group lexically identical phrases and compute the pairwise semantic similarities
using BM25 (Robertson et al., 2009) and an off-the-shelf phrase encoder (Lee et al., 2021b). Conse-
quently, we can identify the most suitable next phrase for each prefix based on the scores. For more
detailed information, please refer to the Appendix A.
3.2.2     I TERATIVE S ELF - REINFORCEMENT
The generation paths determined by the above heuristics are model-agnostic and could be noisy and
sub-optimal (Welleck et al., 2019). To further improve performance, we allow the model to adjust its
own generation paths based on the capabilities it has acquired. That is, transitioning from imitating
the oracles to reinforcing its own preferences. In particular, we propose a bootstrapping algorithm
to iteratively adjust the target phrases. For each prefix p, we first let the model retrieve the k-best
phrases in the entire candidate pool using its current policy. Then, we choose the valid phrase with
the highest semantic matching score from these k phrases as the new target. If no such phrase is
found, i.e., none of the k-best phrases match the ground-truth continuation, we retain the previous
target. The above process is repeated periodically. We present an example in Appendix B.

3.3     T RAINING O BJECTIVES

We optimize our model using the InfoNCE loss (Oord et al., 2018; Karpukhin et al., 2020), for which
a negative phrase set N (p) is introduced for each triplet (p, f, s).
                                            exp(Ep (p) · Ec (s))
                     Lp =                         P                                                (2)
                            exp(Ep (p) · Ec (s)) + t∈N (p) exp(Ep (p) · Ec (t))
The construction of the negative phrase set N (p) is detailed below. To preserve the ability for token-
level generation, we also train our model with the standard next-token prediction loss Lt (Lan et al.,
2023). The training objective is formulated as Lp + αLt .
   1
       https://stanfordnlp.github.io/stanza/


                                                  4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Negative Sampling. We incorporate two types of negative examples to improve the model’s abil-
ity to differentiate phrases: (1) In-batch negatives: We regard all other candidate phrases in the
same training batch as this type of negative example. These negatives help the model learn more
discriminative representations on a large scale without incurring considerable costs. (2) Hard nega-
tives: Recall that in Section 3.2.2, we periodically update the generation targets by retrieving top-k
candidate phrases for each prefix. Among these k phrases, despite one may be chosen as the new
generation target, the remaining phrases can serve as strong negatives because they are likely to
confuse the model.
Note that the above negatives may contain false negatives, which are not chosen as targets but still
make a valid follow-up. To minimize the risk, we remove all phrases that constitute a prefix of the
groundtruth continuation.

3.4     M ODELS

Prefix Encoder. We treat the prefix as a sequence of tokens with previously predicted phrases split
into tokens. This token sequence is encoded using the standard Transformer architecture with causal
attention (Vaswani et al., 2017; Radford et al., 2019). The prefix representation is obtained through
a linear projection of the last-layer representation of the final token in the sequence.

Phrase Encoder. We employ a deep bidirectional Transformer (Vaswani et al., 2017; Devlin et al.,
2019) to generate contextualized token representations of a supporting document. The representation
of a phrase is obtained by concatenating the representations of its first and last tokens, followed by
projecting the concatenated representation to the same dimension as the prefix representation. To
preserve the ability to compose output using single tokens, we also add the token vocabulary to our
phrase table. These standalone tokens can be considered as special phrases, and their representations
are obtained through the standard embedding layer of the LM.


4       E XPERIMENT S ETUP

4.1     I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS

We train our model on the training set of MiniPile2 (Kaddour, 2023), and use the English Wikipedia
dump March 1, 20223 as supporting documents. Specifically, we split each Wikipedia article into
multiple, disjoint text blocks of up to 128 words as documents, which results in 29,488,431 doc-
uments. The size of our phrase index is 137,101,097. We use GPT-2 (Radford et al., 2019) and
DensePhrases4 (Lee et al., 2021b) to initialize the prefix encoder and the phrase encoder, respec-
tively. For efficiency, we solely fine-tune the prefix encoder. This avoid the computational burden of
re-computing phrase embeddings associated with updating the phrase encoder. While revising the
training oracles via self-reinforcement, we retrieve the top k = 128 phrases for each prefix.

4.2     I NFERENCE D ETAILS

During inference, we employ FAISS (Johnson et al., 2019), a library for vector similarity search and
clustering, for efficient retrieval.

Continuation Generation. For text generation, we directly retrieve top-k candidates from the
entire phrase table (including both context-aware phrases and standalone tokens). We then apply
a softmax function to the matching scores of these candidates, creating a next-phrase probability
distribution (Shi et al., 2024), and use top-p sampling (Holtzman et al., 2020) for selecting the next
phrase. In all experiments, we set k to 128 (see the analysis on k in Table 7 in Appendix G) and
p to 0.95. To control the ratio of phrase retrieval, we filter out phrases with probabilities below a
threshold. The threshold is set to ϕ = 0.4 if not otherwise specified.
    2
      https://huggingface.co/datasets/JeanKaddour/minipile
    3
      https://huggingface.co/datasets/wikipedia
    4
      https://huggingface.co/princeton-nlp/densephrases-multi


                                                  5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Likelihood Estimation. To calculate the likelihood of a given text, we approximate the likelihood
by summing all possible generation paths. For instance, given the sentence ”The Moon rises”,
the following generation paths may exist: (1) The→moon→rises; (2) The moon→rises; (3) The
moon rises. The probability of each path is the product of the probabilities of all phrases (tokens)
along that path. For example, the probability of the path (2) is calculated by p(rises|T he moon) ·
p(T he moon). The probabilities of each step are obtained in the same way as we construct the
next-phrase probability distribution for continuation generation. Note that the sum of all possible
paths can be computed efficiently using dynamic programming with time complexity O(n2 ), where
n represents the number of tokens in the text.

4.3     BASELINES

We compare the proposed method with standard LM in the zero-shot setting, also drawing the fol-
lowing state-of-the-art retrieval-augmented methods as baselines:
Base LM is the standard token-level language model using the Transformer (Vaswani et al., 2017)
architecture. We fine-tune the pre-trained GPT-25 (Radford et al., 2019).
kNN-LM (Khandelwal et al., 2020) is a retrieval-augmented LM that interpolates the next-token
distribution of the base LM with a k-nearest neighbors (kNN) model.
RETRO (Borgeaud et al., 2022)6 is a retrieval-augmented LM incorporated with a pre-trained doc-
ument retriever, a document encoder and a cross-attention mechanism.
CoG (Lan et al., 2023)7 is another retrieval-augmented LM that adopts a two-stage search pipeline.
It first retrieves semantically-relevant documents, and then considers all n-grams within them as
candidate phrases.

5       E XPERIMENTS
We verify the effectiveness of our methods on a set of knowledge-intensive tasks and open-ended
text generation tasks without fine-tuning.

5.1     K NOWLEDGE -I NTENSIVE TASKS

5.1.1     DATASETS
We employ five knowledge-insensitive datasets, including three open-domain QA datasets: Open-
bookQA (Mihaylov et al., 2018), ARC-Challenge (Clark et al., 2018), and TruthfulQA (Lin
et al., 2022); and two domain-specific (medical) datasets: MedMCQA (Pal et al., 2022) and Med-
USMILE (Jin et al., 2021). The details for these datasets can be found in Appendix C.
In line with prior research (Brown et al., 2020; Sanh et al., 2022), we adopt a classification with op-
tions methodology to quantify the model performance. This approach involves presenting the model
with a range of options and calculating the likelihood of each option being the correct response.
The option with the highest probability is selected as the model’s prediction. We then report the
accuracy of the model’s predictions.

5.1.2     R ESULTS
We compare our methods with baselines in knowledge-intensive tasks across several settings.

Main Results. As shown in Table 1, our model consistently outperforms various baseline models
across all datasets. Compared with base LM, our model improves the accuracy of the TruthfulQA
and OpenBookQA datasets from 29.73% to 34.27% and 23.47% to 36.27%, respectively. When we
eliminate the phrase retrieval from our model and only use standalone tokens (Ours w/o phrase),
there is a considerable drop in performance, demonstrating the effectiveness of incorporating phrase
    5
      https://huggingface.co/gpt2
    6
      https://github.com/lucidrains/RETRO-pytorch
    7
      https://github.com/gmftbyGMFTBY/Copyisallyouneed


                                                  6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                      TruthfulQA OpenbookQA ARC-Challenge MedMCQA Med-USMILE
Base LM (w/o FT)         30.27      22.67      24.52        27.96    24.89
    Base LM              29.73      23.47      23.92        28.33    24.19
    kNN-LM               30.27      22.93      24.82        27.96    24.72
     RETRO               27.53      26.13      22.21        25.68    25.33
      CoG                34.11      35.47      27.24        29.07    25.07
      Ours               34.27      36.27      28.27        29.44    25.69
Ours(w/o phrase)         28.63      23.73      22.51        27.42    24.80

Table 1: Experiments on knowledge-intensive tasks. Ours (w/o phrase): a variant of our model that
restricts the model to only use standalone tokens without retrieving context-aware phrases.

                     TruthfulQA OpenbookQA ARC-Challenge MedMCQA Med-USMILE
       Ours             34.27      36.27      28.27        29.44    25.69
 w/ enlarged index      39.59      37.07      27.14        31.63    27.87

                   Table 2: Results for our model with an enlarged phrase index.


retrieval in our methods. Note that the models presented in Table 1 are initialized from pre-trained
LMs. To analyze the role of pre-trained models in our framework, we train all models from scratch
with random initialization. The results are shown in Table 8 in Appendix G, our model outperforms
the baselines across all datasets. For example, our model achieves a 12.8% absolute improvement
on OpenbookQA over base LM, suggesting that our training framework is not heavily dependent on
pre-trained models. To elucidate the role of phrase retrieval in knowledge-intensive tasks, we delve
into a case study depicted in Appendix D.

Enlarged Phrase Index. Recall that we exclude phrases with excessively high or low IDF values
(Section 3.2.1). This strategy not only stabilizes the training process but also improves training
efficiency. However, the phrases initially filtered out can be repurposed to augment our phrase index
in a training-free manner. This expanded phrase index, now three times larger than the original,
underscores the scalability of our approach. As evidenced in Table 2, this expansion boosts our
model’s performance, such as a 5.32% increase in accuracy on TruthfulQA. This not only highlights
our model’s potential to generalize to unseen phrases and documents but also emphasizes its plug-
and-play feature, capable of adapting to a larger phrase table without the need for re-training.

Domain Adaption. The plug-and-play                                 MedMCQA Med-USMILE
property of the phrase index further moti-       Base LM (FT)         28.79              25.15
vates us to employ a domain-specific index       General index        29.44              25.69
for the QA tasks in the medical domain           Medical index        29.50              26.38
without any domain-specific training. To           w/o phrase         27.42              24.80
this end, we construct an index consisting
of 3 million phrases by extracting phrases
                                                       Table 3: Results on medical datasets.
from a small text collection of the medical
domain8 . For comparison purpose, we also
fine-tune the base LM on it for fair comparison. As illustrated in Table 3, despite the considerable
reduction in index size compared to the original Wikipedia index (3 million vs 137 million), our
model exhibits even better performance on two medical QA datasets. This result underscores our
model’s capability to enhance its performance in specific domains by leveraging a domain-specific,
well-curated phrase index in a training-free manner.

5.2     O PEN -E NDED T EXT G ENERATION

We conduct open-ended text generation experiments on the test set of MiniPile (Kaddour, 2023).
For each document in the test set, we adopt the first 128 tokens as the prefix. The baselines and our
model are required to generate text continuations of 128 tokens in length based on the same prefix.
   8
       https://huggingface.co/datasets/gamino/wiki medical terms


                                                 7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                 MAUVE↑          Coherence↓         Diversity↑        Latency↓
        Base LM (w/o FT)          69.68             3.64              83.14            1.00x
            Base LM               42.61             3.56              78.72            1.00x
            kNN-LM                13.07             5.63              88.10            6.29x
             RETRO                62.39             4.82              80.96            1.51x
              CoG                 52.27             2.08              55.04            4.40x
              Ours                81.58             3.25              76.26            1.29x

                           Table 4: Results for open-ended text generation.

             Model             Fluency       Coherence        Informativeness        Grammar
        Base LM (w/o FT)         2.91          2.33                2.35                3.00
            Base LM              2.81          2.37                2.40                2.79
              Ours               2.95          2.70                2.67                3.02

                                 Table 5: Human evaluation results.


5.2.1    E VALUATION M ETRICS
Following previous works (Welleck et al., 2020; Su et al., 2022; Lan et al., 2023), we utilize three
automatic evaluation metrics to measure the quality of the generated texts: (i) MAUVE (Pillutla
et al., 2021) captures the overall usefulness of the generated text by estimating the average utility of
the content; (ii) Coherence measures the logical consistency and flow of the generated text, ensuring
that the output is well-structured and easy to understand; and (iii) Diversity evaluates the variety of
generated content, promoting the generation of unique and creative text. We report MAUVE and
diversity as percentages (%). The details for these metrics can be found in Appendix E. We also
measure the average time cost for a model to decode a continuation consisting of 128 tokens given
a prefix of 128 tokens, referred to as latency.

5.2.2    R ESULTS
As shown in Table 4, our model attains the highest MAUVE score among all models, demonstrating
the high quality of the generated text. Other retrieval-augmented methods underperform base LM
in the MAUVE score due to text degeneration, which aligns with findings in previous work (Wang
et al., 2023). Our model also shows a strong balance between coherence and diversity. The co-
herence score of our model is 3.25, which outperforms most baselines except for CoG. However,
we find that CoG often generates lexically similar, meaningless sentences, which is reflected in its
low diversity score of 55.04%. Meanwhile, our model’s diversity score is 76.26%, which is slightly
lower than some baseline models, but these models often generate incoherent sentences, as reflected
in their lower coherence scores.

Human Evaluation. To gain further insights, we randomly sample 100 cases and evaluate the
results of the base LM, the base LM without fine-tuning (w/o FT), and our model from four per-
spectives: fluency, coherence, informativeness, and grammar. Each aspect is scored on a Likert
scale from 1 to 4 (1 represents ”bad”, 2 stands for ”fair”, 3 is considered ”good”, and 4 signifies
”very good”). We report the average scores in table 5. As we can see, our method outperforms the
base LM in all four categories, especially in coherence and informativeness. This indicates that our
model, based on phrase retrieval, is better at following the preceding context and providing more
informative content. As for the lower scores of the base LM compared to the base LM (w/o FT), we
find that they are largely due to formatting issues. Further analysis can be found in Appendix F.

Generation Speed. We now discuss the generation latency of different models. In Table 4, we re-
port the relative latency, taking the base LM as the baseline. kNN-LM incurs the highest cost due to
the need for interpolating the base LM’s token distribution with another distribution computed using
its datastore. The CoG model also exhibits a notable overhead as it involves extracting all n-grams
from the retrieved documents, applying softmax over tokens and all n-grams, and sampling from
the resulting probability distribution. The RETRO model, although faster than the previous two, still


                                                   8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


requires time for applying the representations of retrieved text chunks in attention computation. Our
method stands out with the highest generation speed, since it directly retrieves and utilizes phrases.

Effect of Self-reinforcement. Ablation studies on                     MAUVE↑ Coh.↓ Div.↑
the effect of the Self-Reinforcement (SR) mechanism        w/o SR         7.86     4.14     81.14
reveal significant insights into the performance of our    round1        64.49     3.23     70.15
model. In the case of knowledge-intensive tasks, we        round2        81.58     3.25     76.26
do not observe a significant impact of SR on our
model’s performance (refer to Table 9 in Appendix G). Table 6: Ablation study on the effect of
This suggests that our framework is inherently effec- self-reinforcement.
tive in handling such tasks, even without the aid of SR.
However, the scenario differs for open-ended text gen-
eration. Table 6 shows that models trained with SR exhibit substantial improvements in the MAUVE
scores across multiple rounds, which indicates the importance of SR in enhancing the quality of text
generation. After the second round, we do not observe noticeable improvements with additional
rounds of SR iteration, suggesting that the model converges to its optimal state.

6   R ELATED W ORK

Standard language models (LMs) (Radford et al., 2019; Brown et al., 2020) are trained to predict
the next token given a text prefix. With a vast amount of training corpora and model parameters,
these models show strong zero-shot performance on various downstream tasks, serving as a unified
solution for natural language processing. However, scaling up the model parameters and training
corpora can be very expensive and cannot be done in a timely manner.
To tackle the above issues, there has been an increasing body of work that enhances the paramet-
ric LM with a non-parametric component (Li et al., 2022). Guu et al. (2020); Lewis et al. (2020);
Borgeaud et al. (2022); Izacard et al. (2022) ground the next token prediction on a set of rele-
vant documents obtained using retrieval techniques (Robertson & Zaragoza, 2009; Karpukhin et al.,
2020). Khandelwal et al. (2020); Yogatama et al. (2021); Zhong et al. (2022) augment the output
probability distribution with non-parametric nearest neighborhood estimation. Also, the retrieve-
then-generate paradigm has been extensively studied in specific downstream tasks, such as code
generation (Hashimoto et al., 2018), question answering (Ye et al., 2023; Karpukhin et al., 2020;
Lee et al., 2021a), open-domain dialogue systems (Weston et al., 2018; Wu et al., 2019; Cai et al.,
2019a;b), and machine translation (Khandelwal et al., 2021; Cai et al., 2021), multimodal retrieval
(Jin et al., 2023; Li et al., 2023a).
The work most closely related to ours is that of Min et al. (2022) and Lan et al. (2023). The
former explores a similar idea in the area of masked language models to enhance natural language
understanding. Lan et al. (2023), on the other hand, allows the copy of phrases from the grounding
documents. However, their approach still relies on a two-stage pipeline, grounding the generation
on a small set of retrieved documents only. While Lan et al. (2023) simply employs the longest
common subsequence algorithm to find phrases that can be copied from the retrieved documents,
we present heuristics-based and self-reinforced mechanisms to construct reliable training oracles.
Also, Lan et al. (2023) only evaluates the performance on open-ended text generation tasks.

7   C ONCLUSION

We presented CoG-2, a novel retrieval-based text generation approach using context-aware phrase
retrieval. Our method addresses the primary challenge of constructing training oracles through
heuristic-based initialization and iterative self-reinforcement. Experiments on knowledge-intensive
tasks and open-ended text generation tasks show that the proposed method outperforms the standard
LM and state-of-the-art retrieval-augmented methods. Moreover, our model exhibits superior per-
formance with either an enlarged or a smaller, domain-specific index, and achieves the lowest gen-
eration latency compared to other retrieval-augmented baselines. This work contributes to the NLP
research community by promoting a paradigm shift towards more accurate generation via retrieval.
As we continue to explore and refine the paradigm, we invite readers to consider the limitations of
our current work, as detailed in Appendix H, to fully appreciate the scope of future research.


                                                  9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Akari Asai, Sewon Min, Zexuan Zhong, and Danqi Chen. Retrieval-based language models and
  applications. In Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
  Linguistics (Volume 6: Tutorial Abstracts), 2023.
Sebastian Borgeaud, Arthur Mensch, Jordan Hoffmann, Trevor Cai, Eliza Rutherford, Katie Mil-
  lican, George van den Driessche, Jean-Baptiste Lespiau, Bogdan Damoc, Aidan Clark, Diego
  de Las Casas, Aurelia Guy, Jacob Menick, Roman Ring, Tom Hennigan, Saffron Huang, Loren
  Maggiore, Chris Jones, Albin Cassirer, Andy Brock, Michela Paganini, Geoffrey Irving, Oriol
  Vinyals, Simon Osindero, Karen Simonyan, Jack W. Rae, Erich Elsen, and Laurent Sifre. Im-
  proving language models by retrieving from trillions of tokens. In Kamalika Chaudhuri, Stefanie
  Jegelka, Le Song, Csaba Szepesvári, Gang Niu, and Sivan Sabato (eds.), International Conference
  on Machine Learning, ICML 2022, 17-23 July 2022, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, volume 162 of
  Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, 2022.
Tom B. Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared Kaplan, Prafulla Dhari-
  wal, Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Ariel Herbert-Voss, Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child, Aditya Ramesh, Daniel M.
  Ziegler, Jeffrey Wu, Clemens Winter, Christopher Hesse, Mark Chen, Eric Sigler, Mateusz Litwin,
  Scott Gray, Benjamin Chess, Jack Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam McCandlish, Alec Radford,
  Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. Language models are few-shot learners. In Hugo Larochelle,
  Marc’Aurelio Ranzato, Raia Hadsell, Maria-Florina Balcan, and Hsuan-Tien Lin (eds.), Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems 33: Annual Conference on Neural Information Pro-
  cessing Systems 2020, NeurIPS 2020, December 6-12, 2020, virtual, 2020.
Deng Cai, Yan Wang, Wei Bi, Zhaopeng Tu, Xiaojiang Liu, Wai Lam, and Shuming Shi. Skeleton-
  to-response: Dialogue generation guided by retrieval memory. In Proceedings of the 2019 Con-
  ference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human
  Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers), 2019a.
Deng Cai, Yan Wang, Wei Bi, Zhaopeng Tu, Xiaojiang Liu, and Shuming Shi. Retrieval-guided
  dialogue response generation via a matching-to-generation framework. In Proceedings of the 2019
  Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and the 9th International
  Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP), 2019b.
Deng Cai, Yan Wang, Huayang Li, Wai Lam, and Lemao Liu. Neural machine translation with
  monolingual translation memory. In Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting of the Association
  for Computational Linguistics and the 11th International Joint Conference on Natural Language
  Processing (Volume 1: Long Papers), 2021.
Noam Chomsky. Syntactic structures. 1957.
Peter Clark, Isaac Cowhey, Oren Etzioni, Tushar Khot, Ashish Sabharwal, Carissa Schoenick, and
  Oyvind Tafjord. Think you have solved question answering? try arc, the ai2 reasoning challenge.
  ArXiv preprint, abs/1803.05457, 2018.
D Alan Cruse. Lexical semantics. 1986.
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. BERT: Pre-training of deep
  bidirectional transformers for language understanding. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of
  the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language
  Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers), 2019.
Chris Dyer, Adhiguna Kuncoro, Miguel Ballesteros, and Noah A. Smith. Recurrent neural net-
  work grammars. In Proceedings of the 2016 Conference of the North American Chapter of the
  Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, 2016.
Ruiqi Guo, Sanjiv Kumar, Krzysztof Choromanski, and David Simcha. Quantization based fast
  inner product search. In Arthur Gretton and Christian C. Robert (eds.), Proceedings of the 19th
  International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, AISTATS 2016, Cadiz, Spain,
  May 9-11, 2016, volume 51 of JMLR Workshop and Conference Proceedings, 2016.


                                               10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Kelvin Guu, Kenton Lee, Zora Tung, Panupong Pasupat, and Ming-Wei Chang. Realm: Retrieval-
  augmented language model pre-training. ArXiv preprint, abs/2002.08909, 2020.

Tatsunori B. Hashimoto, Kelvin Guu, Yonatan Oren, and Percy Liang. A retrieve-and-edit frame-
  work for predicting structured outputs. In Samy Bengio, Hanna M. Wallach, Hugo Larochelle,
  Kristen Grauman, Nicolò Cesa-Bianchi, and Roman Garnett (eds.), Advances in Neural Informa-
  tion Processing Systems 31: Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2018,
  NeurIPS 2018, December 3-8, 2018, Montréal, Canada, 2018.

Ari Holtzman, Jan Buys, Li Du, Maxwell Forbes, and Yejin Choi. The curious case of neural text
  degeneration. In 8th International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2020, Addis
  Ababa, Ethiopia, April 26-30, 2020, 2020.

Gautier Izacard, Patrick Lewis, Maria Lomeli, Lucas Hosseini, Fabio Petroni, Timo Schick, Jane
  Dwivedi-Yu, Armand Joulin, Sebastian Riedel, and Edouard Grave. Few-shot learning with re-
  trieval augmented language models. ArXiv preprint, abs/2208.03299, 2022.

Di Jin, Eileen Pan, Nassim Oufattole, Wei-Hung Weng, Hanyi Fang, and Peter Szolovits. What dis-
  ease does this patient have? a large-scale open domain question answering dataset from medical
  exams. Applied Sciences, 11(14), 2021.

Peng Jin, Hao Li, Zesen Cheng, Kehan Li, Xiangyang Ji, Chang Liu, Li Yuan, and Jie Chen. Diffu-
  sionret: Generative text-video retrieval with diffusion model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.09867,
  2023.

Jeff Johnson, Matthijs Douze, and Hervé Jégou. Billion-scale similarity search with gpus. IEEE
   Transactions on Big Data, 7(3), 2019.

Jean Kaddour. The minipile challenge for data-efficient language models, 2023.

Vladimir Karpukhin, Barlas Oguz, Sewon Min, Patrick Lewis, Ledell Wu, Sergey Edunov, Danqi
  Chen, and Wen-tau Yih. Dense passage retrieval for open-domain question answering. In
  Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing
  (EMNLP), 2020.

Urvashi Khandelwal, Omer Levy, Dan Jurafsky, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Mike Lewis. Generalization
  through memorization: Nearest neighbor language models. In 8th International Conference on
  Learning Representations, ICLR 2020, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, April 26-30, 2020, 2020.

Urvashi Khandelwal, Angela Fan, Dan Jurafsky, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Mike Lewis. Nearest neigh-
  bor machine translation. In 9th International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR
  2021, Virtual Event, Austria, May 3-7, 2021, 2021.

Tian Lan, Deng Cai, Yan Wang, Heyan Huang, and Xian-Ling Mao. Copy is all you need. In The
  Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023.

Jinhyuk Lee, Mujeen Sung, Jaewoo Kang, and Danqi Chen. Learning dense representations of
   phrases at scale. In Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
   Linguistics and the 11th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (Volume
   1: Long Papers), 2021a.

Jinhyuk Lee, Alexander Wettig, and Danqi Chen. Phrase retrieval learns passage retrieval, too.
   In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing,
   2021b.

Patrick S. H. Lewis, Ethan Perez, Aleksandra Piktus, Fabio Petroni, Vladimir Karpukhin, Naman
  Goyal, Heinrich Küttler, Mike Lewis, Wen-tau Yih, Tim Rocktäschel, Sebastian Riedel, and
  Douwe Kiela. Retrieval-augmented generation for knowledge-intensive NLP tasks. In Hugo
  Larochelle, Marc’Aurelio Ranzato, Raia Hadsell, Maria-Florina Balcan, and Hsuan-Tien Lin
  (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 33: Annual Conference on Neural
  Information Processing Systems 2020, NeurIPS 2020, December 6-12, 2020, virtual, 2020.

                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Hao Li, Curise Jia, Peng Jin, Zesen Cheng, Kehan Li, Jialu Sui, Chang Liu, and Li Yuan.
  Freestyleret: Retrieving images from style-diversified queries. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.02428,
  2023a.
Huayang Li, Yixuan Su, Deng Cai, Yan Wang, and Lemao Liu. A survey on retrieval-augmented
  text generation. ArXiv preprint, abs/2202.01110, 2022.
Yafu Li, Leyang Cui, Jianhao Yan, Yongjing Yin, Wei Bi, Shuming Shi, and Yue Zhang. Explicit
  syntactic guidance for neural text generation. In Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the
  Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), 2023b.
Stephanie Lin, Jacob Hilton, and Owain Evans. TruthfulQA: Measuring how models mimic human
  falsehoods. In Proceedings of the 60th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
  Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), 2022.
Todor Mihaylov, Peter Clark, Tushar Khot, and Ashish Sabharwal. Can a suit of armor conduct elec-
  tricity? a new dataset for open book question answering. In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference
  on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, 2018.
Tomas Mikolov, Martin Karafiát, Lukas Burget, Jan Cernockỳ, and Sanjeev Khudanpur. Recurrent
  neural network based language model. In Interspeech, volume 2. Makuhari, 2010.
Tomás Mikolov, Ilya Sutskever, Kai Chen, Gregory S. Corrado, and Jeffrey Dean. Distributed
  representations of words and phrases and their compositionality. In Christopher J. C. Burges, Léon
  Bottou, Zoubin Ghahramani, and Kilian Q. Weinberger (eds.), Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems 26: 27th Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2013.
  Proceedings of a meeting held December 5-8, 2013, Lake Tahoe, Nevada, United States, 2013.
Sewon Min, Danqi Chen, Hannaneh Hajishirzi, and Luke Zettlemoyer. A discrete hard EM approach
  for weakly supervised question answering. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical
  Methods in Natural Language Processing and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natural
  Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP), 2019.
Sewon Min, Weijia Shi, Mike Lewis, Xilun Chen, Wen-tau Yih, Hannaneh Hajishirzi, and Luke
  Zettlemoyer. Nonparametric masked language modeling. ArXiv preprint, abs/2212.01349, 2022.
James L Morgan and Elissa L Newport. The role of constituent structure in the induction of an
  artificial language. Journal of verbal learning and verbal behavior, 20(1), 1981.
Aaron van den Oord, Yazhe Li, and Oriol Vinyals. Representation learning with contrastive predic-
  tive coding. ArXiv preprint, abs/1807.03748, 2018.
OpenAI. Introducing chatgpt. 2022.
Ankit Pal, Logesh Kumar Umapathi, and Malaikannan Sankarasubbu. Medmcqa: A large-scale
  multi-subject multi-choice dataset for medical domain question answering. In Gerardo Flores,
  George H Chen, Tom Pollard, Joyce C Ho, and Tristan Naumann (eds.), Proceedings of the Con-
  ference on Health, Inference, and Learning, volume 174 of Proceedings of Machine Learning
  Research, 2022.
Krishna Pillutla, Swabha Swayamdipta, Rowan Zellers, John Thickstun, Sean Welleck, Yejin Choi,
  and Zaı̈d Harchaoui. MAUVE: measuring the gap between neural text and human text using di-
  vergence frontiers. In Marc’Aurelio Ranzato, Alina Beygelzimer, Yann N. Dauphin, Percy Liang,
  and Jennifer Wortman Vaughan (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 34:
  Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2021, NeurIPS 2021, December
  6-14, 2021, virtual, 2021.
Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, Ilya Sutskever, et al. Language
  models are unsupervised multitask learners. OpenAI blog, 1(8), 2019.
Marc’Aurelio Ranzato, Sumit Chopra, Michael Auli, and Wojciech Zaremba. Sequence level train-
 ing with recurrent neural networks. In Yoshua Bengio and Yann LeCun (eds.), 4th International
 Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2016, San Juan, Puerto Rico, May 2-4, 2016,
 Conference Track Proceedings, 2016.


                                                 12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


S. Robertson and H. Zaragoza. The probabilistic relevance framework: Bm25 and beyond. Found.
   Trends Inf. Retr., 3, 2009.
Stephen Robertson, Hugo Zaragoza, et al. The probabilistic relevance framework: Bm25 and be-
  yond. Foundations and Trends® in Information Retrieval, 3(4), 2009.
Gerard Salton and Christopher Buckley. Term-weighting approaches in automatic text retrieval.
  Information processing & management, 24(5), 1988.
Victor Sanh, Albert Webson, Colin Raffel, Stephen H. Bach, Lintang Sutawika, Zaid Alyafeai,
  Antoine Chaffin, Arnaud Stiegler, Arun Raja, Manan Dey, M Saiful Bari, Canwen Xu, Urmish
  Thakker, Shanya Sharma Sharma, Eliza Szczechla, Taewoon Kim, Gunjan Chhablani, Nihal V.
  Nayak, Debajyoti Datta, Jonathan Chang, Mike Tian-Jian Jiang, Han Wang, Matteo Manica,
  Sheng Shen, Zheng Xin Yong, Harshit Pandey, Rachel Bawden, Thomas Wang, Trishala Neeraj,
  Jos Rozen, Abheesht Sharma, Andrea Santilli, Thibault Févry, Jason Alan Fries, Ryan Teehan,
  Teven Le Scao, Stella Biderman, Leo Gao, Thomas Wolf, and Alexander M. Rush. Multitask
  prompted training enables zero-shot task generalization. In The Tenth International Conference
  on Learning Representations, ICLR 2022, Virtual Event, April 25-29, 2022, 2022.
Minjoon Seo, Jinhyuk Lee, Tom Kwiatkowski, Ankur P Parikh, Ali Farhadi, and Hannaneh Ha-
 jishirzi. Real-time open-domain question answering with dense-sparse phrase index. arXiv
 preprint arXiv:1906.05807, 2019.
Chufan Shi, Haoran Yang, Deng Cai, Zhisong Zhang, Yifan Wang, Yujiu Yang, and Wai Lam. A
  thorough examination of decoding methods in the era of llms. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.06925,
  2024.
Anshumali Shrivastava and Ping Li. Asymmetric LSH (ALSH) for sublinear time maximum inner
  product search (MIPS). In Zoubin Ghahramani, Max Welling, Corinna Cortes, Neil D. Lawrence,
  and Kilian Q. Weinberger (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 27: Annual
  Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2014, December 8-13 2014, Montreal,
  Quebec, Canada, 2014.
Yixuan Su and Nigel Collier. Contrastive search is what you need for neural text generation. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2210.14140, 2022.
Yixuan Su, Tian Lan, Yan Wang, Dani Yogatama, Lingpeng Kong, and Nigel Collier. A contrastive
  framework for neural text generation. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35,
  2022.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N. Gomez,
  Lukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. In Isabelle Guyon, Ulrike von
  Luxburg, Samy Bengio, Hanna M. Wallach, Rob Fergus, S. V. N. Vishwanathan, and Roman
  Garnett (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 30: Annual Conference on
  Neural Information Processing Systems 2017, December 4-9, 2017, Long Beach, CA, USA, 2017.
Shufan Wang, Yixiao Song, Andrew Drozdov, Aparna Garimella, Varun Manjunatha, and Mohit
  Iyyer. Knn-lm does not improve open-ended text generation. ArXiv preprint, abs/2305.14625,
  2023.
Sean Welleck, Kianté Brantley, Hal Daumé III, and Kyunghyun Cho. Non-monotonic sequential
  text generation. In Kamalika Chaudhuri and Ruslan Salakhutdinov (eds.), Proceedings of the
  36th International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2019, 9-15 June 2019, Long Beach,
  California, USA, volume 97 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, 2019.
Sean Welleck, Ilia Kulikov, Stephen Roller, Emily Dinan, Kyunghyun Cho, and Jason Weston.
  Neural text generation with unlikelihood training. In 8th International Conference on Learning
  Representations, ICLR 2020, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, April 26-30, 2020, 2020.
Jason Weston, Emily Dinan, and Alexander Miller. Retrieve and refine: Improved sequence genera-
  tion models for dialogue. In Proceedings of the 2018 EMNLP Workshop SCAI: The 2nd Interna-
  tional Workshop on Search-Oriented Conversational AI, 2018.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Yu Wu, Furu Wei, Shaohan Huang, Yunli Wang, Zhoujun Li, and Ming Zhou. Response generation
  by context-aware prototype editing. In The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelli-
  gence, AAAI 2019, The Thirty-First Innovative Applications of Artificial Intelligence Conference,
  IAAI 2019, The Ninth AAAI Symposium on Educational Advances in Artificial Intelligence, EAAI
  2019, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA, January 27 - February 1, 2019, 2019.
Qichen Ye, Bowen Cao, Nuo Chen, Weiyuan Xu, and Yuexian Zou. Fits: Fine-grained two-stage
  training for knowledge-aware question answering. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.11799, 2023.
Dani Yogatama, Cyprien de Masson d’Autume, and Lingpeng Kong. Adaptive semiparametric
  language models. Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 9, 2021.
Susan Zhang, Stephen Roller, Naman Goyal, Mikel Artetxe, Moya Chen, Shuohui Chen, Christo-
  pher Dewan, Mona Diab, Xian Li, Xi Victoria Lin, et al. Opt: Open pre-trained transformer
  language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.01068, 2022.
Wen Zhang, Yang Feng, Fandong Meng, Di You, and Qun Liu. Bridging the gap between training
 and inference for neural machine translation. In Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the
 Association for Computational Linguistics, 2019.
Zexuan Zhong, Tao Lei, and Danqi Chen. Training language models with memory augmentation.
  In Proceedings of the 2022 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing,
  2022.


A        P HRASE TABLE P RUNING AND P HRASE M ATCHING
It is noteworthy that syntactic parsing is a very well-studied task in NLP as well as its cross-domain
and cross-language generalization. For example, the Universal Dependencies 9 project provides con-
sistent grammatical annotation across over 100 languages. To our knowledge, the state-of-the-art
parsing accuracies are pretty high for major languages such as English, Chinese, Italian, Japanese,
Portuguese, etc. Nevertheless, we anticipate performance degradation for languages and domains
when the parser accuracy is relatively low. For situations where a syntactic parser is unavailable,
alternative methods may be utilized such as unsupervised syntactic parsing and unsupervised tok-
enization methods (e.g., BPE, sentencepiece).
After extracting constituents from the training data and supporting documents, we filter these con-
stituents based on the following criteria: (1) remove trivial spans with the following constituent
labels: ‘X’, ‘PRT’, ‘CC’, ‘DT’, ‘EX’, ‘FRAG’, ‘GW’, ‘HYPH’, ‘IN’, ‘INTJ’, ‘LS’, ‘LST’, ‘MD’,
‘NFP’, ‘NML’, ‘PDT’, ‘POS’, ‘PP’, ‘PRP’, ‘PRP$’, ‘PPZ’, ‘RB’, ‘RBR’, ‘RBS’, ‘RP’, ‘S’, ‘SYM’,
‘TO’, ‘WDT’, ‘WHADJP’, ‘WHADVP’, ‘WHNP’, ‘WHPP’, ‘WP’, ‘WP$’, ‘WRB’, ‘#’, ‘$’, ‘”’,
“‘’, ‘-LRB-’, ‘-RRB-’, ‘,’, ‘.’, ‘:’; (2) exclude constituents that are too short (< 2 words) or too
long (> 10 words); (3) discard constituents with excessively high or low Inverse Document Fre-
quency (IDF) values. The (minimum, maximum) thresholds for constituents with different numbers
of words are: 2: (10.50, 14.08), 3: (11.09, 14.08), 4: (11.77, 14.30), 5: (12.10, 14.30), 6: (12.32,
14.30), 7: (12.51, 14.59), 8: (12.59, 14.59), 9: (12.64, 14.59), 10: (12.69, 14.59). Next, we group
lexically identical phrases and retrieve the top-10 candidates for each phrase using the BM25 al-
gorithm (Robertson et al., 2009). We then calculate the semantic similarities between the original
phrase and the retrieved candidate phrases using an off-the-shelf phrase encoder (Lee et al., 2021b).
As a result, we can identify the most appropriate next phrase for each prefix based on the scores.
The entire preprocessing process, including syntactic parsing, phrase selection, and semantic match-
ing, takes approximately 24 hours on 8 V100 GPUs. The overhead is small compared to the cost of
training the model.

B        E XAMPLE FOR I TERATIVE S ELF -R EINFORCEMENT
Suppose we have a prefix p = ”Go right for the top when you”. The ground truth for this prefix is
”Go right for the top when you want to make things happen”. The initial target phrase determined
    9
        https://universaldependencies.org/


                                                 14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Multiple-choice Question
A 16-year-old girl is brought to the physician by her father because of concerns about her behavior during the past 2 years. She
does not have friends and spends most of the time reading by herself. Her father says that she comes up with excuses to avoid
family dinners and other social events. She states that she likes reading and feels more comfortable on her own. On mental status
examination, her thought process is organized and logical. Her affect is flat. Which of the following is the most likely diagnosis?
[A] Schizoid personality disorder [B] Antisocial personality disorder [C] Schizophreniform disorder [D] Autism spectrum disorder
Retrieved Phrases
- Schizoid personality disorder (SPD) is characterized by a lack of interest in social relationships, a tendency towards a solitary
lifestyle, secretiveness, emotional coldness, and apathy …
- Schizotypal personality disorder is characterized by a need for social isolation, anxiety in social situations, odd behavior and
thinking, and often unconventional beliefs. People with this disorder feel extreme discomfort with maintaining close relationships
with people, and therefore they often do not.

Figure 3: An illustrative example from Med-USMILE: The two highlighted phrases in red are re-
trieved in response to the posed question.


by the heuristics might be ”want”. In the iterative self-reinforcement process, we would first let
the model retrieve the k-best phrases for the prefix from the entire candidate pool. Supposing that
the k-best phrases are [”want”, ”want to”, ”want to make things happen”, ”need”, ”can”], only
”want”, ”want to”, and ”want to make things happen” are considered as valid ones. If the model’s
semantic matching score is highest for ”want to make things happen”, we would update the target
phrase for the prefix to this phrase. If none of the k-best phrases are valid, we will retain the previous
target ”want”.

C     D ETAILS OF TASK P HRASING AND S PECIFICATIONS
The statistics of the datasets we select are as follows:
OpenbookQA (Mihaylov et al., 2018) is a collection of 5,957 multiple-choice questions, each with
four options, centered around elementary scientific knowledge. We utilize the test split, which
comprises 500 questions.
ARC-Challenge (Clark et al., 2018) includes 7,787 authentic, grade-school level, multiple-choice
science questions. These questions span a wide range of topics in science and history, among others.
Our experiments focus on the test split of its Challenge Set, which contains 1,172 hard questions.
TruthfulQA (Lin et al., 2022) is a distinctive dataset emphasizing the truthfulness of answers. We
employ the test split of the multiple-choice option, which includes 817 questions.
MedMCQA (Pal et al., 2022) is a comprehensive, high-quality dataset designed for biomedical
question-answering. We use its validation split, which consists of 4,183 questions.
Med-USMILE (Jin et al., 2021) encompasses 12,723 multiple-choice questions, each with four
options, originally sourced from the National Medical Board Examination in the USA. We utilize
its test split, which includes 1,273 questions.
Given a question with several candidate answers, we concatenate the question with each candidate
answer to form options, and then ask the model to select the most accurate one among all the options.
We remove questions from these datasets where all candidate answers are single words to ensure the
inclusion of phrases in the retrieval process.

D     C ASE S TUDY
To elucidate the role of phrase retrieval in knowledge-intensive tasks, we delve into a case study
depicted in Figure 3. As previously discussed in Section 4.2, our approach involves retrieving
phrases for each token in an option, enabling us to estimate the probabilities of alternative gen-
eration paths beyond simply generating the token sequence. In this specific case from the Med-
USMILE dataset, options are formed by concatenating the question with each candidate answer.
We find that the phrases retrieved for the final token of the question include the answer, a proper
noun requiring medical knowledge for understanding. This introduces a new generation path:


                                                               15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   k  TruthfulQA OpenbookQA ARC-Challenge MedMCQA Med-USMILE Avg.
   1     32.74      36.80      27.94        29.95    25.68   30.62
   2     32.88      36.80      28.04        29.90    25.68   30.66
   4     33.29      36.80      27.84        29.84    25.68   30.69
   8     33.42      36.80      27.84        29.76    25.42   30.65
  16     34.25      36.80      27.64        29.61    25.15   30.69
  32     34.11      36.27      27.64        29.50    26.12   30.73
  48     34.38      36.27      28.04        29.27    26.21   30.83
  64     33.84      36.53      28.34        29.38    25.59   30.74
  128    34.27      36.27      28.24        29.44    25.69   30.78
  256    33.42      36.27      27.37        29.24    24.80   30.22
  512    32.88      35.73      27.64        29.33    25.68   30.25
  768    32.47      35.47      27.74        29.67    25.42   30.15
 1024    32.47      35.47      27.54        29.61    24.89   30.00

            Table 7: Ablation studies on the impact of k on knowledge-intensive tasks.


                     TruthfulQA OpenbookQA ARC-Challenge MedMCQA Med-USMILE
     Base LM            30.14      22.40      22.41        28.27    23.58
    kNN-LM              30.14      22.40      23.32        27.99    23.14
       CoG              32.88      34.13      25.13        29.16    25.15
       Ours             33.29      35.20      27.04        30.24    26.21
 Ours (w/o phrase)      28.22      21.87      23.02        27.99    24.89

                        Table 8: The results of models trained from scratch.



question → Schizoid personality disorder. We observe that the contexts of the retrieved phrases,
such as “Schizoid personality disorder (SPD) is characterized by a lack of interest in social rela-
tionships ...”, align closely with the context of the question, “She does not have friends and spends
most of the time reading by herself ...”. These contextually encoded phrases benefit answer selec-
tion, thereby showcasing the interpretability of our model. It also highlights the model’s ability to
leverage contextual information effectively, particularly in tasks that require specialized knowledge.



E    D ETAILS FOR AUTOMATIC EVALUATION METRICS

In this section, we provide a detailed introduction to MAUVE, as well as the concepts of coherence
and diversity.
MAUVE (Pillutla et al., 2021) measures how closely the token distribution in generated text matches
that in human-written text across the entire test set.
Coherence (Su & Collier, 2022; Su et al., 2022) measures the semantic coherence between the
prompt x and the generated text x̂ by calculating the average log-likelihood as: coherence(x̂; x) =
 1
     P|x̂|
|x̂|   i=1 log pM (x̂i |[x : x̂<i ]), where [:] is the concatenation operation and M is a pre-trained LM.
We follow prior work and set M as the OPT-2.7B model (Zhang et al., 2022). In our implementa-
tion, we introduce a slight modification by taking the negative of the average log-likelihood. This
adjustment transforms the typically negative log-likelihood into a positive value, facilitating a more
intuitive interpretation of the results.
Diversity (Welleck et al., 2020; Su et al., 2022; Lan et al., 2023) measures the repetition in generated
text at different n-gram levels by computing the proportion of unique n-grams to total n-grams in
                                                          Q4
the generated text. It is defined as: diversity = n=2 (1.0 − rep-n  100 ), where rep-n = 100 × (1.0 −
|unique n-grams(x̂)|
 |total n-grams(x̂)| ), and x̂ is the text generated by the model.


                                                   16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


             TruthfulQA      OpenbookQA        ARC-Challenge       MedMCQA          Med-USMILE
    w/o SR      34.11           37.07             27.14              30.32             25.85
    round1      33.97           36.80             27.34              29.84             25.77
    round2      34.27           36.27             28.24              29.44             25.69

                   Table 9: Ablation studies on the effect of self-reinforcement.


F     D ETAILED H UMAN E VALUATION

Following the results in Table 5, upon manual analysis, we find that the outputs from our method
often have a tighter connection with the preceding text (coherence) and exhibit stronger knowledge
characteristics (informativeness). For instance, they often include specialized terms, which are not
observed in the outputs from the base LM. As for the lower scores of the base LM compared to the
base LM (w/o FT), one major reason is that the fine-tuned model frequently outputs ”References:
xxx” and ”External Links: xxx”. This is related to the characteristics of the Wikipedia dataset, where
each article typically ends with references and external links. To further investigate this, we retest
the Base LM, excluding all outputs containing ”References” and ”External Links” (which accounts
for 26.77% of the cases). The resulting MAUVE score is 60.23, slightly lower than the 69.68 of the
base LM (w/o FT), but substantially higher than the previous score of 42.61. This also suggests that
one possible reason for the significant drop in the MAUVE score after (c.f. Table 4) fine-tuning the
base model is due to these extraneous outputs.


G     A BLATION STUDIES

The impact of k. As shown in Table 7, k does not have a significant impact on the performance
of our model on knowledge-intensive tasks. Since we retrieve the top 128 phrases during the self-
reinforcement process, we set k = 128 throughout all experiments.

The impact of pre-trained models. The results are given in Table 8. Our model outperforms
the base LM across all datasets, achieving a 12.8% absolute improvement on OpenbookQA. This
suggests that our training framework is not heavily dependent on pre-trained models.

The impact of phrase retrieval threshold ϕ. The
phrase retrieval threshold, which filters out phrases
with probabilities below it, influences the proportion
of tokens (token rate for short) used in the text gen-
eration process. This section explores the intriguing
relationship between token rate and the quality of the
generated text.
A lower token rate boosts the model’s inference effi-
ciency, as phrases typically contain multiple tokens,
thereby reducing the number of decoding steps.
However, this efficiency can sometimes compromise
the quality of the text. This degradation occurs due
to the inherent uncertainty during generation, par-
ticularly when all candidate probabilities are low or Figure 4: The MAUVE score and latency of
when an inappropriate candidate is sampled. In such our model with different token rates.
cases, the selection of an incorrect phrase, given its
length, can significantly disrupt the generation pro-
cess, a phenomenon known as exposure bias (Ranzato et al., 2016; Zhang et al., 2019). Conversely,
the impact of choosing a sub-optimal token is less severe. Therefore, up to a certain point (approx-
imately 0.89), increasing the token rate can stabilize the generation process, as shown in Figure 4.
Beyond this point, the model’s performance peaks.
Furthermore, even without phrases (i.e., the token rate is 1), our model can generate high-quality
text, suggesting that our method also enhances token prediction learning. However, it’s important


                                                  17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


to note that while our model achieves a high MAUVE score based solely on token prediction, the
factuality of the generated text is lower than when phrase retrieval is integrated. This highlights the
need for more innovative metrics to precisely measure the quality of generated text.

The impact of self-reinforcement on knowledge-intensive tasks. Based on the results presented
in Table 9, it can be concluded that the utilization of SR does not significantly affect the performance
of our model on knowledge-intensive tasks. This implies that our framework is inherently capable
of effectively addressing such tasks, even in the absence of SR.

H    L IMITATIONS AND F UTURE W ORK
While our proposed framework has shown promising results in efficiently generating accurate and
coherent text, it is important to acknowledge the limitations of its current form. First of all, the pre-
sented result is just a proof-of-concept of the new paradigm. Future work should focus on (1) Scal-
ability. In our current experiments, we train our models and build the phrase index on the English
Wikipedia corpus. When scaling up to larger corpora, we may encounter computational challenges
due to the significantly increased amount of possible phrases. To make our approach scalable, some
potential solutions include clustering, dimensionality reduction, and fast vector search algorithms
with sub-linear time complexity. (2) Alignment. Recent studies have shown that alignment (i.e.,
fine-tuning language models to following human instructions) is important to make language mod-
els universally useful. Thus, incorporating alignment techniques into our approach is an important
future research direction.


                                                   18
