Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D ON ’ T TRUST YOUR EYES : ON THE
( UN ) RELIABILITY OF FEATURE VISUALIZATIONS
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                             A BSTRACT

         How do neural networks extract patterns from pixels? Feature visualizations at-
         tempt to answer this important question by visualizing highly activating patterns
         through optimization. Today, visualization methods form the foundation of our
         knowledge about the internal workings of neural networks, as a type of mecha-
         nistic interpretability. Here we ask: How reliable are feature visualizations? We
         start our investigation by developing network circuits that trick feature visualiza-
         tions into showing arbitrary patterns that are completely disconnected from normal
         network behavior on natural input. We then provide evidence for a similar phe-
         nomenon occurring in standard, unmanipulated networks: feature visualizations
         are processed very differently from standard input, casting doubt on their ability to
         “explain” how neural networks process natural images. This can be used as a san-
         ity check for feature visualizations. We underpin our empirical findings by theory
         proving that the set of functions that can be reliably understood by feature visual-
         ization is extremely small and does not include general black-box neural networks.
         Therefore, a promising way forward could be the development of networks that
         enforce certain structures in order to ensure more reliable feature visualizations.


1    I NTRODUCTION

A recent open letter called for a “pause on giant AI experiments” in order to gain time to make “state-
of-the-art systems more accurate, safe, interpretable, transparent, robust, aligned, trustworthy, and
loyal” (Future of Life Institute, 2023). While the call sparked controversial debate, there is general
consensus in the field that given the real-world impact of AI, developing systems that fulfill those
qualities is no longer just a “nice to have” criterion. In particular, we need “reliable” interpretability
methods to better understand models that are often described as black-boxes. The development of
interpretability methods has followed a pattern similar to Hegelian dialectic: a method is introduced
(thesis), often followed by a paper pointing out severe limitations or failure modes (antithesis), until
eventually this conflict is resolved through the development of an improved method (synthesis),
which frequently forms the starting point of a new cycle. An example of this cycle are saliency
maps: Developed to highlight which image region influences a model’s decision (e.g., Springenberg
et al., 2014; Sundararajan et al., 2017), many existing saliency methods were shown to fail simple
sanity checks (Adebayo et al., 2018; Nie et al., 2018), which then spurred the ongoing development
of methods that aim to be more reliable (e.g., Gupta & Arora, 2019; Rao et al., 2022).
In contrast to saliency maps and attribution methods like GradCAM (Selvaraju et al., 2017), LIME
(Ribeiro et al., 2016) and SHAP (Lundberg & Lee, 2017) where the field has developed a relatively
good understanding of their reliability, another central mechanistic interpretability method currently
lacks good sanity checks: feature visualizations (Erhan et al., 2009; Mordvintsev et al., 2015; Olah
et al., 2017). While attribution/saliency methods attempt to explain how a network responds to an
individual sample, feature visualizations attempt to explain the general sensitivity of a unit (e.g., a
single channel of a convolutional layer) in a neural network. This is achieved by visualizing highly
activating patterns through activation maximization. First introduced by Erhan et al. (2009), feature
visualizations have continually been refined through better priors and regularization terms that im-
prove their intuitive appeal (e.g., Yosinski et al., 2015; Mahendran & Vedaldi, 2016; Nguyen et al.,


                                                    1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


              original model’s units                              manipulated model’s units
     unit 0            100              200              unit 0             100             200


Figure 1: Arbitrary feature visualizations. Don’t trust your eyes: Feature visualizations can be
arbitrarily manipulated by embedding a fooling circuit in a network, which changes visualizations
while maintaining the original network’s ImageNet accuracy. Left: Original feature visualizations.
Right: In a network with a fooling circuit, feature visualizations can be tricked into visualizing
arbitrary patterns (e.g., Mona Lisa).
2016; Olah et al., 2017; Fel et al., 2023). Today, feature visualization methods underpin many of our
intuitions about the inner workings of neural networks. They have been proposed as debugging tools
(Nguyen et al., 2019), found applications in neuroscience (Walker et al., 2019; Bashivan et al., 2019;
Ponce et al., 2019), and according to Olah et al. (2017), “to make neural networks interpretable, fea-
ture visualization stands out as one of the most promising and developed research directions.” So
what do we know about feature visualization’s reliability? Despite its widespread use within the
mechanistic interpretability community, relatively little: While they appear to provide some infor-
mation, humans often struggle to make sense of those visualizations (Gale et al., 2020; Borowski
et al., 2021; Zimmermann et al., 2021). Furthermore, we know that “by itself, feature visualization
will never give a completely satisfactory understanding” (Olah et al., 2017), but we don’t know to
which degree we can trust or rely on them. After initial excitement, many areas of interpretability
research have become more cautious and sceptical in general—but scepticism alone is not going to
answer important questions such as: Can a method be fooled? How may we sanity-check its relia-
bility? And under which circumstances can the method be guaranteed to be reliable? In this article
we provide answers to those three questions:

1. Adversarial perspective: Can feature visualizations be fooled? We develop fooling circuits
   that trick feature visualizations into displaying arbitrary patterns or visualizations of unrelated
   units. Thus, feature visualizations can be deceived if one has access to the model (Section 2).
2. Empirical perspective: How can we sanity-check feature visualizations? We provide a sim-
   ple sanity check and show that feature visualizations, which are widely used for mechanistic
   interpretability, are processed largely along different paths compared to natural images, casting
   doubt on their ability to explain how neural networks process natural images (Section 3).
3. Theoretical perspective: Under which circumstances is feature visualization guaranteed to
   be reliable? Our theory proves that this is only possible if we know a lot about the network
   already, and impossible if the network is a black-box (Section 4).

We do not mean to imply that feature visualizations per se are not a useful tool for analyzing hidden
representations (they are, and it is important to know how individual parts of a neural network
function). Instead, we hope that our investigations can help inspire the development of more reliable
feature visualizations: a synthesis or new avenue.

2   A DVERSARIAL PERSPECTIVE : C AN FEATURE VISUALIZATIONS BE
    FOOLED ?

One important requirement for interpretability is that the explanations are reliable. We use the
following definition of unreliability: A visualization method is unreliable if one can change the
visualizations of a unit without changing the unit’s behavior on (relevant) test data. More formally,
this can be expressed as: Let U denote the space of all units. A visualization method m is unreliable
                                    bhv          bhv
if ∃u, v ∈ U : m(u) = m(v) ∧ ¬u ∼ v, where ∼ denotes an equivalence class of equal behavior.
To understand the reliability of feature visualizations, we start by actively deceiving visualizations.
For this, we design two different fooling methods: a fooling circuit (Section 2.1) and silent units
(Section 2.2). The motivation for this is twofold. Most importantly, if we can show that one can


                                                  2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                        unit 0   100   200     300    400       500   600      700       800        900

with fooling circuit?
  yes          no


Figure 2: Using a fooling circuit to arbitrarily permute visualizations. Top row: Visualizations
of the last-layer units in the original Inception-V1 model. Bottom row: After integrating a fooling
circuit, units show an arbitrarily permuted visualization (here: offset by 100 indices).

actively fool feature visualizations, this provides a proof of concept by showing that it is possible to
build networks where feature visualizations are completely independent of network behavior on nat-
ural images. This concept (different network behavior for natural images vs. feature visualizations)
is later investigated for non-adversarial settings both empirically and theoretically. Furthermore,
since feature visualizations have been proposed as model auditing tools (Brundage et al., 2020) that
should be integrated “into the testbeds for AI applications” (Nguyen et al., 2019, p. 20), it is im-
portant to understand whether an adversary (i.e., someone with malicious intent) might be able to
construct a model such that feature visualizations are manipulated. This corresponds to a threat sce-
nario where the model itself can be arbitrarily changed while the interpretability technique (feature
visualization) is kept fixed without control over hyperparameters or the random starting point. For
example, a startup may be interested in hiding certain aspects of its model’s behavior from a third-
party (e.g. regulator) audit that uses feature visualizations. In this context, our demonstration of
unreliability relates to a line of work on deceiving other interpretability methods (described in detail
in Appendix A.1). We don’t know whether such a scenario could become realistic in the future, but
as we stated above the main motivation for this section is to provide a proof of concept by showing
that one can build networks that deceive feature visualizations.

2.1                     M ANIPULATING FEATURE VISUALIZATIONS THROUGH A FOOLING CIRCUIT

Our first method to deceive feature visualizations is a fooling circuit. It can be embedded in a
standard neural network architecture and changes how feature visualizations look without changing
the behavior of the network on natural input. By circuit we mean a set of interconnected units
carrying out a specific function (Pulvermüller et al., 2014; Olah et al., 2020). In the literature, the
term unit either means a single convolutional channel in a convolutional layer or a single neuron u
in a fully-connected layer that computes u(x) = ReLU(W x + b). For the sake of introducing the
fooling circuit, we use the latter definition. We start by taking a standard pre-trained neural network,
Inception-V1 (Szegedy et al., 2015), and randomly pick a unit in the last layer (i.e., just before
the softmax is applied). When visualizing this unit, denoted F , using the standard visualization
method by Olah et al. (2017), we might see, for instance, feathers if this unit corresponds to class
“feather” (given that the unit is picked from the last layer, the unit is class-selective since the network
was trained to do object classification). The goal of the fooling circuit is to insert a new deceptive
network unit A that shows two different modes of behavior: If the network processes natural images,
the unit should respond to feathers just like unit F , whereas if feature visualization is performed on
the unit, the unit’s visualization should depict something completely different, e.g., a donut. We
achieve this by wiring six units with ReLU activation functions together as shown in Figure 4.
The fooling circuit has three layers with three, two and one unit(s) each. For the first layer consisting
of three units, we start by taking an existing unit D that responds to donuts and the existing unit that
responds to feathers F . In the same layer, we attach a binary classifier unit E that operates directly
on the network’s input. This classifier is not part of the original network. It is trained to tell whether
the network’s input is a natural image (in which case the classifier output is 1) or a synthetic feature
visualization (output 0). Note that this binary classifier has a relatively simple task since feature
visualizations start from random noise and end up at a synthetic visualization; thus they are clearly
distinguishable from natural images at every step of the process (see Figure 3 for examples). The
middle layer consists of two units (B, C) and the last layer of a single unit A which will become the
unit showing deceptive behavior by responding to natural feather images while feature-visualizing

                                                            3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


          feature visualization trajectory                                   natural ImageNet validation images

                                                                   ≠

Figure 3: Natural vs. synthetic distribution shift. There is a clear distribution shift between feature
visualizations (left) and natural images (right). This can be exploited by a classifier when building
a fooling circuit. Visualizations at different steps in the optimization process for a randomly se-
lected unit in the last layer of standard, unmanipulated Inception-V1; randomly selected ImageNet
validation samples (excluding images containing faces).

                                                                  Figure 4: Fooling circuit. This circuit consists of six
                                                                  units. Unit A responds like unit F for natural im-
                            A             deceptive unit
                                        natural input? output F   ages, but the feature visualizations of A are identical
                        bias 0          visualization? output D
                                                                  to the ones of D. This is achieved by a classifier unit
                    1               1                             (E) distinguishing between natural and visualization
  gate          B                       C
                                        C          gate           input, and two intermediate units with ReLU nonlin-
  unit        bias 0                bias
                                    bias-k
                                         0         unit           earities (B and C) selectively suppressing informa-
          1            -k       k             1                   tion depending on the classifier’s output. k is an ar-
      D
      D                     E                     F
                                                                  bitrary large constant that ensures the gradient flows
                                                                  only through either the left or the right part of the cir-
   bias 0
visualization       classifier        natural input               cuit, not both, by pushing either B or C’s pre-ReLU
    unit      natural input? output 1     unit
              visualization? output 0                             activation below zero.


a donut. The weights connecting the layers are set as follows: The activation of A is identical to B
which is identical to D (the donut unit) for feature visualizations; for natural input, the activation of
A is identical to C which is identical to F (the feather unit). To distinguish between those two cases,
the classifier detects feature visualizations and depending on its output, either unit B or unit C has
a zero activation since the classifier activation selectively suppresses the pre-ReLU activations of
those units by pushing them below zero. Hence, their activations are exactly zero after the ReLU.
As a result, inserting this fooling circuit creates a unit A with donut feature visualizations yet when
processing natural images, the unit ignores donuts and only responds to feathers.
Using this canonical fooling circuit, we can not only create a single deceptive unit but also simply
replicate the circuit for each unit in the last layer of a model and thus, for instance, arbitrarily
permute the visualizations of an entire layer as shown in Figure 2. We can even go so far as to
design completely arbitrary visualizations through a small modification to the circuit: instead of
connecting an existing unit (like the donut unit D), we can add a new unit D0 where the receptive
field (a single convolutional filter) is hard-coded to an arbitrary pattern such as the Mona Lisa,
as shown in Figure 1. Irrespective of how we manipulate the feature visualizations, the network
still responds normally to natural input. This can be verified by checking the network’s validation
accuracy on ImageNet-1K, which only minimally changes when deceiving all visualizations in the
last layer of Inception-V1 (top-1 accuracy changes from 69.146 % to 68.744 %; top-5 from 88.858 %
to 88.330 %). The tiny drop in performance is a result of the binary classifier achieving slightly less-
than-perfect accuracy (99.49% on a held-out test set) when distinguishing between natural input and
visualization input. More experimental details are available in Appendix C.1.
Our fooling circuit shows that it is possible to maintain essentially the same network behavior on
natural input while drastically altering feature visualizations. In Appendix B.1, we formalize
this fooling circuit, and prove that it will always behave in the way we observe in our experiments.
Given that this fooling circuit requires training a binary classifier, we next explore an alternative
fooling method without this requirement.

2.2   M ANIPULATING FEATURE VISUALIZATIONS BY LEVERAGING SILENT UNITS

Our second fooling method does not require a separate classifier but instead leverages orthogonal
filters embedded in silent units; i.e., units that do not activate for the entire training set. We designed
this method to show that fooling can easily be achieved in different ways and across different ar-
chitectures. In order to demonstrate that different model families can be fooled, we here consider a


                                                                    4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                     unit 0   100     150     200       250           300           350   400   450   500

manipulated model?
             no
                                                    near-identical visualizations
  yes


Figure 5: Leveraging silent units to produce identical visualizations throughout a layer. The top
row shows feature visualizations for units of a layer (block 4-1, conv 2) in a standard, unmanipulated
ResNet-50. For the bottom row, we manipulate the model such that the feature visualizations of all
units become near-identical (indicated by the red box). Nevertheless, the units still perform the same
computations as in the original model on natural input, as evident by an unchanged validation loss.
This is achieved by leveraging orthogonal filters in silent units as described in Section 2.2.

different architecture (ResNet-50 (He et al., 2016) instead of Inception-V1) and a randomly selected
intermediate layer instead of the last layer (but note that the approach is not specific to a certain
architecture or layer). We replace a standard computational block,
                                        y = ReLU(BatchNorm(Conv(x, Θ), Ψ)),                                 (1)
where Θ and Ψ are learned conv / batch norm parameters, with the manipulated computation block
                                    ȳ = y + ∆y, where ∆y = ReLU(Conv(x, Θ̄) + b).                          (2)
Our goal is to set Θ̄ and b such that ȳ = y on natural images while the feature visualizations of ȳ are
not related to those of y and instead dominated by ∆y. Since feature visualizations usually lead to
substantially larger activations than natural samples, we can exploit this property without requiring
an explicit classifier like the fooling circuit did. Note that we do not change the original unit, i.e.,
how y is computed; this means that Θ and Ψ stay unchanged. Instead, we introduce a new unit
and choose its two free parameters Θ̄ and b such that ∆y = 0 for natural inputs but ∆y 6= 0 for
feature visualizations. Specifically, we construct Θ̄ as a linear combination of the weight Θ used
to compute y and a sufficiently strong orthogonal perturbation ∆Θ⊥ ; that is, Θ̄ = αΘ + β∆Θ⊥ ,
where α, β control the relative strength of the filter directions. By choosing a sufficiently negative
bias b, we ensure that ∆y remains silent (no activation, ensuring that natural input is processed as
before) unless y is very strongly activated. Letting ȳmax. nat denote the maximal observed activation
on natural input for the constructed filter Θ̄, we set b = −α/β ȳmax. nat . Since we empirically observe
a large gap between activations reached by feature visualizations and natural input, we are able to
steer the visualizations to (almost) arbitrarily chosen images. We demonstrate this by applying it to
a ResNet-50 model trained on ImageNet. In Figure 5, all 512 units in a ResNet layer yield near-
identical feature visualization. This has no impact on the overall behavior of the network: neither
the top-1 nor the top-5 validation accuracy change at all. In summary, we developed two different
methods that trick feature visualizations into showing arbitrary, permuted, or identical visualizations
across a layer. This establishes that feature visualizations can be arbitrarily manipulated if one
has access to the model.

3                    E MPIRICAL PERSPECTIVE : H OW CAN WE SANITY- CHECK FEATURE
                     VISUALIZATIONS ?

In Section 2 we have seen that feature visualizations can be fooled under adversarial circumstances.
However, it is safe to say that in most cases we do not expect an adversary to manipulate a network.
Therefore, a much more pressing question is: How can we check whether feature visualizations work
as intended under normal circumstances, i.e., for standard, unmanipulated networks? In the context
of saliency methods, sanity checks have proven highly valuable for investigating method reliability
(Adebayo et al., 2018). We here provide an empirical sanity check for feature visualizations.
The core idea is simple: Feature visualizations are designed to explain how neural networks process
natural input. This means that once they are generated, good visualizations should be processed
along a similar path as natural images—which is an aspect that we can verify empirically. Let’s say


                                                              5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 6: Sanity check: Feature visualizations are processed differently than natural images.
Feature visualizations are designed to explain how neural networks process natural input—but do
feature visualizations for a certain class actually activate similar units as natural input from this
class? We measure the similarity of a layer’s activations caused by natural images and feature vi-
sualizations across layers. Throughout the first two thirds of Inception-V1 layers, activations of
natural images have roughly as little similarity to same-class visualizations as they have to com-
pletely arbitrary images of different classes. In the last third of the network, similarity increases.
Layer annotations (e.g., “textures” / “object parts”) are from Olah et al. (2017).
we take a unit from the last layer of a network, a unit for which we know that it responds to “cat”
images. If we run feature visualization on this unit and feed the resulting visualization through the
network, a good “cat” visualization should show typical cat features and thus activate very simi-
lar units as natural cat images. Generally speaking, we expect images from the same class to be
processed along a similar path because they share certain features. For instance, all airplanes have
wings, and all cats have paws. Some features are shared across classes (e.g., both cat and airplane
images may contain a blue sky), and some are more class-specific (airplane: wings, cats: paws).
If a neural network contains units that respond to certain features—for instance, one unit responds
to paws and a different unit to wings—then natural images of the same class should, to a certain
degree, activate similar units; and those units should also become activated when processing a good
feature visualization. Conceptually, this approach is motivated by the fooling circuit from Sec-
tion 2.1, where the circuit leads to feature visualizations being disconnected from network behavior
on natural input by using different paths for different inputs. Hence, we can proceed by analyzing
the following three properties for each layer of a standard network:

• How similarly are natural images from the same class processed (e.g., one cat image vs. another
  cat image)? This serves as the upper bound: the maximal similarity we can hope to capture with
  a good feature visualization.
• How similarly are natural images from different classes processed (e.g., a cat image vs. an airplane
  image)? This serves as a lower bound: the baseline similarity we can expect from processing
  completely unrelated input.
• How similarly are natural images from a class vs. feature visualizations for the same class pro-
  cessed? This is an indication of the reliability of the feature visualization method.

For the sake of this sanity check, we focus on feature visualizations (Olah et al., 2017) for the last
layer of a standard network, Inception-V1. The last layer is a perfect choice for this kind of analysis
since in contrast to hidden layers, the units in the last layer have perfectly well-known ground truth
selectivity: each unit is selective for one class. In terms of measuring similarity between activations
of input xi and input xj for a network f in layer l, we compute Γ(fl (xi ), fl (xj )) where Γ could
be any similarity metric. We here use Spearman’s rank order correlation but our findings are not
limited to this metric—other choices such as Cosine Similarity or Pearson correlation lead to the
same results, as can be seen in Appendix C.3. Using this similarity metric, we can compare whether
images of a class are processed similarly to feature visualizations for the same class throughout the
network. If so, they should activate roughly the same units in preceding layers (similar activations
→ high correlation). If they are processed along arbitrary independent paths instead, we would ob-
tain zero correlation. In Figure 6, we plot the results of this analysis, normalized such that a value of
1 corresponds to the Spearman similarity obtained by comparing natural images of the same class


                                                   6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


(airplanes vs. airplanes, cats vs. cats), and 0 corresponds to the similarity that is obtained from com-
paring images of one class against images of a different class (airplanes vs. cats etc.,). The results
are averaged across classes; raw data and additional information can be found in Appendix C.3.
As can be seen in Figure 6, last-layer feature visualizations are processed differently from natural
images throughout most of the network. If they would be processed along the same path, similarity
would need to be high across all layers. Later layers have a higher correlation, but that does not
mean that the activations are resulting from the same paths. In many earlier and mid-level layers,
the activations of, say, cat images are as similar to activations of cat visualizations as they are to
activations of flower, airplane or pizza images. While it would be fine for a feature visualization to
show different low-level features compared to natural images, any visualization that seeks to explain
how natural input is processed should capture similarities in mid- and high-level layers that are de-
scribed by Olah et al. (2017) as responding to “object parts” and ”complex/sophisticated concepts”.
This means that throughout most of the network, the investigated feature visualization does not pass
the sanity check: processing along different paths casts doubt on the ability of feature visu-
alizations to explain how standard neural networks process natural images. Looking ahead,
we hope that the similarity sanity check we introduce here facilitates rigorous, quantitative evalua-
tion of feature visualizations and guides researchers in designing more reliable feature visualization
methods.


4   T HEORETICAL PERSPECTIVE : U NDER WHICH CIRCUMSTANCES IS
    FEATURE VISUALIZATION GUARANTEED TO BE RELIABLE ?

A natural question arising from our experiments is whether the limitations of feature visualization
that we have shown experimentally are always present, or if they can be avoided in certain situations.
Towards addressing this, we now ask: When are feature visualizations guaranteed to be reliable,
i.e., guaranteed to produce results that can be relied upon? Feature visualizations are expected to
help us “answer what the network detects” (Olah et al., 2018), “understand what a model is really
looking for” (Olah et al., 2017), and “understand the nature of the functions learned by the network”
(Erhan et al., 2009). When formalizing these statements, two aspects need to be considered. First,
the structure of functions to be visualized. The current literature does not place assumptions on
the function—it could be any unit in a “black-box” (e.g., Heinrich et al., 2019; Nguyen et al., 2019)
neural network. Second, we need to characterize which aspects of the function feature visualizations
promise to help understand. The existing literature (quotes above and in Appendix A.2) broadly
claims that feature visualizations are useful for ‘understanding’ a function f (such as a unit in a
neural network). If that is indeed the case, then a user should be able to use feature visualizations
to make meaningful predictions about the behavior of f on some input x. Our theory quantifies
this by assessing whether it is possible to predict f (x) for any network input x based on feature
visualizations. We investigate three different settings (see Table 1): exact prediction, approximate
prediction up to an error ε , and predicting at least whether f (x) is closer to the min- or maximum of
f . If none of these can be predicted, then feature visualizations cannot be said to have provided us
with any meaningful understanding of the f . We investigate these three scenarios for twelve different
function classes, ranging from general black-box functions (no assumptions about the function) to
more restrictive settings (e.g., assuming f to be convex).
Conceptually, our theory is based on the insight that feature visualization based on activation max-
imization seeks to synthesize a highly activating image, which corresponds to finding the arg max
of f —an insight that might seem trivial. Paradoxically, it is well-known that it is impossible to
conclude much, if anything, about an unconstrained function from its arg max. Yet, feature visual-
izations are purported to help us understand what black-box functions (e.g., neural network units)
detect. To resolve this paradox, we can impose stronger assumptions on the function, or lower our
expectations by considering successively weaker notions of understanding, such as instead of asking
whether a feature visualization can help predict f (x) simply asking whether it can tell us at least
whether the activation for a new test image x will be closer to the maximum or the minimum of
the function. In this section, we explore both directions, and show that even strong assumptions
on the function f are insufficient to guarantee that feature visualizations are reliable for un-
derstanding f , even for very weak notions of understanding. The core results of our theory are
summarized in Table 1; exact definitions for each function class as well as proofs are in Appendix B.


                                                   7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 1: Theory overview. Feature visualization aims to help understand a function f (e.g., a unit in
a network). While understanding is an imprecise term, it can be formalized: Given f and its arg max
xmax and arg min xmin (approximated by feature visualization), how well can we predict f (x) for
new values of x? We show that this is impossible if f is a black-box. Instead, to make meaningful
predictions, we need strong additional knowledge about f .

                                   Given feature visualization for a function f and an input x, can we reliably predict. . .
                                                                f (x)? f (x) ε-approx.? if f (x) is closer to fmax or fmin ?
←−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−


                        black-box                           F    No                  No                            No
Stronger assumptions about f


                        neural network (NN)                 FNN No                   No                            No
                        NN trained with ERM                 FERM No                  No                            No
                                                             L
                        L−Lipschitz (known L)               FLip     No              No                      Only for small L
                        piecewise affine                    FPAff    No              No                             No
                        monotonic                           FMono No                 No                            No
                        convex                              FConvx No                No                            No
                                                             d>1
                        affine (input dim. > 1)             FAff   No                No                            No
                                                             d=1
                        affine (input dim. = 1)             FAff Yes                 Yes                           Yes
                        constant                            FConst Yes               Yes                           Yes


Notation and definitions. We denote the indicator function of a Boolean expression E as 1E ,
which is 1 if E(x) is true and 0 otherwise. Let d denote the input dimensionality (e.g., number of
pixels and channels), I = [0, 1]d the input space, and F = {I → [0, 1]} the set of all functions from
inputs to scalar, bounded activations.1 A maximally activating feature visualization is the map from
F to I 2 × [0, 1]2 that returns a function’s arg min, arg max, and values at these two points, which
we denote by Φmin max (f ) = (arg minx∈I f (x), arg maxx∈I f (x), minx∈I f (x), maxx∈I f (x)).
When f is clear from context, we write Φmin max = (xmin , xmax , fmin , fmax ) for brevity. We assess
the reliability of a feature visualization by how well it can be used to predict f (x) at new inputs
x. To make such a prediction, the user must decode feature visualization into useful information.
We denote a feature visualization decoder as a map D ∈ D = { I 2 × [0, 1]2 → F }. Our results
do not rely on the structure of D in any way. Rather, “No” in Table 1 means that for every D the
assumptions are insufficient to guarantee accurate prediction of f .

4.1                              M AIN THEORETICAL RESULTS

Throughout, we measure the accuracy of predicting f using k·k∞ . This is primarily for convenience;
the equivalence of Lp norms on bounded, finite-dimensional spaces implies we could prove the same
results with k·kp for any p at the expense of dimension-dependent constants. This captures many
cases of interest: k·kp for p ∈ {1, 2} is the standard measure of accuracy for regression, and for f
that outputs bounded probabilities, the logistic loss is equivalent to k·k2 up to constants.
First, we note that the boundedness of f implies a trivial ability to predict f (x).
Proposition 1. There exists D ∈ D such that for all f ∈ F,

                                                                                             fmax − fmin
                                                           f − D(Φmin max (f ))          ≤               .                         (3)
                                                                                     ∞            2

This means that for any function f , a user can take the feature visualization Φmin max (f ) and apply a
specific decoder (the constant function taking value halfway between fmin and fmax ) to predict f (x)
for any new x. If the user imposed assumptions on f , one might conjecture that a clever choice of
decoder could lead to a better prediction of f (x). Our first main result shows that this is impossible
even for strong assumptions.

                      1
                               For example, class probabilities or normalized activations of a bounded unit in a neural network.


                                                                                 8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Theorem 1. For all G ∈ { F, FNN , FERM , FPAff , FMono }, D ∈ D, and f ∈ G, there exists f 0 ∈ G such
that Φmin max (f ) = Φmin max (f 0 ) and
                                                                     0      0
                                                                    fmax − fmin
                              f 0 − D(Φmin max (f 0 ))         ≥                .                    (4)
                                                           ∞             2
Consider a user who knows that the unit to visualize is piecewise affine (f ∈ FPAff ). Using this
knowledge, they hope to predict f by applying some decoder to the visualization Φmin max (f ).
However, for every f , there is always another f 0 that satisfies the user’s knowledge (f 0 ∈ FPAff )
and has Φmin max (f ) = Φmin max (f 0 ). Therefore, without further information it is impossible to
distinguish between the case when the true function is f and when it is f 0 , regardless of how refined
the decoder is. Theorem 1 says that f and f 0 are sufficiently different, and thus, the user will do
poorly at predicting at least one of them; that is, the user does not improve on the uninformative
predictive ability prescribed by Proposition 1. This implies No for the first two columns in Table 1.
                                              L
A similar result can be shown for FConvx and FLip as shown in Theorem 3 and Theorem 4, accordingly.
Our second result is an analogous negative result for predicting whether f (x) is closer to fmax or
fmin , implying No for the third column in Table 1. To state it, for any f ∈ F we define mf =
(fmax + fmin )/2; note that f (x) is closer to fmax iff f (x) > mf .
Theorem 2. For all G ∈ { F, FNN , FERM , FPAff , FMono , FConvx }, D ∈ D, and f ∈ G, there exists
f 0 ∈ G such that Φmin max (f ) = Φmin max (f 0 ) and

                          1f 0 >mf 0 − 1D(Φ          (f 0 ))>mf 0       ≥ 1fmax 6=fmin .             (5)
                                           min max
                                                                    ∞

The LHS of Eq. (5) quantifies “Can the user tell if f 0 (x) is closer to fmax
                                                                          0         0
                                                                               or fmin ?” Since indicator
functions are bounded in [0, 1], the LHS is trivially bounded above by 1. Again consider the user
who knows f ∈ FPAff . Theorem 2 says that for any f —unless f also happens to be constant (i.e.,
fmax = fmin )—there is always some f 0 ∈ FPAff that is indistinguishable from f to the user and
sufficiently different from f so that the user cannot reliably tell if f 0 (x) is closer to fmax
                                                                                             0        0
                                                                                                  or fmin
                                                                 L
(i.e., the RHS is also 1). The same result can be shown for FLip with dependence on L (Theorem 5).
For an analogous analysis and further results for more function classes, see Theorems 6 to 8. In
summary, we prove that without additional assumptions about a function, it is impossible to
guarantee that standard feature visualizations can be used to understand (i.e., predict) many
types of functions, including black boxes, neural networks, and even convex functions. That
said, if strong additional knowledge is available, for instance, if the function is known to be affine
with low input dimensionality, then feature visualizations are provably reliable. In line with other
work (Srinivas & Fleuret, 2019; Bilodeau et al., 2022; Fokkema et al., 2022; Han et al., 2022),
this marks a departure from the conventional concept of black-box interpretability and suggests that
more knowledge about the function—for instance, enforced through architectural primitives—are
necessary to ensure feature visualization reliability.

5   A RE MORE LINEAR UNITS EASIER TO INTERPRET ?
The theory above makes a prediction: the simpler a function is, the easier it should be to interpret
given a feature visualization. We here empirically test this prediction. As a measure of simplicity,
we use path linearity: based on a highly activating natural image (start point), we perform feature
visualization to arrive at a highly activating optimized image (end point). We then analyze how much
the optimization path deviates from linearity by measuring the angle between gradients of the first n
steps of the path. This metric (across many such paths) is then compared to human experimental data
from Zimmermann et al. (2023) for the same units, who measured how well humans can interpret
different units in Inception-V1. Intriguingly, we find a significant correlation (Spearman’s r = −.36,
p = .001) between this human interpretability score and our path linearity measure (lower angle
means higher interpretability) especially for the beginning of the trajectory (e.g., n = 2); a plot
can be found in Appendix C.4. Overall, we interpret this as preliminary evidence in favor of the
hypothesis that more linear units, at least at the beginning of the optimization trajectory, might be
easier to interpret. An interesting direction for future work would be to enforce higher degrees of


                                                      9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


linearity, for instance through regularization or the architecture. This is one example of how our
theory might be used to develop hypotheses for better feature visualizations.


6    C ONCLUSION

Feature visualizations based on activation maximization are a widely used tool within the mech-
anistic interpretability community. We here asked whether feature visualizations are reliable, i.e.,
whether we can trust/rely on their results. Our work has the following practical implications:

1. Adversarial perspective: Feature visualizations can be arbitrarily manipulated/fooled.
   Thus, contrary to calls in the literature, feature visualizations are not a reliable tool for model
   auditing by a third party that did not train the model itself (e.g., a regulator).
2. Empirical perspective: A sanity check shows that feature visualizations are processed very
   differently from natural images; they currently do not explain how natural input is pro-
   cessed. We therefore recommend: (a) using feature visualization for exploratory but not for
   confirmatory use cases; (b) consistent with the recommendation by Olah et al. (2018; 2020), al-
   ways combining visualizations with additional methods including dataset samples and (c) when
   proposing a new feature visualization method, measuring whether it reflects how natural input is
   processed throughout the network using the quantitative sanity check we introduced.
3. Theoretical perspective: Feature visualization based on activation maximization can only
   be guaranteed to be reliable if we know a lot about the network already; it’s impossible if
   the network is a black-box. This challenges the concept of post-hoc interpretability methods:
   explaining completely black-box systems may sometimes be more than we can hope for.

We believe that developing novel, more reliable feature visualizations is a challenging and impor-
tant direction for future work.Given that our theory proves that visualizing black-box systems via
feature visualizations based on activation maximization (i.e., the current dominant paradigm) cannot
be guaranteed to be reliable without making strong assumptions about the system, we see two po-
tential avenues: either radically deviating from activation maximization, or making much stronger
assumptions on the network (e.g., stronger linearity as explored in Section 5). In either case, it is
important to understand the problem first before we can solve it—in fact, developing solutions may
well be a multi-year effort. This article aims to convince readers that there is indeed an important
problem, proposes a sanity check, develops a theoretical framework for reliability guarantees, and
seeks to motivate future work on solutions.

R EPRODUCIBILITY STATEMENT
Code to replicate experiments from this paper is available from the supplementary material and will be open-
sourced on GitHub. The proofs for our theory can be found in Appendix B. Method details beyond the descrip-
tions from the main text, including the choice of hyperparameters, are available from our extensive 18-page
appendix as well (Appendix C). There are no special compute requirements (e.g., we do not train large mod-
els). Information pertaining to code libraries and feature visualization details can be found in Appendix C.2.
We added a table of contents at the beginning of the appendix section to facilitate accessibility.


R EFERENCES
Julius Adebayo, Justin Gilmer, Michael Muelly, Ian Goodfellow, Moritz Hardt, and Been Kim.
  Sanity checks for saliency maps. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 31, 2018.
  Cited on pages 1 and 5.

Yossi Adi, Carsten Baum, Moustapha Cisse, Benny Pinkas, and Joseph Keshet. Turning your weak-
  ness into a strength: Watermarking deep neural networks by backdooring. In 27th USENIX Secu-
  rity Symposium (USENIX Security 18), pp. 1615–1631, 2018. Cited on page 15.

Ulrich Aı̈vodji, Hiromi Arai, Olivier Fortineau, Sébastien Gambs, Satoshi Hara, and Alain Tapp.
  Fairwashing: the risk of rationalization. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
  161–170. PMLR, 2019. Cited on page 15.


                                                     10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Christopher Anders, Plamen Pasliev, Ann-Kathrin Dombrowski, Klaus-Robert Müller, and Pan
  Kessel. Fairwashing explanations with off-manifold detergent. In International Conference on
  Machine Learning, pp. 314–323. PMLR, 2020. Cited on page 15.
Raman Arora, Amitabh Basu, Poorya Mianjy, and Anirbit Mukherjee. Understanding deep neu-
  ral networks with rectified linear units. In Proceedings of the 6th International Conference on
  Learning Representations, 2018. Cited on page 23.
A. Banerjee, Xin Guo, and Hui Wang. On the optimality of conditional expectation as a Bregman
  predictor. IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 51(7):2664–2669, 2005. Cited on page 20.
Hubert Baniecki, Wojciech Kretowicz, and Przemyslaw Biecek. Fooling partial dependence via data
  poisoning. In Machine Learning and Knowledge Discovery in Databases: European Conference,
  ECML PKDD 2022, Grenoble, France, September 19–23, 2022, Proceedings, Part III, pp. 121–
  136. Springer, 2023. Cited on page 16.
Pouya Bashivan, Kohitij Kar, and James J DiCarlo. Neural population control via deep image
  synthesis. Science, 364(6439):eaav9436, 2019. Cited on page 2.
David Bau, Bolei Zhou, Aditya Khosla, Aude Oliva, and Antonio Torralba. Network dissection:
  Quantifying interpretability of deep visual representations. In Proceedings of the IEEE Confer-
  ence on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 6541–6549, 2017. Cited on page 16.
Blair Bilodeau, Natasha Jaques, Pang Wei Koh, and Been Kim. Impossibility theorems for feature
  attribution. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.11870, 2022. Cited on page 9.
Julian Bitterwolf, Maximilian Müller, and Matthias Hein. In or out? fixing ImageNet out-of-
  distribution detection evaluation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.00826, 2023. Cited on page 33.
Judy Borowski, Roland Simon Zimmermann, Judith Schepers, Robert Geirhos, Thomas SA Wallis,
  Matthias Bethge, and Wieland Brendel. Exemplary natural images explain CNN activations better
  than state-of-the-art feature visualization. In International Conference on Learning Representa-
  tions, 2021. Cited on pages 2, 17, and 26.
Miles Brundage, Shahar Avin, Jasmine Wang, Haydn Belfield, Gretchen Krueger, Gillian Hadfield,
 Heidy Khlaaf, Jingying Yang, Helen Toner, Ruth Fong, et al. Toward trustworthy AI development:
 mechanisms for supporting verifiable claims. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.07213, 2020. Cited on
 pages 3 and 15.
Kuan-Lin Chen, Harinath Garudadri, and Bhaskar D. Rao. Improved bounds on neural complex-
  ity for representing piecewise linear functions. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems 36, 2022. Cited on page 23.
Xinyun Chen, Chang Liu, Bo Li, Kimberly Lu, and Dawn Song. Targeted backdoor attacks on deep
  learning systems using data poisoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1712.05526, 2017. Cited on page 15.
Dumitru Erhan, Yoshua Bengio, Aaron Courville, and Pascal Vincent. Visualizing higher-layer
  features of a deep network. University of Montreal, 1341(3):1, 2009. Cited on pages 1, 7, and 16.
Shihong Fang and Anna Choromanska. Backdoor attacks on the DNN interpretation system. In
  Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pp. 561–570, 2022. Cited on
  page 16.
Thomas Fel, Thibaut Boissin, Victor Boutin, Agustin Picard, Paul Novello, Julien Colin, Drew
  Linsley, Tom Rousseau, Rémi Cadène, Laurent Gardes, et al. Unlocking feature visualization for
  deeper networks with MAgnitude Constrained Optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.06805,
  2023. Cited on page 2.
Hidde Fokkema, Rianne de Heide, and Tim van Erven. Attribution-based explanations that provide
  recourse cannot be robust. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.15834, 2022. Cited on page 9.
Future of Life Institute. Pause giant AI experiments: An open letter, 2023. URL https://
  futureoflife.org/open-letter/pause-giant-ai-experiments/. Cited on
  page 1.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Ella M Gale, Nicholas Martin, Ryan Blything, Anh Nguyen, and Jeffrey S Bowers. Are there any
  ’object detectors’ in the hidden layers of CNNs trained to identify objects or scenes? Vision
  Research, 176:60–71, 2020. Cited on page 2.
Micah Goldblum, Dimitris Tsipras, Chulin Xie, Xinyun Chen, Avi Schwarzschild, Dawn Song,
 Aleksander Madry, Bo Li, and Tom Goldstein. Dataset security for machine learning: Data
 poisoning, backdoor attacks, and defenses. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine
 Intelligence, 45(2):1563–1580, 2022. Cited on page 16.
Greentfrapp. Lucent. https://github.com/greentfrapp/lucent, v0.1.8. Cited on
  page 27.
Tianyu Gu, Brendan Dolan-Gavitt, and Siddharth Garg. Badnets: Identifying vulnerabilities in the
  machine learning model supply chain. arXiv preprint arXiv:1708.06733, 2017. Cited on page 15.
Arushi Gupta and Sanjeev Arora. A simple saliency method that passes the sanity checks. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1905.12152, 2019. Cited on page 1.
Tessa Han, Suraj Srinivas, and Himabindu Lakkaraju. Which explanation should I choose? A func-
  tion approximation perspective to characterizing post hoc explanations. In Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems 36, 2022. Cited on page 9.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image recog-
  nition. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp.
  770–778, 2016. Cited on page 5.
Matthias Hein and Maksym Andriushchenko. Formal guarantees on the robustness of a classifier
 against adversarial manipulation. Advances in neural information processing systems, 30, 2017.
 Cited on page 32.
Kai Heinrich, Patrick Zschech, Tarek Skouti, Jakob Griebenow, and Sebastian Riechert. Demystify-
  ing the black box: A classification scheme for interpretation and visualization of deep intelligent
  systems. In Twenty-fifth Americas Conference on Information Systems, 2019. Cited on page 7.
Juyeon Heo, Sunghwan Joo, and Taesup Moon. Fooling neural network interpretations via adver-
  sarial model manipulation. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019. Cited
  on pages 15 and 16.
Kurt Hornik, Maxwell Stinchcombe, and Halbert White. Multilayer feedforward networks are uni-
  versal approximators. Neural Networks, 2(5):359–366, 1989. Cited on page 18.
Nikolaus Kriegeskorte. Deep neural networks: a new framework for modeling biological vision
  and brain information processing. Annual Review of Vision Science, 1:417–446, 2015. Cited on
  page 17.
Matthew L Leavitt and Ari Morcos. Towards falsifiable interpretability research. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2010.12016, 2020. Cited on page 17.
Scott M Lundberg and Su-In Lee. A unified approach to interpreting model predictions. Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems, 30, 2017. Cited on page 1.
Aravindh Mahendran and Andrea Vedaldi. Understanding deep image representations by inverting
  them. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp.
  5188–5196, 2015. Cited on page 16.
Aravindh Mahendran and Andrea Vedaldi. Visualizing deep convolutional neural networks using
  natural pre-images. International Journal of Computer Vision, 120:233–255, 2016. Cited on
  page 1.
Alexander Mordvintsev, Christopher Olah, and Mike Tyka. DeepDream-a code example for visual-
  izing neural networks. Google Research, 2(5), 2015. Cited on page 1.
Geraldin Nanfack, Alexander Fulleringer, Jonathan Marty, Michael Eickenberg, and Eugene
  Belilovsky. Adversarial attacks on the interpretation of neuron activation maximization. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2306.07397, 2023. Cited on pages 16 and 17.


                                                 12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Anh Nguyen, Jason Yosinski, and Jeff Clune. Multifaceted feature visualization: Uncovering
  the different types of features learned by each neuron in deep neural networks. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1602.03616, 2016. Cited on page 1.
Anh Nguyen, Jason Yosinski, and Jeff Clune. Understanding neural networks via feature visualiza-
  tion: A survey. Explainable AI: interpreting, explaining and visualizing deep learning, pp. 55–76,
  2019. Cited on pages 2, 3, 7, 15, and 16.
Weili Nie, Yang Zhang, and Ankit Patel. A theoretical explanation for perplexing behaviors of
 backpropagation-based visualizations. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
 3809–3818. PMLR, 2018. Cited on page 1.
Maximilian Noppel, Lukas Peter, and Christian Wressnegger. Backdooring explainable machine
 learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.09498, 2022. Cited on page 16.
Chris Olah, Alexander Mordvintsev, and Ludwig Schubert. Feature visualization. Distill, 2017. doi:
  10.23915/distill.00007. https://distill.pub/2017/feature-visualization. Cited on pages 1, 2, 3, 6, 7,
  16, 17, and 26.
Chris Olah, Arvind Satyanarayan, Ian Johnson, Shan Carter, Ludwig Schubert, Katherine Ye, and
  Alexander Mordvintsev. The building blocks of interpretability. Distill, 2018. doi: 10.23915/
  distill.00010. https://distill.pub/2018/building-blocks. Cited on pages 7, 10, and 16.
Chris Olah, Nick Cammarata, Ludwig Schubert, Gabriel Goh, Michael Petrov, and Shan Carter.
  Zoom in: An introduction to circuits. Distill, 5(3):e00024–001, 2020. Cited on pages 3, 10,
  and 17.
Carlos R Ponce, Will Xiao, Peter F Schade, Till S Hartmann, Gabriel Kreiman, and Margaret S
  Livingstone. Evolving images for visual neurons using a deep generative network reveals coding
  principles and neuronal preferences. Cell, 177(4):999–1009, 2019. Cited on page 2.
Friedemann Pulvermüller, Max Garagnani, and Thomas Wennekers. Thinking in circuits: toward
  neurobiological explanation in cognitive neuroscience. Biological Cybernetics, 108:573–593,
  2014. Cited on page 3.
Sukrut Rao, Moritz Böhle, and Bernt Schiele. Towards better understanding attribution methods.
  In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp.
  10223–10232, 2022. Cited on page 1.
Benjamin Recht, Rebecca Roelofs, Ludwig Schmidt, and Vaishaal Shankar. Do ImageNet classifiers
  generalize to ImageNet? In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 5389–5400.
  PMLR, 2019. Cited on page 33.
Marco Tulio Ribeiro, Sameer Singh, and Carlos Guestrin. ”why should i trust you?” explaining the
 predictions of any classifier. In Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGKDD International Conference
 on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, pp. 1135–1144, 2016. Cited on page 1.
Sara Sabour, Yanshuai Cao, Fartash Faghri, and David J Fleet. Adversarial manipulation of deep rep-
  resentations. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2015. Cited on page 16.
Hadi Salman, Andrew Ilyas, Logan Engstrom, Ashish Kapoor, and Aleksander Madry. Do adver-
  sarially robust imagenet models transfer better? Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 33:3533–3545, 2020. Cited on page 32.
Ramprasaath R Selvaraju, Michael Cogswell, Abhishek Das, Ramakrishna Vedantam, Devi Parikh,
  and Dhruv Batra. Grad-cam: Visual explanations from deep networks via gradient-based local-
  ization. In Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 618–626,
  2017. Cited on page 1.
Ali Shahin Shamsabadi, Mohammad Yaghini, Natalie Dullerud, Sierra Wyllie, Ulrich Aı̈vodji, Aisha
  Alaagib, Sébastien Gambs, and Nicolas Papernot. Washing the unwashable: On the (im) possi-
  bility of fairwashing detection. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:14170–
  14182, 2022. Cited on page 15.


                                                  13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Lee Sharkey. Circumventing interpretability: How to defeat mind-readers.            arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2212.11415, 2022. Cited on page 15.
Dylan Slack, Sophie Hilgard, Emily Jia, Sameer Singh, and Himabindu Lakkaraju. Fooling
  LIME and SHAP: Adversarial attacks on post hoc explanation methods. In Proceedings of the
  AAAI/ACM Conference on AI, Ethics, and Society, pp. 180–186, 2020. Cited on page 16.
Jost Tobias Springenberg, Alexey Dosovitskiy, Thomas Brox, and Martin Riedmiller. Striving for
  simplicity: The all convolutional net. arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6806, 2014. Cited on page 1.
Suraj Srinivas and François Fleuret. Full-gradient representation for neural network visualization.
  In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 33, 2019. Cited on page 9.
Mukund Sundararajan, Ankur Taly, and Qiqi Yan. Axiomatic attribution for deep networks. In
 International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 3319–3328. PMLR, 2017. Cited on page 1.
Christian Szegedy, Wei Liu, Yangqing Jia, Pierre Sermanet, Scott Reed, Dragomir Anguelov, Du-
  mitru Erhan, Vincent Vanhoucke, and Andrew Rabinovich. Going deeper with convolutions. In
  Proceedings of the IEEE conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 1–9, 2015.
  Cited on page 3.
Edgar Y Walker, Fabian H Sinz, Erick Cobos, Taliah Muhammad, Emmanouil Froudarakis, Paul G
  Fahey, Alexander S Ecker, Jacob Reimer, Xaq Pitkow, and Andreas S Tolias. Inception loops
  discover what excites neurons most using deep predictive models. Nature Neuroscience, 22(12):
  2060–2065, 2019. Cited on page 2.
Jason Yosinski, Jeff Clune, Anh Nguyen, Thomas Fuchs, and Hod Lipson. Understanding neural
  networks through deep visualization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1506.06579, 2015. Cited on page 1.
Roland S Zimmermann, Judy Borowski, Robert Geirhos, Matthias Bethge, Thomas Wallis, and
  Wieland Brendel. How well do feature visualizations support causal understanding of CNN acti-
  vations? Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:11730–11744, 2021. Cited on
  pages 2, 17, 26, 30, and 31.
Roland S Zimmermann, Thomas Klein, and Wieland Brendel. Scale alone does not improve mecha-
  nistic interpretability in vision models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.05471, 2023. Cited on pages 9,
  30, and 31.


                                                14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Appendix
Table of Contents
      A Literature                                                                                   15
        A.1 Related work on deceiving interpretability methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       15
        A.2 Literature expectations about feature visualization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      16
        A.3 Relationship to highly activating natural samples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      17

      B Proofs and theory details                                                                    17
        B.1 Proof for fooling circuit (Section 2.1) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    17
        B.2 Details on interpretation of Table 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     18
        B.3 Additional impossibility results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     20
        B.4 Positive results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   21
        B.5 Proofs for Section 4 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     21
        B.6 Can we move beyond worst-case analyses? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          26
        B.7 Relationship of theoretical results to psychophysical experiments . . . . . . . .        26

      C Method details                                                                               26
        C.1 Classifier training (Section 2.1) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    26
        C.2 Feature visualization figures (Section 2) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    27
        C.3 Sanity check (Section 3) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     27
        C.4 Linearity experiments (Section 5) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      30

      D Fooling feature visualizations of adversarially robust models                                32

      E Do feature visualizations fail the sanity check simply because they are out-of-
        distribution?                                                                   33

      F Broader impacts                                                                              35

      G Limitations                                                                                  35

      H Image sources                                                                                36



A     L ITERATURE
A.1   R ELATED WORK ON DECEIVING INTERPRETABILITY METHODS

Our experiments from Section 2 serve two purposes. First, we provide a proof of concept that it is
possible to develop networks with arbitrary or misleading visualizations. Second, feature visualiza-
tions have been proposed as model auditing tools (Brundage et al., 2020) that should be integrated
“into the testbeds for AI applications” (Nguyen et al., 2019, p. 20). Our work demonstrates the first
“interpretability circumvention method” (term by Sharkey, 2022) for feature visualization, which
corresponds to a well-known attack scenario where an entity wants to hide certain network behavior
(e.g., to fool a third-party model audit or regulator). For instance, the literature considers scenarios
where a model bias is discovered (e.g., a model exploits protected attributes like gender for classi-
fication), but since removing this bias decreases model performance, there is an incentive to hide
the bias instead (Heo et al., 2019; Anders et al., 2020; Shahin Shamsabadi et al., 2022) without
compromising model performance. Adapting models to maintain their behavior on standard input
while showing malicious behavior under adversarial circumstances is known under various names:
fairwashing if the goal is to hide model bias (Anders et al., 2020; Aı̈vodji et al., 2019), model
backdooring or weight poisoning (Chen et al., 2017; Gu et al., 2017; Adi et al., 2018) (applied to


                                                     15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


saliency maps by (Fang & Choromanska, 2022; Noppel et al., 2022)), data poisoning (Goldblum
et al., 2022) if the change in model weights is achieved through interfering with the training data
(explored by Baniecki et al. (2023) in the context of explanation methods), adversarial model ma-
nipulation to fool saliency maps (Heo et al., 2019), and scaffolding for fooling LIME and SHAP
(Slack et al., 2020). Thus, while we are the first to successfully deceive feature visualizations in this
manner, the scenario of adapting a model to deceive an interpretability method has a rich history.
A complementary approach is proposed by Nanfack et al. (2023), which changes highly activating
dataset samples without changing feature visualizations; finally, Sabour et al. (2015) demonstrated
that hidden representations of neural networks can be adversarially manipulated, fooling the early
visualization method by Mahendran & Vedaldi (2015).

A.2   L ITERATURE EXPECTATIONS ABOUT FEATURE VISUALIZATION

This short section provides a few expectations/hopes that are presented in the literature when it
comes to feature visualizations.
Original activation maximization paper by Erhan et al. (2009):

      • “a pattern to which the unit is responding maximally could be a good first-order represen-
        tation of what a unit is doing”
      • “It is perhaps unrealistic to expect that as we scale the datasets to larger and larger images,
        one could still find a simple representation of a higher layer unit.”
      • “we hope that such visualization techniques can help understand the nature of the functions
        learned by the network”

More recent literature:

      • “Feature visualization allows us to see how GoogLeNet, trained on the ImageNet dataset,
        builds up its understanding of images over many layers” (Olah et al., 2017)
      • “Feature visualization answers questions about what a network—or parts of a network—are
        looking for by generating examples.” (Olah et al., 2017)
      • “If we want to find out what kind of input would cause a certain behavior—whether that’s
        an internal neuron firing or the final output behavior—we can use derivatives to iteratively
        tweak the input towards that goal” (Olah et al., 2017)
      • “optimization approach can be a powerful way to understand what a model is really looking
        for, because it separates the things causing behavior from things that merely correlate with
        the causes”. “Optimization isolates the causes of behavior from mere correlations.” (Olah
        et al., 2017)
      • “In the quest to make neural networks interpretable, feature visualization stands out as one
        of the most promising and developed research directions. By itself, feature visualization
        will never give a completely satisfactory understanding. We see it as one of the fundamental
        building blocks that, combined with additional tools, will empower humans to understand
        these systems.” (Olah et al., 2017)
      • “To make a semantic dictionary, we pair every neuron activation with a visualization of that
        neuron and sort them by the magnitude of the activation.”; “Semantic dictionaries give us
        a fine-grained look at an activation: what does each single neuron detect?” (Olah et al.,
        2018)
      • “Feature visualization helps us answer what the network detects” (Olah et al., 2018)
      • “The behavior of a CNN can be visualized by sampling image patches that maximize acti-
        vation of hidden units [...], or by using variants of backpropagation to identify or generate
        salient image features” (Bau et al., 2017)
      • “Activation maximization techniques enable us to shine light into the black-box neural
        networks.” (Nguyen et al., 2019)

Critical voices:


                                                   16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


      • “While these methods may be useful for building intuition, they can also encourage three
        potentially misleading assumptions: that the visualization is representative of the neuron’s
        behavior; that the neuron is responsible for a clearly delineated portion of the task or the
        network’s behavior; and that the neuron’s behavior is representative of the network’s be-
        havior.” (Leavitt & Morcos, 2020)
      • “synthetic images from a popular feature visualization method are significantly less infor-
        mative for assessing CNN activations than natural images” (Borowski et al., 2021)
      • “[We] find no evidence that a widely-used feature visualization method provides humans
        with better ‘causal understanding’ of unit activations than simple alternative visualizations”
        (Zimmermann et al., 2021)
      • “Neural networks often contain ‘polysemantic neurons’ that respond to multiple unrelated
        inputs.” (Olah et al., 2020)
      • “Units similar to those [hand-picked units] may be the exception rather than the rule, and
        it is unclear whether they are essential to the functionality of the network. For example,
        meaningful selectivities could reside in linear combinations of units rather than in sin-
        gle units, with weak distributed activities encoding essential information.” (Kriegeskorte,
        2015)

A.3   R ELATIONSHIP TO HIGHLY ACTIVATING NATURAL SAMPLES

In the interpretability community, visualizing highly activating natural samples for certain units is
often done either alongside or instead of feature visualizations (Olah et al., 2017; Borowski et al.,
2021). A natural question to ask is whether our results would apply to highly activating natural
samples, too. Since this paper covers three perspectives we have three answers to this question:
From the adversarial perspective, we could easily use our method from Section 2.2 to build a net-
work where the top k natural images do not correspond to what the unit is usually selective for. This
can be achieved by setting the bias parameter b to a smaller value such that it would only suppress
activations up to the, say, 95th percentile of natural input. A recent paper specifically looked into
manipulating the top-k activating images (Nanfack et al., 2023).
From the empirical perspective, highly activating natural images would pass the sanity check since
highly activating natural images are, by definition, natural images that highly activate a unit and they
would thus be processed like other natural images.
From the theoretical perspective, our impossibility results can be extended to many variations on
using the argmax for feature visualization, including using the most activating dataset samples as
explanations. Essentially, as long as the feature visualization method does not narrow down the
function space too much, our results will apply. It is easy to see that two simple (e.g., piecewise lin-
ear) functions could have the same 5 (or 10, etc.) local (arg)maxima and yet behave very differently
even quite near these local maxima, and hence our theorems could be extended.
Thus in summary, highly activating natural images would pass our sanity check but it would still
be possible to construct networks that show misleading highly activating natural images, which is a
case that is covered by the theory.


B     P ROOFS AND THEORY DETAILS

B.1   P ROOF FOR FOOLING CIRCUIT (S ECTION 2.1)

Lemma 1. Let k > 0, A : R+ × R+ → R and B, C : R+ × { 0, 1 } → R+ with

                                   A(x, y) = x + y
                                   B(x, z) = max(0, x − kz)
                                   C(x, z) = max(0, x + kz − k)



                                                  17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


be computations represented by a sub-graph of a neural network. Denote the combination of these
computations as N : R+ × R+ × { 0, 1 } with
                                 N (x, y, z) = A(B(x, z), C(y, z)).
Then it holds that

                                                              N (x, y, 0) = x
                      ∀x, y ∈ R+ : k ≥ max(x, y) =⇒                             .
                                                              N (x, y, 1) = y

Proof of Lemma 1. First, consider the case where the binary input of N is 0; that is, z = 0. Then,
since k ≥ y,
                                 B(x, 0) = max(0, x) = x
                                                                                               (6)
                                 C(y, 0) = max(0, y − k) = 0,
so N (x, y, 0) = A(B(x, 0), C(y, 0)) = A(x, 0) = x.
Analogously consider z = 1. Then, since k ≥ x,
                                   B(x, 1) = max(0, x − k) = 0
                                                                                                   (7)
                                   C(y, 1) = max(0, y) = y,
so N (x, y, 1) = A(B(x, 1), C(y, 1)) = A(0, y) = y, completing the proof.
Lemma 2. Let X denote the space of all possible inputs (e.g., all images), D some distribution on
X (e.g., ImageNet). Let D, F : X → R+ represent the full computation of a unit in the original
and in the tinkered network, respectively, that can be bounded on their domain. For an arbitrary
algorithm Opt : {X → R} × X → X and distribution π0 on X define the following sequence of
random variables: ∀n > 0 : Xn+1 = Opt(D, Xn ) and X0 ∼ π0 . Denote the distribution over
X induced by this process π. If D and π have disjoint support, then there exists a neural network
implementing a function N : X → R such that
                     Px∼π [N (x) = D(x)] = 1 and Px∼D [N (x) = F (x)] = 1.

Proof of Lemma 2. As D and π have disjoint support this means that there exists a function E :
R → { 0, 1 } such that
                         Px∼π [E(x) = 0] = 1 and Px∼D [E(x) = 1] = 1.                              (8)
Let k = max (maxx∈D D(x), maxx∈π D(x)), which exists as both D and F are bounded. In
line with Lemma 1, we construct N as N (x) = A(B(D(x), E(x)), C(F (x), ¬E(x))). Per the
universal approximation theorem (Hornik et al., 1989), there exists a neural network implementing
the assumed function E. As all other computations (i.e., A, B, C, D, F ) are implemented by a
neural network, we can conclude that the constructed function N can also be implemented by a
neural network.
Applying Lemma 1 and Eq. (8) directly yields
                     Px∼π [N (x) = D(x)] = 1 and Px∼D [N (x) = F (x)] = 1,                         (9)
concluding the proof.
Remark 1. In the case of feature visualizations, the assumption that π and D have disjoint support
is plausible as demonstrated empirically in Section 2.1; this can also be visually appreciated from
looking at Figure 3 showing a visualization trajectory which at no point resembles natural images.
                                                                                                  /

B.2   D ETAILS ON INTERPRETATION OF TABLE 1

First, we elaborate on what No and Yes mean in Table 1.
The weakest form of answering No would be to find a single function f where feature visualization
cannot be used to predict f . At the other extreme, one could hope to show that feature visualization
cannot be used to predict f for all f . Unfortunately, this is trivially impossible to show: for every
distinct value the feature visualization can take, one could pick a function f that agrees with this


                                                 18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


visualization (e.g., has the same arg max) and use this as the prediction. In light of this, we prove
the next strongest impossibility result. When the answer is No, we show that for all2 functions f
(except for a handful of corner cases, like constant functions), there exists another function f 0 that
gets the exact same feature visualization as f yet cannot be accurately predicted. Similarly, for the
cells with extra assumptions in orange, this means that the answer is No (as defined in the previous
sentence) unless these extra assumptions are satisfied.
We measure predictive accuracy using the sup norm for simplicity, but our results could be extended
to any other strictly convex loss. This is essentially the strongest result one could hope for: by the
intermediate value theorem, any continuous f must take every value in between fmin and fmax , and
hence it is impossible to prove that f (x) can’t be recovered for every x. On the contrary, for the
cells where the answer is Yes, we can actually prove something much stronger than the converse
of No: we prove that f (x) can be predicted for all x and for all f . This hints at the necessity of
such strong assumptions. Either the function class is so simple that feature visualization reveals
everything about every function, or feature visualization reveals hardly anything about any function.
To find the precise results that correspond to each cell of Table 1, see Table 2.


                                     Table 2: Theoretical results corresponding to each cell of Table 1.

                               Given feature visualization for a function f and an input x, can we reliably predict. . .
                                                            f (x)?      f (x) ε-approx.? if f (x) is closer to fmax or fmin ?
←−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−


                        black-box                  F    Theorem 1          Theorem 1                  Theorem 2
Stronger assumptions about f


                        neural network (NN)        FNN Theorem 1           Theorem 1                  Theorem 2
                        NN trained with ERM        FERM Theorem 1          Theorem 1                  Theorem 2
                                                    L
                        L−Lipschitz (known L)      FLip  Theorem 4         Theorem 4                  Theorem 5
                        piecewise affine           FPAff Theorem 1         Theorem 1                  Theorem 2
                        monotonic                  FMono Theorem 1         Theorem 1                  Theorem 2
                        convex                     FConvx Theorem 3        Theorem 3                  Theorem 2
                                                    d>1
                        affine (input dim. > 1)    FAff   Theorem 6        Theorem 6                  Theorem 7
                                                    d=1
                        affine (input dim. = 1)    FAff Theorem 8          Theorem 8                  Theorem 8
                        constant                   FConst Theorem 8        Theorem 8                  Theorem 8


   2
     Affine functions are the only exception, since there are more cases where an affine f can be exactly recov-
ered from feature visualization. See Theorem 6 for the precise characterization.


                                                                      19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Finally, we define precisely what each assumption means in Table 1. For any space A, let M(A)
denote the set of all probability measures on A.
                                  n                                                          o
Neural Network: FNN             = f ∈ F : can be written as mat. mul. with scalar activations
                                  n
NN with ERM:          FERM      = f ∈ FNN : ∃π ∈ M(I × [0, 1]) s.t.
                                         f = arg min        E       `(f 0 (X), Y ),
                                                f 0 ∈F   (X,Y )∼π
                                                                                                     o
                                      where ` is a Bregman loss function (see Banerjee et al., 2005)

                          L
                                     n                f (x) − f (x0 )    o
Lipschitz:               FLip       = f ∈ F : sup             0
                                                                      ≤ L
                                              x,x0 ∈I kx − x k∞
                                     n                                                                   o
Piecewise Affine: FPAff             = f ∈ F : can be written as affine on each piece of a partition of I
                                     n                                 o n                               o
Monotone:                FMono      = f ∈ F : ∀x ≤ x0 , f (x) ≤ f (x0 ) ∪ f : ∀x ≤ x0 , f (x) ≥ f (x0 ) 3
                                     n
Convex:                  FConvx     = f ∈ F : ∀x, x0 ∈ I ∀α ∈ [0, 1],
                                                                                    o
                                      f (αx + (1 − α)x0 ) ≤ αf (x) + (1 − α)f (x0 )
                                     n                                                        o
                          d
Affine:                  FAff       = f ∈ F : ∃A ∈ Rd ∃b ∈ R s.t. ∀x ∈ I, f (x) = AT x + b
                                     n                                   o
Constant:                FConst     = f ∈ F : ∀x, x0 ∈ I, f (x) = f (x0 ) .


B.3      A DDITIONAL IMPOSSIBILITY RESULTS

While Theorems 1 and 2 already provide impossibility for strong assumptions like monotonicity
and piecewise affine, convexity is a particularly strong assumption since it restricts the output space
of functions. In particular, no convex function can cross the diagonal line from fmin to fmax , and
hence it is possible that more information can be recovered from just these values. However, the
next result shows that this information can only be used to possibly improve a constant 1/2 to 1/4,
and arbitrary approximation is still impossible (unless the function is constant).
Theorem 3. For all D ∈ D and f ∈ FConvx , there exists f 0 ∈ FConvx such that Φmin max (f ) =
Φmin max (f 0 ) and
                                                              0       0
                                                            fmax  − fmin
                              f 0 − D(Φmin max (f 0 ))    ≥               .
                                                       ∞          4
Similarly, a known Lipschitz constant implies local stability of f , which may be possible for a
decoder to exploit. However, we show that this is also not possible in general (our result is stated
in 1-dimension for simplicity, but could be extended trivially to arbitrary dimension using the sup
norm definition of Lipschitz).
Theorem 4. For all D ∈ D, L > 0, and f ∈ FLip   L
                                                  , there exists f 0 ∈ FLip
                                                                         L
                                                                            such that Φmin max (f ) =
            0
Φmin max (f ) and if 2 |fmax − fmin | ≤ L |xmax − xmin | then
                                                                         0      0
                                                                        fmax − fmin
                                  f 0 − D(Φmin max (f 0 ))          ≥               .
                                                                ∞            2
Moreover, even if 2 |fmax − fmin | > L |xmax − xmin |,
                                             n                                      o
       f 0 − D(Φmin max (f 0 ))     ≥ L max min{xmin , xmax }, 1 − max{xmin , xmax } .
                                        ∞

                    L
First, for all f ∈ FLip it holds that |fmax − fmin | ≤ L |xmax − xmin |, so the first condition nearly
captures all cases. As already argued, under this condition our lower bound is tight by Proposi-
tion 1. Even when the condition fails, our lower bound is zero if and only if |xmax − xmin | = 1
   3
       For d-dimensional inputs, x ≤ x0 if and only if xj ≤ x0j for all j ∈ [d].


                                                          20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


and |fmax − fmin | > L/2. This is nearly tight, since if |fmax − fmin | = L, then necessarily
|xmax − xmin | = 1 and f is linear and uniquely identifiable from Φmin max (f ) (and hence the lower
bound must be zero in this case).
A similar condition can be used to provide a Lipschitz analogue of Theorem 2.
                                                 L
Theorem 5. For all D ∈ D, L > 0, and f ∈ FLip       such that 2 |fmax − fmin | ≤ L |xmax − xmin |,
there exists f ∈ FLip such that Φmin max (f ) = Φmin max (f 0 ) and
              0    L



                   1f 0 >mf 0 − 1D(Φ             (f 0 ))>mf 0         ≥ 1sup                            .
                                       min max                               x∈I f (x)6=inf x∈I f (x)
                                                                  ∞

Finally, we have the following negative result for affine functions. Due to the extra structure im-
posed by an affine assumption, in more cases it is possible to fully recover f from just the feature
visualization. However, in the worst case, f may still be completely unrecoverable. We show this
for d = 2; a similar result can be shown in higher dimensions with more careful accounting of edge
cases.
Theorem 6. For all D ∈ D and f ∈ FAff       d=2
                                                , there exists f 0 ∈ FAff
                                                                      d=2
                                                                          such that Φmin max (f ) =
            0
Φmin max (f ) and
                                                                                           0      0
                                                                                          fmax − fmin
              f 0 − D(Φmin max (f 0 ))          ≥ 1xmin,1 6=xmin,2 1xmax,1 6=xmax,2                   .
                                          ∞                                                    2
The same can also be shown for the analogue of Theorem 2.
Theorem 7. For all D ∈ D and f ∈ FAff    d=2
                                             , there exists f 0 ∈ FAff
                                                                   d=2
                                                                       such that Φmin max (f ) =
           0
Φmin max (f ) and

                1f 0 >mf 0 − 1D(Φ             (f 0 ))>mf 0        ≥ 1xmin,1 6=xmin,2 1xmax,1 6=xmax,2 .
                                    min max
                                                              ∞
Remark 2. Our negative results for affine functions rely on the constrained nature of the inputs.
Without such constraints, the task of feature visualization would generally become even more dif-
ficult (and in practice, inputs are always bounded). However, specifically for affine functions, on
unbounded inputs one could take advantage of the fact that the arg max will be proportional to the
weight vector, and hence could more reliably predict f from Φmin max (f ). Similarly, adding regular-
ization when computing Φmin max could lead to reliably predicting f even with bounded inputs. /

B.4     P OSITIVE RESULTS

Finally, we state our positive result for very simple functions.
                              d=1
Theorem 8. For all G ∈ {FAff      , FConst } there exists D ∈ D such that for all f ∈ G,

                                      f − D(Φmin max (f ))                  = 0.
                                                                        ∞


B.5     P ROOFS FOR S ECTION 4

Remark 3. Throughout, we prove impossibility results for 1-dimensional functions. The exten-
sion to multiple dimensions follows from using our constructions componentwise and then applying
Lemma 3 or Lemma 4 as appropriate, which hold for any input dimension.                         /

B.5.1    H ELPER LEMMAS
To prove results for the first two columns on Table 1, we use the following lemma to characterize
the performance of an arbitrary decoder D ∈ D.
Lemma 3. For any D ∈ D and f1 , f2 ∈ F such that Φmin max (f1 ) = Φmin max (f2 ), for some
f ∈ {f1 , f2 }
                                                         kf1 − f2 k∞
                               f − D(Φmin max (f ))    ≥              .
                                                    ∞          2

                                                             21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Proof of Lemma 3. Let g = D(Φmin max (f1 )) = D(Φmin max (f2 )) and let x be such that
|f1 (x) − f2 (x)| = kf1 − f2 k∞ . Then, since mean is less than max,
        1                    1                 1
          |f1 (x) − f2 (x)| ≤ |f1 (x) − g(x)| + |g(x) − f2 (x)| ≤ max |f (x) − g(x)| .
        2                    2                 2                 f ∈{f1 ,f2 }


Then, for any G ⊆ F of interest and any f ∈ G, we simply have to find f1 , f2 ∈ G such that
Φmin max (f ) = Φmin max (f1 ) = Φmin max (f2 ) and kf1 − f2 k∞ is appropriately large (where
“large” will depend on f ).
Similarly, we use the following lemma to prove results for the third column of Table 1.
Lemma 4. For any D ∈ D and f1 , f2 ∈ F such that Φmin max (f1 ) = Φmin max (f2 ), for some
f ∈ {f1 , f2 }

                        1f >mf − 1D(Φ             (f ))>mf        ≥ k1f1 >m − 1f2 >m k∞ ,
                                        min max
                                                              ∞

where m = mf1 = mf2 .

Proof of Lemma 4. Let g = D(Φmin max (f1 )) = D(Φmin max (f2 )) and let x be such that
 1f1 (x)>m − 1f2 (x)>m = k1f1 >m − 1f2 >m k∞ .
If k1f1 >m − 1f2 >m k∞ = 0 the result holds trivially, so suppose that k1f1 >m − 1f2 >m k∞ = 1.
That is, 1f1 (x)>m 6= 1f2 (x)>m . If 1g(x)>m = 1f1 (x)>m , then

                    1f2 >m − 1D(Φ             (f2 ))>m        ≥ 1f2 (x)>m − 1g(x)>m = 1.
                                    min max
                                                         ∞

Otherwise, if 1g(x)>m = 1f2 (x)>m , then

                    1f1 >m − 1D(Φ             (f1 ))>m        ≥ 1f1 (x)>m − 1g(x)>m = 1.
                                    min max
                                                         ∞

That is,
                 max        1f >m − 1D(Φ           (f ))>m        ≥ 1 = k1f1 >m − 1f2 >m k∞ .
                f ∈f1 ,f2                min max
                                                              ∞


B.5.2      P ROOF OF P ROPOSITION 1

Let D(xmin , xmax , fmin , fmax ) ≡ (1/2)(fmax + fmin ) and fix f ∈ F. For any x,
                               fmax + fmin          fmax + fmin   fmax − fmin
                     f (x) −               ≤ fmax −             =
                                    2                    2             2
and
                     fmax + fmin           fmax + fmin          fmax − fmin
                                 − f (x) ≤             − fmin =             .
                          2                     2                    2
Thus,
                                            fmax + fmin   fmax − fmin
                                  f (x) −               ≤             .
                                                 2             2
Since x was arbitrary, the result holds.



                                                         22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B.5.3     P ROOF OF T HEOREM 1
First, suppose 0 ≤ xmin < xmax ≤ 1.
Define
                 
                 f2(f
                   min                                                  x ∈ [0, (xmin + xmax )/2]
                     max −fmin )      2f  x   −f     x    −f x
      f1 (x) =      x   −x         x + min max x max−xmin max max        x ∈ [(xmin + xmax )/2, xmax ]
                  max min
                                               max    min

                   fmax                                                  x ∈ [xmax , 1]
and
                 
                 f2(f
                   min                                                  x ∈ [0, xmin ]
                      max −fmin )      f   x   +f     xmin −2fmax xmin
      f2 (x) =      x   −x          x + min max x min −x                 x ∈ [xmin , (xmin + xmax )/2]
                  max min
                                                max     min

                   fmax                                                  x ∈ [(xmin + xmax )/2, 1].

Since Φmin max (f1 ) = Φmin max (f2 ) = Φmin max (f ), and f1 and f2 are both monotone and piece-
wise affine, the result follows for FMono and FPAff from applying Lemma 3 and observing that
kf1 − f2 k∞ ≥ fmax − fmin (this occurs at (xmin + xmax )/2).
If 0 ≤ xmax < xmin ≤ 1, the same argument applies with 1 − f1 and 1 − f2 .
Finally, when xmin = xmax , then fmax − fmin = 0 so the result holds trivially.
To prove the result for FNN , note that we imposed no constraints on fmax or fmin . Thus, for any
f ∈ FNN , we can construct f1 and f2 . We then use that any piecewise affine function can be exactly
represented by a sufficiently large neural network (Arora et al., 2018; Chen et al., 2022) to conclude
f1 , f2 ∈ FNN .
The same argument applies to prove the result for F, since clearly f1 , f2 ∈ F.
Finally, for FERM , we must construct appropriate distributions with conditional means f1 and f2
respectively (we already noted these are both elements of FNN ). For simplicity, define the joint
distribution by X ∼ Unif(I) and Y |X ∼ Ber(fj (X)) for j ∈ {1, 2}.



B.5.4     P ROOF OF T HEOREM 2
We use f1 and f2 from Theorem 1, and recall that m = (fmin + fmax )/2. Consider when 0 ≤
xmin < xmax ≤ 1. Then, at x = (xmin + xmax )/2, f1 (x) = fmin < m and f2 (x) = fmax > m,
so k1f1 >m − 1f2 >m k∞ = 1. The result then follows by Lemma 4. If 0 ≤ xmax < xmin ≤ 1, the
same argument applies with 1 − f1 and 1 − f2 .
For FConvx , we use f1 and f2 from the proof of Theorem 3 (Appendix B.5.5). Recall that m =
(fmin + fmax )/2. Consider when xmax = 1 and xmin < 1. Then, at x = xmin /4 + 3/4, f1 (x) =
fmin /4 + 3fmax /4 > m and f2 (x) = m, so k1f1 >m − 1f2 >m k∞ = 1. The result then follows by
Lemma 4. If xmin = 0 and xmax > 0, the same argument applies using f10 and f20 as defined in
Appendix B.5.5.
If xmin = xmax then fmin = fmax and hence f is constant, so the result holds trivially.



B.5.5     P ROOF OF T HEOREM 3
Note that for any f ∈ FConvx , one of xmin or xmax are in {0, 1}.
First, consider xmax = 1 and xmin < 1. Define
                              (
                                fmin                                     x ∈ [0, xmin ]
                     f1 (x) = fmax −fmin      f −f    x                                                  (10)
                                 1−x     x + min1−xmax min               x ∈ [xmin , 1]
                                             min              min


                                                        23
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


and                    (
                           fmin                                     x ∈ [0, (xmin + 1)/2]
            f2 (x) =       2(fmax −fmin )    2f  −fmax xmin −fmax                                  (11)
                              1−xmin      x + min 1−x               x ∈ [(xmin + 1)/2, 1].
                                                       min

Clearly, f1 , f2 ∈ FConvx (since they are flat then linear with positive slope) and kf1 − f2 k∞ ≥
(fmax − fmin )/2 (this occurs at x = (xmin + 1)/2). Since xmin = 0 implies that xmax = 1 by
convexity, this case also covers xmin = 0.
Second, consider xmax = 0 and xmin > 0. Using Eqs. (10) and (11), define g1 (x) = f1 (1 − x) and
g2 (x) = f2 (1 − x). These also satisfy g1 , g2 ∈ FConvx (since they are linear with negative slope then
flat) and kg1 − g2 k∞ ≥ (fmax − fmin )/2 (this occurs at x = xmin /2). Since xmin = 1 implies that
xmax = 0 by convexity, this case also covers xmin = 1.
Finally, if xmin = xmax then fmin = fmax and the result holds trivially.



B.5.6    P ROOF OF T HEOREM 4
                                                                                          L
When 2 |fmax − fmin | ≤ L |xmax − xmin |, the proof of Theorem 1 applies since f1 , f2 ∈ FLip .
Otherwise, suppose that 0 ≤ xmin < xmax ≤ 1. Define
                          
                          ffmin −f
                                                                   x ∈ [0, xmin ]
                                        f   x    −f     x
                f1 (x) = xmax −xmin x + min xmax −xmax min          x ∈ [xmin , xmax ]
                            max    min       max   min

                                                                    x ∈ [xmax , 1]
                          
                           fmax
and                       
                          −L(x
                                 − xmin ) + fmin
                            fmax −fmin     f  x    −f     x
                                                                    x ∈ [0, xmin ]
                  f2 (x) = x −x x + min xmax −xmax min              x ∈ [xmin , xmax ]
                            max   min          max   min

                            −L(x − xmax ) + fmax                    x ∈ [xmax , 1].
                          

                                  L                                                      L
Recall that by definition of f ∈ FLip , |fmax − fmin | ≤ L |xmax − xmin |, so f1 , f2 ∈ FLip .
If xmin > 1 − xmax , then kf1 − f2 k∞ ≥ Lxmin (which is realized at x = 0), and otherwise
kf1 − f2 k∞ ≥ L(1 − xmax ) (which is realized at x = 1).
If 0 ≤ xmax < xmin ≤ 1, the same argument applies with 1 − f1 and 1 − f2 .



B.5.7    P ROOF OF T HEOREM 5
                                                                                             L
Since 2 |fmax − fmin | ≤ L |xmax − xmin |, the proof of Theorem 2 applies because f1 , f2 ∈ FLip .



B.5.8    P ROOF OF T HEOREM 6
                               d=2
When d = 2, any f ∈ FAff           satisfies f (x) = ax1 + bx2 + c for some a, b, c ∈ R. Given
                                                                  d=2
Φmin max (f ) = (xmin , fmin , xmax , fmax ), the compatible f ∈ FAff are those fc such that

                          xmax,2 fmin − xmin,2 fmax + (xmin,2 − xmax,2 )c
                       a=
                                   xmin,1 xmax,2 − xmax,1 xmin,2
                          −xmax,1 fmin + xmin,1 fmax + (xmax,1 − xmin,1 )c
                       b=                                                  ,
                                    xmin,1 xmax,2 − xmax,1 xmin,2
where c is a free parameter (with the only constraint that fc (x) ∈ [0, 1] for all x ∈ I).
Since f is affine, xmin and xmax must both occur at one of the four corners of [0, 1]2 . Note that a
and b above are undefined for some of these combinations, which we now enumerate.


                                                   24
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


If xmin = xmax , then f is constant and can be recovered exactly. If xmin = (0, 0), then necessarily
c = fmin , so f can be recovered exactly. Similarly, if xmax = (0, 0) then necessarily c = fmax .
Moreover, there are other cases where f can be recovered. If xmin = (1, 1) and xmax ∈
{(1, 0), (0, 1)}, then one of a or b do not depend on c and hence c can be directly recovered. The
same is true when xmax = (1, 1).
There are two possibilities left.
1) xmin = (0, 1) and xmax = (1, 0):
                                              a = fmax − c
                                              b = fmin − c.
Take c1 = fmin and c2 = fmax to get
                                    f1 (x) = (fmax − fmin )x1 + fmin
and
                                    f1 (x) = (fmin − fmax )x2 + fmax .
These still have Φmin max (f ) = Φmin max (f1 ) = Φmin max (f2 ), but kf1 − f2 k∞ ≥ fmax − fmin
(this is realized at x = (1, 1)).
2) xmin = (1, 0) and xmax = (0, 1):
                                              a = fmin − c
                                              b = fmax − c.
Take c1 = fmin and c2 = fmax to get
                                    f1 (x) = (fmax − fmin )x2 + fmin
and
                                    f1 (x) = (fmin − fmax )x1 + fmax .
These still have Φmin max (f ) = Φmin max (f1 ) = Φmin max (f2 ), but kf1 − f2 k∞ ≥ fmax − fmin
(this is again realized at x = (1, 1)). The result holds by then applying Lemma 3.



B.5.9    P ROOF OF T HEOREM 7
This follows directly from applying Lemma 4 to the functions constructed in the proof of Theorem 6
(Appendix B.5.8).



B.5.10    P ROOF OF T HEOREM 8
                        d=1
First suppose that f ∈ FAff . That is, there exists a, b such that f (x) = ax + b for all x. Given
Φmin max (f ), define
                                             fmax − fmin
                                       af =
                                             xmax − xmin
and
                                             xmax fmin − xmin fmax
                                      bf =                         .
                                                 xmax − xmin
Set D(Φmin max (f )) = [x 7→ af x + bf ]. Since there is a unique affine function passing through
both (xmin , fmin ) and (xmax , fmax ), and D(Φmin max (f )) is an affine function passing through both
of these, this implies that D(Φmin max (f )) ≡ f .
If f ∈ FConst , then there exists y ∈ [0, 1] such that fmin = fmax = y and f (x) = y for all x. Define
D(Φmin max (f )) ≡ fmin , which implies that D(Φmin max (f )) ≡ f .



                                                    25
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B.6   C AN WE MOVE BEYOND WORST- CASE ANALYSES ?

The theoretical results above are of a worst-case nature (for every claim, we construct a counterex-
ample to refute the claim). Of course, another interesting question to ask is: How likely are these
counterexamples to appear in reality when we generate the function f by training a neural net using
SGD? Here, we briefly discuss our results in the context of this average-case perspective.
On the one hand, a strength of our counterexamples is that they can be realized by very simple
functions, and hence we are not “cherry-picking” convoluted functions that SGD will not learn.
Similarly, our counterexamples can be easily extended to a family of functions that are rich in the
space of all functions in the model class, again in contrast to having only a single, unrealistic function
that works as a counterexample. On the other hand, it is very possible that while these counterexam-
ples are easily learned by SGD, they are more or less likely depending on, say, the specific training
data. Unfortunately, to answer this question, it seems one would have to have a rather refined under-
standing of the distribution of models learned from training on realistic data via SGD, which would
resolve some very large open problems in learning theory along the way. We pose it as an open prob-
lem to extend our approach of proving negative results for feature visualization by incorporating the
learning algorithm.

B.7   R ELATIONSHIP OF THEORETICAL RESULTS TO PSYCHOPHYSICAL EXPERIMENTS

Borowski et al. (2021) and Zimmermann et al. (2021) performed psychophysical experiments to
investigate the tness of feature visualizations for human observers. Both papers find that natural
highly activating images are more interpretable (as measured by human prediction performance)
compared to feature visualizations. A candidate explanation for this behaviour is our analysis in
Section 3, showing that for last-layer Inception-V1 feature visualizations, those visualizations are
processed along very different paths for most of the network (compared to natural images as a
baseline).
The task used by Borowski et al. (2021) is related to the third column of Table 1. They asked
participants to predict which one of two natural images is strongly activating for a certain unit based
on maximally and minimally activating feature visualizations for that unit. This can be seen as
an easier version of the task in Table 1: Borowski et al. (2021) did not use random test samples
but instead two curated samples, out of which one has extremely high and one has extremely low
activations. They find that that humans are able to do this task above chance.
At first glance, this result seems to contradict our theoretical finding from Theorem 2, which states
that reliable prediction is impossible unless additional assumptions about the function are known.
However, there is no contradiction: our theory allows for the possibility of a specific function (e.g.,
a specific neural network unit) and a specific decoder (e.g., a human observer) to be aligned in the
sense that predictions about the function can happen to be correct—however, for every function f
for which the decoder is correct there is a function f 0 from the same function family for which the
decoder is wrong (in spirit, a case of “no free lunch” for feature visualization). If an observer gets
significantly above chance in one case, they would pay the price by being significantly below chance
in the other case. To the best of our knowledge, there is currently no way for the observer to know
in advance whether they’re visualizing a function f for which their decoding is aligned or a function
f 0 for which their decoding leads to the wrong conclusions. It is an interesting open question to
develop a practical and rigorous approach to distinguish these cases, perhaps relying on additional
information such as the data distribution (e.g., does ImageNet lead to benign f more often?) and the
training procedure (e.g., does SGD lead to benign f more often?).

C     M ETHOD DETAILS
C.1   C LASSIFIER TRAINING (S ECTION 2.1)

For classifier training, we create a dataset by combining 1, 281, 167 images from the training set of
the ImageNet 2012 dataset and 472, 500 synthetic images. These synthetic images are the (interme-
diate) results of the feature visualization optimization process. Specifically, for 1, 000 classification
units in the last layer of an ImageNet-trained InceptionV1 network, we run the optimization process
with the parameters used by (Olah et al., 2017) 35 times each, resulting in 35, 000 unique optimiza-


                                                   26
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


tion trajectories. We logarithmically sample 15 (intermediate) steps from the optimization trajectory,
resulting in 525, 000 synthetic images in total. Finally, we split the synthetic images into 472, 500
(= 90%) training and 52, 500 (= 10%) testing images. Note that we use different units for the two
sets. We train a model implementing the simple six layer CNN architecture displayed in Table 3
for 8 epochs on the aforementioned dataset with an SGD optimizer using a learning rate of 0.01,
momentum of 0.9 and weight decay of 0.00005. The classifier achieves a near-perfect accuracy of
99.49% on the held-out test set (99.66% and 99.31% for natural input and feature visualizations,
respectively).

                            Type        Size/Channels     Activation    Stride
                         Conv 3 × 3           16            ReLU           3
                         Conv 5 × 5           16            ReLU           2
                         Conv 5 × 5           16            ReLU           2
                         Conv 5 × 5           16            ReLU           2
                         Conv 5 × 5           16            ReLU           2
                         Conv 3 × 3           16            ReLU           2
                          Flatten              -              -            -
                           Linear              1              -            -

             Table 3: Architecture of the classifier used to detect feature visualizations.


C.2   F EATURE VISUALIZATION FIGURES (S ECTION 2)

Throughout the paper, feature visualizations were generated using the lucent library (Greent-
frapp, v0.1.8), version v0.1.8. Per default, we used thresholds=(512,) except for
Figure 3 where the five images at different points in the optimization trajectory are shown
(specifically, thresholds=(1,8,32,128,512)). For Figure 1, we used the thresholds
that visually looked best (in line with existing literature: there is no principled way to de-
termine the threshold); specifically thresholds=(512,512,512,6,32,6) for the six
visualizations from left to right (for the three rightmost images, higher thresholds produced
qualitatively similar yet oversaturated images). In terms of transformations during feature
visualization,    transforms=lucent.optvis.transform.standard_transforms
+ [center_crop(224, 224)] was used.                      The image was parameterized via
param_f=lambda: lucent.optvis.param.image(224, batch=1).
For Figure 1, a natural image was embedded into the weights of a single convolu-
tional layer, torch.nn.Conv2d, with kernel_size=224, stride=1, padding=0,
dilation=1, groups=1, bias=True, padding_mode=‘zeros’). To this end, the
image was loaded and the layer weights were set to the corresponding image values, di-
vided by 2242 to avoid a potential overflow. Architecturally, the layer received the stan-
dard image input and its ouptut was appended to the output of the desired layer (e.g.,
softmax2_pre_activation_matmul) where it was used in the role of D from Figure 4.

C.3   S ANITY CHECK (S ECTION 3)

Motivation: relationship between path similarity and Spearman correlation. In Section 3, we
describe that different processing paths lead to different activation similarity as measured through
Spearman correlation. We here attempt to explain this relationship in a bit more detail. For the
context of our analysis, we define a path as a (sub-)graph of a directed acyclic graph (DAG, a neural
network or sub-network in our case), starting at the input nodes (first layer units) and ending at a
single unit (the unit for which the analysis is performed). How can we quantify the overlap between
two different paths, layer by layer? If a node is in the subgraph forming the path, the node is assigned
a value of 1; if it is not, it is assigned a value of 0. Then, layer-wise overlap can be quantified by
the Spearman correlation, which is exactly zero if there is only chance overlap, exactly 1.0 if there
is perfect overlap, and exactly -1.0 if the units in a certain layer (corresponding to two different
paths) are perfectly anticorrelated. Similarly, in the non-binary case (such as a path formed by
activation patterns for natural images vs. feature visualization images, which is what we consider
for the similarity analysis), the values assigned to the node are simply the activations, and the same


                                                   27
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


analysis can be applied. Since we only care about the path similarity and not about whether this
similarity is a linear relationship, Spearman’s rank-order correlation is the correct measure to use
here (while the Pearson correlation, plotted in Figure 10 for comparison, is a measure of a linear
relationship).


Methods. Performing a full comparison is computationally expensive: Inception-V1’s largest
layer (conv2d0_pre_relu_conv) contains 802,816 values; computing the Spearman cor-
relation for this takes about one third of a second. Inception-V1 has 138 layers and sub-layers
(see Figure 7 x-axis labels for a list). Even if we just consider the comparison between nat-
ural images vs. natural images of a different class, for the ImageNet-1K validation set this
amounts to 138 (= number of layers) · 50 · 50 (= number of comparisons between two spe-
cific classes of the ImageNet validation split) · 1000·1001
                                                        2     − 1000 (= number of comparisons
when comparing each class with each other class except for itself) = 172, 327, 500, 000 com-
parisons. With 3 comparisons per second, this amounts to about eighteen hundred years
required to do the full comparison. In order to make this more feasible, we chose the fol-
lowing approach.       We randomly selected 10 classes via numpy.random.seed(42);
randomly_selected_class_indices = sorted(numpy.random.choice(1000,
10)), resulting in randomly_selected_class_indices=[20, 71, 102, 106,
121, 270, 435, 614, 700, 860] and obtained 10 feature visualizations per class. Im-
ages that were not correctly classified by the model (wrong top-1 classification) were excluded from
the comparison since those images do not constitute natural images for which the corresponding
unit is selective for.
From this point onward, when computing the Spearman and Pearson correlations, we only per-
formed every 10th comparison for natural images vs. natural images of the same class; every 100th
comparison for natural images vs. natural images of a different class, and every 5th comparison for
natural images vs. feature visualizations of the same class. For Cosine similarity (which is much
faster), we performed every single comparison.


Raw and normalized plots. For each metric, absolute values are plotted in Figures 7, 9, and 11.
For Figures 6, 8, and 10, normalized values are plotted. For these plots, we normalized the data
according to the raw absolute values, i.e., such that natural images vs. natural images of the same
class is set to 1.0 and natural images vs. natural images of a different class is set to 0.0 since it
makes sense to interpret similarity results relative to those two extreme baselines. A tiny number
of layers was excluded from the normalized comparison if the green and black points from the
absolute plots differed by strictly less than a threshold of 0.01. To reduce noise in the orange curve
(natural images vs. feature visualizations of the same class), we smoothed the curve by convolving it
with scipy.ndimage.convolve using a window size of 7 and the following uniform weights:
np.ones(windowsize)/windowsize. The shaded blue area corresponds to the standard
deviation of the orange data points, convolved over a window of of size std_windowsize=5
which is then (for the lower bound of the blue area) subtracted from the orange curve, and (for the
upper bound of the blue area) added to the orange curve; thus in total the blue area area vertically
extends two standard deviations. The idea behind this is to give a rough visual estimate of the
standard deviation range that the orange values have at certain points throughout the network. By
itself, it does not provide an indication of statistical significance.


                                                 28
                                                                                                              Cosine similarity                                                                                                                                 Normalized similarity                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Spearman correlation


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          3


                                                                                                        0.0
                                                                                                              0.2
                                                                                                                    0.4
                                                                                                                          0.6
                                                                                                                                0.8
                                                                                                                                      1.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0.3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.7


                                                                                                                                                                                                            0
                                                                               conv2d0_pre_relu_conv
                                                                                              conv2d0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     conv2d0_pre_relu_conv
                                                                                            maxpool0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     conv2d0
                                                                               conv2d1_pre_relu_conv                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   maxpool0
                                                                                              conv2d1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     conv2d1_pre_relu_conv
                                                                               conv2d2_pre_relu_conv                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     conv2d1
                                                                                              conv2d2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     conv2d2_pre_relu_conv
                                                                                            maxpool1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     conv2d2
                                                                           mixed3a_1x1_pre_relu_conv                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   maxpool1
                                                                mixed3a_3x3_bottleneck_pre_relu_conv                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  mixed3a_1x1_pre_relu_conv
                                                                mixed3a_5x5_bottleneck_pre_relu_conv                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       mixed3a_3x3_bottleneck_pre_relu_conv
                                                                                        mixed3a_pool                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       mixed3a_5x5_bottleneck_pre_relu_conv
                                                                                        mixed3a_1x1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                mixed3a_pool
                                                                              mixed3a_3x3_bottleneck                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               mixed3a_1x1
                                                                              mixed3a_5x5_bottleneck                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     mixed3a_3x3_bottleneck
                                                                   mixed3a_pool_reduce_pre_relu_conv                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     mixed3a_5x5_bottleneck
                                                                           mixed3a_3x3_pre_relu_conv                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          mixed3a_pool_reduce_pre_relu_conv


                                                                                                                                                                                                            20
                                                                           mixed3a_5x5_pre_relu_conv                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  mixed3a_3x3_pre_relu_conv
                                                                                 mixed3a_pool_reduce                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  mixed3a_5x5_pre_relu_conv
                                                                                        mixed3a_3x3                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         mixed3a_pool_reduce
                                                                                        mixed3a_5x5                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                mixed3a_3x3
                                                                                              mixed3a                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              mixed3a_5x5
                                                                           mixed3b_1x1_pre_relu_conv                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     mixed3a
                                                                mixed3b_3x3_bottleneck_pre_relu_conv                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  mixed3b_1x1_pre_relu_conv
                                                                mixed3b_5x5_bottleneck_pre_relu_conv                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       mixed3b_3x3_bottleneck_pre_relu_conv
                                                                                        mixed3b_pool                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       mixed3b_5x5_bottleneck_pre_relu_conv
                                                                                        mixed3b_1x1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                mixed3b_pool
                                                                              mixed3b_3x3_bottleneck                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               mixed3b_1x1
                                                                              mixed3b_5x5_bottleneck                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     mixed3b_3x3_bottleneck
                                                                   mixed3b_pool_reduce_pre_relu_conv                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     mixed3b_5x5_bottleneck
                                                                           mixed3b_3x3_pre_relu_conv                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          mixed3b_pool_reduce_pre_relu_conv
                                                                           mixed3b_5x5_pre_relu_conv                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  mixed3b_3x3_pre_relu_conv
                                                                                 mixed3b_pool_reduce                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  mixed3b_5x5_pre_relu_conv
                                                                                        mixed3b_3x3                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         mixed3b_pool_reduce
                                                                                        mixed3b_5x5                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                mixed3b_3x3
                                                                                              mixed3b                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              mixed3b_5x5
                                                                                            maxpool4                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     mixed3b
                                                                           mixed4a_1x1_pre_relu_conv                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   maxpool4
                                                                mixed4a_3x3_bottleneck_pre_relu_conv                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  mixed4a_1x1_pre_relu_conv


                                                                                                                                                                                                            40
                                                                mixed4a_5x5_bottleneck_pre_relu_conv                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       mixed4a_3x3_bottleneck_pre_relu_conv
                                                                                        mixed4a_pool                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       mixed4a_5x5_bottleneck_pre_relu_conv
                                                                                        mixed4a_1x1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                mixed4a_pool
                                                                              mixed4a_3x3_bottleneck                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               mixed4a_1x1
                                                                              mixed4a_5x5_bottleneck                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     mixed4a_3x3_bottleneck
                                                                   mixed4a_pool_reduce_pre_relu_conv                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     mixed4a_5x5_bottleneck
                                                                           mixed4a_3x3_pre_relu_conv                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          mixed4a_pool_reduce_pre_relu_conv
                                                                           mixed4a_5x5_pre_relu_conv                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  mixed4a_3x3_pre_relu_conv
                                                                                 mixed4a_pool_reduce                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  mixed4a_5x5_pre_relu_conv
                                                                                        mixed4a_3x3                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         mixed4a_pool_reduce
                                                                                        mixed4a_5x5                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                mixed4a_3x3
                                                                                              mixed4a                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              mixed4a_5x5
                                                                           mixed4b_1x1_pre_relu_conv                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     mixed4a
                                                                mixed4b_3x3_bottleneck_pre_relu_conv                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  mixed4b_1x1_pre_relu_conv
                                                                mixed4b_5x5_bottleneck_pre_relu_conv                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       mixed4b_3x3_bottleneck_pre_relu_conv
                                                                                        mixed4b_pool                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       mixed4b_5x5_bottleneck_pre_relu_conv
                                                                                        mixed4b_1x1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                mixed4b_pool
                                                                              mixed4b_3x3_bottleneck                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               mixed4b_1x1
                                                                              mixed4b_5x5_bottleneck                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     mixed4b_3x3_bottleneck
                                                                   mixed4b_pool_reduce_pre_relu_conv                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     mixed4b_5x5_bottleneck
                                                                           mixed4b_3x3_pre_relu_conv                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          mixed4b_pool_reduce_pre_relu_conv
                                                                           mixed4b_5x5_pre_relu_conv                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  mixed4b_3x3_pre_relu_conv


                                                                                                                                                                                                            60
                                                                                 mixed4b_pool_reduce                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  mixed4b_5x5_pre_relu_conv
                                                                                        mixed4b_3x3                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         mixed4b_pool_reduce
                                                                                        mixed4b_5x5                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                mixed4b_3x3
                                                                                              mixed4b                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              mixed4b_5x5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         mixed4b
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                           mixed4c_1x1_pre_relu_conv
                                                                mixed4c_3x3_bottleneck_pre_relu_conv                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  mixed4c_1x1_pre_relu_conv


29
                                                                mixed4c_5x5_bottleneck_pre_relu_conv                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       mixed4c_3x3_bottleneck_pre_relu_conv
                                                                                        mixed4c_pool                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       mixed4c_5x5_bottleneck_pre_relu_conv
                                                                                        mixed4c_1x1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                mixed4c_pool
                                                                              mixed4c_3x3_bottleneck                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               mixed4c_1x1
                                                                              mixed4c_5x5_bottleneck                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     mixed4c_3x3_bottleneck
                                                                   mixed4c_pool_reduce_pre_relu_conv                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     mixed4c_5x5_bottleneck
                                                                           mixed4c_3x3_pre_relu_conv                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          mixed4c_pool_reduce_pre_relu_conv
                                                                           mixed4c_5x5_pre_relu_conv                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  mixed4c_3x3_pre_relu_conv


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                natural images vs. natural images of the same class
                                                                                 mixed4c_pool_reduce                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  mixed4c_5x5_pre_relu_conv
                                                                                        mixed4c_3x3                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         mixed4c_pool_reduce
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   mixed4c_3x3


                                               InceptionV1 layer (input
                                                                                        mixed4c_5x5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          InceptionV1 layer (input


                                                                                              mixed4c                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              mixed4c_5x5
                                                                           mixed4d_1x1_pre_relu_conv                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     mixed4c
                                                                mixed4d_3x3_bottleneck_pre_relu_conv                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  mixed4d_1x1_pre_relu_conv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           mixed4d_3x3_bottleneck_pre_relu_conv


                                                                                                                                                                                        InceptionV1 layer index (input
                                                                mixed4d_5x5_bottleneck_pre_relu_conv                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       mixed4d_5x5_bottleneck_pre_relu_conv
                                                                                        mixed4d_pool


                                                                                                                                                                                                            80
                                                                                        mixed4d_1x1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                mixed4d_pool
                                                                              mixed4d_3x3_bottleneck                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               mixed4d_1x1
                                                                              mixed4d_5x5_bottleneck                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     mixed4d_3x3_bottleneck
                                                                   mixed4d_pool_reduce_pre_relu_conv                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     mixed4d_5x5_bottleneck
                                                                           mixed4d_3x3_pre_relu_conv                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          mixed4d_pool_reduce_pre_relu_conv
                                                                           mixed4d_5x5_pre_relu_conv                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  mixed4d_3x3_pre_relu_conv
                                                                                 mixed4d_pool_reduce                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  mixed4d_5x5_pre_relu_conv
                                                                                        mixed4d_3x3                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         mixed4d_pool_reduce
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   mixed4d_3x3


                                                                                                                                                                                                                         natural images vs. feature visualizations of the same class
                                                                                        mixed4d_5x5                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                mixed4d_5x5


                                               output)
                                                                                              mixed4d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          output)


                                                                           mixed4e_1x1_pre_relu_conv                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     mixed4d
                                                                mixed4e_3x3_bottleneck_pre_relu_conv                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  mixed4e_1x1_pre_relu_conv
                                                                mixed4e_5x5_bottleneck_pre_relu_conv                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       mixed4e_3x3_bottleneck_pre_relu_conv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           mixed4e_5x5_bottleneck_pre_relu_conv


     Figure 9: Absolute similarity (Cosine).
                                                                                                                                                                                        output)
                                                                                        mixed4e_pool                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               mixed4e_pool
                                                                                        mixed4e_1x1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                mixed4e_1x1


                                                                                                                                            Figure 8: Normalized similarity (Cosine).
                                                                              mixed4e_3x3_bottleneck
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Figure 7: Absolute similarity (Spearman).


                                                                              mixed4e_5x5_bottleneck                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     mixed4e_3x3_bottleneck
                                                                   mixed4e_pool_reduce_pre_relu_conv                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     mixed4e_5x5_bottleneck
                                                                           mixed4e_3x3_pre_relu_conv                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          mixed4e_pool_reduce_pre_relu_conv
                                                                           mixed4e_5x5_pre_relu_conv                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  mixed4e_3x3_pre_relu_conv
                                                                                 mixed4e_pool_reduce                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  mixed4e_5x5_pre_relu_conv
                                                                                        mixed4e_3x3                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         mixed4e_pool_reduce


                                                                                                                                                                                                            100
                                                                                        mixed4e_5x5                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                mixed4e_3x3
                                                                                              mixed4e                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              mixed4e_5x5
                                                                                           maxpool10                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     mixed4e
                                                                           mixed5a_1x1_pre_relu_conv                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  maxpool10
                                                                mixed5a_3x3_bottleneck_pre_relu_conv                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  mixed5a_1x1_pre_relu_conv
                                                                mixed5a_5x5_bottleneck_pre_relu_conv                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       mixed5a_3x3_bottleneck_pre_relu_conv
                                                                                        mixed5a_pool                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       mixed5a_5x5_bottleneck_pre_relu_conv
                                                                                        mixed5a_1x1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                mixed5a_pool
                                                                              mixed5a_3x3_bottleneck                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               mixed5a_1x1
                                                                              mixed5a_5x5_bottleneck                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     mixed5a_3x3_bottleneck
                                                                   mixed5a_pool_reduce_pre_relu_conv                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     mixed5a_5x5_bottleneck
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              mixed5a_pool_reduce_pre_relu_conv
                                                                           mixed5a_3x3_pre_relu_conv                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  mixed5a_3x3_pre_relu_conv
                                                                           mixed5a_5x5_pre_relu_conv                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  mixed5a_5x5_pre_relu_conv
                                                                                 mixed5a_pool_reduce                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        mixed5a_pool_reduce
                                                                                        mixed5a_3x3                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                mixed5a_3x3
                                                                                        mixed5a_5x5                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                mixed5a_5x5
                                                                                              mixed5a                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    mixed5a
                                                                           mixed5b_1x1_pre_relu_conv                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  mixed5b_1x1_pre_relu_conv
                                                                mixed5b_3x3_bottleneck_pre_relu_conv                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       mixed5b_3x3_bottleneck_pre_relu_conv
                                                                mixed5b_5x5_bottleneck_pre_relu_conv                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       mixed5b_5x5_bottleneck_pre_relu_conv
                                                                                        mixed5b_pool                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               mixed5b_pool
                                                                                        mixed5b_1x1
                                                                                                                                                                                                            120

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   mixed5b_1x1
                                                                              mixed5b_3x3_bottleneck                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     mixed5b_3x3_bottleneck
                                                                              mixed5b_5x5_bottleneck                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     mixed5b_5x5_bottleneck
                                                                   mixed5b_pool_reduce_pre_relu_conv                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          mixed5b_pool_reduce_pre_relu_conv
                                                                           mixed5b_3x3_pre_relu_conv                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  mixed5b_3x3_pre_relu_conv
                                                                           mixed5b_5x5_pre_relu_conv                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  mixed5b_5x5_pre_relu_conv
                                                                                 mixed5b_pool_reduce                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        mixed5b_pool_reduce
                                                                                        mixed5b_3x3                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                mixed5b_3x3
                                                                                        mixed5b_5x5                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                mixed5b_5x5
                                                                                              mixed5b                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    mixed5b
                                                                      softmax2_pre_activation_matmul                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             softmax2_pre_activation_matmul
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       natural images vs. natural images of different classes


                                                                                             softmax2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   softmax2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Pearson correlation                                                                                                                                       Normalized similarity


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         C.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.75
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0.50
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0.25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0.00
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0.50
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.75
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1.00
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1.25


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           conv2d0_pre_relu_conv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          conv2d0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        maxpool0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           conv2d1_pre_relu_conv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          conv2d1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           conv2d2_pre_relu_conv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          conv2d2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        maxpool1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       mixed3a_1x1_pre_relu_conv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            mixed3a_3x3_bottleneck_pre_relu_conv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            mixed3a_5x5_bottleneck_pre_relu_conv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    mixed3a_pool
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    mixed3a_1x1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          mixed3a_3x3_bottleneck
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          mixed3a_5x5_bottleneck
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               mixed3a_pool_reduce_pre_relu_conv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       mixed3a_3x3_pre_relu_conv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       mixed3a_5x5_pre_relu_conv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             mixed3a_pool_reduce
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    mixed3a_3x3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    mixed3a_5x5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          mixed3a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       mixed3b_1x1_pre_relu_conv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            mixed3b_3x3_bottleneck_pre_relu_conv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            mixed3b_5x5_bottleneck_pre_relu_conv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    mixed3b_pool
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    mixed3b_1x1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          mixed3b_3x3_bottleneck
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          mixed3b_5x5_bottleneck
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               mixed3b_pool_reduce_pre_relu_conv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       mixed3b_3x3_pre_relu_conv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       mixed3b_5x5_pre_relu_conv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             mixed3b_pool_reduce
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    mixed3b_3x3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    mixed3b_5x5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          mixed3b
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        maxpool4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       mixed4a_1x1_pre_relu_conv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            mixed4a_3x3_bottleneck_pre_relu_conv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            mixed4a_5x5_bottleneck_pre_relu_conv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    mixed4a_pool
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            40


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 paths) might be more interpretable.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    mixed4a_1x1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          mixed4a_3x3_bottleneck
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          mixed4a_5x5_bottleneck
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               mixed4a_pool_reduce_pre_relu_conv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       mixed4a_3x3_pre_relu_conv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       mixed4a_5x5_pre_relu_conv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             mixed4a_pool_reduce
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    mixed4a_3x3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    mixed4a_5x5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          mixed4a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       mixed4b_1x1_pre_relu_conv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            mixed4b_3x3_bottleneck_pre_relu_conv


          ∀j = 1, . . . , N − 1 :
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            mixed4b_5x5_bottleneck_pre_relu_conv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    mixed4b_pool
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    mixed4b_1x1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          mixed4b_3x3_bottleneck
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          mixed4b_5x5_bottleneck
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               mixed4b_pool_reduce_pre_relu_conv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       mixed4b_3x3_pre_relu_conv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       mixed4b_5x5_pre_relu_conv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             mixed4b_pool_reduce
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            60


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         L INEARITY EXPERIMENTS (S ECTION 5)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    mixed4b_3x3


                                                and compute the angle between successive steps:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    mixed4b_5x5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          mixed4b
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       mixed4c_1x1_pre_relu_conv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            mixed4c_3x3_bottleneck_pre_relu_conv


30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            mixed4c_5x5_bottleneck_pre_relu_conv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    mixed4c_pool
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    mixed4c_1x1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          mixed4c_3x3_bottleneck
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          mixed4c_5x5_bottleneck
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               mixed4c_pool_reduce_pre_relu_conv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       mixed4c_3x3_pre_relu_conv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       mixed4c_5x5_pre_relu_conv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             mixed4c_pool_reduce
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         natural images vs. natural images of the same class


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    mixed4c_3x3


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           InceptionV1 layer (input
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    mixed4c_5x5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          mixed4c
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       mixed4d_1x1_pre_relu_conv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            mixed4d_3x3_bottleneck_pre_relu_conv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            mixed4d_5x5_bottleneck_pre_relu_conv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        InceptionV1 layer index (input


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    mixed4d_pool
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    mixed4d_1x1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            80


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          mixed4d_3x3_bottleneck
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          mixed4d_5x5_bottleneck
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               mixed4d_pool_reduce_pre_relu_conv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       mixed4d_3x3_pre_relu_conv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       mixed4d_5x5_pre_relu_conv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             mixed4d_pool_reduce
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    mixed4d_3x3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    mixed4d_5x5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          natural images vs. feature visualizations of the same class


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           output)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          mixed4d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       mixed4e_1x1_pre_relu_conv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            mixed4e_3x3_bottleneck_pre_relu_conv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            mixed4e_5x5_bottleneck_pre_relu_conv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    mixed4e_pool
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        output)


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    mixed4e_1x1


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Figure 11: Absolute similarity (Pearson).
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          mixed4e_3x3_bottleneck
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          mixed4e_5x5_bottleneck
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Figure 10: Normalized similarity (Pearson).


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               mixed4e_pool_reduce_pre_relu_conv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       mixed4e_3x3_pre_relu_conv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       mixed4e_5x5_pre_relu_conv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             mixed4e_pool_reduce
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    mixed4e_3x3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    mixed4e_5x5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            100


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          mixed4e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       maxpool10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       mixed5a_1x1_pre_relu_conv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            mixed5a_3x3_bottleneck_pre_relu_conv


                                                                                                                                                          maximally activating natural dataset samples (from ImageNet) they provided.


     aj (xsi ) := ](ĝj (xi ), ĝj+1 (xss )).
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            mixed5a_5x5_bottleneck_pre_relu_conv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    mixed5a_pool
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    mixed5a_1x1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          mixed5a_3x3_bottleneck
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          mixed5a_5x5_bottleneck
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               mixed5a_pool_reduce_pre_relu_conv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       mixed5a_3x3_pre_relu_conv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       mixed5a_5x5_pre_relu_conv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             mixed5a_pool_reduce
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    mixed5a_3x3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    mixed5a_5x5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          mixed5a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       mixed5b_1x1_pre_relu_conv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            mixed5b_3x3_bottleneck_pre_relu_conv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            mixed5b_5x5_bottleneck_pre_relu_conv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    mixed5b_pool
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    mixed5b_1x1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            120


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          mixed5b_3x3_bottleneck
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          mixed5b_5x5_bottleneck
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               mixed5b_pool_reduce_pre_relu_conv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       mixed5b_3x3_pre_relu_conv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       mixed5b_5x5_pre_relu_conv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             mixed5b_pool_reduce
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    mixed5b_3x3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    mixed5b_5x5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          mixed5b
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  softmax2_pre_activation_matmul
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 natural images vs. natural images of different classes


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         softmax2


                                                optimization we record the normalized gradients with respect to the current image (ĝj (xsi ))j=1,...,N


          (12)
                                                the unit’s activation. We use standard hyperparameters and optimize for N = 512 steps. During
                                                sample xsi and perform feature visualization to iteratively optimize this image to further increase
                                                we compute the following quantity for each unit: We start from a maximally activating dataset
                                                Quantifying degree of nonlinearity through gradient angles To measure the linearity of a unit
                                                                                                                                                          (see Appendix B.7 for details). We use the experimental data of 84 units as well as the M = 20
                                                                                                                                                          for individual units of a CNN when supported with explanations in the form of feature visualizations
                                                                                                                                                          et al. (2023) tested how well humans can differentiate maximally and minimally activating images
                                                                                                                                                          et al. (2023). Based on the experimental paradigm by Zimmermann et al. (2021), Zimmermann
                                                                                                                                                          To measure the interpretability of a unit we use the experimental data provided by Zimmermann
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 computing how aligned its gradients are. The hypothesis is that more linear units (or visualization
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 tional simplicity. Specifically, we approximate how linear a function’s optimization trajectory is by
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 easier it may be to interpret through feature visualizations, we set out to measure one type func-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 As our theory (see Table 1) predicts that the simpler the function class of a network’s unit is the
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


We take the average over all M maximally activating images and denote the average gradient path
angle as:
                                                                                                                                                        M
                                                                                                                  1 X
                                                   ∀j = 1, . . . , N − 1 :                               AGPAj :=       aj (xsi ).                                                                  (13)
                                                                                                                  M i=1
Finally, we denote the average of the average gradient path angle AGPA as the average gradient
angle:
                                                                                      N −1
                                                                                  1 X
                                                                    AGA =                  AGPAi .                                                                                                  (14)
                                                                                N − 1 i=1

                           0.00                                                                                                            0.20
                                                                                                                                                                                              100
                           0.05                                                                                                            0.15
                                                                                10 1
                                                                                                                                           0.10


                                                                                   Spearman's Significance p
                           0.10


                                                                                                                                                                                                     Spearman's Significance p
Spearman's Correlation r


                                                                                                                Spearman's Correlation r
                                                                                                                                                                                              6 × 10 1
                           0.15                                                                                                            0.05

                           0.20                                                                                                            0.00
                                                                                10 2                                                                                                          4 × 10 1
                           0.25                                                                                                            0.05
                                                                                                                                                                                              3 × 10 1
                                                                                                                                           0.10
                           0.30
                                                                                                                                           0.15
                           0.35                                                 10 3                                                                                                          2 × 10 1
                                                                                                                                           0.20
                                  0   100    200        300        400    500                                                                     0     100    200        300     400   500
                                            Optimization Step                                                                                                 Optimization Step

(a) Average gradient path angle AGPAk . Strikingly, (b) Average line distance path AGLDk . Interest-
only the first few gradient angles are strongly and sig- ingly, while we see a anti-correlation at the beginning
nificantly correlated with the units’ interpretability.  (cf. Figure 12a), this turns into a weak correlation.
                                                         However, these correlations are not significant.

Figure 12: Development of Spearman’s rank correlation between the units’ interpretability score and
the (a) average gradient path angle AGPAk and (b) average line distance path ALDPk as a function
of the number of optimization steps k to consider.

To answer our initial question—whether simpler/more linear units are more interpretable—we now
measured the rank correlation between the average gradient angle and the interpretability scores by
Zimmermann et al. (2023) based on the paradigm of Zimmermann et al. (2021). Intriguingly, we
find a significant correlation (Spearman’s r = −.36, p = .001) between this human interpretability
score and our path linearity measure (lower angle means higher interpretability) for the beginning of
the trajectory (e.g., n = 2). Linearity at later steps in the trajectory does not seem to contribute much
to human interpretability, thus increasing n to include all 512 steps decreases the overall correlation.
The results depending on path length are plotted in Figure 12a.

Quantifying degree of nonlinearity through deviations from linear interpolation There are
many different ways that could be used to measure path or unit linearity. As a more global mea-
sure, we also tested another one: Here, we begin by computing a linear interpolation between the
maximally activation data samples we initialize the optimization with xsi and the final visualization
xfi :
                                                                { z | xsi + α(xfi − xsi ) ∀α ∈ [0, 1] }.                                                                                            (15)
Next, for each step j of the optimization process we compute the distance of the current image
xj (xsi ) to to the linear interpolation

                      dj (xsi ) = d xj ((xsi )), { z | xsi + α(xfi − xsi ) ∀α ∈ [0, 1] } , (16)
where d(·, ·) represents the `2 distance. Analogously to the computation above, we then take the
mean over the different start images and define this property as the average line distance path
                                                                                                                                                      M
                                                                                                                                                  1 X dj (xsi )
                                                ∀j = 1, . . . , N − 1 :                ALDPj :=                                                                       ,                             (17)
                                                                                                                                                  M i=1 d(x2i , xfi )


                                                                                                               31
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


         feature visualization trajectory                   natural ImageNet validation images

                                                   ≠

Figure 13: Natural vs. synthetic distribution shift for a robust model. As shown above for the
Inception-V1 model in Figure 3, there is still a clear distribution shift between feature visualizations
(left) and natural images (right) an adversarial robust model (ResNet50). Visualizations at different
steps in the optimization process for a randomly selected unit in the last layer of standard, unma-
nipulated but robust ResNet50; randomly selected ImageNet validation samples (excluding images
containing faces).


where we normalize the distances from the line with the distance between start and end point of the
optimization trajectory to make these values scaleless. Finally, by averaging again over optimization
steps final average line distance:
                                                N −1
                                            1 X
                                    ALD =            ALDPi .                                       (18)
                                          N − 1 i=1
The lower the ALD value, the smaller is the deviation of the optimization path from a line. For this
global measure, we see a non-significant relation between the average line distance and the inter-
pretability scores (Spearman’s r = 0.02, p = 0.86). Analogously to the local measure explained
above (gradient angle), we zoom into these results again in Figure 12b. While there might be a weak
anti-correlation at the beginning of the optimization path (which later turns into a weak correlation),
none of these are significant.

Interpretation. We believe there is more to be understood: while it is intriguing that linearity
at the beginning of the optimization trajectory is predictive of a human interpretability score, the
global measure of linearity (through distance to linear interpolation) does not seem to be predictive
and more investigations are needed to fully understand this phenomenon—as we say in the main
paper, this can only be considered “very preliminary evidence”. A promising way forward could
be to enforce (or optimize for) different properties in neural networks and measure whether this
improves human interpretability.

D    F OOLING FEATURE VISUALIZATIONS OF ADVERSARIALLY ROBUST
     MODELS

In Section 2, we presented two proofs of concept that feature visualizations can manipulated: one
based on a fooling circuit, and one leveraging silent units. We empirically demonstrated this for
two standard vision models. Our theoretical results in Table 1 in Section 4 indicate that feature
visualizations become more reliable for networks with a sufficiently small Lipschitz constant. At
the same time, a lower Lipschitz constant is also connected with higher adversarial robustness of
models (Hein & Andriushchenko, 2017). Therefore, a natural question is: Can feature visualizations
of (more) robust models still be manipulated? We investigate this question for adversarially trained
ResNet50 (`∞ ,   = 4/255) by Salman et al. (2020).

Fooling circuit Integrating a fooling circuit is guaranteed to manipulate the visualizations of a
model without changing its overall behavior as long as one can clearly distinguish between feature
visualizations and standard dataset examples (see Section 2.1). Therefore, to demonstrate the this
approach also works for an adversarial robust model, it suffices to show that we can almost surely
detect whether an input is a feature visualization. Qualitatively, this is suggested by an analogy of
Figure 3, i.e., a visual comparison of feature visualizations and dataset samples, in Figure 13. Quan-
titatively, we tested the same feature visualization detector that we used for a non-robust Inception-
V1 model in Section 2.1 for the robust ResNet50 and see strong generalization results: the binary
classifier’s accuracy is still very high at 99.19 %.

Silent units To apply the methodology presented in Section 2.2 to an adversarial robust model,
only a single change needs to be implemented: Namely, we noticed that the ranges of activations


                                                  32
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                     unit 0   100   150   200       250           300           350   400   450   500

manipulated model?
             no
                                                near-identical visualizations
  yes


Figure 14: Leveraging silent units to produce identical visualizations throughout a layer of a
robust model. Replication of Figure 5 for a robust ResNet50 model. The top row shows feature
visualizations for units of a layer (block 4-1, conv 2) in a robust but unmanipulated ResNet-50. For
the bottom row, we manipulate the model such that the feature visualizations of all units become
near-identical (indicated by the red box).


caused by feature visualizations and dataset examples, respectively, are closer for a robust than for
a non-robust model. For some units, there even exist natural dataset examples that elicit slightly
higher activation than feature visualizations. We, therefore, need to adjust how we choose the bias
b in Eq. (11): Instead of using a value proportional to the maximal activation value recorded on any
natural test sample, we use a value proportional to the 99th percentile of the activation range for
test samples. While this change ensures that we can manipulate the visualizations of more/all units,
it comes with a small price: Namely, the network’s behavior on natural samples does not remain
unchanged (as for a non-robust ResNet50, cf., Section 2.2) but drops very slightly from 63.924 % to
63.784 %. The analogue of Figure 5 for the robust model, Figure 14, shows that even a robust model
can be manipulated to show near-identical feature visualizations.



E                    D O FEATURE VISUALIZATIONS FAIL THE SANITY CHECK SIMPLY BECAUSE
                     THEY ARE OUT- OF - DISTRIBUTION ?


In Section 3, we showed that feature visualizations fail a sanity check. An anonymous reviewer
asked whether this might be due to the case that they are out-of-distribution (compared to natu-
ral images)—an interesting question that we decided to investigate. We therefore performed the
analysis for two complementary additional datasets: ImageNet-V2 (Recht et al., 2019) which has
the same classes as original ImageNet and only a small distribution shift as evidenced by a roughly
10–15% accuracy drop of standard models, and NINCO (Bitterwolf et al., 2023), a dedicated out-of-
distribution detection dataset that specifically contains no classes that are part of original ImageNet.
We run the sanity check analysis with those datasets separately by computing the same baselines
as before (natural images vs. natural images of the same class; natural images vs. natural images
of different classes) with the difference that those natural images are now sampled from the respec-
tive OOD dataset, not from ImageNet. We then plot the previously computed similarity between
feature visualizations vs. natural ImageNet images of the same class in relationship to those new
baselines. The key idea is that if a simple out-of-distribution shift is responsible for strongly de-
creased processing similarity, then those new baselines should be drastically lower. At the same
time, the normalized similarity between feature visualizations and natural ImageNet images (plotted
in orange) should be a lot higher than it is in Figure 6 since it is now normalized with respect to the
out-of-distribution baselines.
As we can see for ImageNet-V2 in Figure 15 and for NINCO in Figure 17, this is not the case: even
though there is a substantial distribution shift, the similarity between same-class images of those
OOD datasets is still a lot higher than the natural-vs-feature-visualization similarity on ImageNet
throughout the network (except for the last few layers). We conclude from this analysis that simple
distribution shifts are insufficient to explain the different processing paths of feature visualizations—
either the distribution shift does not play a role, or the distribution shift from feature visualizations
is much larger even than the ImageNet-NINCO distribution shift (keeping in mind that NINCO is a
dedicated out-of-distribution detection dataset aimed at providing a much more systematic shift than
many other datasets).


                                                         33
                                                                                                                         Normalized similarity                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Spearman correlation                                                                                                                             Normalized similarity


                                                                                                                             0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                               0.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                           1.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               2.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1.0


                                                                                  0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                conv2d0_pre_relu_conv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               conv2d0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             maxpool0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                conv2d1_pre_relu_conv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               conv2d1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                conv2d2_pre_relu_conv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               conv2d2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             maxpool1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            mixed3a_1x1_pre_relu_conv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 mixed3a_3x3_bottleneck_pre_relu_conv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 mixed3a_5x5_bottleneck_pre_relu_conv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         mixed3a_pool
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         mixed3a_1x1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               mixed3a_3x3_bottleneck
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               mixed3a_5x5_bottleneck
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    mixed3a_pool_reduce_pre_relu_conv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            mixed3a_3x3_pre_relu_conv


                                                                                  20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            mixed3a_5x5_pre_relu_conv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  mixed3a_pool_reduce
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         mixed3a_3x3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         mixed3a_5x5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               mixed3a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            mixed3b_1x1_pre_relu_conv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 mixed3b_3x3_bottleneck_pre_relu_conv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 mixed3b_5x5_bottleneck_pre_relu_conv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         mixed3b_pool
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         mixed3b_1x1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               mixed3b_3x3_bottleneck
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               mixed3b_5x5_bottleneck
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    mixed3b_pool_reduce_pre_relu_conv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            mixed3b_3x3_pre_relu_conv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            mixed3b_5x5_pre_relu_conv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  mixed3b_pool_reduce
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         mixed3b_3x3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         mixed3b_5x5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               mixed3b
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             maxpool4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            mixed4a_1x1_pre_relu_conv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 mixed4a_3x3_bottleneck_pre_relu_conv


                                                                                  40
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  40


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 mixed4a_5x5_bottleneck_pre_relu_conv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         mixed4a_pool
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         mixed4a_1x1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               mixed4a_3x3_bottleneck
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               mixed4a_5x5_bottleneck
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    mixed4a_pool_reduce_pre_relu_conv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            mixed4a_3x3_pre_relu_conv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            mixed4a_5x5_pre_relu_conv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  mixed4a_pool_reduce
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         mixed4a_3x3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         mixed4a_5x5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               mixed4a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            mixed4b_1x1_pre_relu_conv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 mixed4b_3x3_bottleneck_pre_relu_conv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 mixed4b_5x5_bottleneck_pre_relu_conv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         mixed4b_pool
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         mixed4b_1x1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               mixed4b_3x3_bottleneck
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               mixed4b_5x5_bottleneck
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    mixed4b_pool_reduce_pre_relu_conv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            mixed4b_3x3_pre_relu_conv


                                                                                  60
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            mixed4b_5x5_pre_relu_conv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  60


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  mixed4b_pool_reduce
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         mixed4b_3x3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         mixed4b_5x5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               mixed4b
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            mixed4c_1x1_pre_relu_conv


34
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 mixed4c_3x3_bottleneck_pre_relu_conv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 natural images vs. feature visualizations


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 mixed4c_5x5_bottleneck_pre_relu_conv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         mixed4c_pool
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         mixed4c_1x1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               mixed4c_3x3_bottleneck
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               mixed4c_5x5_bottleneck
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    mixed4c_pool_reduce_pre_relu_conv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            mixed4c_3x3_pre_relu_conv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        natural


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            mixed4c_5x5_pre_relu_conv


                                                                                                                                                                                                             natural images vs. natural images of the same class
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          natural images vs. natural images of the same class


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  mixed4c_pool_reduce
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         mixed4c_3x3


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                InceptionV1 layer (input
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         mixed4c_5x5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               mixed4c
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            mixed4d_1x1_pre_relu_conv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 mixed4d_3x3_bottleneck_pre_relu_conv


                                                              InceptionV1 layer index (input
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              InceptionV1 layer index (input


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 mixed4d_5x5_bottleneck_pre_relu_conv


                                                                                  80
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         mixed4d_pool
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  80


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         mixed4d_1x1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               mixed4d_3x3_bottleneck
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           of theimages


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               mixed4d_5x5_bottleneck
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    mixed4d_pool_reduce_pre_relu_conv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            mixed4d_3x3_pre_relu_conv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            mixed4d_5x5_pre_relu_conv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  mixed4d_pool_reduce
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         mixed4d_3x3


                                                                                               natural images vs. feature visualizations of the same class
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  same class


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         mixed4d_5x5


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                output)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               mixed4d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            mixed4e_1x1_pre_relu_conv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 mixed4e_3x3_bottleneck_pre_relu_conv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 mixed4e_5x5_bottleneck_pre_relu_conv


                                                              output)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              output)


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         mixed4e_pool
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         mixed4e_1x1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               mixed4e_3x3_bottleneck
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               mixed4e_5x5_bottleneck
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    mixed4e_pool_reduce_pre_relu_conv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            mixed4e_3x3_pre_relu_conv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            mixed4e_5x5_pre_relu_conv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  mixed4e_pool_reduce


                                                                                  100
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         mixed4e_3x3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         mixed4e_5x5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  100


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               mixed4e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            maxpool10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            mixed5a_1x1_pre_relu_conv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 mixed5a_3x3_bottleneck_pre_relu_conv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 mixed5a_5x5_bottleneck_pre_relu_conv


     Figure 17: Normalized similarity (Spearman) for NINCO.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         mixed5a_pool
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         mixed5a_1x1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               mixed5a_3x3_bottleneck


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Figure 16: Absolute similarity (Spearman) for ImageNet-V2.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               mixed5a_5x5_bottleneck
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    mixed5a_pool_reduce_pre_relu_conv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Figure 15: Normalized similarity (Spearman) for ImageNet-V2.


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            mixed5a_3x3_pre_relu_conv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            mixed5a_5x5_pre_relu_conv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  mixed5a_pool_reduce
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         mixed5a_3x3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         mixed5a_5x5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               mixed5a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            mixed5b_1x1_pre_relu_conv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 mixed5b_3x3_bottleneck_pre_relu_conv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 mixed5b_5x5_bottleneck_pre_relu_conv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         mixed5b_pool


                                                                                  120
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         mixed5b_1x1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               mixed5b_3x3_bottleneck
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  120


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               mixed5b_5x5_bottleneck
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    mixed5b_pool_reduce_pre_relu_conv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            mixed5b_3x3_pre_relu_conv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            mixed5b_5x5_pre_relu_conv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  mixed5b_pool_reduce
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         mixed5b_3x3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         mixed5b_5x5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               mixed5b


                                                                                                                                      natural images vs. natural images of different classes
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       softmax2_pre_activation_matmul
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        vs. natural images of different classes


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              softmax2
  Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                       0.7
                       0.6

Spearman correlation   0.5
                       0.4
                       0.3
                       0.2
                       0.1
                       0.0
                       0.1
                                                conv2d0_pre_relu_conv
                                                               conv2d0
                                                             maxpool0
                                                conv2d1_pre_relu_conv
                                                               conv2d1
                                                conv2d2_pre_relu_conv
                                                               conv2d2
                                                             maxpool1
                                            mixed3a_1x1_pre_relu_conv



                                    mixed3a_pool_reduce_pre_relu_conv


                                    mixed4d_pool_reduce_pre_relu_conv
                                 mixed3a_3x3_bottleneck_pre_relu_conv
                                 mixed3a_5x5_bottleneck_pre_relu_conv
                                                         mixed3a_pool
                                                         mixed3a_1x1

                                            mixed3a_3x3_pre_relu_conv
                                            mixed3a_5x5_pre_relu_conv
                                                  mixed3a_pool_reduce



                                                         mixed3b_pool


                                            mixed4a_1x1_pre_relu_conv



                                    mixed4a_pool_reduce_pre_relu_conv


                                            mixed4d_3x3_pre_relu_conv
                                            mixed4d_5x5_pre_relu_conv
                                                  mixed4d_pool_reduce


                                            mixed5a_1x1_pre_relu_conv



                                    mixed5a_pool_reduce_pre_relu_conv


                                                  mixed5b_pool_reduce
                                               mixed3a_3x3_bottleneck
                                               mixed3a_5x5_bottleneck


                                                         mixed3a_3x3
                                                         mixed3a_5x5
                                                               mixed3a
                                            mixed3b_1x1_pre_relu_conv
                                 mixed3b_3x3_bottleneck_pre_relu_conv
                                 mixed3b_5x5_bottleneck_pre_relu_conv
                                                         mixed3b_1x1

                                    mixed3b_pool_reduce_pre_relu_conv
                                            mixed3b_3x3_pre_relu_conv
                                            mixed3b_5x5_pre_relu_conv
                                                  mixed3b_pool_reduce
                                               mixed3b_3x3_bottleneck
                                               mixed3b_5x5_bottleneck


                                                         mixed3b_3x3
                                                         mixed3b_5x5
                                                               mixed3b
                                                             maxpool4
                                 mixed4a_3x3_bottleneck_pre_relu_conv
                                 mixed4a_5x5_bottleneck_pre_relu_conv
                                                         mixed4a_pool
                                                         mixed4a_1x1

                                            mixed4a_3x3_pre_relu_conv
                                            mixed4a_5x5_pre_relu_conv
                                                  mixed4a_pool_reduce


                                                  mixed4b_pool_reduce
                                               mixed4a_3x3_bottleneck
                                               mixed4a_5x5_bottleneck


                                                         mixed4a_3x3
                                                         mixed4a_5x5
                                                               mixed4a
                                            mixed4b_1x1_pre_relu_conv
                                 mixed4b_3x3_bottleneck_pre_relu_conv
                                 mixed4b_5x5_bottleneck_pre_relu_conv
                                                         mixed4b_pool
                                                         mixed4b_1x1

                                    mixed4b_pool_reduce_pre_relu_conv
                                            mixed4b_3x3_pre_relu_conv
                                            mixed4b_5x5_pre_relu_conv
                                               mixed4b_3x3_bottleneck
                                               mixed4b_5x5_bottleneck


                                                         mixed4b_3x3
                                                         mixed4b_5x5
                                                               mixed4b
                                            mixed4c_1x1_pre_relu_conv



                                    mixed4c_pool_reduce_pre_relu_conv
                                 mixed4c_3x3_bottleneck_pre_relu_conv
                                 mixed4c_5x5_bottleneck_pre_relu_conv
                                                         mixed4c_pool
                                                         mixed4c_1x1

                                            mixed4c_3x3_pre_relu_conv
                                            mixed4c_5x5_pre_relu_conv
                                                  mixed4c_pool_reduce
                                               mixed4c_3x3_bottleneck
                                               mixed4c_5x5_bottleneck


                                                         mixed4c_3x3
                                                         mixed4c_5x5
                                                               mixed4c
                                            mixed4d_1x1_pre_relu_conv
                                 mixed4d_3x3_bottleneck_pre_relu_conv
                                 mixed4d_5x5_bottleneck_pre_relu_conv
                                                         mixed4d_pool
                                                         mixed4d_1x1
                                               mixed4d_3x3_bottleneck
                                               mixed4d_5x5_bottleneck


                                                         mixed4d_3x3
                                                         mixed4d_5x5
                                                               mixed4d
                                            mixed4e_1x1_pre_relu_conv
                                 mixed4e_3x3_bottleneck_pre_relu_conv
                                 mixed4e_5x5_bottleneck_pre_relu_conv
                                                         mixed4e_pool
                                                         mixed4e_1x1

                                    mixed4e_pool_reduce_pre_relu_conv
                                            mixed4e_3x3_pre_relu_conv
                                            mixed4e_5x5_pre_relu_conv
                                                  mixed4e_pool_reduce


                                                         mixed5b_3x3
                                                         mixed5b_5x5
                                                               mixed5b
                                       softmax2_pre_activation_matmul
                                                              softmax2
                                               mixed4e_3x3_bottleneck
                                               mixed4e_5x5_bottleneck


                                                         mixed4e_3x3
                                                         mixed4e_5x5
                                                               mixed4e
                                                            maxpool10
                                 mixed5a_3x3_bottleneck_pre_relu_conv
                                 mixed5a_5x5_bottleneck_pre_relu_conv
                                                         mixed5a_pool
                                                         mixed5a_1x1

                                            mixed5a_3x3_pre_relu_conv
                                            mixed5a_5x5_pre_relu_conv
                                                  mixed5a_pool_reduce
                                               mixed5a_3x3_bottleneck
                                               mixed5a_5x5_bottleneck


                                                         mixed5a_3x3
                                                         mixed5a_5x5
                                                               mixed5a
                                            mixed5b_1x1_pre_relu_conv
                                 mixed5b_3x3_bottleneck_pre_relu_conv
                                 mixed5b_5x5_bottleneck_pre_relu_conv
                                                         mixed5b_pool
                                                         mixed5b_1x1

                                    mixed5b_pool_reduce_pre_relu_conv
                                            mixed5b_3x3_pre_relu_conv
                                            mixed5b_5x5_pre_relu_conv
                                               mixed5b_3x3_bottleneck
                                               mixed5b_5x5_bottleneck
                                                              InceptionV1 layer (input   output)

                                             Figure 18: Absolute similarity (Spearman) for NINCO.


   F                    B ROADER IMPACTS
  Our paper investigates the reliability of feature visualizations. Overall, we expect this to contribute
  to better scrutiny towards existing interpretability methods, which hopefully inspires the develop-
  ment of more reliable interpretability methods in the future, as well the development of models
  that incorporate certain reliably “interpretability-enabling” assumptions right from the start, rather
  than being faced with the (sometimes impossible) task of post-hoc interpretability through feature
  visualizations.
  In terms of potential negative impact, the fooling methods developed here could be used to deceive
  an entity (e.g., a model auditor or regulator) as described in Section 2 and Appendix A.1. That
  being said, we believe that the risk is lower if this knowledge is public—it would be much more
  problematic to believe that feature visualizations can be taken at face value, because then whoever
  designs a fooling circuit would be met with an unsuspecting audience.

   G                     L IMITATIONS
  We see the following potential limitations:
                             1. We design methods that fool feature visualizations. Once it is known that a certain fooling
                                method might be used, it is easy to develop a detection mechanism. That said, the space
                                of potential fooling methods is vast. Therefore, developing a specific detection mechanism
                                would probably lead to a pattern similar to adversarial attacks and defenses: after an attack
                                is developed, a detection/circumvention method defends, which is then again circumvented
                                by a revised attack/fooling method.
                             2. The fooling methods that we developed in Section 2 assume bad intent. Most models are
                                developed with good intent. However, we believe that the reliability of interpretability
                                methods should not rely on assuming good intentions. The experiments in Section 3 and
                                the theory from Section 4 are independent of good/bad intent assumptions.
                             3. No sanity check is perfect, and like any sanity check, ours is just a necessary but not a
                                sufficient condition for a reliable feature visualization. For instance, if the training data
                                contains spurious correlations (all cows are on grass); a unit in the network is selective for
                                grass and not for cows but the feature visualization shows realistic-looking cows on grass
                                (rather than just grass), then the visualizations would pass the sanity check without raising
                                a warning about the spurious correlation present in the visualization. We would love to
                                see more research on sanity checks—to the best of our knowledge we provide the first one
                                which hopefully serves as a motivation for research on both better visualizations and more
                                sanity checks.
                             4. The potential assumptions on the function space listed in Table 1 are not exhaustive. It is
                                possible that other assumptions enable stronger prediction. Furthermore, our theory is a


                                                                          35
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


        worst-case analysis. It may be possible to go beyond worst-case analyses—an aspect we
        discuss in Appendix B.6—but the strength of our theoretical counterexamples is that they
        can be realized by very simple functions, hence we are not “cherry-picking” complicated
        functions that SGD would never learn.
     5. The investigated networks, Inception-V1 and ResNet-50, are of course not exhaustive ei-
        ther. None of our methods is specific to those networks. This means that other networks
        could be equipped with a fooling circuit, too. At the same time, the empirical results might
        look different for other networks, which would be an interesting direction to explore in
        future work.
     6. One could argue that the fooling circuit in Figure 4 only deceives a user when looking at
        unit A, whereas the other units still have their original visualization. That’s correct: the
        fooling circuit manipulates the visualization of A but not of e.g., units D or F . From a
        single unit perspective, this is already problematic since it means we can’t trust a unit’s
        visualization. It would be interesting avenue for future work to develop networks where
        every single unit’s visualization is misleading.
     7. There is no one definition of what it means to “understand” or “explain” a neural network,
        since those are very vague terms. We seek to be precise about our definition and motivate
        it with expectations about feature visualization stated in the literature (Appendix A.2), but
        we realize that this means not everyone’s notion of “understanding” / “explaning” neural
        networks can be captured by our definition.

H    I MAGE SOURCES
Figure 1. “Girl with a Pearl Earring” by Johannes Vermeer was downloaded from here and is
public domain according to the website. “Puppies” (West Highland White Terrier puppies) by Lucie
Tylová, Westik.cz was downloaded from here and is licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0 according to
the website. “Mona Lisa” by Leonardo da Vinci was downloaded from here and is public domain
according to the website. All three images were cropped to size 224 × 224 pixels. The photographs
were then embedded in the weights of a single convolutional layer and to some degree recovered by
the feature visualization method, subject to distortion by the method’s transformations.


                                                36
