Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


I MPLICIT BIAS OF SGD IN L2 - REGULARIZED LINEAR
DNN S : O NE - WAY JUMPS FROM HIGH TO LOW RANK
 Zihan Wang & Arthur Jacot
 Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences
 New York University
 New York, NY 10012, USA
 {zw3508,arthur.jacot}@nyu.edu



                                            A BSTRACT

         The L2 -regularized loss of Deep Linear Networks (DLNs) with more than one
         hidden layers has multiple local minima, corresponding to matrices with differ-
         ent ranks. In tasks such as matrix completion, the goal is to converge to the
         local minimum with the smallest rank that still fits the training data. While rank-
         underestimating minima can be avoided since they do not fit the data, GD might
         get stuck at rank-overestimating minima. We show that with SGD, there is always
         a probability to jump from a higher rank critical point to a lower rank one, but the
         probability of jumping back is zero. More precisely, we define a sequence of sets
         B1 ⊂ B2 ⊂ · · · ⊂ BR so that Br contains all critical points of rank r or less (and
         not more) that are absorbing for small enough ridge parameters λ and learning
         rates η: SGD has prob. 0 of leaving Br , and from any starting point there is a
         non-zero prob. for SGD to go in Br .


1   I NTRODUCTION

Several types of algorithmic bias have been observed in DNNs for a range of architectures (10; 34;
27; 28). Understanding and characterizing these types of implicit bias is crucial to understand the
practical performances of Deep Neural Networks (DNNs).
We focus on Deep Linear Networks (DLNs) Aθ = WL · · · W1 for θ = (W1 , . . . , WL ), that are
known to be biased towards low-rank linear maps in a number of settings:

      1. Adding L2 -regularization to the parameters of a DLN has the effect of adding Lp -Schatten
         norm (the Lp norm of the singular values of a matrix) regularization to the learned matrix
         for p = 2/L where L is the depth of the network (9).
      2. When trained with the cross-entropy loss, Gradient Descent (GD) diverges towards infinity
         along direction that maximizes the margin w.r.t. the parameter norm (17), leading to a form
         of implicit L2 -regularization with the same bias towards low-rank matrices.
      3. When the parameters are initialized with a small variance, the network learns incrementally
         matrices of growing rank, thus converging to a low-rank solution (23; 14).

This low-rank bias is particularly useful in the context of matrix completion (5), where the goal
is to recover a matrix from a subset of its entries under the assumption that the full matrix is low
rank. The task of finding the lowest rank matrices fitting the observed entries is NP-hard, but convex
approximations can work well (5; 6), as well as DLNs (18; 35).
In the deep case L > 2, the Lp -Schatten norm becomes non-convex (because p = 2/L < 1) and there
are multiple local minima in the L2 -regularized loss, each corresponding to matrices with different
ranks (similarly with cross-entropy there could be multiple directions that locally minimize the rank).
Which of these local minima/critical point will GD converge to? And what will be the final rank?
We will see how Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) can lead the dynamics to jump between critical
points with a bias towards low-rank points.


                                                  1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


1.1   C ONTRIBUTIONS

In this paper, we focus on the implicit bias of SGD in Deep Linear Networks (DLNs) of depth L
larger than 2 with L2 -regularization, when trained on Matrix Completion (MC) tasks.
We first describe the many critical points of the L2 -regularized loss. We then split them into three
groups, depending on whether they recover the ‘true rank’, underestimate, or overestimate it.
We show that the rank-underestimating critical points can easily be avoided by taking a small enough
ridge λ, but no such strategy exists to avoid rank-overestimating points with GD.
However we show SGD has a small but non-zero probability of jumping from any parameter to a
lower rank parameter, but the probability of jumping to a higher rank is zero. More precisely, we
define sets Br that contain all critical points of rank r or less and show that they are absorbing: the
probability for SGD to leave this set is zero, but the probability for SGD to move from outside of this
set to inside (in sufficiently many steps) is non-zero.
This suggests that rank-overestimation can be avoided if we continue SGD training long enough (but
not too long), since the rank will decrease incrementally. This illustrates the low-rank bias of SGD.

1.2   R ELATED W ORKS

The low-rank bias of DLNs has been observed in a number of different settings: for example as
a result of L2 -regularization or training with the cross-entropy loss (9), and as a result of small
initializations (2; 3; 23; 14). These results rely on similar tools such as the balancedness condition,
however the underlying training dynamics leading to sparsity are very distinct.
Motivated by the empirical observation that SGD improves generalization (20; 19), there has been
interest in the implicit bias of SGD. There is a line of work approximating SGD with different
Stochastic Differential Equations (SDEs) (25; 33; 16; 7), sometimes approximating the parameter
dependent noise covariance with a fixed scalar multiple of the identity thus leading to Langevin
dynamics (16), and in general studying the resulting steady-state distributions (7). These SDE
approximations require small learning rates (22), but approximations to capture the effect of large
learning rates have been proposed too (22; 32).
These works however focus on the bias of SGD in parameter space, showing e.g. that it can be
interpreted as changing the potential/loss (7), or adding a regularization term (32). More recent work
has focused on the bias of SGD in diagonal linear networks (29; 36) leading to a sparsity effect in the
vector represented by this network.
We focus on the effect of SGD in the context of deep fully-connected linear networks with L2 -
regularization, showing that SGD strengthens the already existing low-rank bias induced by L2 -
regularization. To our knowledge our work is also unique in that it does not rely on a SDE/continuous
approximation.

2     S ETUP
We study Deep Linear Networks (DLNs) of depth L and widths w0 = din , w1 , . . . , wL = dout
                                         Aθ = W L · · · W 1 ,
for the wℓ × wℓ−1 weight matrices Wℓ and parameters θ = (W1 , . . . , WL ). We will always assume
that the number of neurons in the hidden layers is sufficiently large wℓ ≥ min{din , dout } so that any
dout × din matrix A can be recovered for some parameters θ: A = Aθ .

2.1   M ATRIX C OMPLETION

We consider the L2 -regularized loss
                                                               2
                                    Lλ (θ) = C(Aθ ) + λ ∥θ∥
where C is a loss on matrices such as the Matrix Completion (MC) loss
                                           1 X                    2
                                C(A) =              A∗ij − Aθ,ij
                                          2N
                                               (i,j)∈I


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


where A∗ is the true matrix we want to recover and I ⊂ {1, . . . , dout } × {1, . . . , din } is the set of
observed entries of A∗ of size N = |I|. While it is not possible in general to recover an entire matrix
A∗ from a subset of its entries, it is possible if A∗ is assumed to be low rank.
The ideal goal is to find the matrix Â with lowest rank that matches the observed entries. We define
the smallest rank as the smallest integer r∗ such that inf A:RankA≤r∗ C(A) = 0. Note that one could
also define r∗ to be the smallest integer where this infimum is attained at a finite matrix A, which can
be higher in MC problems where filling in infinitely large entries can allow for lower ranks fitting
functions. In the main we restrict ourselves to the first definition, but we discuss the second choice
and its implications in Appendix A.
Since finding the minimal rank solution is NP-hard in general (5), a popular approximation is to find
the matrix Â that minimizes the MC loss with a nuclear norm regularization
                                   1 X                   2
                              min             A∗ij − Aij + λ ∥A∥∗ ,
                               A 2N
                                         (i,j)∈I
                                                                       PRankA
where the nuclear norm is the sum of the singular values of A: ∥A∥∗ = i=1 si (A). This loss is
convex and can be efficiently minimized, and it has been shown that it recovers the true matrix A∗
with high probability with an almost optimal number of observations (5; 6).
DLNs have also been used effectively in Matrix Completion, thanks to their implicit low-rank bias.
The importance of low-rank bias in the Matrix Completion setting, makes it ideal to study the implicit
bias of SGD in DLNs.

2.2   R EPRESENTATION C OST

The low-rank bias of L2 -regularized DLNs can be understood in terms of the representation cost
R(A; L) of DLNs, which equals the minimal parameter norm required to represent a matrix A with a
DLN of depth L:
                                                        2
                                    R(A; L) = min ∥θ∥ .
                                                         θ:A=Aθ

                                                                                               p
As observed in (9), the representation cost of DLNs equals the Lp -Schatten norm ∥A∥p (the Lp norm
of the singular values) of A for p = 2/L:
                                                                 RankA
                                                       2/L
                                                                  X
                                                                         si (A) /L .
                                                                               2
                                R(A; L) = L ∥A∥2/L := L
                                                                  i=1

This implies that the L2 -norm regularization in parameter space can be interpreted as adding a
Lp -Schatten norm regularization in matrix space:
                                                   2                               2/L
                          min C(Aθ ) + λ ∥θ∥ = min C(A) + λL ∥A∥2/L .
                            θ                                A


For shallow networks (L = 2), the representation cost equals the nuclear norm R(A; 2) = 2 ∥A∥∗ .
The loss has only global minima and strict saddles, thus guaranteeing convergence with probability
1 to a global minimizer θ̂ of the LHS, and the represented matrix Aθ̂ then minimizes the RHS. We
therefore simply recover the convex relaxation of Matrix Completion, with the advantage that the
loss Lλ (θ) is differentiable everywhere, so that it can be optimized with vanilla GD (35).
                                                                                         2/L
In the deep (L > 2) case however, the representation cost R(A; L) = L ∥A∥2/L is non-convex,
and both RHS and LHS may have distinct local minima with varying rank. We will show that the
correspondence extends to local minima of the RHS and LHS, and that there always exists one local
minimum with the right rank r∗ .
But there are multiple local minima and critical poinnts with different ranks, for example the zero
parameters θ = 0 corresponding to the zero matrix Aθ = 0 is always a local minimum. Or there
might also be critical points that overestimate the ‘true rank’ that we want to recover.
For GD with a Gaussian initialization, there is a non-zero probability to converge to any local
minimum. On the other hand, we will see how SGD can jump from local minima to local minima.


                                                         3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


2.3   S TOCHASTIC G RADIENT D ESCENT

We consider SGD with replacement, that is at each time step t an index (it , jt ) is sampled uniformly
from the index set I, independently from the previous iterations. The parameters are then updated
according to the learning rate η
                                                   η                        2
                          θt+1 = (1 − 2ηλ)θt − ∇θ A∗it jt − Aθt ,it jt .
                                                   2
Note that due to the L2 -regularization there remains noise even at the local minimizers, in contrast
without L2 -regularization there is neither noise nor drift at the global minima of the loss. Thus with
L2 -regularization the dynamics never completely stop, making it possible for SGD to jump from one
local minimum to another.
Remark 2.1. A number of previous works have approximated SGD by GD with Gaussian noise, the
simplest of which is to approximate SGD by Langevin dynamics. Under this approximation, there
is always a likelihood of jumping from local minimum to any other local minimum, with a higher
likelihood of going to (and staying at) local minima with lower loss. Our theoretical results show a
completely different behavior, where SGD may have non-zero probability of jumping from one local
minimum to another, but zero likelihood of jumping back. Furthermore the likelihood of SGD visiting
a certain local minimum will not scale with the loss of that local minimum, but rather its rank. This
further shows that the Langevin approximation of SGD is inadequate.
It appears that what leads to this difference in dynamics, is that the covariance of the noise is
low-dimensional and highly anisotropic, with a lot of noise along directions that keep or lower the
rank, and almost no noise along directions that increase the rank.

3     M AIN R ESULTS
We will first give a description of the loss landscape of L2 -regularized DLNs and then state our main
result, which says that SGD has a non-zero probability of jumping from parameters of a certain rank
to a lower rank, and that once in the neighborhood of a low rank critical point, the probability of
reaching a higher rank is zero.

3.1   L2 - REGULARIZED L OSS L ANDSCAPE
                                                                                    2/L
The correspondence of the minimizers of Lλ (θ) and Cλ (A) := C(A) + λL ∥A∥2/L extends to their
local minima:
Theorem 3.1. If θ̂ is a local minimum of Lλ (θ), then Aθ̂ is a local minimum of Cλ (A). Conversely,
if Â is a local minimum of Cλ (A) then there is a local minimum θ̂ of Lλ (θ) such that Â = Aθ̂ .

The critical points of the L2 -regularized loss are balanced, i.e. WℓT Wℓ = Wℓ−1 Wℓ−1        T
                                                                                                 for all
ℓ = 1, . . . , L − 1 (see Appendix A). This implies that all weight matrices have the same singular
values and the same rank r. We may therefore define the rank of a critical point θ̂ as the rank r of any
weight matrix Wℓ which also matches the rank of the represented matrix Aθ̂ .
In general, there are several distinct local minima/critical points with different ranks. The origin
θ = 0 is always a local minimum (since the unregularized loss has vanishing first L − 1 derivatives at
0, it becomes a local min even for any λ > 0), furthermore for small enough ridge λ, there always is
a local minimum that finds the minimal rank required to fit the observed entries:
Proposition 3.1. Consider a matrix completion problem with true matrix A∗ and observed entries I.
For all λ, there is a rank r∗ local minima θ(λ) of Lλ (θ) such that limλ↘0 C(Aθ(λ) ) = 0.

Note that finding a fitting matrix of minimal rank is known to be a NP-hard problem in general (5),
which means that it should in general be hard to find this local minimum. There are three types of
problematic local minima/critical points:
Rank-underestimating critical points: these are critical points such as the origin θ = 0 with a rank
lower than the minimal rank r∗ , so that the represented matrix Aθ cannot fit the observed entries. GD
with a small enough ridge λ and learning rate η will avoid such rank underestimating minima:


                                                   4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Proposition 3.2. Given an initialization θ0 such that unregularized (λ = 0) gradient descent
converges to a global minimum, there is a constant c > 0 such that for all small enough ridge λ and
learning rate η, regularized GD θt for all t ≥ t0 the r∗ -th largest singular value of the matrix is
non-zero: sr∗ (Aθt ) ≥ c.

There exists multiple papers proving convergence to a global minimum under different assumptions
(1; 13; 26), but empirical evidence seem to suggest that convergence to a global minimum is much
more general, and we expect more convergence results to come.
Rank-overestimating critical points: these have a larger rank than r∗ and the represented matrix
Aθ can fit the observed entries (with a small O(λ) error). These are harder to avoid, suggesting that
the NP-hardness of finding an optimal rank r∗ fitting matrix can be related to avoiding these points.
It might happen that there are no rank-overestimating minima/critical points, in which case GD can
recover the minimal rank solution easily, but from now on we will focus on settings where these
rank-overestimating points appear and how SGD manages to avoid them.
‘Bad’ Rank-estimating local minima: Finally there might exists local minima (or non-strict saddles
where GD/SGD might also get stuck) with the right rank r∗ that do not fit the true matrix. This paper
will not focus on how to avoid these points, but we believe that it could be proven that such minima
 are rare for large input and output dimensions, using similar tools as (4; 18). The noise of SGD might
 also help avoid these minima/saddles. In our numerical experiments, we never encountered such
 minima, but we did encounter both other types.

3.2   O NE - WAY J UMPS FROM H IGH TO L OW R ANK

We now show how SGD helps avoiding rank-overestimating critical points. More precisely we show
under conditions on the learning rate η and ridge λ that there is always a (small) likelihood of jumping
to a lower rank, but the probability of jumping back is zero. This suggests a strategy: train the
network with a small ridge to guarantee convergence to a critical point of at least the right rank, and
then take advantage of the SGD noise to lower the rank until finding the right rank.
For our analysis, we define a family of regions Br ⊂ RP of parameters θ that are:
                                                                                 2
      1. ϵ1 -approximately balanced: for all layers ℓ, WℓT Wℓ − Wℓ−1 Wℓ−1    T
                                                                                  F
                                                                                    ≤ ϵ1 ,
                                                          PRankWℓ              ⊤
      2. ϵ2 , α-approximately rank r (or less): for all ℓ, i=1       fα (si (Wℓ Wℓ )) ≤ r + ϵ2 where
         si (A) is the i-th singular value of A and fα (x) is a twice differentiable function such that
         fα (0) = 0, fα (x) = 1 for x > α, 0 ≤ fα′ (x) ≤ K                                 ′′
                                                            α for some constant K and fα (x) ≤ 0.
                             2
      3. C-bounded: ∥Wℓ ∥F ≤ C.

Note that we chose the function fα to be differentiable, and to satisfy fα (0) = 0 and fα (x) =
1, ∀x ≥ α. This yields a notion of approximaterank that converges to the true rank as α ↘ 0. One
                                               1
                                                   x(2α − x), x ≤ α
example of such approximate rank is fα (x) = α2                             .
                                              1                 x>α

Since all critical points θ̂ of the L2 -regularized loss are balanced, the set Br contains all critical
points of rank r or less for C large enough and all ϵ1 , ϵ2 ≥ 0, and it contains no critical point of
higher rank for ϵ2 and α small enough. These sets allows us to separate critical points by rank, with a
small neighborhood.
                                                            PRankA
Proposition 3.3. For any critical point θ̂ in Br , we have i=1 θ̂ fα (si (Aθ̂ )2/L ) ≤ r + ϵ2 .

Proof. Since θ̂ is balanced, Aθ̂ = UL⊤ S L U0 where S ∈ Rdout ×din is the diagonal matrix of
                                              PRankW
singular values of all Wℓ ’s. Since for any ℓ, i=1 ℓ fα (si (Wℓ⊤ Wℓ )) ≤ r + ϵ2 , Aθ̂ satisfies
PRankAθ̂           2/L
   i=1    fα (si (Aθ̂ )) ≤ r + ϵ2 .

We can now state our main result, which says that the set Br is absorbing for all r, i.e. SGD starting
from anywhere will always end up at some time inside Br and then never leave it:


                                                   5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Theorem 3.2. For any r ≥ 0, λ ≥ 0, any large enough C and small enough ϵ1 , ϵ2 , α, η, the set Br is
closed
                                       θt ∈ Br ⇒ θt+1 ∈ Br
and for r ≥ 1 and any parameters θt there is a time T = Ω̃(λ−1 η −1 ) (i.e up to log terms) such that
                                                                      T
                                                           r
                             P (θt+T ∈ Br |θt ) ≥                       ,
                                                    min{din , dout }
thus for any starting point SGD will eventually reach Br :
                                    P(∃T : θt+T ∈ Br |θt ) = 1.

Proof. (sketch) (1) The closedness of the set of ϵ1 -approximately balanced parameters follows from
the fact that in the gradient flow limit η ↘ 0, the balancedness errors WℓT Wℓ − Wℓ−1 Wℓ−1 T
                                                                                              decay
exponentially
                     ∂t WℓT Wℓ − Wℓ−1 Wℓ−1  T
                                                  = −λ WℓT Wℓ − Wℓ−1 Wℓ−1  T

                                                                                .
To guarantee a similar decay with SGD, we simply need to the control the O(η 2 ) terms.
Given ϵ1 -approximately balancedness, the closedness of the ϵ2 -approximately rank r or less parame-
ters follows from the fact that the dynamics resulting from the minimization of the cost C(Aθ ) are
very slow along the smallest singular vectors of Aθ (1) but the L2 -regularization term pushes these
small singular values towards zero. For small enough singular values, this second force dominates,
thus leading to a decay towards zero.
(2) Under the event AT that in the steps s from t to t + T − 1 all the random entries (is , js ) are
sampled from the same r of the dout columns, one can show that the dout − r other columns of WL
decay exponentially to approximately 0, implying an approximate rank of r or less. The probability
                                T
                           r
of that event is at least dout    .

This shows the implicit bias of SGD towards low-rank matrices in matrix completion: SGD can avoid
any rank-overestimating minima/critical point given enough training steps.
Explicit bounds on C, α, ϵ1 , ϵ2 , η can be found in Appendix B. The bounds are rather complex, but
                                                                             L+2            L+2
we give here an example of acceptable rates in terms of λ: C ∼ λ−1 ,α ∼ λ L−2 , ϵ1 ∼ λ2 L−2 +2L+1 ,
                            L+1
ϵ2 ∼ λ0 , and η ∼ λ4L+1+ L−2 . These rate suggest that an extremely small learning rate η is necessary,
especially for large depths L, thus making the likelihood of a jump appear very small. This seems in
contradiction with our empirical observations that larger depths tend to make these jumps more likely.
We believe our bounds could be made tighter, in particular when it comes to the dependence on the
depth L to better reflect our empirical observations.
We expect this result to generalize to other tasks. The first part of the theorem (the closedness of Br )
should generalize to costs such as the MSE loss and others, and the second part too, under the event
that one samples from the same r training points over T time steps for the MSE loss, or sample from
the same r classes for classification tasks.
A limitation however is that the second part of the result relies on the fact that we sample the observed
entries independently at each time t with possible replacement. In practice, the dataset is randomly
shuffled and taken in this random order, so that every observed entry is chosen exactly once during
each epoch. This would force the jumps to happen within an epoch, which may not be possible
depending on the problem.
Another limitation is the average time required to observe one of our predicted jumps can easily be
absurdly large. To observe a jump in reasonable time, one also needs rather large learning rates η,
leading to very noisy dynamics. This makes periodic learning rate choices attractive, with large η
periods allowing for jumps to lower-rank region, and low η periods allowing for SGD to settle around
a local minimum.
Nevertheless, our result also shows that the common approach of approximating SGD with a SDE
such as Langevin dynamics and studying the stationary distribution (usually with full support over
the parameter space) is misleading. In contrast, our result implies that any stationary distribution
must have support inside Br=1 , thus under-estimating the true rank in general. It is thus crucial to
understand the distribution of SGD at intermediate times, when the rank has not yet collapsed to 1.


                                                   6
            Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                             1.0
                                                                                   25
            4
                                                             0.8
                                                                                   20
            3
                                                             0.6
test loss


                                                                       test loss
                                                                                   15


                                                               s2/s1
            2
                                                             0.4
                                                                                   10

            1                                                0.2
                                                                                   5

            0                                                0.0
                0    1000   2000   3000   4000    5000    6000                          0   1000   2000   3000          4000   5000   6000   7000
                                   time                                                                          time


            Figure 1: Annealing Schedule: DLN with L =                        Figure 2: Effect of depth: We study the effect
            3, w1 = 100 on the 2 × 2 MC problem with                          of on the MC problem with ϵ = 0.1. We train 5
            ϵ = 0.25 [Light blue] SGD with λ = 0.1 and                        networks of each depths L = 3 [blue] and L = 4
            η = 0.2 (η = 0.03 for the first 500 steps to                      [red] with the same schedule: η = 0.03, λ = 0.1
            avoid explosion) [dark blue] at different times,                  until t = 500, then η = 0.25, λ = 0.1 until t =
            we create offshoots with λ = 0.001 and η =                        5000 and finally η = 0.05, λ = 0.001 until the
            0.02 to fit the data. [red] The ratio of the second               end. We see that the five depth L = 3 networks
            to first singular value of Aθ on the large λ, η                   are unable to jump in this time, while all five
            path. We see a jump around time 2000, where                       depth L = 4 networks jump at different times
            the output matrix becomes rank 1. The offshoots                   during the first 5000 SGD steps.
            created before this jump fail to fit the missing
            entry while those created after succeed.


            3.2.1     N ONLINEAR NETWORKS

            Since linear networks are a simplification of nonlinear networks, it is natural to wonder whether the
            results presented here could be generalized to the nonlinear case. We identify two possible strategy to
            generalize our results:
            First along the lines of (8) which observes a similar phenomenon where SGD is naturally attracted to
            symmetric regions of the loss (where for example two neurons are identical or one neuron is dead)
            in nonlinear networks. The L2 -regularization is known to make these region more attractive (15),
            which could have a compound effect with SGD. In DLNs, the regions of low rank that we prove are
            attractive can also be interpreted as neighborhoods of symmetric / invariant regions.
            Second, recent work has shown that L2 regularized ReLU DNNs with large depths are biased towards
            minimizing a notion of rank over nonlinear functions, the Bottleneck rank (12). We have hope that
            our results could be extended to prove a similar low-rank bias with this new notion of rank. This is
            further motivated by the observation that such large depth networks exhibit a Bottleneck structure
            (11) where the middle layers of the network behave approximately like linear layers.


            4       N UMERICAL E XPERIMENTS

            For our numerical experiments, we want to find a Matrix Completion problem that GD cannot solve
            but SGD can. In particular, we want to find a setup where GD converges with a high probability
            to a rank-overestimating minimum, and where SGD can jump from this minimum to a lower rank
            minimum in a reasonable amount of time.
            It is rather difficult to find a setup that lies between the regimes where both GD and SGD work and
            where neither work. This is in line with previous work in the bias of SGD (29): in diagonal networks
            a value (determined by the initialization) determines a transition between a sparse and non-sparse
            regimes, and SGD has the effect of pushing this value towards the sparse regime; this can have a
            significant sparsity effect if the original value was at the transition between regimes, but little effect if
            it was far into either regimes.


                                                                       7
     Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


            1.0
                                                                        10
            0.8
                                                                        8

            0.6   t0 = 0
test loss


                  t0 = 250


                                                            test loss
                                                                        6
                  t0 = 1000
            0.4   t0 = 4000
                                                                        4

            0.2                                                         2

            0.0                                                         0
                          10 1                     100                       0   1000   2000   3000     4000   5000   6000   7000
                                                                                                      time


       Figure 3: Annealing accross ϵ: For a range of            Figure 4: Periodic Schedule: DLN with L = 3,
       ϵ, we train 4 networks (L = 4,w = 100) with an           w1 = 100 on the 2×2 MC problem with ϵ = 0.2.
       annealing schedule as in Figure 1 and plot the           We plot 5 runs of SGD with periodic learning
       test loss divided by the test loss when putting          rates alternating between η = 0.1, λ = 0.001
       zeros in the missing entries. The four networks          and η = 0.4, λ = 0.1. We see that the different
       are trained for t0 steps with high noise, followed       trials make jumps during the high η, λ period.
       by 4000 steps in the low noise regime. Without a         After the jump, SGD will settle at a low test
       noise phase (t0 = 0) the network fails to recover        error in the slow periods, allowing us to identify
       the rank 1 solution. Larger t0 allow the network         when the jump happened.
       to recover it for even smaller ϵ.



     We choose a MC problem, inspired by (30), that allows us to tune the difficulty of finding a sparse
     solution. We observe 3 out of 4 entries of a 2 × 2 matrix:

                                                     1 ∗
                                                             .
                                                     ϵ 1

     Filling the missing entry ∗ with ϵ−1 leads to a rank 1 matrix. The smaller ϵ is, the larger the missing
     entry that needs to be filled in needs to be.
     In L2 -regularized DLNs with L > 2 there are three local minima: the rank 0 minimum at the
     origin which can easily be avoided, a set of minima that learn the rank 1 solution, and a set of
     rank-overestimating minima that learn a rank 2 solution by filling the missing entry with a small
     value.
     For small ϵ values, GD almost always converges to a rank-overestimating minimum (see Figure 3).
     In such setup, SGD can outperform GD by jumping to a rank 1 solution. To achieve a jump in a
     reasonable amount of time, we need the ridge parameter λ and the learning rate η to be large. But
     such a choice of large λ, η prevent SGD from minimizing the train error.
     We investigate two strategies to take advantage of both the jumping properties of large λ, η and fitting
     properties of small λ, η:
   ‘Annealing’ Schedule: In Figure 1, we run SGD with large λ, η for some time t0 , waiting for a jump
    and then switch to small values of λ, η for convergence. Another specificity is that we take a small
    learning rate for the first few steps, because SGD diverges if we start with a too large learning rate
    directly at initialization, whereas large learning rates are possible after a few steps (we do not have a
    theoretical explanation for that).
     We test different switching times to small λ, η values, and we see clearly that if we switch after the
     jump at time ∼ 2000, we obtain a rank 1 solution, but if we switch before the jump then training fails
     and recovers a rank 2 solution.
     By changing ϵ we can tune the difficulty of finding the rank 1 solution. We see in Figure 3 that the
     smaller ϵ, the longer one needs to wait for a jump, and thus the longer one needs to stay in the high
     noise setting. We also see that without a high noise period (i.e. when we are close to GD) the network
     fails to recover the rank 1 solution even for ϵ = 1.


                                                            8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Periodic Schedule: Another strategy it to alternate between large and small λ, η. We see in Figure 4
how the jumps all happen during the large λ, η periods. It is also interesting to see that even after
SGD has settled in the vicinity of a local minimum in one of the small λ, η periods, SGD can still
jump to another minimum in a subsequent large λ, η period.
Finally we also study the effect of depth in Figure 2, and observe that depth increases the probability
of jumps. We train networks of depths L = 3 and L = 4 on the 2 × 2 MC task with ϵ = 0.1. While
for the choice ϵ = 0.25, a depth L = 3 network was able to jump in a reasonable amount of time, for
this smaller choice of ϵ we do not observe a jump (even with the same hyper-parameters). In contrast,
the deeper networks L = 4 all jump in a reasonable amount of time, suggesting that depth increases
the likelihood of a jump.

5    C ONCLUSION
We have given a description of the loss landscape of L2 -regularized DLNs, giving a classification of
its critical points by their rank. We have then shown that SGD has a non-zero probability of jumping
from any higher rank critical point to a lower rank one, but it has a zero probability of jumping in the
other direction. We observe these jumps empirically. To our knowledge, this is the first description of
the low-rank bias of SGD in the context of fully-connected linear networks with two or more hidden
layers.
Our analysis is also significantly different from previous approaches that rely on approximating SGD
with a continuous stochastic process, and/or studying of the limiting distribution of this continuous
process. It appears that the phenomenon of absorbing sets of different ranks cannot be recovered with
a continuous approximation, and the jumps we describe happen before SGD has reached its limiting
distribution. This puts into question the adequacy of the continuous approximation and limiting
distribution assumption.

R EFERENCES
 [1] Sanjeev Arora, Nadav Cohen, Noah Golowich, and Wei Hu. A convergence analysis of
     gradient descent for deep linear neural networks. In International Conference on Learning
     Representations, 2019.
 [2] Sanjeev Arora, Nadav Cohen, and Elad Hazan. On the optimization of deep networks: Implicit
     acceleration by overparameterization. In Jennifer Dy and Andreas Krause, editors, Proceedings
     of the 35th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 80 of Proceedings of
     Machine Learning Research, pages 244–253. PMLR, 10–15 Jul 2018.
 [3] Sanjeev Arora, Nadav Cohen, Wei Hu, and Yuping Luo. Implicit regularization in deep matrix
     factorization. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019.
 [4] Emmanuel Candes and Benjamin Recht. Exact matrix completion via convex optimization.
     Communications of the ACM, 55(6):111–119, 2012.
 [5] Emmanuel J Candès and Benjamin Recht. Exact matrix completion via convex optimization.
     Foundations of Computational mathematics, 9(6):717–772, 2009.
 [6] Emmanuel J Candès and Terence Tao. The power of convex relaxation: Near-optimal matrix
     completion. IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 56(5):2053–2080, 2010.
 [7] Pratik Chaudhari and Stefano Soatto. Stochastic gradient descent performs variational inference,
     converges to limit cycles for deep networks. In 2018 Information Theory and Applications
     Workshop (ITA), pages 1–10. IEEE, 2018.
 [8] Feng Chen, Daniel Kunin, Atsushi Yamamura, and Surya Ganguli. Stochastic collapse: How
     gradient noise attracts sgd dynamics towards simpler subnetworks, 2023.
 [9] Zhen Dai, Mina Karzand, and Nathan Srebro. Representation costs of linear neural networks:
     Analysis and design. In A. Beygelzimer, Y. Dauphin, P. Liang, and J. Wortman Vaughan, editors,
     Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2021.


                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


[10] Suriya Gunasekar, Jason Lee, Daniel Soudry, and Nathan Srebro. Characterizing implicit bias
     in terms of optimization geometry. In Jennifer Dy and Andreas Krause, editors, Proceedings of
     the 35th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 80 of Proceedings of Machine
     Learning Research, pages 1832–1841. PMLR, 10–15 Jul 2018.
[11] Arthur Jacot. Bottleneck structure in learned features: Low-dimension vs regularity tradeoff,
     2023.
[12] Arthur Jacot. Implicit bias of large depth networks: a notion of rank for nonlinear functions. In
     The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023.
[13] Arthur Jacot, Franck Gabriel, and Clément Hongler. Neural Tangent Kernel: Convergence and
     Generalization in Neural Networks. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 31,
     pages 8580–8589. Curran Associates, Inc., 2018.
[14] Arthur Jacot, François Ged, Berfin Şimşek, Clément Hongler, and Franck Gabriel. Saddle-to-
     saddle dynamics in deep linear networks: Small initialization training, symmetry, and sparsity,
     2022.
[15] Arthur Jacot, Eugene Golikov, Clément Hongler, and Franck Gabriel. Feature learning in
     l2 -regularized dnns: Attraction/repulsion and sparsity. In Advances in Neural Information
     Processing Systems, volume 36, 2022.
[16] Stanisław Jastrz˛ebski, Zachary Kenton, Devansh Arpit, Nicolas Ballas, Asja Fischer, Yoshua
     Bengio, and Amos Storkey. Three factors influencing minima in sgd. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:1711.04623, 2017.
[17] Ziwei Ji and Matus Telgarsky. Directional convergence and alignment in deep learning. In
     H. Larochelle, M. Ranzato, R. Hadsell, M. F. Balcan, and H. Lin, editors, Advances in Neural
     Information Processing Systems, volume 33, pages 17176–17186. Curran Associates, Inc.,
     2020.
[18] Raghunandan H Keshavan, Andrea Montanari, and Sewoong Oh. Matrix completion from a
     few entries. IEEE transactions on information theory, 56(6):2980–2998, 2010.
[19] Nitish Shirish Keskar, Dheevatsa Mudigere, Jorge Nocedal, Mikhail Smelyanskiy, and Ping
     Tak Peter Tang. On large-batch training for deep learning: Generalization gap and sharp minima.
     ArXiv, abs/1609.04836, 2016.
[20] Yann A LeCun, Léon Bottou, Genevieve B Orr, and Klaus-Robert Müller. Efficient backprop.
     In Neural networks: Tricks of the trade, pages 9–48. Springer, 2012.
[21] Adrian S Lewis and Hristo S Sendov. Twice differentiable spectral functions. SIAM Journal on
     Matrix Analysis and Applications, 23(2):368–386, 2001.
[22] Qianxiao Li, Cheng Tai, and E Weinan. Stochastic modified equations and adaptive stochastic
     gradient algorithms. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 2101–2110.
     PMLR, 2017.
[23] Zhiyuan Li, Yuping Luo, and Kaifeng Lyu. Towards resolving the implicit bias of gradient
     descent for matrix factorization: Greedy low-rank learning. In International Conference on
     Learning Representations, 2020.
[24] Chaoyue Liu, Libin Zhu, and Mikhail Belkin. Toward a theory of optimization for over-
     parameterized systems of non-linear equations: the lessons of deep learning. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2003.00307, 2020.
[25] Stephan Mandt, Matthew D Hoffman, and David M Blei. Stochastic gradient descent as
     approximate bayesian inference. arXiv preprint arXiv:1704.04289, 2017.
[26] Hancheng Min, Rene Vidal, and Enrique Mallada. On the convergence of gradient flow on
     multi-layer linear models. In Andreas Krause, Emma Brunskill, Kyunghyun Cho, Barbara
     Engelhardt, Sivan Sabato, and Jonathan Scarlett, editors, Proceedings of the 40th International
     Conference on Machine Learning, volume 202 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research,
     pages 24850–24887. PMLR, 23–29 Jul 2023.


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


[27] Edward Moroshko, Blake E Woodworth, Suriya Gunasekar, Jason D Lee, Nati Srebro, and
     Daniel Soudry. Implicit bias in deep linear classification: Initialization scale vs training accuracy.
     In H. Larochelle, M. Ranzato, R. Hadsell, M. F. Balcan, and H. Lin, editors, Advances in Neural
     Information Processing Systems, volume 33, pages 22182–22193. Curran Associates, Inc.,
     2020.
[28] Greg Ongie, Rebecca Willett, Daniel Soudry, and Nathan Srebro. A function space view of
     bounded norm infinite width relu nets: The multivariate case. In International Conference on
     Learning Representations, 2020.
[29] Scott Pesme, Loucas Pillaud-Vivien, and Nicolas Flammarion. Implicit bias of sgd for diagonal
     linear networks: a provable benefit of stochasticity. In M. Ranzato, A. Beygelzimer, Y. Dauphin,
     P.S. Liang, and J. Wortman Vaughan, editors, Advances in Neural Information Processing
     Systems, volume 34, pages 29218–29230. Curran Associates, Inc., 2021.
[30] Noam Razin and Nadav Cohen. Implicit regularization in deep learning may not be explainable
     by norms. In H. Larochelle, M. Ranzato, R. Hadsell, M. F. Balcan, and H. Lin, editors, Advances
     in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 33, pages 21174–21187. Curran Associates,
     Inc., 2020.
[31] Horn Roger and R Johnson Charles. Topics in matrix analysis, 1994.
[32] Samuel L Smith, Benoit Dherin, David GT Barrett, and Soham De. On the origin of implicit
     regularization in stochastic gradient descent. arXiv preprint arXiv:2101.12176, 2021.
[33] Samuel L. Smith and Quoc V. Le. A bayesian perspective on generalization and stochastic
     gradient descent. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2018.
[34] Daniel Soudry, Elad Hoffer, Mor Shpigel Nacson, Suriya Gunasekar, and Nathan Srebro. The
     implicit bias of gradient descent on separable data. The Journal of Machine Learning Research,
     19(1):2822–2878, 2018.
[35] Ruoyu Sun and Zhi-Quan Luo. Guaranteed matrix completion via non-convex factorization.
     IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 62(11):6535–6579, 2016.
[36] Loucas Pillaud Vivien, Julien Reygner, and Nicolas Flammarion. Label noise (stochastic)
     gradient descent implicitly solves the lasso for quadratic parametrisation. In Conference on
     Learning Theory, pages 2127–2159. PMLR, 2022.
[37] G.A. Watson. Characterization of the subdifferential of some matrix norms. Linear Algebra
     and its Applications, 170:33–45, 1992.


                                                   11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


The Appendix is organized as follows:

        • Section A contains the proofs of Theorem 3.1 and Propositions 3.1 and 3.2 of the main.
        • Section B then describes how Theorem 3.2 of the main can be split into two statements:
          Theorems B.1 and B.2.
        • Section C state some preliminary result for the proofs.
        • Section D proves the first part of Theorem 3.2 from the main, that is Theorem B.1.
        • Section E proves the second part of Theorem 3.2, that is Theorem B.2.
        • Section F states and proves a more general version of Proposition 3.3 of the main.

A      L OSS L ANDSCAPE

Proposition A.1. Let θ̂ be a critical point of the loss Lλ , then θ̂ is balanced, i.e. Wℓ WℓT =
  T
Wℓ+1 Wℓ+1 .

Proof. At a critical point, we have
                          T
                         Wℓ+1 · · · WLT ∇C(Aθ )W1T · · · Wℓ−1
                                                          T
                                                              + 2λWℓ = 0.
Thus
                                1 T
                 Wℓ WℓT = −      W    · · · WLT ∇C(Aθ )W1T · · · WℓT = Wℓ+1
                                                                        T
                                                                            Wℓ+1 .
                               2λ ℓ+1


Proposition A.2. Let θ̂ be a critical point of the loss Lλ , then:

        • θ̂ is a local minimum if and only if Aθ̂ is a local minimum of Cλ .

        • θ̂ is a strict saddle/maximum if and only if Aθ̂ is a strict saddle/maximum.

Proof. We know that any critical point of the L2 -regularized loss is balanced. The parameters
θ̂ = (W1 , . . . , WL ) are therefore of the form
                                                        1
                                                       T
                                          Wℓ = Uℓ S L Uℓ−1 ,
for some d × d diagonal S (where d = min{din , dout }) and wℓ × d matrices Uℓ with orthonormal
columns (UℓT Uℓ = Id ).
(0) For any sequence of matrices A1 , A2 , . . . converging to Aθ̂ with SVD decompositions Ai =
Ũi Si ṼiT (chosen so that Ũi , Si and Ṽi converge to the SVD decomposition Aθ̂ = UL SU0T ) we can
construct parameters θi with weight matrices
                                                        1
                                          W1 = U1 SiL ṼiT
                                                        1
                                                       T
                                          Wℓ = Uℓ SiL Uℓ−1
                                                        1
                                                        T
                                          WL = Ũi SiL UL−1 .
                                              2             2/L
We have (1) Aθi = Ai , (2) θi → θ̂, (3) ∥θi ∥ = L ∥Ai ∥2/L and therefore Cλ (Ai ) = Lλ (θi ).

(1a) If θ̂ is not a local minimum, there is a sequence θi → θ̂ with Lλ (θi ) < Lλ (θ̂), thus the sequence
Ai = Aθi converges to Aθ̂ and Cλ (Ai ) ≤ Lλ (θi ) < Lλ (θ̂) = Cλ (Aθ̂ ), implying that Aθ̂ is not a
local minimum.
(1b) If Aθ̂ is not a local minimum, there is a sequence Ai → Aθ̂ with Cλ (Ai ) < Cλ (Aθ̂ ), by point
(0), we construct a sequence θi → θ̂ such that Lλ (θi ) = Cλ (Ai ) < Cλ (Aθ̂ ) = Lλ (θ̂), proving that θ̂
is not a local minimum.


                                                   12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


(2a) θ̂ is a strict saddle/maximum if there is a sequence θi → θ̂ such that

                                               Lλ (θi ) − Lλ (θ̂)
                                        lim                                < 0.
                                        i→∞       ∥θi − θ̂∥2
Our goal is now to show that the sequence Aθi that converges to Aθ̂ satisfies the same property. First
note that
                      Cλ (Aθi ) − Cλ (Aθ̂ )        Lλ (θi ) − Lλ (θ̂) ∥θi − θ̂∥2F
                 lim                 2      ≤ lim                                  2 ,
                i→∞       Aθi − Aθ̂ F         i→∞    ∥θi − θ̂∥2F      Aθi − Aθ̂ F
since Cλ (Aθi ) ≤ Lλ (θi ) and Cλ (Aθ̂ ) = Lλ (θ̂).

Since Aθ is twice differentiable w.r.t. θ, we know that Aθi − Aθ̂ F ≤ c∥θi − θ̂∥ + O ∥θi − θ̂∥2
and thus
        ∥θi − θ̂∥2                     ∥θi − θ̂∥2                     1             1
                      ≥                                  2 =                    2 ≥ 2 ,
       ∥Aθi − Aθ̂ ∥2F                                                              4c

                             c∥θi − θ̂∥ + O ∥θi − θ̂∥2         c + O ∥θi − θ̂∥

for large enough i. This implies that

                            Cλ (Aθi ) − Cλ (Aθ̂ )                  Lλ (θi ) − Lλ (θ̂) 1
                      lim                 2         ≤ lim                                < 0,
                     i→∞        Aθi − Aθ̂ F            i→∞           ∥θi − θ̂∥2F      c2

where we used the fact that for i large enough Lλ∥θ
                                                 (θi )−Lλ (θ̂)
                                                     −θ̂∥2
                                                               is negative.
                                                           i       F

This implies that Aθ̂ is a strict saddle/maximum.
(2b) Aθ̂ is a strict saddle if there is a sequence Ai → Aθ̂ with
                                              Cλ (Ai ) − Cλ (Aθ̂ )
                                       lim                         2        < 0.
                                       i→∞        Ai − Aθ̂ F
For L > 2 we may assume that Ai has the same rank as Aθ̂ for large enough i: a matrix cannot be
approached with matrices of strictly lower rank (the best rank k approximation matches the k largest
singular values leading to an error larger than the k + 1 largest singular value), and if it is approached
                                                         2/L
with a strictly larger rank the regularization term ∥Ai ∥2/L would be strictly larger.

We now construct a sequence θi → θ̂ as in (0). Consider the map ϕ that maps matrices A = Ũ S Ṽ T
in the neighborhood of Aθ̂ with the same rank to the parameters
                                                               1
                                              W1 = U1 S L Ṽ T
                                                               1
                                                           T
                                              Wℓ = Uℓ S L Uℓ−1
                                                           1
                                                          T
                                             WL = Ũ S L UL−1 .

We have ϕ(Ai ) = θi and ϕ(Aθ̂ ) = θ̂. And since ϕ is differentiable at Aθ̂ along directions that do not
change the rank (37), we have
                                                                                           2
                  Lλ (θi ) − Lλ (θ̂)            Cλ (Ai ) − Cλ (Aθ̂ )               Ai − Aθ̂ F
            lim                 2      = lim                           2                          2 < 0.
            i→∞                         i→∞         Ai − Aθ̂ F                ϕ (Ai ) − ϕ Aθ̂
                      θi − θ̂



Finally we prove the existence of a minimum with the minimal rank required to fit the data:
Proposition A.3. Consider a matrix completion problem with true matrix A∗ and observed entries I.
For all λ, there is a rank r∗ local minima θ(λ) of Lλ (θ) such that limλ↘0 C(Aθ(λ) ) = 0.


                                                      13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Proof. For all λ, take the matrix A(λ) to minimize the cost Cλ (A) amongst the set of matrices of
rank r∗ or less. The regularization ensures that the infinimum inf A:RankA≤r∗ Cλ (A) is attained at a
finite matrix A.
The matrix A(λ) is also a (possibly non-global) minimum of the non-restricted loss: it is locally
optimal amongst matrices of the same rank, and for any matrix A′ of rank r > r∗ , define A′≤r∗ to be
the closest rank r∗ matrix (which is obtained by setting all but the r∗ -th largest singular values of A′
to zero), we have
                                                            2/L
                Cλ (A′ ) = Cλ (A′≤r∗ ) + λL∥A′ − A′≤r∗ ∥2/L + [C(A′ ) − C(A′≤r∗ )].

We have that Cλ (A′≤r∗ ) ≥ Cλ (A(λ)) and in a small enough neighborhood of A(λ), one can
guarantee that the second term dominates the third one since C is differentiable (if sr∗ +1 > 0 is the
                                                                             2/L
r∗ + 1-th largest singular value of A′ , then the second term is at least λLsr∗ +1 , while the second one
                     ′    ∗
is at most c(RankA − r )sr∗ +1 where c < ∞ bounds the Lipschitzness of C in the neighborhood).
By Proposition A.2 there are corresponding local minima θ(λ) of Lλ (θ) such that A(λ) = Aθ(λ) .
By the definition of the minimal rank r∗ , we know that inf A:RankA≤r∗ Cλ (A) = 0 and thus
limλ↘0 C(Aθ(λ) ) = 0.

A.1    AVOIDING R ANK - UNDERESTIMATING C RITICAL P OINTS

With a small enough ridge λ and learning rate η, one can guarantee that GD will avoid all rank-
underestimating local minima:
Proposition A.4 (Proposition 3.2 in the main). Given an initialization θ0 such that unregularized
(λ = 0) gradient descent converges to a global minimum, there is a constant c > 0 such that for all
small enough ridge λ and learning rate η, regularized GD θt for all t ≥ t0 the r∗ -th largest singular
value of the matrix is non-zero: sr∗ (Aθt ) ≥ c.

Proof. Since unregularized GD converges to a global minimum with zero loss, there is a time t0 such
that L(θt0 ,λ=0 ) ≤ 14 inf A:RankA<r∗ C(A).
We know that L2 -regularized GD θλ (t) converges to unregularized GD θ(t) as λ ↘ 0 for any fixed
time t. Then for all sufficiently small λ we have Lλ (θt0 ,λ ) ≤ 12 inf A:RankA<r∗ C(A).
Lemma A.5 also tells us that GD is non-increasing for a small enough η, so that for all t ≥ t0 we also
have
                                              1
                               Lλ (θt,λ,η ) ≤        inf     C(A).
                                              2 A:RankA<r∗

Let us now show that there is a constant c > 0 such that the r∗ -th largest singular value sr∗ (Aθt,λ,η )
of Aθt,λ,η is lower bounded by c.
Assume by contradiction that this is not the case, then for all ϵ, there is a matrix Aϵ with sr (Aϵ ) ≤ ϵ
for all r ≥ r∗ and with Cλ (Aϵ ) ≤ 21 inf A:RankA<r∗ C(A).
                                                                               2/L
We know that the matrices Aϵ are bounded for all ϵ since ∥Aϵ ∥2/L ≤ λ1 Cλ (Aϵ ) ≤
 1
2λ inf A:RankA<r C(A) < ∞. There is thus a convergent sequence Aϵ1 , Aϵ2 , . . . with ϵn → 0
                ∗

as n → ∞, whose limit Â = limn→∞ Aϵn is finite, has rank strictly less than r∗ and satis-
fies C(Â) ≤ Cλ (Â) ≤ 12 inf A:RankA<r∗ C(A) which yields a contradiction with the fact that
inf A:RankA<r∗ C(A) > 0.

Here are a few Lemmas required for the previous proof:
Lemma
  √    A.1. The loss gradient ∇Lλ (θ) in the ball B(0, D) is Lipschitz with constant H =
2L (L−1)
   N     (2D2L−2 + cDL−2 + 2λ).

Proof. For all parameters θ with ∥θ∥ ≤ D, we have ∥Wℓ ∥F ≤ D and thus ∥Aθ ∥F ≤ DL . Further-
more for any two parameters θ = (W1 , . . . , WL ) and ϕ = (V1 , . . . , VL ) with ∥θ∥ , ∥ϕ∥ ≤ D, we


                                                   14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


have
          ∥Aθ − Aϕ ∥F ≤ ∥WL · · · W2 (W1 − V1 )∥F + · · · + ∥(WL − VL )VL−1 · · · V1 ∥F
                                      L
                                      X
                          ≤ DL−1            ∥Wℓ − Vℓ ∥F
                                      ℓ=1
                              √
                          ≤       LDL−1 ∥θ − ϕ∥ .

Now since ∇C(Aθ ) = N2 M ⊙ (Aθ − A∗ ), this implies that
                                             2          2         2
                         ∥∇C(Aθ )∥F ≤          ∥Aθ ∥F +   ∥A∗ ∥F ≤ DL + c
                                             N          N         N
and
                                                   2               2√
                   ∥∇C(Aθ ) − ∇C(Aϕ )∥F ≤            ∥Aθ − Aϕ ∥F ≤    LDL−1 ∥θ − ϕ∥ .
                                                   N               N
                                                                               2
Now using these facts, we get that the difference ∥∇Lλ (θ) − ∇Lλ (ϕ)∥ is upper bounded by
L
X
        T                                                                                                 2
       Wℓ+1 · · · WLT ∇C(Aθ )W1T · · · Wℓ−1
                                        T       T
                                            − Vℓ+1 · · · VLT ∇C(Aϕ )V1T · · · Vℓ−1
                                                                                T
                                                                                   + 2λWℓ − 2λVℓ
ℓ=1
    L X
    X                                                                                                      2
≤              DL−2 ∥Wk − Vk ∥F ∥∇C(Aθ )∥ + DL−1 ∥∇C(Aθ ) − ∇C(Aϕ )∥ + 2λ ∥Wℓ − Vℓ ∥F
    ℓ=1 k̸=ℓ
    L X                                                                                               2
    X    2                                                      2√
≤                   (D2L−2 + cDL−2 ) ∥Wk − Vk ∥F +                 LD2L−2 ∥θ − ϕ∥ + 2λ ∥Wℓ − Vℓ ∥F
               N                                                N
    ℓ=1 k̸=ℓ
    L X                                                        2
    X    2√                  2L−2          L−2
≤                     L(2D          + cD         + 2λ) ∥θ − ϕ∥
               N
    ℓ=1 k̸=ℓ

   4L2 (L − 1)                               2
=              (2D2L−2 + cDL−2 + 2λ)2 ∥θ − ϕ∥ .
        N2
and thus
                                   p
                                 2L (L − 1)
           ∥∇Lλ (θ) − ∇Lλ (ϕ)∥ ≤            (2D2L−2 + cDL−2 + 2λ) ∥θ − ϕ∥ .
                                     N


                                     √ θ0 , we have that GD with ridge λ and learning rate
Proposition A.5.qGiven initial parameters
                                             2L    (L−1)
η< H 2
       for D = Lλλ(θ0 ) and H =         N      (2D2L−2 + cDL−2 + 2λ) remains inside the ball
B(0, D) and has a non-increasing regularized loss.

Proof. Given the parameters at any time step θt in the ball B(0, D) the loss along the gradient
θt − η∇Lλ (θt ) (for any η small enough so that this next step remains inside the ball B(0, D))
satisfies

                                       Z η
Lλ (θt − η∇Lλ (θt )) − Lλ (θt ) =         ∇Lλ (θt )T ∇Lλ (θt − p∇Lλ (θt ))dp
                                        0
                                                          Z η
                                                     2
                                     ≤ −η ∥∇Lλ (θt )∥ + η     ∥∇Lλ (θt )∥ ∥∇Lλ (θt ) − ∇Lλ (θt − p∇Lλ (θt ))∥ dp
                                                                   0
                                                     2 η2            2
                                     ≤ −η ∥∇Lλ (θt )∥ + H ∥∇Lλ (θt )∥
                                                       2
               √
          2L   (L−1)                                         2
for H =        N     (2D2L−2 + cDL−2 + 2λ). Thus for any η ≤ H , the loss is non-increasing:
                                     Lλ (θt − η∇Lλ (θt )) − Lλ (θt ) ≤ 0.


                                                           15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                q
Choosing D = Lλλ(θ0 ) , we know that θ0 ∈ B(0, D) since ∥θ0 ∥ ≤ Lλλ(θ0 ) and all subsequent steps
                                                                     2

                             2
θt with a learning rate η < H    will remain inside the ball, since Lλ (θ0 ) is non-increasing along the
continuous path made up of the concatenation of the segments [θt , θt+1 ] it can never leave the ball
since ∥θt ∥ ≤ Lλλ(θt ) ≤ Lλλ(θ0 ) (where t is a real value that can lie on any segment).
           2



A.1.1    D IFFERENT NOTION OF OPTIMAL RANK
In settings where the infimum inf A:RankA≤r∗ C(A) is not attained, we can define another notion of
smallest rank r̃∗ > r∗ to be the smallest integer where this infimum is attained. One could wonder
under which conditions one can avoid minima with rank < r̃∗ . A similar result can be proven, though
we require an additional assumption (and for simplicity, it is proven for GF instead of GD):
Proposition A.6. Given an initialization θ0 such that unregularized (λ = 0) gradient flow (GF)
converges to a global minimum θ∞ such that the loss is β-PL in a neighborhood of θ∞ , then for λ
small enough, regularized GF converges to a minimum rank no smaller than r̃∗ .

Proof. If we let the ridge λ go to zero we have that GF trained with λ-weight decay θt,λ converges
to GF without weight decay: θt,λ → θt as λ ↘ 0. We can therefore choose aqtime t0 large enough
                                                                                       L (θ
                                                                                    λ t0 ,λ   )
and small enough λ0 such that for all λ ≤ λ0 , the ball B(θt0 ,λ , R) for R =         β      lies in the
neighborhood of θ∞ where the loss is β-PL. We can apply Lemma A.2 to obtain that at time Tλ the
loss will be below λk0 and one can easily check that k0 is bounded as λ ↘ 0 (since θt0 ,λ converges
to the unregularized GF θt0 ,λ=0 as λ ↘ 0). Since the loss will only decrease after that, we know that
GF will converge to a local minimum with O(λ) loss.
Let us now assume by contradiction that there is a sequence λ1 > λ2 > . . . with λn → 0 as n → ∞
such that the minimum θ∞,λn that GF with ridge λn converges to is rank-underestimating for all
n, i.e RankAθ∞,λn < r̃∗ . Since λn ∥θ∞,λn ∥ ≤ Lλ (θ∞,λn ) = O(λn ), we know that the θ∞,λn are
bounded, which implies the existence of a convergent subsequence that converges to parameters θ̃
which by continuity of θ 7→ Aθ and θ, λ 7→ Lλ (θ) satisfies RankAθ̃ < r̃∗ and L(θ̃) = 0, which is in
contradiction with the assumption that r∗ is the smallest fitting rank.
                                                                          2
Lemma A.2. Let the loss L satisfy the β-PL inequality ( 12 ∥∇L(θ)∥ ≥ βL(θ)) in a ball of radius
     √
       Lλ (θ0 )
R =     √       around initialization θ0 for some λ, then there is a time Tλ ≤ − log λ+log
                                                                                      β
                                                                                           k0
                                                                                              for
         βp
     2                                            2
k0 = β 2 2βL(θ0 ) (∥θ0 ∥ + R) + β (∥θ0 ∥ + R) , where GF θTλ ,λ on the L2 -regularized loss
Lλ satisfies Lλ (θTλ ,λ ) = λk0 .

Proof. Let TR,λ be the first time gradient flow θt,λ leaves the ball of radius R, we will describe the
dynamics before TR,λ and then show that TR,λ is larger than the time Tλ we are interested in.
Inside the ball, we have


                        2                          2
            ∥∇Lλ (θ)∥ ≥ (∥∇L(θ)∥ − 2λ ∥θ∥)
                         p                  2
                      ≥    2βL(θ) − 2λ ∥θ∥
                                   p
                      ≥ 2βL(θ) − 2 2βL(θ)2λ ∥θ∥
                                       p
                                                                             2
                      ≥ 2βLλ (θ) − 2λ 2 2βL(θ0 ) (∥θ0 ∥ + R) + β (∥θ0 ∥ + R)
                    ≥ β (2Lλ (θ) − λk0 ) ,
             p
                                                  2
for k0 = β2 2 2βL(θ0 ) (∥θ0 ∥ + R) + β (∥θ0 ∥ + R) .

Let Tλ be the first time that Lλ (θt,λ ) = λk0 , , then for all t ≤ min {Tλ , TR,λ }
                                                                2
                                ∂t Lλ (θt,λ ) = − ∥∇Lλ (θt,λ )∥


                                                   16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                λk0
                                             ≤ −2β Lλ (θt,λ ) −
                                                                 2
                                             ≤ −βLλ (θt,λ ),
which implies that Lλ (θt,λ ) ≤ Lλ (θ0 )e−βt and thus that Tλ ≤ − logβ λ − logβ 0/2 under the condition
                                                                                      k


that this is smaller than TR,λ .
Let us now show that TR,λ ≥ Tλ , by showing that ∥θTλ ,λ − θ0 ∥ < R.

                                           Z Tλ
                        ∥θTλ ,λ − θ0 ∥ ≤          ∥∇Lλ (θt,λ )∥ dt
                                            0
                                           Z Lλ (θ0 )−λ k20
                                                                                −1
                                       =                      ∇Lλ (θt(τ ),λ )        dτ
                                            0
where we did a change of variable in time to t(τ ) which is chosen so that Lλ (θt(τ ),λ ) = Lλ (θ0 ) − τ
                                                  −2                                               2−2
which implies that ∂τ t(τ ) = ∇Lλ (θt(τ ),λ )     (so that ∂τ Lλ (θt(τ ),λ ) = − ∇Lλ (θt(τ ),λ )         =
−1 as needed). We can now further bound
          Z Lλ (θ0 )−λ k20                           Z Lλ (θ0 )−λ k20
                                            −1                               1
                            ∇Lλ (θt(τ ),λ )    dτ ≤                   p              dτ
            0                                         0                  βLλ (θt,λ )
                                                          Z Lλ (θ0 )−λ k20
                                                      1                            1
                                                  =√                        p               dτ
                                                       β 0                     Lλ (θ0 ) − τ
                                                                            r       !
                                                      1     p                   k0
                                                  =√           Lλ (θ0 ) − λ            .
                                                       β                         2
                                                     p
                                                        Lλ (θ0 )
                                                  ≤     √
                                                           β
                                                  = R.



While the PL inequality condition might be unexpected, it is actually satisfied at almost all global
minima:
Proposition A.7. Given global minimum θ of a network with widths wℓ ≥ din + dout for all
ℓ = 1, . . . , L − 1, then for all ϵ > 0 there is a closeby global minimum θ′ , i.e. ∥θ − θ′ ∥ ≤ ϵ, such
that the loss satisfies the PL inequality in a neighborhood of θ′ .

Proof. W.l.o.g., let us assume that din ≤ dout , then it is possible to change the parameters infinitesi-
mally to make WL−1 · · · W1 full rank while keeping the outputs Aθ = WL · · · W1 unchanged (by
only changing WL−1 · · · W1 orthogonally to ImWLT which is possible since wL−1 ≥ din + dout ).
We now choose a neighborhood of θ′ such that the smallest singular value of WL−1 · · · W1 is lower
                                                                                               2
bounded by some λ > 0. For any parameters θ in this neighborhood, the loss satisfies the β = 2λ
                                                                                              N -PL
inequality:
                    2     1 X                                                          2
            ∥∇L(θ)∥ = 2              T
                                   Wℓ+1 · · · WLT [M ⊙ (A∗ − Aθ )] W1T · · · Wℓ−1T
                         N
                                  ℓ
                            1                                2
                         ≥ 2 [M ⊙ (A∗ − Aθ )] W1T · · · WL−1
                                                         T
                           N
                           λ2                2
                         ≥ 2 ∥M ⊙ (A∗ − Aθ )∥
                           N
                           2λ2
                         =     L(θ).
                            N



                                                       17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


The PL-inequality is typically satisfied in the NTK regime (13; 24), but in the Saddle-to-Saddle
regime (23; 14) it seems that GF converges to the vicinity of a minima that does not satisfy the PL
inequality (minima that are balanced and low-rank typically do not satisfy it), so that the PL-inequality
might only be satisfied in a small neighborhood and with a small constant β. This suggests that in
settings where the two notions of minimal rank r∗ and r̃∗ do not agree, the question of which minima
GF converges to might be dependent on the regime of training we are in, with the NTK regime
leading to a rank no less than r̃∗ and the Saddle-to-Saddle regime leading to a rank no less than r∗ at
least for reasonable values of λ.

B     L OW R ANK B IAS
In Theorem 5, there are two statements: (1) if θt ∈ Br,ε1 ,ε2 ,C then θt+1 ∈ Br,ε1 ,ε2 ,C and (2) with a
positive probability such that there exists a time T such that θT ∈ Br,ε1 ,ε2 ,C . The following theorems
give the formal expression of the two statements.
Theorem B.1. For weight Wl , l = 1, . . . , L, L ≥ 3, let
             BC,ε1 := {θ : ∥Wl ∥2F ≤ C, ∥Wl Wl⊤ − Wl+1
                                                    ⊤
                                                       Wl+1 ∥2 ≤ ε1 , l = 1, . . . , L},
                                     Pd
where C ≥ C1 /2λ. Define Fα (x) = i=1 fα (xi ) for any x ∈ Rd , where fα is twice differentiable
function such that fα (0) = 0, fα (x) = 1 for x > α, 0 ≤ fα′ (x) ≤ K
                                                                   α for some constant K and
fα′′ (x) ≤ 0. Denote
                    Br,ε2 := {θ : Fα ◦ σ(Wl⊤ Wl ) ≤ r + ε2 , l = 1, . . . , L},
                                                                      1
                                                                     L−2
                                                             2
where σ maps a matrix to its singular values and α ≤ 2(C1λ+C L )          . Then for any ε1 , ε2 > 0
                       √                   λαε2
such that ε2 < 1/2 and ε1 ≤                  L−1 √          , if θ(t) ∈ B := BC,ε1 ∩ Br,ε2 , then
                                  64nKL(r+1)2 C    2        2(C1 +C L )
stochastic gradient descent iteration with learning rate

                                       C1                       2λε1
              η ≤ min                                    ,                     ,
                         4(2(C1 + C L )C L−1 + λ2 C) 4(C1 + C L )C L−1 + λ2 ε1

                                            λαε2                  2(r + 1)
                                                                ,
                        64nK(r + 1)2 (2(C1 + C L )C L−1 + λ2 C)      λ
satisfies θ(t + 1) ∈ B, where n is the maximal widths and heights of weight matrices.
Theorem B.2. For any initialization θ0 , denote C0 := max1≤l≤L ∥Wl ∥2F , if

                                       C1                           λε1
              η ≤ min                                  ,
                         4(2(C1 + C0L )C0L−1 + λ2 C0 ) 4(C1 + C L )C L−1 + 2λ2 C
             C1                                                                         log(2C0 /ε1 )
and C ≥       λ , then for any    time T = T0 + T1 satisfying T0 ≥                           ηλ         and T1 ≥
log((4(n−r)C)/(αε2 ))
         2ηλ          , we have
                                                                               T1
                                                                  r
                            P(θT ∈ Br,ε1 ,ε2 ,C ) ≥                                 .
                                                           min{din , dout }

C     P RELIMINARIES OF P ROOFS
C.1   FACTS IN L INEAR A LGEBRA

Fact C.1. ∥AB∥∗ ≤ ∥A∥∗ ∥B∥∗ , where ∥ · ∥∗ represents Frobenius norm or 2 norm.
Fact C.2. For matrices A, B satisfy AB is square, we have |Tr(AB)| ≤ ∥A∥F ∥B∥F .

Let σ1 ≥ σ2 ≥ · · · ≥ σr be the singular values of a matrix A ∈ Rm×n , where r = min{m, n}. We
have following facts.
Fact C.3. σi (AB) ≤ σ1 (A)σi (B) and σi (AB) ≤ σi (A)σ1 (B) for any i.


                                                   18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Fact C.4 (Theorem 3.3.13 in (31)). For a square matrix A ∈ Rn×n , let λ1 ≥ · · · ≥ λn be the
eigenvalues. Then we have
                                        k
                                        X                   k
                                                            X
                                              |λpi (A)| ≤         σip (A)
                                        i=1                 i=1

for k = 1, 2, . . . , n and p > 0.

C.2    S PECTRAL F UNCTION

For a function f : Rn 7→ R that preserves permutation, we consider the function f ◦ λ, where λ(A)
represents all eigenvalues of symmetric matrix A ∈ Rn×n . We define Diagµ be the diagonal matrix
with its entries equal to µ and diagA = (A11 , . . . , Ann ). The following lemmas gives the first and
second order derivatives of f ◦ λ.
Lemma C.1 (Lemma 3.1 from (21)). f is differentiable at point λ(A) if and only if f ◦ λ is
differentiable at A. Moreover, we have

                                ∇(f ◦ λ)(A) = U (Diag∇f (λ(A)))U ⊤ ,

where U is a orthogonal matrix satisfying A = U (Diagλ(A)U ⊤ .

For a decreasing sequence µ ∈ Rn , where

                        µ1 = · · · = µk1 > µk1 +1 = · · · = µk2 > µk2 +1 · · · µkr ,

denote Il = {kl−1 + 1, . . . , kl } for l = 1, . . . , r. For a twice differentiable function f , we define
vector b(µ) as
                                       ′′
                                       fii (µ)                 if |Il | = 1,
                        bi (µ) =         ′′          ′′                                                  (1)
                                       fpp  (µ) − fpq   (µ) for any p ̸= q ∈ Il

and matrix A(µ) as
                                     
                                     0
                                                           if i = j,
                            Aij (µ) = bi′(µ) ′              if i ̸= j but i, j ∈ Il ,
                                      fi (µ)−fj (µ)
                                     
                                                            otherwise.
                                              µi −µj


Lemma C.2 (Theorem 3.3 from (21)). f is twice differentiable at point λ(A) if and only if f ◦ λ is
twice differentiable at A. Moreover, we have

               ∇2 (f ◦ λ)(A)[H] = ∇2 f (λ(A))[diagH̃, diagH̃] + ⟨A(λ(A), H̃ ◦ H̃)⟩,

where A = W Diagλ(A)W ⊤ and H̃ = W ⊤ HW .


D     P ROOF OF T HEOREM B.1

For stochastic gradient descent, the parameter updates as
                                                η
                             θt+1 = (1 − ηλ)θt − ∇θ (A∗it jt − Aθt ,it jt )2 .                          (2)
                                                2
Then for each l, l-th layer’s weight Wl updates as

    Wl (t + 1) = Wl (t) − η Wl+1 (t)⊤ · · · WL (t)⊤ Gθt ,it jt W1 (t)⊤ · · · Wl−1 (t)⊤ + λWl (t) ,

                                                                                                        (3)

where Gθ,ij is a matrix where the (i, j)-th entry is Aθ,ij − A∗ij and other entries are 0. In the
proofs below, we will omit the iteration t for convenience (for example Wl = Wl (t)). We denote
        ⊤
Tl = Wl+1  · · · WL⊤ Gθ,ij W1⊤ · · · Wl−1
                                       ⊤
                                          .


                                                       19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D.1     A PPROXIMATE BALANCE

First we give a lemma that bounds ∥Gθ,ij ∥F .
Lemma D.1. For any C, if ∥Wl (t)∥2F ≤ C for any l = 1, . . . , L, then ∥Gθ,ij ∥2F ≤ 2(C1 + C L ).
                                         QL
Proof. By Fact C.1, we have ∥Aθ ∥2F ≤                2    L
                                            l=1 ∥Wl ∥F ≤ C . Then

                         ∥Gθ,ij ∥2F = (Aθ,ij − A∗ij )2 ≤ 2 A2θ,ij + (A∗ij )2

                                                                                                    (4)
                                    ≤ 2 ∥Aθ ∥2F + C1 ≤ 2(C L + C1 ).


Proposition D.2. For any C ≥ C                 2
                               2λ , if ∥Wl (t)∥F ≤ C for any l = 1, . . . , L, then stochastic gradient
                                 1


descent iteration with learning rate η ≤ 4(2(C1 +CCL1)C L +λ2 C) satisfies ∥Wl (t + 1)∥2F ≤ C for
l = 1, . . . , L.

Proof. If ∥Wl ∥2F ≤ C, we have
                                                                                  2
            ∥Wl (t + 1)∥2F = ∥Wl ∥2F − 2η λ∥Wl ∥2F + Tr(Wl⊤ Tl ) + η 2 ∥Tl + λWl ∥F .

                                                                                                    (5)
We estimate each part in the equation separately. We have
                         Tr(Wl⊤ Tl ) = Tr(W1⊤ · · · WL⊤ Gθ,ij )
                                       = Tr(A⊤                           ∗
                                             θ Gθ,ij ) = Aθ,ij (Aθ,ij − Aij )
                                           1            1
                                       ≥ − (A∗ij )2 ≥ − C1 .
                                           4            4

By Lemma D.1, we have
                                                                                   
                                                        Y
                      ∥Tl + λWl ∥2F ≤ 2 ∥Gθ,ij ∥2F            ∥Wk ∥2F + λ2 ∥Wl ∥2F 
                                                        k̸=l

                                     ≤ 2 2(C1 + C )C L−1 + λ2 C .
                                                   L


Then we have
                                              1
           ∥Wl (t + 1)∥2F ≤ (1 − 2ηλ)∥Wl ∥2F + ηC1 + 2η 2 (2(C1 + C L )C L−1 + λ2 C).
                                              2
When η ≤ 4(2(C1 +C LC)C1 L−1 +λ2 C) and C ≥ C
                                            2λ ,
                                             1



                          ∥Wl (t + 1)∥2F ≤ (1 − 2ηλ)∥Wl ∥2F + ηC1 ≤ C.


Proposition D.3. For any ε, C > 0, if ∥Wl (t)Wl (t)⊤ − Wl+1 (t)⊤ Wl+1 (t)∥2 ≤ ε and ∥Wl (t)∥2F ≤
C for all l, then stochastic gradient descent iteration with learning rate η ≤ 4(C1 +C L2λε 1
                                                                                         )C L−1 +λ2 ε1
                               ⊤                 ⊤
satisfies ∥Wl (t + 1)Wl (t + 1) − Wl+1 (t + 1) Wl+1 (t + 1)∥2 ≤ ϵ for l = 1, . . . , L.

Proof. We first compute the update of Wl Wl⊤ :
                                                                                        ⊤
             Wl (t + 1)Wl (t + 1)⊤ = ((1 − ηλ)Wl − ηTl ) ((1 − ηλ)Wl − ηTl )
                        = (1 − ηλ)2 Wl Wl⊤ − (1 − ηλ)η(Wl Tl⊤ + Tl Wl⊤ ) + η 2 Tl Tl⊤ .
Similarly, we have
        Wl+1 (t + 1)⊤ Wl+1 (t + 1)
                            ⊤                                  ⊤                 ⊤
              = (1 − ηλ)2 Wl+1 Wl+1 − (1 − ηλ)η(Wl+1 ⊤Tl+1 + Tl+1 Wl+1 ) + η 2 Tl+1 Tl+1 .
Since
                       Tl Wl⊤ = Wl+1
                                  ⊤
                                     · · · WL⊤ Gθ,ij W1⊤ · · · Wl⊤ = Wl+1
                                                                       ⊤
                                                                          Tl+1


                                                   20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


and                                                ⊤                      ⊤
                            Wl Tl⊤ = Tl Wl⊤                ⊤
                                                       = Wl+1 Tl+1                ⊤
                                                                              = Tl+1 Wl+1 ,
we have
               Wl (t + 1)Wl (t + 1)⊤ − Wl+1 (t + 1)⊤ Wl+1 (t + 1)
                            = (1 − ηλ)2 (Wl Wl⊤ − Wl+1
                                                    ⊤
                                                       Wl+1 ) + η 2 (Tl Tl⊤ − Tl+1
                                                                                ⊤
                                                                                   Tl+1 ).
Then
            ∥Wl (t + 1)Wl (t + 1)⊤ − Wl+1 (t + 1)⊤ Wl+1 (t + 1)∥2
                           ≤ (1 − ηλ)2 Wl Wl⊤ − Wl+1     ⊤
                                                           Wl+1 2 + η 2 Tl Tl⊤ − Tl+1
                                                                                   ⊤
                                                                                       Tl+1 2
                                                                                     
                                                            Y           Y                                               (6)
                           ≤ (1 − ηλ)2 ε + η 2 ∥Gθ,ij ∥22  ∥Wk ∥22 +         ∥Wk ∥22 
                                                                k̸=l                k̸=l+1
                                                2 2        2             l    L−1
                           ≤ ε − 2ηλε + η λ ε + 4η (C1 + C )C                       .
When η ≤ 4(C1 +C L2λε 1
                   )C L−1 +λ2 ε1
                                 ,
          ∥Wl (t + 1)Wl (t + 1)⊤ − Wl+1 (t + 1)⊤ Wl+1 (t + 1)∥2 ≤ ε − 2ηλε + 2ηλε = ε.


With Proposition D.2 and Proposition D.3, we have the following statement that θt+1 is approximate
balance and the weight of each layer is bounded.:
Theorem D.4. For any ε > 0 and Cn≤ 1/2λ, if θ(t) ∈ BC,ε , then the stochastic gradient
                                                                                  o        descent
                                                           C1                      2λε1
iteration with learning rate η ≤ min                                     ,
                                                4(2(C1 +C L )C L−1 +λ2 C) 4(C1 +C L )C L−1 +λ2 ε1
                                                                                                         satisfies θ(t +
1) ∈ BC,ε .

D.2     A PPROXIMATE R ANK -r

In this section, we prove the following theorem that the weight Wl (t+1) of each layer is approximately
rank-r.
                                                                √                   λαε2
Theorem D.5. For any ε1 , ε2 > 0 such that ε2 < 1/2 and ε1 ≤                        L−1 √           , if
                                                                                        32nL(r+1)C   2    2(C1 +C L )
              layers L ≥ 3 and θ(t) ∈ B, then stochastic
the number of n                                     o gradient descent iteration with learning
rate η ≤ min 32n(r+1)(2(C1λαε  2
                            +C L )C L−1 +λ2 C)
                                               , 2(r+1)
                                                    λ                  satisfies θ(t + 1) ∈ Br,ε2 , where n is the
maximal widths and heights of weight matrices.
Proof. We denote by rl the minima of height and width of Wl and the singular value decomposition
        ⊤
Wl = Ũl Sl Ṽl , where Ũl and Ṽl are orthogonal matrices. Let fα and Fα be as defined in Theorem
B.1. By Taylor’s expansion, for any l we have
        Fα ◦ σ Wl (t + 1)⊤ Wl (t + 1)


      =Fα ◦ σ Wl⊤ Wl − ηWl⊤ Tl − ηTl⊤ Wl − 2ηλWl⊤ Wl + η 2 (Tl + λWl )⊤ (Tl + λWl )


       =Fα ◦ σ(Wl⊤ Wl ) − ∇(Fα ◦ σ)(Wl⊤ Wl ), η(Wl⊤ Tl + Tl⊤ Wl )
                                                                                                                        (7)
                       − ∇(Fα ◦ σ(Wl⊤ Wl ), 2ηλWl⊤ Wl
                       + ∇(Fα ◦ σ)(Wl⊤ Wl ), η 2 (Tl + λWl )⊤ (Tl + λWl )
                       + ∇2 (Fα ◦ σ)(Wl⊤ Wl + γη∆)[η∆, η∆],
where γ ∈ (0, 1) and ∆ = −Wl⊤ Tl − Tl⊤ Wl − 2λWl⊤ Wl + η(Tl + λWl )⊤ (Tl + λWl ). By Lemma
C.1, we have
                          ∇(Fα ◦ σ)(Wl⊤ Wl ) = Ṽl⊤ diag{fα′ (s21 ), . . . , fα′ (s2rl )}Ṽl ,
where s1 , . . . , srl are the entries of diagonal matrix Sl . Denote diag{fα′ (s21 ), . . . , fα′ (s2rl )} = fα′ (S 2 ).
Then
                                            rl
                                       X
Fα ◦ σ Wl (t + 1)⊤ Wl (t + 1) ≤                fα (s2i ) − 2ηλfα′ (s2i )s2i + 2η Tr Ṽl fα′ (S 2 )Ṽl Wl⊤ Tl + β,
                                          i=1


                                                          21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


where β is the O(η 2 ) term. Now we can estimate the trace term

   Tr Ṽl fα′ (S 2 )Ṽl Wl⊤ Tl

= Tr W1⊤ · · · Wl−1   ⊤
                         Ṽl fα′ (S 2 )Ṽl Wl⊤ · · · WL⊤ Gθ,ij

≤ W1⊤ · · · Wl−1
              ⊤
                 Ṽl fα′ (S 2 )Ṽl Wl⊤ · · · WL⊤ ∥Gθ,ij ∥F
                                                   F
 q
≤ 2(C1 + C ) W1 · · · Wl−1 Ṽl fα (S )Ṽl Wl⊤ · · · WL⊤
              L         ⊤          ⊤        ′  2
                                                                      F
 q               r
= 2(C1 + C L ) Tr (W1⊤ · · · Wl−1          ⊤ Ṽ f ′ (S 2 )Ṽ W ⊤ · · · W ⊤ )⊤ W ⊤ · · · W ⊤ Ṽ f ′ (S 2 )Ṽ W ⊤ · · · W ⊤
                                               l α          l l         L      1         l−1  l α          l l         L
 q               r
=     2(C1 + C L ) Tr Wl−1 · · · W1 W1⊤ · · · Wl−1
                                                ⊤ Ṽ f ′ (S 2 )Ṽ W ⊤ · · · W ⊤ W · · · W Ṽ f ′ (S 2 )Ṽ ,
                                                    l α          l l         L   L       l l α           l

                                                                                                                      (8)
where the first inequality is from Fact C.2.
             Pk        ⊤
Let Ek =        i=1 (Wk+1 Wk+1 )
                                  i−1
                                      (Wk Wk⊤ − Wk+1
                                                 ⊤
                                                     Wk+1 )(Wk Wk⊤ )k−i for k < l and Ek =
PL               ⊤   L−i      ⊤              ⊤     ⊤
  i=k (Wk−1 Wk−1 )       (Wk Wk − Wk+1 Wk+1 )(Wk Wk )i−k for k > l. Then we have

                                    (Wk Wk⊤ )k = (Wk+1
                                                   ⊤
                                                       Wk+1 )k + Ek
for k < l and
                              (Wk⊤ Wk )L−k+1 = (Wk−1 Wk−1
                                                      ⊤
                                                          )L−k+1 + Ek
for k > l. Thus,

          Tr Wl−1 · · · W1 W1⊤ · · · Wl−1
                                       ⊤
                                          Ṽl⊤ fα′ (S 2 )Ṽl Wl⊤ · · · WL⊤ WL · · · Wl Ṽl⊤ fα′ (S 2 )Ṽl
                                                                                     X
       ≤ Tr (Wl⊤ Wl )l−1 Ṽl⊤ fα′ (S 2 )Ṽl (Wl⊤ Wl )L−l+1 Ṽl⊤ fα′ (S 2 )Ṽl +            |Tr(Ek )|
                                                                                                     k̸=l
                                                                                                                      (9)
                                                     X
         = Tr Ṽl⊤ (fα′ (S 2 ))2 S 2L Ṽl        +          |Tr(Ek )|,
                                                     k̸=l

where
                              ⊤           ⊤
     Ek = Wl−1 · · · Wk+1 Ek Wk+1 · · · Wl−1 Ṽl⊤ fα′ (S 2 )Ṽl Wl⊤ · · · WL⊤ WL · · · Wl Ṽl⊤ fα′ (S 2 )Ṽl
for k < l and
                Ek = (Wl⊤ Wl )l−1 Ṽl⊤ fα′ (S 2 )Ṽl Wl⊤ · · · Wk−1
                                                                ⊤
                                                                    Ek Wk−1 Wl Ṽl⊤ fα′ (S 2 )Ṽl
for k > l.

Second term in (9). Denote Ek = Ck Ṽl⊤ fα′ (S 2 )Ṽl . We define an operator S(A) equals to the √   sum
of all singular values of A. Then by Fact C.4, |Tr(Ek )| ≤ S(Ek ). Since ∥Ws ∥2 ≤ ∥Ws ∥F ≤ C,
∥Ek ∥2 ≤ kε1 C k−1 for k < l and ∥Ek ∥2 ≤ (L − k + 1)ε1 C L−k for k > l by D.4. Since
∥Ṽl ⊤fα′ (S 2 )∥2 Ṽl ≤ Tr(fα′ (S 2 )), we have ∥Ck ∥2 ≤ Tr(fα′ (S 2 ))C L−1 kε1 for k < l and ∥Ck ∥2 ≤
Tr(fα′ (S 2 ))C L−1 (L − k + 1)ε1 for k > l. Thus, by Fact C.3,
              X                               X
                    |Tr(Ek )| ≤ S(fα′ (S 2 ))   ∥Ck ∥2
             k̸=l                                k̸=l
                                                                                                                 !
                                                                                  X          X
                            ≤ S(fα′ (S 2 ))Tr(fα′ (S 2 ))C L−1 ε1                       k+         (L − k + 1)       (10)
                                                                                  k<l        k>l
                                                     rl
                                                                         !2
                                       2
                                  L−1 L
                                                     X
                            ≤C              ε1              fα′ (s2i )        .
                                        2            i=1


                                                               22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


First term in (9). By Fact C.4 and Fact C.3, we have
                                                                 Xrl                      Xrl
 Tr Ṽl⊤ (fα′ (S 2 ))2 S 2L Ṽl ≤ S Ṽl⊤ (fα′ (S 2 ))2 S 2L Ṽl ≤    (fα′ (s2i ))2 s2L
                                                                                    i  ≤ (    fα′ (s2i )sL  2
                                                                                                         i ) .
                                                                              i=1                           i=1

Then we have that
        r
                                         ⊤ Ṽ f ′ (S 2 )Ṽ W ⊤ · · · W ⊤ W · · · W Ṽ f ′ (S 2 )Ṽ
           Tr Wl−1 · · · W1 W1⊤ · · · Wl−1   l α          l l         L   L       l l α           l
         v
         u rl                                   rl
         uX                             L2 X
      ≤ t(        fα′ (s2i )sL  2
                             i ) +C
                                    L−1   ε1 (     fα′ (s2i ))2
             i=1
                                        2      i=1
            rl                               rl
            X                     L−1 √      X
        ≤         fα′ (s2i )sL
                             i +C
                                   2 L  ε1         fα′ (s2i )
            i=1                              i=1
                      Prl       ′
                                                                    p
We denote δ      :=                 2 2
                        i=1 λfα (si )si                      −       2(C1 + C L )fα′ (s2i )sL
                                                                                            i                   and   E    :=
p
          L
             L−1 √  Prl   ′   2
  2(C1 + C )C 2 L ε1 i=1 fα (si ). Then
                                                    n
                                                   X
                    Fα ◦ σ Wl (t + 1)⊤ Wl (t + 1) ≤   fα (s2i ) − 2ηδ + 2ηE + β.
                                                                i=1
       Prl         2
When
Prl       i=1 fα (si ) > r + ε2 /2, we have −2ηδ + 2ηE + β ≤ 0 by Lemma D.7 and when
            2
  i=1 fα (si ) ≤ r + ε2  /2, we have −2ηδ + 2ηE + β ≤ ε2 /2 by Lemma D.8. Then Fα ◦
σ Wl (t + 1)⊤ Wl (t + 1) ≤ r + ε2 .

D.3    B OUNDS ON E RROR T ERMS

Note that we have fα (x) ∈ [0, 1], fα′ (x) ∈ [0, α2 ] and fα′′ (x) ≤ 0.
Lemma D.6. With same conditions and notations in Theorem D.5, the O(η 2 ) term
                                                         rl
                                                         X
                     β ≤ 2η 2 (2(C1 + C L )C L−1 + λ2 C)    fα′ (s2i ).
                                                                               i=1

Proof. As defined in Theorem D.5,
                        β = ∇(Fα ◦ σ)(Wl⊤ Wl ), η 2 (Tl + λWl )⊤ (Tl + λWl )
                                                                                                                          (11)
                               + ∇2 (Fα ◦ σ)(Wl⊤ Wl + γη∆)[η∆, η∆].
We bound the two terms in (11) separately.

First term in (11).     By Fact C.3 and the proof of Proposition D.2, we have
                    ∇(Fα ◦ σ)(Wl⊤ Wl ), η 2 (Tl + λWl )⊤ (Tl + λWl )
                                         ≤η 2 Tr(fα′ (S 2 ))∥Tl + λWl ∥22
                                                                                             rl                           (12)
                                                                                             X
                                              2
                                         ≤2η (2(C1 + C )C          L      L−1
                                                                                + λ C)2
                                                                                                   fα′ (s2i )
                                                                                             i=1

Second term in (11). By Lemma C.2,
  ∇2 (Fα ◦ σ)(Wl⊤ Wl + γη∆)[η∆, η∆]
               h                                                                 i
                                            ˜ diag∆]
           =η 2 ∇2 Fα (σ(Wl⊤ Wl + γη∆))[diag∆,    ˜ + ⟨A(σ(Wl⊤ Wl + γη∆)), ∆
                                                                           ˜ ◦ ∆⟩
                                                                               ˜

      ˜ = Ṽl ∆Ṽ ⊤ and
where ∆          l
                                                    ′′ 2
                                                   fα′ (s̃2i ) ′
                                                                              if i ̸= j but s̃2i = s̃2j ,
                                                       fα (s̃i )−fα (s̃2j )
                   Aij (σ(Wl⊤ Wl + γη∆)) =                   s̃2i −s̃2j
                                                                               if s̃2i ̸= s̃2j ,
                                                   
                                                   
                                                       0                       otherwise,

                                                           23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


where s̃1 , . . . s̃rl are the eigenvalues of Wl⊤ Wl + γη∆. Since ∇2 Fα (σ(Wl⊤ Wl + θη∆)) =
diag{fα′′ (s̃21 ), . . . , fα′′ (s̃2rl )} with all entries non-positive, we have
                                                               ˜ diag∆]
                                   ∇2 Fα (σ(Wl⊤ Wl + γη∆))[diag∆,    ˜ ≤ 0.
Moreover, since fα (x) is concave, all entries of A(σ(Wl⊤ Wl )) are non-positive. Thus,
                               ⟨A(σ(Wl⊤ Wl + γη∆)), ∆˜ ◦ ∆⟩
                                                          ˜ ≤ 0.
                                            P rl ′ 2
Overall, β ≤ 2η 2 (2(C1 + C L )C L−1 + λ2 C) i=1 fα (si )
                                                                              Prl
Lemma D.7. With same conditions and notations in Theorem D.5, when r + ε2 /2 < i=1 fα (s2i ) ≤
r + ε2 , we have −2ηδ + 2ηE + β ≤ 0.
                                       p
Proof. Define g(x) = fα′ (x) λx − 2(C1 + C L )xL/2 on x ≥ 0. Then since L ≥ 3, for
                    1
                   L−2
             2                                              p
α ≤ 2(C1λ+C L )        , fα′ (x) = 0 when x > α and λx − 2(C1 + C L )xL/2 ≥ 0 when x ≤ α.
                                          Prl
Thus, g(x) ≥ 0 for any x ≥ 0. Since δ = i=1    g(s2i ), we have δ ≥ 0.
                                                           2r+1
Note that there are at most r si ’s such that fα (s2i ) ≥ 2(r+1) =: Mr . Otherwise,
                               rl
                               X                            2r + 1
                                     fα (s2i ) ≥ (r + 1)            = r + 1/2 > r + ε2 .
                               i=1
                                                           2(r + 1)
                        P rl       2
Specifically, when        i=1 fα (si ) ≥ r + ε2 /2, we have
                                                            rl
                                      X                    X                  ε2
                                               fα (s2i ) ≥     fα (s2i ) − r ≥ .                                  (13)
                                                                              2
                                i:fα (s2i )<Mr             i=1


Since fα (x)(α − x) ≥ 1 − fα (x) by concavity, we have
                                                      1 − fα (x)   1 − fα (x)
                                          fα′ (x) ≥              ≥            .                                   (14)
                                                        α−x            α
                            Rx
We also have fα (x) =          0
                                   fα′ (s)ds ≤ Kx                      K
                                               α according to fα (x) ≤ α . Then we have

                                              fα (x)
                                                     α.x≥                                                         (15)
                                                K
Moreover, by L ≥ 3 and the concavity of fα (x), we have
                         x   L−2
                              2
                                        r
                                            x        p       1 − fα (x)
                   1−            ≥1−          ≥ 1 − fα (x) ≥            .                                         (16)
                         α                  α                    2
By equation Eq. (14), (15) and (16), we have
                                   x   L−2
                                        2

                                                λ                        λfα (x)
          g(x) = λfα′ (x)x 1 −               ≥    fα (x)(1 − fα (x))2 ≥            .                              (17)
                                   α           2K                       8K(r + 1)2

Thus, we have
      rl
      X                        X                               X                           λ           λε2
 δ=         g(s2i ) ≥                    g(sx − i2 ) >                     fα (s2i )              ≥             , (18)
                                                                                       8K(r + 1)2   16K(r + 1)2
      i=1               i:fα (s2i )<Mr                     i:f (s2i )<Mr
                                                                     Prl ′             2rl
where the last inequality is by (13).                      Note that  i=1 fα (si ) ≤    α  ≤ 2n
                                                                                             α . Then
     √                      λαε2                                                   λε2
since ε1 ≤                   L−1 √                           , we have E ≤ 32K(r+1)2 and since η ≤
                  64nKL(r+1)2 C 2         2(C1 +C L )
              λαε2                                     λε2
64nK(r+1)2 (2(C1 +C L )C L−1 +λ2 C)
                                    , we have β ≤ η 16K(r+1)2 . Thus,


                                                 λε2          λε2           λε2
         −2ηδ + 2ηE + β ≤ η −                            +             +                                   = 0.   (19)
                                              8K(r + 1)2   16K(r + 1)2   16K(r + 1)2



                                                               24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                                                                                        Prl        2
Lemma D.8. With same conditions and notations in Theorem D.5, when                        i=1 fα (si ) ≤ r + ε2 /2,
we have −2ηδ + 2ηE + β ≤ ε2 /2.
                                                                                                  2
                               λε2                 λε2                 4K(r+1)
Proof. Note that δ ≥ 0, E ≤ 32K(r+1)2 and β ≤ η 16K(r+1)2 . Since η ≤     λ    , we have

                                            λε2               λε2           ε2
                  −2ηδ + 2ηE + β ≤ η                2
                                                      +              2
                                                                         ≤ .                                     (20)
                                        16K(r + 1)      16K(r + 1)          2



E     P ROOF OF T HEOREM B.2
In Theorem B.2, T = T0 + T1 . The following statements explain the change of θt during first T0
iterations and last T1 iterations respectively.
                                                                                 2
Theorem
     n                                           o C0 := max1≤l≤L ∥Wl ∥F , if η ≤
            E.1. For any initialization θ0 , denote
                   C1                        λε1                                  C1
min                               ,
       4(2(C1 +C0L )C0L−1 +λ2 C0 ) 4(C1 +C L )C L−1 +2λ2 C
                                                                  and C ≥         λ ,   then for any time T ≥
log(2C0 /ε1 )
     ηλ       we have
                                                 θT ∈ BC,ε1

Proof. Similar to the proof of D.2, if η ≤ 4(2(C +C L C1
                                                      )C L−1 +λ2 C )
                                                                     and C ≥ Cλ1 , we have
                                                     1    0   0           0


                             ∥Wl (t + 1)∥2F ≤ (1 − 2ηλ)∥Wl (t)∥2F + ηC1 .
If ∥Wl (t)∥2F ≥ C, then ∥Wl (t + 1)∥2F ≤ (1 − ηλ)∥WL (t)∥2F . Otherwise, ∥Wl (t  + 1)∥ 2
                                                                                     F ≤ C. Thus,
there exists t ≤ T0 such that ∥Wl ∥2F ≤ C for any l when T0 ≥ log(C0 /C)
                                                                  ηλ     ≥ log                    C
                                                                                                  C0   / log (1 − ηλ).

After all weights satisfy ∥Wl ∥2F ≤ C, ∥Wl Wl⊤ − Wl+1
                                                   ⊤
                                                      Wl+1 ∥2 ≤ 2C. Similar to the proof of D.3,
we have
      ∥Wl (t + 1)Wl (t + 1)⊤ − Wl+1 (t + 1)⊤ Wl+1 (t + 1)∥2
                  ≤ (1 − ηλ)2 ∥Wl Wl⊤ − Wl+1
                                          ⊤
                                             Wl+1 ∥2 + 4η 2 (C1 + C L )C L−1                                     (21)
                  ≤ (1 − 2ηλ)∥Wl Wl⊤ − Wl+1
                                         ⊤
                                            Wl+1 ∥2 + 2η 2 λ2 C + 4η 2 (C1 + C L )C L−1
                         λε1
When η ≤       4(C1 +C L )C L−1 +2λ2 C
                                       , we have ∥Wl (t + 1)Wl (t + 1)⊤ − Wl+1 (t + 1)⊤ Wl+1 (t +
1)∥2 ≤ (1 − ηλ) max{∥Wl Wl⊤ − Wl+1          ⊤
                                              Wl+1 ∥2 , ε1 } for any l. Then for T1 ≥ log(2C/ε
                                                                                             ηλ
                                                                                                1)
                                                                                                   ≥
      ε1

log 2C / log (1 − ηλ), θT0 +T1 ∈ BC,ε1 .
                                                                          αε2
Theorem E.2. For any parameter θt ∈ Bε1 ,C satisfying ε1 ≤ 2K(n−r)(L−1)           , then for any T ≥
log((2K(n−r)C)/(αε2 ))
           2ηλ           we have
                                                                                          T
                                                                              r
                      P(θt+T ∈ Br,ε1 ,ε2 ,C |θt ∈ Bε1 ,C ) ≥                                  .
                                                                      min{din , dout }

Proof. For the true matrix A∗ , the number of columns is din and the number of rows is dout . Let
n = min{din , dout }. Without loss of generality we can assume that n = din , i.e. there are n columns.
We consider the r columns with most observed entries and denote the the set of these entries by J.
Then |J| ≥ nr |I| and for each step s, the probability of sampling from J is P((is , js ) ∈ J) ≥ nr .
Then the event that all steps s from t to t + T − 1, random entries (is , js ) are all sampled from J has
                         T
probability at least nr . Under this event, we consider the weight of first layer W1 . We have
                   W1 (s + 1) = (1 − ηλ)W1 (s) − ηW2 (s)⊤ · · · WL (s)⊤ Gθs ,is js .
Then
                                      T
                                      X
      W1 (T ) = (1 − ηλ)T W1 (t) +          (1 − ηλ)T −s W2 (t + s)⊤ · · · WL (t + s)⊤ Gθt+s ,it+s jt+s .
                                      s=1


                                                         25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Since (it+s , jt+s ) ∈ J, the non-zero entry of Gθt+s ,it+s jt+s is located on the r columns supporting J,
for any s = 1, . . . , T . Thus, W2 (t + s)⊤ · · · WL (t + s)⊤ Gθt+s ,it+s jt+s only has non-zero entries on
                                                                                                        √
those r columns. Then the r+1’s singular value of W1 (t+T ) satisfies σi (W1 (t+T )) ≤ (1−ηλ)T C
for any i > r.
                               ⊤
For l > 1, we have ∥Wl−1 Wl−1       − Wl⊤ Wl ∥2 ≤ ε1 . Then |σi (Wl⊤ Wl ) − σi (Wl−1 Wl−1
                                                                                        ⊤
                                                                                          )| ≤ ε1 for
                     2            2                                       2          2T
any i, i.e. |σi (Wl ) − σi (Wl−1 ) |. Then for any l, we have σi (Wl (T )) ≤ (1 − ηλ) C + (l − 1)ε1 .
              αε2
When ε1 ≤ 2K(n−r)(L−1) and T ≥ log((2K(n−r)C)/(αε
                                        2ηλ
                                                 2 ))
                                                      ≥ log                      αε2
                                                                              2K(n−r)C         /2 log(1 − ηλ), we
                 2      αε2
have σi (Wl (T ))    ≤ K(n−r) for any i > r. Then for any i > r,
                                                       K                   ε2
                               fα (σi (Wl (T )2 )) ≤     σi (Wl (T )2 ) ≤
                                                       α                  n−r
since fα′ ≤ K/α. Thus,
                                                         n
                                                         X
                    Fα ◦ σ(Wl (T )⊤ Wl (T )) ≤ r +              fα (σi (Wl (T )2 )) ≤ r + ε2 .
                                                        i=r+1


If n = dout , the proof is the same by selecting r rows with most observed entries.

F    L OW R ANK P ROPERTY OF Aθ

In Proposition 4, we show that for any minimizer θ̂ in Br,ε1 ,ε2 ,C , it is approximate rank-r. In fact,
any general parameter θ ∈ Br,ε1 ,ε2 ,C is approximate rank-r or less:
Proposition F.1. For any parameter θ ∈ Br,ε1 ,ε2 ,C , we have
                            Rank
                              XAθ                                    KnL2 L−1
                                    fα (si (A⊤
                                             θ Aθ )) ≤ r + ε2 +          C    ε1 .
                              i=1
                                                                      2α
                    2αε2
Moreover, if ε1 ≤ KnL 2 C L−1 , we have

                                    Rank
                                      XAθ
                                             fα (si (A⊤
                                                      θ Aθ )) ≤ r + 2ε2 .
                                      i=1

                                                                         Pk
Proof. Since (Wk Wk⊤ )k = (Wk+1
                            ⊤
                                Wk+1 )k + Ek and Ek =                             ⊤
                                                                            i=1 (Wk+1 Wk+1 )
                                                                                             i−1
                                                                                                 (Wk Wk⊤ −
  ⊤               ⊤ k−i
Wk+1 Wk+1 )(Wk Wk ) , we have
                                                                                  L−1
                                                                                  X
                      Aθ A⊤                ⊤        ⊤        ⊤ L
                          θ = WL · · · W1 W1 · · · WL = (WL WL ) +                      Ek ,
                                                                                  k=1
                             ⊤
where Ek = WL · · · Wk+1 Ek Wk+1 · · · WL⊤ . Then by Taylor’s expansion, we have
                      rL
                      X
                            fα (si (A⊤                    ⊤
                                     θ Aθ )) = Fα ◦ σ(Aθ Aθ )
                      i=1
                            = Fα ◦ σ(((WL WL⊤ )L + E))                                                       (22)
                            = Fα ◦ σ((WL WL⊤ )L ) + ∇(Fα ◦ σ)((WL WL⊤ )L ), E
                               + ∇2 (Fα ◦ σ)((WL WL⊤ )L + γE)[E, E],
                              PL−1                                                        ⊤
where γ ∈ (0, 1) and E =         k=1 Ek . Note that the Rank Aθ ≤ rL , so we can let si (Aθ Aθ ) = 0 for
i > Rank Aθ .
                                            PrL
First term in (22). Fα ◦ σ((WL WL⊤ )L ) = i=1     fα (s2L
                                                       i ), where {s1 , . . . , srL } are the singular
values of Wl . Then since fα is non-decreasing, fα (s2L          2
                                                      i ) ≤ fα (si ) for si ≤ 1 and fα (si ) =
                                                                                                2L
     2                                         ⊤ L                 ⊤
fα (si ) = 1 for si > 1 > α. Thus, Fα ◦ σ((WL WL ) ) ≤ Fα ◦ σ(WL WL ) ≤ r + ε2 .


                                                       26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Second term in (22). By Lemma C.1, ∇(Fα ◦σ)((WL WL⊤ )L ) = ŨL diag{fα′ (s2L            ′   2L
                                                                          i ), . . . , fα (srl )}.
Then by Fact C.3 and C.4, we have
                ∇(Fα ◦ σ)((WL WL⊤ )L ), E ≤ S ∇(Fα ◦ σ)((WL WL⊤ )L ) ∥E∥2

                                                 rL
                                                 X
                                          ≤ ∥E∥2    fα′ (s2L
                                                          i )
                                                        i=1
                                                KrL        Kn
                                              ≤     ∥E∥2 ≤    ∥E∥2
                                                 α         α
Since ∥Ek ∥F ≤ kC k−1 ε1 , we have ∥Ek ∥F ≤ kC L−1 ε1 . Then
                                    L−1                           L−1
                                    X
                                                       L−1
                                                                  X          L2 L−1
                  ∥E∥2 ≤ ∥E∥F ≤           ∥Ek ∥F ≤ C         ε1         k≤     C    ε1 .
                                                                             2
                                    k=1                           k=1
                                          2
Thus,   ∇(Fα ◦ σ)((WL WL⊤ )L ), E   ≤ KnL
                                       2α C
                                            L−1
                                                ε1 .

Third term in (22). By Lemma C.2,
  ∇2 (Fα ◦σ)((WL WL⊤ )L + γE)[E, E]
            = ∇2 Fα σ((WL WL⊤ )L + γE) [diagẼ, diagẼ] + ⟨A(σ((WL WL⊤ )L + γE)), Ẽ ◦ Ẽ⟩,


where Ẽ = ŨL E ŨL⊤ . Since the entries of ∇2 Fα σ((WL WL⊤ )L + γE) and A(σ((WL WL⊤ )L + γE))

are all non-positive (follows the proof in D.6), we have
                            ∇2 (Fα ◦ σ)((WL WL⊤ )L + γE)[E, E] ≤ 0.

Therefore, we can add the three terms up and have
                       Rank
                         XAθ                                      KnL2 L−1
                               fα (si (A⊤
                                        θ Aθ )) ≤ r + ε2 +            C    ε1 .
                         i=1
                                                                   2α


                                                27
