Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


S UMMING U P THE FACTS : A DDITIVE M ECHANISMS
BEHIND FACTUAL R ECALL IN LLM S

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT
         How do large language models (LLMs) store and retrieve knowledge? We focus
         on the most basic form of this task – factual recall, where the model is tasked with
         explicitly surfacing stored facts in prompts of form Fact: The Colosseum is
         in the country of. We find that the mechanistic story behind factual recall
         is more complex than previously thought – we show there exist several distinct,
         independent and qualitatively different mechanisms that additively combine, con-
         structively interfering on the correct attribute. We term this generic phenomena the
         additive motif: models compute correct answers through adding together multiple
         independent contributions; the contributions from each mechanism may be insuffi-
         cient alone, but together they constructively interfere on the correct attribute when
         summed. In addition, we extend the method of direct logit attribution to attribute a
         head’s output to individual source tokens. We use this technique to unpack what we
         call ‘mixed heads’ – which are themselves a pair of two separate additive updates
         from different source tokens.


1   I NTRODUCTION
How do large language models (LLMs) store and use factual knowledge? We study the factual
recall set up, where models are explicitly tasked with surfacing knowledge as output tokens in
prompts of form Fact: The Colosseum is in the country of. Our work falls within the
field of mechanistic interpretability (Elhage et al., 2021; Olah et al., 2020), which focuses on reverse-
engineering the algorithms that trained neural networks have learned. Much attention has recently
been paid to interpreting decoder-only transformer-based large language models, as while these
models have demonstrated impressive capabilities (Brown et al., 2020; Wei et al., 2022), we have
little understanding into how these models produce their outputs.
Prior work on interpreting factual recall has mostly focused on localizing knowledge within trans-
former parameters. Meng et al. (2023a) find an important role of early MLP layers is to enrich the
internal representations of subjects (The Colosseum), through simultaneously looking up all known
facts, and storing them in activations on the final subject token. Since the model is autoregressive,
this occurs before seeing which relation (country of) is requested. We study how this information
is subsequently moved and used by the model. There are several possible mechanisms models could
use to retrieve facts from these enriched subject representations. Geva et al. (2023a) suggest an
algorithm that allows models to extract just the correct fact, ignoring other irrelevant facts in the
subject representation. Hernandez et al. (2023) more recently showed that such facts can be linearly
decoded from the enriched subject representations. In this paper, we build on this prior work by
carefully inspecting internal model mechanisms using tools from mechanistic interpretability.
Our core contribution in this work is showing that models primarily solve factual recall tasks
additively. We say models produce outputs additively if
      1. There are multiple model components whose outputs independently directly contribute
         positively to the correct logit.
      2. These components are qualitatively different – their distribution over output logits are
         meaningfully different.
      3. These components constructively interfere on the correct answer, even if the correct answer
         is not the argmax output logit of individual components in isolation.


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


               input tokens                                            top head output tokens           END residual stream

                  Fact                                                       gladiators

                                              Subject Heads

   PREFIX                                                                    amphitheatre

                                             Extract particular
            Italy

                    :
                                            SUBJECT attributes               Flavian ...             additive result of
                                                                                                    multiple independent
                   The
                                                                                                        mechanisms
 SUBJECT
                Colosseum

                                                                                                +
                                                Mixed Heads
                 Italian
                   Italy

                                                                             Italy
                     Rome

                   is                   Extract attributes from both         Rome
                      Italian

                                         SUBJECT and RELATION                Austria ...                Vatican
                   in
 RELATION
                   the
                                             Relation Heads
                 France

                                                                             England

                 country                      Extract many
                 Spain

                                           RELATION attributes               Italy ...
                   of


Figure 1: Four independent mechanisms models use for factual recall. (1) Subject heads, (2)
Relation Heads, (3) Mixed Heads and (4) MLPs (omitted). These combine additively, constructively
interfering to elicit the correct answer. Each mechanism individually is less performant than the sum
of them all, with most individual mechanisms incapable of performing the task alone.



We term this generic phenomena the additive motif. We provide further discussion regarding this in
Section 4.
Consider the example shown in Figure 1. There are two sources of information here – the subject
Colosseum and the relation country. These correspond to two clusters of additive updates - updates
that write many attributes about the Colosseum (e.g. Italy, Rome), and updates that write many
countries (e.g. Italy, Spain). By using mechanistic interpretability to investigate the how factual
recall is performed by the model, we find four different mechanisms implement these two updates.
Each mechanism independently boosts the correct answer (condition 1). There are two qualitatively
different clusters of output behavior (condition 2). And while each mechanism may not individually
completely solve the task, we find that additively combining all four results in a large amount of
constructive interference on correct attributes – this is significantly more robust (condition 3).
Our work also highlights a limitation of narrow circuit analysis. We should expect models to
make predictions based on multiple parts of their input. Prior mechanistic interpretability work has
neglected to consider all sources of information in mechanistic analysis. For instance, in the work by
Wang et al. (2022) models are tasked with completing sentences of the form When John and Mary
went to the store, John bought flowers for. This task has two components – (a) figure
out the answer should be a name, and then (b) figure out what the correct name is. By using the ‘logit
difference’ Mary - John as a metric, the authors isolate the circuit for (b), but neglect to study (a).
Though just studying (b) and conditioning on the answer being a name is a valid research question,
it’s important to be explicit that part of the behaviour is left unexplained, and our work implies that (a)
is also an important part of predicting the next token. In factual recall, this corresponds to updating
outputs based on the relation, as well as the subject. We find additivity through studying both of these
sources of information, and analyzing output attributes relating to both.
We additionally extend the technique of direct logit attribution (DLA) (Wang et al., 2022; Elhage
et al., 2021; nostalgebraist, 2020). DLA is a technique that converts individual model component
(attention head, MLP neuron) outputs into the space of output logits, through the insights that the
map to logits from the residual stream is linear,1 and that the residual stream is a cumulative sum of
prior model components (Elhage et al., 2021). DLA by default considers the entire attention head
as one unit, but Elhage et al. (2021) demonstrate that attention head outputs are a linear weighted
sum over source positions. We may therefore split the DLA of attention head up into contributions
from different source tokens. This insight allows us to disentangle the two separate and additive
contributions of particular attention heads from SUBJECT and RELATION tokens.


   1
       up to LayerNorm, which may be reduced to just a scaling factor for our purposes (Nanda, 2022).


                                                                2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Subject s          Relation r             Attribute a           Attributes S\{a}           Attributes R\{a}
Kobe Bryant        plays the sport of      basketball         NBA, Lakers, USA           tennis, golf, football
The Eiffel Tower   is in the country of       France          Paris, iron, Gustave     Pakistan, China, Sudan
Germany            has capital city           Berlin        German, Rhine, BMW       London, Rome, Canberra

Table 1: Some examples of factual tuples (s, r, a). We prepend the prefix Fact:             to the con-
catenated pair (s, r) for inference, as this slightly improves performance. We also include example
elements in the sets S and R of attributes pertaining to the subject s and relation r respectively.


2       M ETHODOLOGY

Task. We consider tuples (s, r, a) of factual information containing a subject s, attribute 2 a, and
relation r connecting the two. To elicit facts in models, we provide a natural language prompt
describing the pair (s, r). See Table 1 for example tuples and prompts. At various points we study
and aggregate over sets (s, r, a) with s or r held constant. We filter for tuples (s, r, a) for which the
model attains the correct answer, which we define as a being within the top ten output tokens. Most
commonly the correct attribute a attains rank 0 (See Figure 7 in the Appendix). Our dataset is hand
written, but is inspired by CounterFact (Meng et al., 2023a), ParaRel(Elazar et al., 2021), and
Hernandez et al. (2023). See Appendix C for more information on our dataset, including a discussion
of issues we encountered in creating this dataset.
Model. We primarily investigate the Pythia-2.8b model Biderman et al. (2023), though find similar
mechanisms are present in other models (GPT2-XL (Radford et al.), GPT-J (Wang and Komatsuzaki,
2021), and other Pythia models), which we discuss briefly in Appendix E.2.
Counterfactual Attributes. We are interested in what mechanisms surface the correct attributes a.
In order to better understand this, we find it useful to study two further sets of attributes3 S and R.
The correct attribute a ∈ S ∩ R. S is the set of attributes relevant to the subject. In particular, an
attribute a ∈ S if there exists some other relationship r′ such that (s, r′ , a) is a valid factual tuple. R
is the set of attributes relevant to the relation. An attribute a ∈ R if there exists some other subject s′
such that (s′ , r, a) is a valid factual tuple. See Table 1 for example elements in S and R.
Token Positions. We will often refer to particular token positions of interest.

         • PREFIX– all tokens before the subject, usually Fact:
         • SUBJECT– all tokens of the subject s, e.g. The Colosseum.
         • RELATION– all (other) tokens of the relation r e.g. is in the country of.
         • END– the final token, which is where factual information must be moved to in order to
           surface the correct answer, e.g. of.

Logit Lens. The logit lens (nostalgebraist, 2020) is an interpretability technique for interpreting
intermediate activations of language models, through the insights that the residual stream is a linear
sum of contributions from each layer (Elhage et al., 2021) and that the map to logits is approximately
linear. It pauses model computation early, converting hidden residual stream activations to a set of
logits over the vocabulary at each layer.
Direct Logit Attribution (DLA) is an extension of the logit lens technique. It zooms in to individual
model components, through the insight that the residual stream of a transformer can be viewed as
an accumulated sum of outputs from all model components (Elhage et al., 2021).4 DLA therefore
gives a measure of the direct effect on the of individual model components on model outputs. We
extend this technique to DLA by source token group through the further insight that attention head
outputs are a weighted sum of outputs corresponding to distinct attention source position (Elhage
et al., 2021), allowing us to quantify how each group of source tokens in turn contributes directly to
    2
    We use the words ‘attribute’ and ‘fact’ interchangeably.
    3
    While our sets may not be complete, or faithful to true model concepts, but do suffice to help us find
mechanisms.
  4
    DLA can be limited, see e.g. Rager et al. (2023).


                                                        3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                        Subject                                               1                                        Subject
                                                                        Mixed                                                                                          Mixed
                               1                                        Relation                                                                                       Relation


                                                                                            Attention from END to RELATiON
                                                                                                                             0.8
DLA attributed to RELATION


                              0.5                                                                                            0.6


                                                                                                                             0.4

                               0



                                                                                                                             0.2



                             −0.5

                                                                                                                              0

                                        0          1          2          3                                                         0   0.2     0.4      0.6      0.8        1
                                            DLA attributed to SUBJECT                                                                  Attention from END to SUBJECT



Figure 2: Three different types of attention head for factual extraction for prompts of form s plays
the sport of: subject heads, relation heads and mixed heads. (Left) DLA on the correct sport,
split by attention head source token, for top 10 heads by total DLA. Each data point is one prompt
for one factual tuple. The grey lines have gradients 1/10 and 10 and denote the boundary we use to
define head types, after aggregating over a relation r. These cleanly separate subject and relation
heads. (Right) Attention patterns of the top four heads of each kind on each prompt in the dataset.
Subject and Relation heads attend mostly to SUBJECT and RELATION respectively. Mixed heads
attend to both. Attention patterns is not used to define head type, but correlate well.


the logits. This is useful in disentangling head types, in particular mixed heads (Figure 1), which
comprise two separate contributions from their attention paid to the subject and their attention paid
to the relationship. See Appendix D for more details on this technique. We say the DLA can be
attributed to either the SUBJECT tokens or RELATION tokens. This mostly makes sense for the short
prompts in our setup, but may be misleading in longer context lengths, as models move information
around and may store information on intermediate tokens.

3                                   R ESULTS
In this section, we use mechanistic interpretability to find four separate mechanisms behind factual
recall that correspond to two clusters of additive updates, relating to either the subject or relation in
the prompt. These updates constructively interfere on the correct attribute to elicit the correct answer.
These mechanisms all act on the END position. We summarize these mechanisms as follows and in
Figure 1.

                                    1. Subject Heads (Section 3.1) – Attention Heads that attend strongly to SUBJECT and extract
                                       attributes pertaining to the subject, in the set S, from the enriched subject representation.
                                       Some such heads extract the correct attribute a, others extract a range of other attributes.
                                       These heads activate in response to any factual recall type prompt, even if the relationship
                                       given does not match their category - they can and do misfire, extracting irrelevant attributes.
                                    2. Relation Heads (Section 3.2)– Attention Heads that attend strongly to RELATION for a
                                       particular relation and extract many attributes pertaining to the relation, in the set R. They
                                       do not preferentially extract the correct attribute associated with the subject, a.
                                    3. Mixed Heads (Section 3.3)– Attention Heads that attend to both SUBJECT and RELATION,
                                       and perform the role of both (1) and (2) simultaneously. From SUBJECT, they extract
                                       attributes the correct attribute a, among other things. From RELATION, they extract many
                                       attributes in the set R, often also privileging the correct attribute a, due to a phenomena we
                                       term ‘subject to relation propagation’. The sum of these two separate contributions is the
                                       total head direct effect.
                                    4. MLPs (Section 3.4)– Part of the function of MLPs is to boost many attributes in the set R.

Inspecting the logit ranks is highly suggestive of an additive algorithm: many incorrect attributes in
both of the sets S and R appear highly in output tokens (Table 4 in the Appendix).


                                                                                   4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                                                                     a (SUBJECT)                                                                                                                                                                                                                               a (SUBJECT)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               a (RELATION)


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       DLA on attribute(s) by source token group
                                                                                                                                     a (RELATION)


DLA on attribute(s) by source token group
                                             1.2

                                                                                                                                     R-{a}, top-5-mean (SUBJECT)                                                                                                                   1.5                                                                                         R-{a}, top-5-mean (SUBJECT)
                                              1
                                                                                                                                     R-{a}, top-5-mean (RELATION)                                                                                                                                                                                                              R-{a}, top-5-mean (RELATION)

                                             0.8


                                             0.6                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1


                                             0.4


                                             0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.5

                                              0


                                            −0.2

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0
                                            −0.4


                                                   L2              L2                L2              L1                L1                L1                L1                L1                L2                L1                                                                      L1              L2                L1                L1                L2              L2                L1                L2                L1                L1
                                                      1   H9          2   H1            0   H2          6   H2            7   H3            3   H3            8   H2            6   H1            7   H1            7   H2                                                                  7   H2          3   H2            7   H1            6   H1            6   H8          1   H2            3   H3            1   H1            8   H3            8   H2
                                                               S             5                   M             0                 0                 1                 5                 7                 1                 8                                                                         S             2                 7                 2                   M             3                 1                 8                 0                 0
                                                                                 M                                 S                 M                 R                 M                 M                 M                 S                                                                                       M                 S                 S                                 M                 R                 M                 S                 R

                                                                                                                         Head                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Head



Figure 3: Top heads by absolute DLA for the relationships plays the sport of (left) and for is
in the country of (right), labeled as Subject (S), Relation (R) or Mixed (M) heads. Studying
a large set of counterfactual attributes, and splitting by attention source token lets us disentangle
these head types. We plot DLA on the correct attribute a. We also plot the mean DLA on the 5
largest magnitude attributes in R − {a}. We split all DLAs by attention source token (SUBJECT
vs RELATION). All three head types emerge. Subject heads are characterized by the largest column
being blue. Relation heads have comparable red and purple columns, with small blue and green
columns. Mixed heads capture everything remaining.


In the remainder of this section, we provide several lines of evidence that these four mechanisms
implement an additive algorithm. In particular, we will show (a) all four mechanisms exist for a
range of relationships and are distinct, (b) each mechanism contributes positively to both correct and
incorrect attributes and matters for task performance and therefore (c) each individual mechanism is
inferior to the sum of all four mechanisms. Showing (a-c) suffices via our definition of additivity in
the Introduction. We perform further experiments in Appendix E. Figures 2 and 3 summarise these
results.

 3.1                                               S UBJECT H EADS

Individual subject heads extract specific attributes about subjects in some set S ∩ C by attending from
END to SUBJECT, but not meaningfully to RELATION. 5 These heads extract the same attributes from
a given subject no matter what relationship is given – the attribute basketball is still extracted
significantly by some subject head on the prompt Michael Jordan is from the country of.
Such heads explain why we observe incorrect attributes about the subject (i.e. in the set S) appearing
in the top few output tokens on factual recall prompts. These heads sometimes depend on the
relationship indirectly, through their attention pattern.
We define subject heads for a relation r to be heads with average DLA attributed to SUBJECT tokens
/ average DLA attributed to RELATION tokens > 10, when aggregated over a dataset of prompts with
the relation held constant. This captures the intuition that these heads primarily read attributes from
the subject and not the relation.
In Figure 4, we analyze subject heads for different relationships across a range of subjects. We
may view individual heads as linear probes for particular output tokens through their OV (output-
value) circuit (Elhage et al., 2021), which projects the final SUBJECT token’s residual stream to
unembedding directions, which we map to logits. This technique effectively saturates the attention
of the subject head to one on the final subject token, performs the usual attention head calculation,
and reads off some DLA from the output. Since subject heads always attend to the subject, this
is principled: we discuss attention patterns of subject heads in Appendix E.4. We evaluate each
head-probe qualitatively on a range of subjects, showing they extract meaningful and interpretable
attributes from the enriched subject representation. This also demonstrates that the head category C
    5
      Generically, since individual attention heads read and write from a low rank subspace of the residual stream
(Elhage et al., 2021), we find them to be specialized to same category of attributes C, which may not perfectly
align with S or R (See Appendix E.8 for more discussion on head categories).


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                     1.5


                                               basketball


                                                              DLA on attribute(s)
                                                                                      1

                                               tennis

                                    L21H9      ---

 Michael Jordan
                                                                     0.5
                                               boxing
 Roger Federer
     MLP subject
 Stephen Hawking
   enrichment
                                               USA
                                   0
 The Colosseum
                                               Switzerland

                                    L17H2
                                               England
                             −0.5
                                                                                                                                                              a
                                                                                                                                                              R-{a}, top-5-mean
                                               Italy                                                                                                          S-{a}, top-5-mean
                                                                                              L21H9       L16H20      L17H2      L17H17     L17H2       L16H12        L23H2     L19H13
                                                                                           PLAYS_SPORT PLAYS_SPORT IN_COUNTRY IN_COUNTRY CAPITAL_CITY CAPITAL_CITY PRODUCT_BY PRODUCT_BY
                                                                                             AR=16.76    AR=10.53    AR=10.05  AR=107.23   AR=2.99      AR=2.83     AR=24.61    AR=9.84

                                                                                                                                      Head



Figure 4: Subject Heads exist for a range of relations. (Left) The mechanism by which subject
heads act. They read from enriched subject representations, and copy the relevant attributes to output
directions. We show this for a ‘sport’ head and a ‘country’ head. Both pathways activate whenever
a factual recall prompt with the given subject is presented, no matter what the stated relationship
is. No sport is extracted for Stephen Hawking. Raw data for this figure is in the Appendix in
Table 6. (Right) Top two subject heads for four different relationships. These heads individually
extract the correct attribute (blue) significantly more than other relation attributes R (red) and other
subject attributes S (green). This indicates their category C is mostly narrow. L17H2 is more general,
extracting many correlated facts about countries (e.g. country, currency, cities, etc.). These heads
also have a high attention ratio to SUBJECT over RELATION (shown in the x axis labels).


is not aligned with R or S: e.g. L22H17 extracts only the sport of basketball, but not other sports.
We also observe correlated facts NBA and basketball being extracted simultaneously.

3.2    R ELATION H EADS

Individual relation heads extract many attributes in the set R∩C by attending from END to RELATION,
but not significantly to SUBJECT tokens. These heads do not causally depend on the subject, even
indirectly. Such heads explain why we observe incorrect attributes pertaining to the relation (i.e. in
the set R) appearing in the top few output tokens on factual recall prompts.
We define relation heads for a relation r to be heads with average DLA attributed to RELATION
tokens / average DLA attributed to SUBJECT tokens > 10, over a dataset of prompts with the the
relation held constant. This captures the intuition that relation heads mostly read the correct attribute
from the relation, and not the subject.
Figure 5 demonstrates relation heads exist for a range of relationships r and that their direct effect on
logits mostly does not depend on the subject s. Preliminary results suggest this latter finding is less
true in larger models; a result which we expand on in Appendix E.5.4. These heads can additionally
be characterized through high attention to the RELATION over SUBJECT. Interestingly, there are
many shared heads between relationships, including L13H31, which is important for both sports and
countries. Each relation head will push for certain attributes over others, with a small amount of
variation from prompt to prompt. Which attributes a relation head prefers is affected minimally by
the subject. A complication is that DLA can be affected by the norm of the accumulated residual
stream (via LayerNorm), which varies slightly between prompts, leading to some variation.
To show this is a large effect, we analyze the ordered DLA across all vocab tokens of the top few
relation heads for several prompts in Appendix E.5. This demonstrates that the primary function of
these heads is to extract attributes in R. We also perform patching experiments, where we patch the
top few relation heads, and demonstrate that this does not reduce performance on average - indicating
that these heads do not meaningfully depend on the subject, even indirectly.

3.3    M IXED H EADS

Individual mixed heads extract many attributes in some set (S ∪ R) ∩ C, and also privilege the
correct attribute a among such attributes. They behave as a combination of subject and relation heads
– they attend to both SUBJECT and RELATION. From SUBJECT, they extract the correct attribute


                                                     6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                                                                               0.7
                                                                                                a                                                                                                                                L18H20 AR=18.36
                      0.8                                                                       R-{a}, top-5-mean                                                                                                                L13H31 AR=216.87
                                                                                                                                               0.6                                                                               L14H24 AR=30.00
                      0.7                                                                                                                                                                                                        L23H12 AR=26.87
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 L18H25 AR=4.48
                                                                                                                                               0.5
                      0.6
DLA on attribute(s)


                                                                                                                            DLA on Attribute
                      0.5                                                                                                                      0.4



                      0.4
                                                                                                                                               0.3


                      0.3
                                                                                                                                               0.2

                      0.2

                                                                                                                                               0.1
                      0.1


                                                                                                                                                0
                       0                                                                                                                             Lo          Pa      Se       Mu             To       Be         Sh                Ba           Am            Ma
                               L13H31      L14H24      L13H31     L18H20    L18H20       L13H31       L28H17     L31H20                                nd          ris     ou          m           ky       ijin          an             ng              s te       dr
                                                                                                                                                            on                l            ba         o          g           g                ko                      id
                            PLAYS_SPORT PLAYS_SPORT IN_COUNTRY IN_COUNTRY CAPITAL_CITY CAPITAL_CITY PRODUCT_BY PRODUCT_BY                                                                    i                                   ha             k            rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   i                            am
                             AR=138.62    AR=13.73   AR=650.78   AR=12.09  AR=18.36     AR=216.87 AR=4950.10    AR=17.39

                                                                       Head                                                                                                                      Attribute



Figure 5: Relation heads exist for a range of different relationships. (Left) The top two relation heads
for four different relationships. The heads extract the correct attribute (blue) about as much as they
extract many other attributes in the set R (red). They also have a high attention ratio to RELATION
over SUBJECT (shown in the x axis labels). (Right) Many cities are extracted by heads over a range
of prompts with relation has the capital city with different subjects. The error bars denote the
standard deviation over these subjects. While heads push for some cities more than others, small error
bars indicate this variation is consistent across input subjects. This suggests relation head outputs do
not causally depend on the subject. We include similar plots for other relationships in Appendix E.5.


a more than other attributes from R. From RELATION, they extract many attributes in R, often
also privileging a. This is due to significant propagation of subject information to the RELATION,
which we do not rigorously study, but attempt to disentangle in Appendix E.6. We attribute the two
contributions from different source positions SUBJECT and RELATION through our DLA by source
technique.
Figure 3 demonstrates this; We see mixed heads generally extract the correct attribute a from both
SUBJECT and RELATION (blue and green) more than other relation attributes R (red and purple). To
further illustrate this effect, we analyze the top DLA token outputs of a selection of mixed heads in
the Appendix in Table 8, split by source token, demonstrating these heads (a) attend to two distinct
places and (b) extract significant information from these two distinct places.

3.4                              MLP S

MLP layers on the END token often uniformly boost many attributes in the set R (like relation heads).
The MLPs do not preferentially boost the correct attribute a. We find that the category C of the MLP
direct effect is significantly larger than those of individual heads, which intuitively makes sense given
the MLP has many more parameters than individual attention heads. Individual neurons would likely
have much more restricted categories. We note we only study part of the function of the MLP, and
only on the END position. We hypothesize MLPs either compose with relation heads, or with relation
information directly.
In Figure 6, we show that for a range of relationships an aspect of the total direct effect of the MLP
layers is to boost many attributes in R, including a, but that a is not privileged among the attributes
R. We too see that while the MLP layers up-weight certain attributes more than others, this variation
is consistent across subjects, indicating these outputs do not causally depend on the subject. In
Appendix E.7, we show that, at least for some relationships, this is the primary direct effect of the
MLP layers, through analyzing the top DLA tokens of summed MLP outputs. See Appendix E.7 for
more experiments.

4                             D ISCUSSION
Additivity. We speculate that models in general prefer to solve tasks in an additive manner via
multiple independent circuits, as we describe in Section 1. This claim is supported by prior work
(Nanda et al., 2023; Chughtai et al., 2023). We do not explain why the additive mechanism is preferred,


                                                                                                                            7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                9                                                        DLA, a
                                                                                                                                                    9
                                                                                         DLA, R-a, top-5-mean
                                8
                                                                                                                                                    8


                                                                                                                    DLA (sum over all MLP layers)
DLA (sum over all MLP layers)   7                                                                                                                   7


                                                                                                                                                    6
                                6

                                                                                                                                                    5
                                5
                                                                                                                                                    4

                                4
                                                                                                                                                    3

                                3                                                                                                                   2


                                2                                                                                                                   1


                                                                                                                                                    0
                                1


                                                                                                                                                        squash

                                                                                                                                                                 surﬁng

                                                                                                                                                                          skiing

                                                                                                                                                                                   rugby

                                                                                                                                                                                           boxing

                                                                                                                                                                                                    volleyball

                                                                                                                                                                                                                 hockey

                                                                                                                                                                                                                          cricket

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    cycling

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               swimming

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          basketball

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       golf

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              sailing

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        soccer

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 tennis

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          baseball

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     gymnastics

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  lacrosse

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             canoeing

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        wrestling
                                0
                                    PLAYS_SPORT   IN_COUNTRY              CAPITAL_CITY          PRODUCT_BY
                                                               Relation                                                                                                                                                                       Attribute


Figure 6: (Left) The sum of all MLP outputs boosts relation attributes R for a range of relationships.
The MLPs boost the correct attribute (blue) less than they boost other attributes in the set R (red).
The MLP boosts a wider set of attributes in R than we automatically check: this is a limitation of
our dataset, and would not be the case with a wider dataset (see Table 10 in the Appendix). (Right)
many sports are boosted by MLPs over a range of prompts with relation plays the sport of,
independent of which subject is given. Error bars are standard deviation over different subjects. This
suggests the direct effect of the MLP does not causally depend on the subject.


but speculate that compounding evidence through several simple circuits is significantly easier for
models than more complex alternatives. Due to a softmax being applied to model outputs when
taking cross-entropy loss, models extremize their outputs. Outputting small amounts of incorrect
answers is therefore not that costly to the model, so long as constructive interference results in a large
logit difference between correct and incorrect answers pre-softmax.
As additional intuition, we present a toy example of additivity. Consider a logistic model tasked with
predicting whether an integer is divisible by 6 (into two classes, true or false). Consider the following
two mechanistic ways of solving the task. (a) Solve the task directly, memorising which integers
are divisible by 6. (b) Solve the task in two independent parts. Assign +1 true logit to all numbers
divisible by 2. Assign +1 true logit to all numbers divisible by 3, with a different circuit. Apply a
uniform bias corresponding to a -1.5 false logit. Both mechanisms solve the task.
In this example (a) is non additive. (b) is additive, by the criteria (1-3) given in Section 1. There are
two different components that contribute to the answer (1), they have qualitatively different outputs
(2), which constructively interfere on the correct answer, with each component insufficient alone (3).
This example is analogous to how a transformer functions, since the residual stream is an additive sum
of outputs from model components, and there iss an (approximately) linear map from the residual
stream to the output logits given by the unembedding, so each component can be considered to
be writing to logits separately in a linear fashion (Elhage et al., 2021). Note that condition (2) is
necessary to exclude cases where the model increases its confidence through adding two identical
components, which we do not consider to be additive.
Reversal Curse. Our work on factual recall offers a mechanistic explanation for the reversal curse
– the noted limitation of LLMs to generalize to ‘B is A’ when trained on ‘A is B’ (Berglund et al.,
2023), which has also been suggested by Grosse et al. (2023); Thibodeau (2022). In our work, we
provide indirect and suggestive evidence this is to be expected. We find a circuit by which models
may learn to output ‘A is B’, involving subject enrichment on the A tokens, and some attention head
attending to A and extracting B. Importantly, this is a unidirectional circuit with two unidirectional
components - it extracts the fact ‘B’ from ‘A’. Our circuit suggests that the reason fine-tuning on A is
B does not boost ‘B is A’ in general is because training on ‘A is B’ only boosts the unidirectional A →
B mechanisms, and has no effect on potential B → A mechanisms. As further evidence, assembling
multi-token input representations is a different task mechanistically to outputting multi-token facts.
This is in part due to input and output spaces being separate – Embeddings and unembeddings are
untied in modern LLMs: WE ̸= WUT . So the ‘A’ in ‘A is B’ is internally represented differently to
the ‘A’ in ‘B is A’, further suggesting these two tasks are separate. We view this as evidence that our
work, and mechanistic interpretability more generally, can produce useful insights into the kinds of
high level behavior neural networks may implement.


                                                                                                                8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


5    R ELATED W ORK

Interpreting Factual Knowledge. There has been much interest in understanding and editing factual
knowledge in language models in a white box manner. Geva et al. (2021) demonstrated transformer
MLP layers can be interpreted as key-value memories, and later extended this to show a partial
function of transformer MLP layers is to perform computation to iteratively update the distribution
over output vocabulary space (Geva et al., 2022).
In a separate line of work, Meng et al. (2023a) found a separate function of MLP layers: to enrich
the representations in the residual stream of subjects with facts for the model to later use, which was
discovered using a causal intervention based methodology. They also had success with using this
localization to edit the weights of the model to change output predictions, which was later scaled up
to 10000 facts (Meng et al., 2023b). Subsequent work has demonstrated this technique may just be
introducing a “loud” fact (Thibodeau, 2022), and that the performance of editing in a layer may not
be a reliable way to localize the fact (Hase et al., 2023).
Equipped with this knowledge, an interesting question is that of how specific knowledge about a
subject is isolated from other knowledge. Geva et al. (2023b) describe a circuit for factual recall
with three steps: (1) subject enrichment in MLP sublayers, as in ROME, (2) relation propagation
to the END token, and (3) selective attribute extraction by later layer attention heads. Our work
offers a fuller understanding of this circuitry by zooming in more deeply into what individual model
components are doing. This goes beyond the ablation based approach taken in Geva et al. (2023a).
Separately, Hernandez et al. (2023) demonstrate that facts can be linearly decoded from the enriched
subject residual stream, which supports an aspect of the full picture we find. We build on this by
zooming in to the actual transformer mechanisms, finding linear decoding maps in head OV circuits.
Extracting Knowledge from LMs. The standard approach to understand what a model knows is
through prompting models in a black box fashion. (Petroni et al., 2019; Jiang et al., 2020; Roberts
et al., 2020; Zhong et al., 2021). Elazar et al. (2021) study whether factual knowledge generalizes
across paraphrasing. Our work gives initial insights into what mechanisms could explain when
models may generalize to paraphrases and when they would not. Recently, Berglund et al. (2023)
discuss a phenomena named the ‘reversal curse’, where models trained on “A is B” fail to generalize
to “B is A”, which has also been observed by prior work (Grosse et al., 2023; Thibodeau, 2022).
Our work explains why this phenomenon is to be expected mechanistically – facts are stored as
asymmetric look up tables in models, and so training on “A is B” is unlikely to reinforce the inverse
look up table “B is A” too.
Mechanistic interpretability encompasses understanding features learned by machine learning mod-
els (Olah et al., 2017), mathematical frameworks for understanding machine learning architectures
(Elhage et al., 2021), and efforts to find circuits in models (Cammarata et al., 2021; Nanda et al.,
2023; Chughtai et al., 2023; Heimersheim and Janiak; Wang et al., 2022). Mechanistic interpretabil-
ity work encompasses manually inspecting model components, performing causal interventions
to localize model behavior (Chan et al.; Geiger et al., 2022; 2021) and work on automating the
discovery of causal mechanisms (Conmy et al., 2023; Bills et al., 2023). We make use of mechanistic
interpretability techniques and frameworks in this paper.

6    C ONCLUSION

In this work, we analyze neural circuitry responsible for the recall of known facts about subjects. We
show that factual recall mechanistically comprises several distinct moving parts. We find several
simple and distinct mechanisms that interact additively to extract facts. These constructively interfere
to produce the correct answer. Each mechanism is insufficient alone, but the summing up of several
contributions is significantly more robust. We call this the additive motif. This motif seems core
to the model’s functioning in this fairly general set up, and so likely generalizes to other tasks -
we see this as a promising direction of future investigation. Our work contributes to the growing
literature on factual recall, and opens up several interesting new directions, discussed in Appendix B.
We also highlight some of the limitations of narrow circuit analysis. By expanding our scope of
study were able to uncover mechanisms for factual recall prior work had missed. We consider such
study important for comprehensively understanding neural networks, a stated goal of the field of
mechanistic interpretability (Elhage et al., 2021).


                                                   9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Lukas Berglund, Meg Tong, Max Kaufmann, Mikita Balesni, Asa Cooper Stickland, Tomasz Korbak,
  and Owain Evans. The Reversal Curse: LLMs trained on "A is B" fail to learn "B is A", September
  2023. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2309.12288. arXiv:2309.12288 [cs].
Stella Biderman, Hailey Schoelkopf, Quentin Anthony, Herbie Bradley, Kyle O’Brien, Eric Hallahan,
  Mohammad Aflah Khan, Shivanshu Purohit, USVSN Sai Prashanth, Edward Raff, Aviya Skowron,
  Lintang Sutawika, and Oskar van der Wal. Pythia: A Suite for Analyzing Large Language Models
  Across Training and Scaling, May 2023. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2304.01373.
  arXiv:2304.01373 [cs].
Steven Bills, Nick Cammarata, Dan Mossing, Henk Tillman, Leo Gao, Gabriel Goh, Ilya
  Sutskever, Jan Leike, Jeff Wu, and William Saunders. Language models can explain neurons
  in language models, 2023. URL https://openaipublic.blob.core.windows.net/
  neuron-explainer/paper/index.html.
Tom B. Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Sandhini Agarwal, Ariel
  Herbert-Voss, Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child, Aditya Ramesh, Daniel M. Ziegler,
  Jeffrey Wu, Clemens Winter, Christopher Hesse, Mark Chen, Eric Sigler, Mateusz Litwin, Scott
  Gray, Benjamin Chess, Jack Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam McCandlish, Alec Radford, Ilya
  Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. Language Models are Few-Shot Learners, July 2020. URL
  http://arxiv.org/abs/2005.14165. arXiv:2005.14165 [cs].
Nick Cammarata, Gabriel Goh, Shan Carter, Chelsea Voss, Ludwig Schubert, and Chris Olah. Curve
  circuits. Distill, 2021. doi: 10.23915/distill.00024.006.
Lawrence Chan, Adrià Garriga-alonso, Nicholas Goldowsky-Dill, ryan_greenblatt,
  jenny, Ansh Radhakrishnan, Buck, and Nate Thomas.         Causal Scrubbing: a
  method for rigorously testing interpretability hypotheses [Redwood Research].
  URL        https://www.alignmentforum.org/posts/JvZhhzycHu2Yd57RN/
  causal-scrubbing-a-method-for-rigorously-testing.
Bilal Chughtai, Lawrence Chan, and Neel Nanda. A Toy Model of Universality: Reverse Engineering
  How Networks Learn Group Operations, May 2023. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2302.
  03025. arXiv:2302.03025 [cs, math].
Arthur Conmy, Augustine N. Mavor-Parker, Aengus Lynch, Stefan Heimersheim, and Adrià Garriga-
  Alonso. Towards Automated Circuit Discovery for Mechanistic Interpretability, July 2023. URL
  http://arxiv.org/abs/2304.14997. arXiv:2304.14997 [cs].
Hoagy Cunningham, Aidan Ewart, Logan Riggs, Robert Huben, and Lee Sharkey. Sparse Au-
  toencoders Find Highly Interpretable Features in Language Models, September 2023. URL
  http://arxiv.org/abs/2309.08600. arXiv:2309.08600 [cs].
Yanai Elazar, Nora Kassner, Shauli Ravfogel, Abhilasha Ravichander, Eduard Hovy, Hinrich Schütze,
  and Yoav Goldberg. Measuring and Improving Consistency in Pretrained Language Models, May
  2021. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2102.01017. arXiv:2102.01017 [cs].
Nelson Elhage, Neel Nanda, Catherine Olsson, Tom Henighan, Nicholas Joseph, Ben Mann, Amanda
  Askell, Yuntao Bai, Anna Chen, Tom Conerly, Nova DasSarma, Dawn Drain, Deep Ganguli, Zac
  Hatfield-Dodds, Danny Hernandez, Andy Jones, Jackson Kernion, Liane Lovitt, Kamal Ndousse,
  Dario Amodei, Tom Brown, Jack Clark, Jared Kaplan, Sam McCandlish, and Chris Olah. A
  mathematical framework for transformer circuits, 2021.
Nelson Elhage, Tristan Hume, Catherine Olsson, Nicholas Schiefer, Tom Henighan, Shauna Kravec,
  Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Robert Lasenby, Dawn Drain, Carol Chen, Roger Grosse, Sam McCan-
  dlish, Jared Kaplan, Dario Amodei, Martin Wattenberg, and Christopher Olah. Toy models of
  superposition. Transformer Circuits Thread, 2022.
Atticus Geiger, Hanson Lu, Thomas Icard, and Christopher Potts. Causal Abstractions of Neural
  Networks, October 2021. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2106.02997. arXiv:2106.02997
  [cs].


                                               10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Atticus Geiger, Zhengxuan Wu, Hanson Lu, Josh Rozner, Elisa Kreiss, Thomas Icard, Noah D.
  Goodman, and Christopher Potts. Inducing Causal Structure for Interpretable Neural Networks,
  July 2022. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2112.00826. arXiv:2112.00826 [cs].
Mor Geva, Roei Schuster, Jonathan Berant, and Omer Levy. Transformer Feed-Forward Layers
 Are Key-Value Memories, September 2021. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2012.14913.
 arXiv:2012.14913 [cs].
Mor Geva, Avi Caciularu, Kevin Ro Wang, and Yoav Goldberg. Transformer Feed-Forward Layers
 Build Predictions by Promoting Concepts in the Vocabulary Space, October 2022. URL http:
 //arxiv.org/abs/2203.14680. arXiv:2203.14680 [cs].
Mor Geva, Jasmijn Bastings, Katja Filippova, and Amir Globerson. Dissecting Recall of Factual
 Associations in Auto-Regressive Language Models, April 2023a. URL http://arxiv.org/
 abs/2304.14767. arXiv:2304.14767 [cs].
Mor Geva, Jasmijn Bastings, Katja Filippova, and Amir Globerson. Dissecting Recall of Factual
 Associations in Auto-Regressive Language Models, April 2023b. URL http://arxiv.org/
 abs/2304.14767. arXiv:2304.14767 [cs].
Roger Grosse, Juhan Bae, Cem Anil, Nelson Elhage, Alex Tamkin, Amirhossein Tajdini, Benoit
  Steiner, Dustin Li, Esin Durmus, Ethan Perez, Evan Hubinger, Kamilė Lukošiūtė, Karina Nguyen,
  Nicholas Joseph, Sam McCandlish, Jared Kaplan, and Samuel R. Bowman. Studying Large
  Language Model Generalization with Influence Functions, August 2023. URL http://arxiv.
  org/abs/2308.03296. arXiv:2308.03296 [cs, stat].
Wes Gurnee, Neel Nanda, Matthew Pauly, Katherine Harvey, Dmitrii Troitskii, and Dimitris Bertsimas.
 Finding Neurons in a Haystack: Case Studies with Sparse Probing, June 2023. URL http:
 //arxiv.org/abs/2305.01610. arXiv:2305.01610 [cs].
Peter Hase, Mohit Bansal, Been Kim, and Asma Ghandeharioun. Does Localization Inform Editing?
  Surprising Differences in Causality-Based Localization vs. Knowledge Editing in Language
  Models, January 2023. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2301.04213. arXiv:2301.04213
  [cs].
Stefan Heimersheim and Jett Janiak. A circuit for Python docstrings in a 4-layer attention-only trans-
  former. URL https://www.alignmentforum.org/posts/u6KXXmKFbXfWzoAXn/
  a-circuit-for-python-docstrings-in-a-4-layer-attention-only.
Evan Hernandez, Arnab Sen Sharma, Tal Haklay, Kevin Meng, Martin Wattenberg, Jacob Andreas,
  Yonatan Belinkov, and David Bau. Linearity of Relation Decoding in Transformer Language
  Models, August 2023. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2308.09124. arXiv:2308.09124
  [cs].
Adam Jermyn, Chris Olah, and Tom Henighan. Attention Head Superposition, 2023.
  URL https://transformer-circuits.pub/2023/may-update/index.html#
  attention-superposition.
Zhengbao Jiang, Frank F. Xu, Jun Araki, and Graham Neubig. How Can We Know What
  Language Models Know?, May 2020. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1911.12543.
  arXiv:1911.12543 [cs].
Kevin Meng, David Bau, Alex Andonian, and Yonatan Belinkov. Locating and Editing Fac-
  tual Associations in GPT, January 2023a. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2202.05262.
  arXiv:2202.05262 [cs].
Kevin Meng, Arnab Sen Sharma, Alex Andonian, Yonatan Belinkov, and David Bau. Mass-Editing
  Memory in a Transformer, August 2023b. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2210.07229.
  arXiv:2210.07229 [cs].
Neel Nanda. TransformerLens/further_comments.md at main · neelnanda-io/TransformerLens,
  2022.    URL https://github.com/neelnanda-io/TransformerLens/blob/
  main/further_comments.md.


                                                 11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Neel Nanda, Lawrence Chan, Tom Lieberum, Jess Smith, and Jacob Steinhardt. Progress measures
  for grokking via mechanistic interpretability, January 2023. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/
  2301.05217. arXiv:2301.05217 [cs].

nostalgebraist. interpreting GPT: the logit lens — LessWrong, January 2020.
  URL              https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/AcKRB8wDpdaN6v6ru/
  interpreting-gpt-the-logit-lens.

Chris Olah, Alexander Mordvintsev, and Ludwig Schubert. Feature Visualization. Distill, 2(11):
  e7, November 2017. ISSN 2476-0757. doi: 10.23915/distill.00007. URL https://distill.
  pub/2017/feature-visualization.

Chris Olah, Nick Cammarata, Ludwig Schubert, Gabriel Goh, Michael Petrov, and Shan Carter.
  Zoom in: An introduction to circuits. Distill, 2020. doi: 10.23915/distill.00024.001.

Catherine Olsson, Nelson Elhage, Neel Nanda, Nicholas Joseph, Nova DasSarma, Tom Henighan,
  Ben Mann, Amanda Askell, Yuntao Bai, Anna Chen, Tom Conerly, Dawn Drain, Deep Ganguli,
  Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Danny Hernandez, Scott Johnston, Andy Jones, Jackson Kernion, Liane
  Lovitt, Kamal Ndousse, Dario Amodei, Tom Brown, Jack Clark, Jared Kaplan, Sam McCandlish,
  and Chris Olah. In-context learning and induction heads. Transformer Circuits Thread, 2022.

Fabio Petroni, Tim Rocktäschel, Patrick Lewis, Anton Bakhtin, Yuxiang Wu, Alexander H. Miller,
  and Sebastian Riedel. Language Models as Knowledge Bases?, September 2019. URL http:
  //arxiv.org/abs/1909.01066. arXiv:1909.01066 [cs].

Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, and Ilya Sutskever. Language
  Models are Unsupervised Multitask Learners.

Can Rager, Yeu-Tong Lau, James Dao, and Jett.         An adversarial exam-
  ple for Direct Logit Attribution: memory management in gelu-4l.     2023.
  URL             https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/2PucFqdRyEvaHb4Hn/
  an-adversarial-example-for-direct-logit-attribution-memory.

Adam Roberts, Colin Raffel, and Noam Shazeer. How Much Knowledge Can You Pack Into the
  Parameters of a Language Model?, October 2020. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2002.
  08910. arXiv:2002.08910 [cs, stat].

Jacques Thibodeau.  But is it really in Rome?  An investigation of the
  ROME model editing technique — AI Alignment Forum, 2022.        URL
  https://www.alignmentforum.org/posts/QL7J9wmS6W2fWpofd/
  but-is-it-really-in-rome-an-investigation-of-the-rome-model.

Ben Wang and Aran Komatsuzaki. GPT-J-6B: A 6 billion parameter autoregressive language model,
  May 2021. URL https://github.com/kingoflolz/mesh-transformer-jax.

Kevin Wang, Alexandre Variengien, Arthur Conmy, Buck Shlegeris, and Jacob Steinhardt. Inter-
  pretability in the Wild: a Circuit for Indirect Object Identification in GPT-2 small, November 2022.
  URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2211.00593. arXiv:2211.00593 [cs].

Jason Wei, Yi Tay, Rishi Bommasani, Colin Raffel, Barret Zoph, Sebastian Borgeaud, Dani Yogatama,
  Maarten Bosma, Denny Zhou, Donald Metzler, Ed H. Chi, Tatsunori Hashimoto, Oriol Vinyals,
  Percy Liang, Jeff Dean, and William Fedus. Emergent Abilities of Large Language Models,
  October 2022. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2206.07682. arXiv:2206.07682 [cs].

Zexuan Zhong, Dan Friedman, and Danqi Chen. Factual Probing Is [MASK]: Learning vs. Learning to
  Recall, December 2021. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2104.05240. arXiv:2104.05240
  [cs].

Andy Zou, Zifan Wang, J. Zico Kolter, and Matt Fredrikson. Universal and Transferable Adversarial
  Attacks on Aligned Language Models, July 2023. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2307.
  15043. arXiv:2307.15043 [cs].


                                                 12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A    L IMITATIONS
Our investigation attempts to present evidence that a range of mechanisms for factual recall exist
within models, but does not claim to explain all such mechanisms. We present some evidence that all
of these are important, but do not attempt to quantify how important each mechanism is. Further,
while our separation of heads into Subject, Relation and Mixed heads is useful in understanding head
function, the true picture is less clean, and where we draw the boundaries is somewhat arbitrary. In
this paper, we argue that the distinction of at least Subject and Relation heads makes sense, but we
acknowledge the mixed head boundary is somewhat fuzzy.
Since our focus is demonstrating a range of mechanisms exist, we primarily investigate one model,
Pythia-2.8b, on a fairly small dataset. We discuss some of the limitations we faced during dataset
curation in Appendix C.
Finally, in the plots in the main body of the paper, we generally focus on attributes that have high
unigram frequency - (sports, countries, etc.). This makes analysis of individual model components
simpler, as polysemantic heads will generally write common attributes with higher norm than less
common ones. Our additive and constructive interference picture does still hold up for less common
categories of word - however, often with lower logit lens significance on individual model components.

B    F UTURE W ORK
Understanding Correlation. Correlated features have been shown to be organize themselves into
geometric patterns in toy set ups where there are more features than parameter count. This can
be thought of as a form of lossy compression, and is known as superposition (Elhage et al., 2022).
In our work, we found similar attention heads responsible for reading and writing very correlated
features, eg. ‘France’ and ‘Paris’ or ‘basketball’ and ‘NBA’, suggesting these features are stored
together in superposition. We know superposition exists in real language models (Gurnee et al., 2023),
but an open problem is understanding how models perform computation of compressed features in
superposition, overcoming issues of interference. In particular, it is unlikely that a linear method such
as (Hernandez et al., 2023) could disentangle these. It is possible that constructive interference of our
four mechanisms suffice to, but something more complex may be at play.
Understanding MLP neurons. In this work, we analyze MLPs very briefly, showing they generally
boost many attributes in the set R. Understanding how this is done more precisely would be of
interest. One could first zoom in to individual neurons, instead of MLP layers as a whole, and attempt
to identify which inputs are responsible for boosting the unembedding directions of attributes in R.
Is the relation information being used explicitly? Or do these neurons just compose directly with
relation head outputs? MLP neurons remain a challenge in interpreting the algorithms implemented
by transformers.
ROME. The ROME technique Meng et al. (2023a) is able to edit model outputs in a way that
generalises across a range of prompts, but has some limitations. The localisation needed may not be
precise (Hase et al., 2023), and the phenomenon of “loud facts” suggests ROME is not as surgical
as initially thought Thibodeau (2022). Future work could use our understanding of the end to end
mechanisms behind factual recall to try and understand how ROME works in an end-to-end manner,
and explain mechanistically why these limitations exist.
Prompting Set Up. One could study how different prompting set ups affect the task of factual recall.
For instance, how does a few shot prompt, or prompt injection of form "Never say ‘Paris’. The
Eiffel Tower is in the city of” work in improving or reducing performance? One could also study
paraphrasing, in a similar fashion to (Elazar et al., 2021). One could compare the internal mechanisms
found in this paper to those found for different prompting set ups and analyze the difference. Olsson
et al. (2022) argues induction heads are important in in-context learning, but our understanding of
the general phenomenon remains poor in general. Similarly, our understanding why jailbreaks such
as that presented in Zou et al. (2023) occur would be productive in mitigating the prevalence of
jailbreaks.
Multi-Step Factual Recall. Consider prompts of form The largest church in the world
is located in the city of. Humans would solve this task sequentially, with two inference
steps. However, models may be able to solve this task in one forward pass. Additivity may be able


                                                  13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


to explain why. Investigating the mechanisms behind model performance in this task would be an
interesting area of further investigation.


C    DATASET


Our dataset is loosely inspired by Meng et al. (2023a) and Hernandez et al. (2023), but is manually
generated. We found these preexisting datasets to be unsatisfactory for our analysis, due to some
additional requirements our set up necessitated. We firstly required models to both know facts and to
say facts when asked in a simple prompting set up, and for the correct attribute a to be completely
determined in its tokenized form by the subject and relationship. For example ‘The Eiffel Tower is
in’ permits both the answer ‘Paris’ and ‘France’. For simplicity we avoided prompts of this form.
Synonyms also gave us issues, e.g. ‘football’ and ‘soccer’, or ‘unsafe’ and ‘dangerous’. This mostly
restricted us to very categorical facts, like sports, countries, cities, colors etc. We also wanted to
avoid attributes that mostly involved copying, such as ‘The Syndey Opera House is in the city of
Sydney‘, as we expect this mechanism to differ substantially from the more general mechanism, and
to rely mostly on induction heads (Olsson et al., 2022). Next, we wanted to create large datasets with
r held constant, and separately, with s held constant. Holding the relation constant and generating
many facts is fairly easy. But generally models know few facts about a given subject, e.g. ‘Michael
Jordan’ is associated very strongly with ‘basketball’, but other facts about him are less important and
well known. Certain kinds of attributes, like ‘gender’ are likely properties of the tokens themselves,
and not likely not reliant on the ‘subject enrichment’ circuitry - e.g. ‘Michael’ and ‘male’. We try
and avoid these cases. We also restrict to attributes where the first attribute token mostly uniquely
identifies the token – often the attribute is just a single token. If the first token of the attribute is a
single character, this can be vague, so we omitted these cases. These considerations limited the size
of the dataset we studied.
Here, we provide further details regarding our dataset. Our dataset comprises 106 prompts, across 10
different relations r. We summarise the relations we study in Table 2, and validate our primary model
of study achieves high accuracy on the dataset in Figure 7.


     Relation           Relation Text                         Number of Subjects   Example Subjects

     PROFESSOR_AT       is a professor at the university of                   9    Charles Darwin, Isaac Newton, Alan Turing
     PLAYS_SPORT        plays the sport of                                   15    Tom Brady, Patrick Mahomes, LeBron James
     PRIMARY_MACRO      has the primary macronutrient of                     11    Potatoes, Rice, Oil
     PRODUCT_BY         is a product by the company of                        9    Wii Balance Board, Windows 10, Platform Controller hub
     IN_COUNTRY         is in the country of                                  7    The Eiffel Tower, Sydney Opera House, Machu Picchu
     CAPITAL_CITY       has the capital city of                              10    Brazil, Spain, Russia
     LEAGUE_CALLED      plays in the league called the                        6    Tom Brady, Patrick Mahomes, Mookie Betts
     FROM_COUNTRY       is from the country of                               12    LeBron James, David Beckham, Kobe Bryant
     IN_CONTINENT       is in the continent of                                7    The Eiffel Tower, Sydney Opera House, Machu Picchu
     IN_CITY            is in the city of                                     7    The Eiffel Tower, Sydney Opera House, Machu Picchu



                Table 2: The factual tuples in our dataset, aggregated over the relation r.


                                                                    14
                       Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                60


                                                                50


                                                                40


                                                        Count
                                                                30


                                                                20


                                                                10


                                                                 0
                                                                     0               2              4              6               8             10
                                                                                                         Rank



                       Figure 7: Ranks of the correct attribute a for all prompts in our dataset on Pythia-2.9b. We filter for
                       prompts where the attribute a is within the top 10 logits. Though, the model has a very high top-1
                       accuracy – the rank is usually zero.


                       To generate sets S and R We used GPT-4 to generate a large list of relevant attributes for each subject
                       s and relation r. We then manually filtered these lists of attributes. For instance, removing attributes
                       beginning with the token the.


                       C.1      E XAMPLE DATAPOINTS

                       We include below three data points, corresponding to three separate tuples (s, r, a), along with sets S
                       and R.

subject              relation        relation text                       attribute       prompt                        counterfactual subject attributes        counterfactual relation attributes

Sydney Opera House   IN_COUNTRY      is in the country of                Australia       Fact: Sydney Opera            [’1973’, ’Sydney’, ’modern architec-     [’China’, ’France’, ’Germany’, ’Italy’, ’Austria’, ’USA’,
                                                                                         House is in the country       ture’, ’iconic’, ’Jørn Utzon’, ’Benne-   ’Canada’, ’Finland’, ’Hungary’, ’Afghanistan’, ’Alba-
                                                                                         of                            long Point’, ’performing arts’, ’shell   nia’, ’Algeria’, ’Greece’, ’Argentina’, ’Bangladesh’, ’Bel-
                                                                                                                       roofs’, ’UNESCO World Heritage           gium’, ’Brazil’, ’Cambodia’, ’Bulgaria’, ’Chile’, ’Colom-
                                                                                                                       site’, ’Sydney Harbour’, ’Danish         bia’, ’Croatia’, ’Cuba’, ’Denmark’, ’England’, ’Egypt’, ’Es-
                                                                                                                       architect’, ’multi-venue’, ’ceramic      tonia’, ’Ethiopia’, ’Iceland’, ’India’, ’Indonesia’, ’Iran’,
                                                                                                                       tiles’, ’expressionist design’]          ’Iraq’, ’Ireland’, ’Israel’, ’Jamaica’, ’Japan’, ’Jordan’,
                                                                                                                                                                ’Kenya’, ’Kuwait’, ’Lebanon’, ’Malaysia’, ’Mexico’, ’Mon-
                                                                                                                                                                golia’, ’Morocco’, ’Nepal’, ’New Zealand’, ’Nigeria’, ’Nor-
                                                                                                                                                                way’, ’Pakistan’, ’Peru’, ’Philippines’, ’Poland’, ’Portugal’,
                                                                                                                                                                ’Qatar’, ’Romania’]
Cristiano Ronaldo    FROM_COUNTRY    is from the country of              Portugal        Fact: Cristiano Ronaldo       [’football’, ’Real Madrid’, ’Manch-      [’USA’, ’China’, ’France’, ’Germany’, ’England’, ’Italy’,
                                                                                         is from the country of        ester United’, ’Juventus’, ’World        ’Afghanistan’, ’Albania’, ’Algeria’, ’Argentina’, ’Aus-
                                                                                                                       Player’, ’Euro’, ’Nike’, ’endorse-       tralia’, ’Austria’, ’Bangladesh’, ’Belgium’, ’Brazil’, ’Bul-
                                                                                                                       ments’, "Ballon d’Or", ’Champi-          garia’, ’Cambodia’, ’Canada’, ’Chile’, ’Colombia’, ’Croa-
                                                                                                                       ons League’, ’forward’, ’La Liga’,       tia’, ’Cuba’, ’Denmark’, ’Egypt’, ’Estonia’, ’Ethiopia’, ’Fin-
                                                                                                                       ’Serie A’, ’free-kicks’, ’hat-tricks’,   land’, ’Greece’, ’Hungary’, ’Iceland’, ’India’, ’Indonesia’,
                                                                                                                       ’CR7 brand’, ’foundation’, ’Museu        ’Iran’, ’Iraq’, ’Ireland’, ’Israel’, ’Jamaica’, ’Japan’, ’Jordan’,
                                                                                                                       CR7’, ’scoring records’]                 ’Kenya’, ’Kuwait’, ’Lebanon’, ’Malaysia’, ’Mexico’, ’Mon-
                                                                                                                                                                golia’, ’Morocco’, ’Nepal’, ’New Zealand’, ’Nigeria’, ’Nor-
                                                                                                                                                                way’, ’Pakistan’, ’Peru’, ’Philippines’, ’Poland’, ’Qatar’,
                                                                                                                                                                ’Romania’]


                                      Table 3: Some full example data points from our dataset, (s, r, a, S, R)


                       D        F URTHER M ETHODS

                       Here, we provide details for regarding how to calculate the logit lens, DLA and DLA by source token.
                       We borrow from the notation presented in ?.
                       The function a standard transformer with L layers and parameters θ implements fθ can be expressed
                       fθ (x≤t ) = softmax(πt (x≤ t)) where πt is a vecotr of logits given by


                                                                                                        15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                          πt = LayerNorm(ztL )WU
                                            ztl = ztl−1 + alt + mlt
                                            alt = Attn(ztl−1 )
                                        mlt = MLP(ztl−1 ),

where LayerNorm() is a LayerNorm normalisation layer, WU an unembedding matrix, Attn() a
multi-head attention layer, and MLP() a two layer perceptron. The dependence on model parameters
θ is left implicit. In common with much of the literature on mechanistic interpretability Elhage et al.
(2021), we refer to the series of residual activations zil as the residual stream.
Logit Lens. The logit lens (nostalgebraist, 2020) is an interpretability technique for interpreting
intermediate activations of language models, through the insights that the residual stream is a linear
sum of contributions from each layer (Elhage et al., 2021) and that the map to logits is approximately
linear. It pauses model computation early, converting hidden residual stream activations to probability
distributions over the vocabulary at each layer.


                                        π̃tl = LayerNorm(ztl )WU


with l ≤ L.
Direct Logit Attribution (DLA) is an extension of the logit lens technique. It zooms in to individual
model components, through the insight that the residual stream of a transformer can be viewed as an
accumulated sum of outputs from all model components (Elhage et al., 2021) DLA therefore gives a
measure of the direct effect on the of individual model components on model outputs. Mathematically,
we may write

                                                             H
                                                             X
                                  alt = Attn(ztl−1 ) =             ah (ztl−1 )
                                                             h=1
                                                             N
                                                             X
                                 mlt = MLP(ztl−1 ) =               mn (ztl−1 ),
                                                             n=1

where we decompose the attention layer into individual attention heads, and the mlp layer into
individual neurons (Elhage et al., 2021). DLA corresponds to the sets of logits


                                  π̃tl,h = LayerNorm(ah (ztl−1 ))WU
                                  π̃tl,n = LayerNorm(mn (ztl−1 ))WU

DLA by source token. We extend this technique for attention heads through the further insight
that attention head outputs are a weighted sum of outputs corresponding to distinct attention source
position (Elhage et al., 2021), allowing us to quantify how each group of source tokens in turn
contributes directly to the logits. To do so note that the attention head contribution with query position
q = l − 1 is a sum over key (source) positions

                                      t
                                      X
                      ah (ztl−1 ) =         attn_probl−1,k LayerNorm(zkl−1 )WV WO
                                      k=1

Unravelling this sum, just as above, gives a separation of attention head DLA contributions by source
token.


                                                        16
     Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                π̃tl,h,k = LayerNorm(attn_probl−1,k LayerNorm(zkl−1 )WV WO )WU


     E       F URTHER R ESULTS



     E.1        M ANY ATTRIBUTES ARE E XTRACTED


Prompt                                               Attribute           Counterfactual Relation Attributes                Counterfact Subject Attributes

Fact: Tom Brady plays the sport of                   football (0)        golf (2), baseball (3), hockey (5)                quarterback (4), NFL (23), Gisele Bündchen
                                                                                                                           (34)
Fact: The Eiffel Tower is in the country of          France (0)          Belgium (1), China (13), Germany (14)             Paris (2), Europe (12), Seine River (347)
Fact: The Colosseum is in the country of             Italy (0)           Albania (1), Egypt (13), Greece (15)              Rome (2), ancient (33), ruins (97)
Fact: England has the capital city of                London (0)          Kuala Lumpur (35), Beijing (40), Dublin (43)      Queen Elizabeth (219), English (236), football
                                                                                                                           (337)
Fact: Michael Jordan plays in the league called      NBA (0)             NFL (9), PGA (13), NHL (34)                       United States (6), USA (23), Chicago Bulls (39)
the
Fact: Pasta has the primary macronutrient of         carbohydrates (0)   protein (3), fiber (4), fat (12)                  macaroni (49), fettuccine (54), spaghetti (217)
Fact: Stephen Hawking is a professor at the uni-     Cambridge (0)       Edinburgh (1), Manchester (2), Oxford (3)         CBE (30), England (31), cosmology (46)
versity of
Fact: Alan Turing is a professor at the university   Manchester (0)      Cambridge (1), Edinburgh (2), California Insti-   computer science (13), Bletchley Park (29), Eng-
of                                                                       tute of Technology (6)                            land (38)



     Table 4: Many attributes are extracted from the sets S and R. Rank displayed in brackets. We analyze
     the rank of many attribute logits, and display the top 3 from each category among those in our dataset.
     Generally the highest attributes in R have higher rank than the highest in S. Sometimes, the highest
     rank attributes in S are very correlated with a and therefore r, e.g. France with Paris. Often the
     counterfactual attributes are decorrelated with r. For instance professor at the university
     of and CBE or England. This suggests subject heads ‘misfire’ and extract these attributes even in
     contexts that do not necessitate it.


     E.2        OTHER M ODELS



     In this section, we provide some analogous summary plots to Figures 2 and 3 for the relations plays
     the sport of and is in the country of for several other models.
     GPT2-XL (1.5B)


                                                                                   17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                                                                                                   Mixed                                                                            1                                                                                                                                              Mixed
                                                                                                                                                                   Subject                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Subject
                      0.8
                                                                                                                                                                   Relation                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Relation

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0.8
                      0.6


                                                                                                                                                                                                     Attention to relation
DLA on relation


                      0.4                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.6


                      0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0.4



                       0

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0.2

                  −0.2


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0
                  −0.4
                                                 0                        0.5                             1                             1.5                            2                                                                                 0                                0.2                        0.4                             0.6                              0.8                               1
                                                                                    DLA on subject                                                                                                                                                                                                         Attention to subject


Figure 8: GPT2-XL. Three different types of attention head for factual extraction for prompts of form
“s plays the sport of”: Subject heads, Relation heads and Mixed heads. (Left) DLA on the correct
sport, split by attention head source token, for top 10 heads by total DLA. Each data point is one
prompt for one factual tuple. The gray lines have gradients 1/10 and 10 and denote the boundary we
use to define heads, post averaging, which is somewhat arbitrary. (Right) Attention patterns of the
top four heads of each kind on each prompt. Subject and Relation heads attend mostly to subjects
and relations respectively. Mixed heads attend to both. Attention is not used to define head type.


                0.9
                                                                                                     DLA, a (SUBJECT)                                                                                                                                                                                                                        a (SUBJECT)
                                                                                                     DLA, a (RELATION)                                                                                                                                                                                                                       a (RELATION)
                                                                                                                                                                                                     DLA on attribute(s) by source token group


                0.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0.6
                                                                                                     DLA, R-a (SUBJECT), top-5-mean                                                                                                                                                                                                          R-{a}, top-5-mean (SUBJECT)
                0.7                                                                                  DLA, R-a (RELATION), top-5-mean                                                                                                                                                                                                         R-{a}, top-5-mean (RELATION)


                0.6                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.4
DLA by source


                0.5

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0.2
                0.4


                0.3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0

                0.2


                0.1                                                                                                                                                                                                                              −0.2


                  0
                        L3                L3              L4              L3                L2                L3                L2              L4              L2                L3                                                                    L3                L3               L3              L4                L3              L2              L3                L4                L3              L3
                           8   H2            9   H2          5   H8          2   H1            7   H1            5   H1            6   H8          2   H0          1   H1            2   H1                                                                5   H1            0   H8           1   H0          2   H2            9   H0          4   H4          4   H2            3   H1            2   H3          6   H3
                                  2                   S               M             2                 3                 9                   M               M             9                 5                                                                     9                   S                S             4                   S               S             0                 5                   R               M
                                      M                                                 M                 M                 M                                                 R                 M                                                                     M                                                  M                                                 S                 M

                                                                                              Head                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Head



Figure 9: GPT2-XL. Top heads by absolute DLA for the relationships plays the sport of
(left) and for is in the country of (right), labeled as Subject (S), Relation (R) or Mixed (M).
Studying a large set of counterfactual attributes, and splitting by attention source token let’s us
disentangle these head types. We plot DLA on the attribute a, and for the mean of the top 5 attributes
in the set R but excluding a, both split by attention source token (SUBJECT vs RELATION). All three
head types emerge.


GPT-J (5.6B)


                                                                                                                                                                                                    18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                   1.5                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1
                                                                                                                                                                      Mixed                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Mixed
                                                                                                                                                                      Subject                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Subject
                                                                                                                                                                      Relation                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Relation
                        1                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0.8


                                                                                                                                                                                                       Attention to relation
DLA on relation


                   0.5                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0.6


                        0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.4


                  −0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.2


                    −1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0

                            −1                          0                            1                             2                          3                             4                                                                              0                              0.2                                 0.4                            0.6                             0.8
                                                                                      DLA on subject                                                                                                                                                                                                          Attention to subject


Figure 10: GPT-J. Three different types of attention head for factual extraction for prompts of form
“s plays the sport of”: Subject heads, Relation heads and Mixed heads. (Left) DLA on the correct
sport, split by attention head source token, for top 10 heads by total DLA. Each data point is one
prompt for one factual tuple. The gray lines have gradients 1/10 and 10 and denote the boundary we
use to define heads, post averaging, which is somewhat arbitrary. (Right) Attention patterns of the
top four heads of each kind on each prompt. Subject and Relation heads attend mostly to subjects
and relations respectively. Mixed heads attend to both. Attention is not used to define head type.


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2
                   3
                                                                                                         DLA, a (SUBJECT)                                                                                                                                                                                                                      a (SUBJECT)
                                                                                                         DLA, a (RELATION)                                                                                                                                                                                                                     a (RELATION)
                                                                                                                                                                                                       DLA on attribute(s) by source token group


                                                                                                         DLA, R-a (SUBJECT), top-5-mean                                                                                                                                                                                                        R-{a}, top-5-mean (SUBJECT)
                  2.5
                                                                                                         DLA, R-a (RELATION), top-5-mean                                                                                                            1.5                                                                                        R-{a}, top-5-mean (RELATION)

                   2
DLA by source


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1
                  1.5



                   1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0.5



                  0.5

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0
                   0



                −0.5                                                                                                                                                                                                                               −0.5
                            L1              L2              L2                L1                L1                L1              L1              L2                L1              L1                                                                    L1                L1                L1              L1               L1              L1                L2              L1              L1                L2
                               9   H4          1   H5          1   H1            6   H1            5   H1            8   H9          7   H8          1   H1            1   H8          9   H1                                                                9   H1            6   H1            6   H0          2   H7           8   H3          9   H1            0   H6          2   H6          9   H1            3   H0
                                        M               M             4                 5                 2                   M               M             5                   M             4                                                                     2                 0                   S               S                R             4                   S               R             5                   M
                                                                          M                 S                 M                                                 M                                 S                                                                     M                 M                                                                  M                                                 S

                                                                                                  Head                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Head



Figure 11: GPT-J. Top heads by absolute DLA for the relationships plays the sport of (left) and
for is in the country of (right), labeled as Subject (S), Relation (R) or Mixed (M). Studying
a large set of counterfactual attributes, and splitting by attention source token let’s us disentangle
these head types. We plot DLA on the attribute a, and for the mean of the top 5 attributes in the set R
but excluding a, both split by attention source token (SUBJECT vs RELATION). All three head types
emerge.


Pythia-6.9b


                                                                                                                                                                                                      19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                              1.4                                                                                                                                                  Mixed                                                                              1                                                                                                                                                Mixed
                                                                                                                                                                                                   Relation                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Relation
                                              1.2                                                                                                                                                  Subject                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Subject


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Attention from END to RELATiON
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.8
                                                   1
DLA attributed to RELATION


                                              0.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.6

                                              0.6


                                              0.4                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0.4


                                              0.2

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.2
                                                   0


                                             −0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0

                                                                          0                            0.5                                 1                               1.5                                 2                                                                             0                              0.2                               0.4                           0.6                            0.8                               1
                                                                                                DLA attributed to SUBJECT                                                                                                                                                                                                   Attention from END to SUBJECT


Figure 12: Pythia-6.9b. Three different types of attention head for factual extraction for prompts
of form “s plays the sport of”: Subject heads, Relation heads and Mixed heads. (Left) DLA on the
correct sport, split by attention head source token, for top 10 heads by total DLA. Each data point is
one prompt for one factual tuple. The gray lines have gradients 1/10 and 10 and denote the boundary
we use to define heads, post averaging, which is somewhat arbitrary. (Right) Attention patterns of
the top four heads of each kind on each prompt. Subject and Relation heads attend mostly to subjects
and relations respectively. Mixed heads attend to both. Attention is not used to define head type.


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1.6
                                                                                                                                           a (SUBJECT)                                                                                                                                                                                                                          a (SUBJECT)
                                                                                                                                           a (RELATION)
DLA on attribute(s) by source token group


                                             1.2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                a (RELATION)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    DLA on attribute(s) by source token group


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1.4
                                                                                                                                           R-{a}, top-5-mean (SUBJECT)                                                                                                                                                                                                          R-{a}, top-5-mean (SUBJECT)
                                              1                                                                                            R-{a}, top-5-mean (RELATION)                                                                                                                                                                                                         R-{a}, top-5-mean (RELATION)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1.2


                                             0.8                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1


                                             0.6                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0.8


                                             0.4                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0.6


                                             0.2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0.4



                                              0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.2



                                            −0.2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0


                                                       L1                L2              L2                L2              L2              L1                L1                L1                L2                L1                                                                     L2              L2                L1                L1              L1                L2              L2                L1                L2              L1
                                                          8   H2            6   H6          2   H1            1   H7          0   H0          2   H2            8   H2            9   H1            6   H1            6   H5                                                                 4   H5          0   H1            9   H2            4   H6          6   H1            0   H8          2   H1            3   H2            0   H0          7   H2
                                                                 4                   M             2                   M               M             2                 2                 1                 1                   M                                                                      M             8                 8                   S             6                   S             2                 8                   R             9
                                                                     M                                 M                                                 R                 M                 M                 M                                                                                                        S                 S                                 R                                 M                 R                                 S

                                                                                                                             Head                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Head



Figure 13: Pythia-6.9b. Top heads by absolute DLA for the relationships plays the sport of
(left) and for is in the country of (right), labeled as Subject (S), Relation (R) or Mixed (M).
Studying a large set of counterfactual attributes, and splitting by attention source token let’s us
disentangle these head types. We plot DLA on the attribute a, and for the mean of the top 5 attributes
in the set R but excluding a, both split by attention source token (SUBJECT vs RELATION). All three
head types emerge.


 E.3                                                   R ELATIVE M ECHANISM I MPORTANCE

We consider here several measures of importance among the various mechanisms.
Fraction of heads in each class. The fraction of heads in each of (subject/relation/mixed) is one
possible measure of importance. This varies depending on the choice of subject and relation. See
Figure 3 for two examples. There, we see the split of (subject, relation, mixed) among the top 10
heads for the relation “plays the sport of” is (2, 1, 7), but for “is in the country of” it is (4, 2, 4).
Inspecting the top 10 heads by DLA for each example in the entire dataset we find 37% of heads get


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   20
                       Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  relation                          baseline loss         subject percent change                  relation percent change               mixed percent change loss                  mlp percent change
  PLAYS_SPORT                                  0.68                               16.71                                   254.31                                   345.56                             483.11
  IN_COUNTRY                                   0.51                              250.29                                   710.23                                   375.23                             207.43
  CAPITAL_CITY                                 1.41                               67.38                                   206.48                                    90.53                             222.64
  LEAGUE_CALLED                                1.58                              170.37                                    97.31                                   185.97                             104.80
  PROFESSOR_AT                                 0.62                              127.90                                   503.27                                    78.52                             714.40
  PRIMARY_MACRO                                1.60                              190.55                                    10.92                                    69.08                             189.48
  PRODUCT_BY                                   0.75                              112.21                                   578.38                                   145.64                             249.04
  FROM_COUNTRY                                 1.16                              196.88                                   234.61                                   101.40                             255.63

                               Table 5: Percent change in loss when ablating the direct path to logits of each component.



                       categorised as subject heads and 33% as relation heads, with the remaining 30% as mixed heads.
                       This indicates all three head types are important for the task.
                       Logit contribution. The contribution to logits is another possible choice of metric. Figure 2 visualises
                       this – we can qualitatively see that all three head types are important. We may analyse the percentage
                       of the final (mean centered) logit contributed from each component type, across the entire dataset.
                       We omitted several negatively suppressive components for the purpose of this analysis. Again, we
                       see that the contributions from each type of mechanism is important. Subject heads contribute 18%,
                       relation heads 24%, mixed heads 27%, and the mlp layers 30%, across the entire dataset.
                       Ablations. Naive ablations have been noted in prior work to be counteracted by self-repair in the
                       factual recall set up, a phenomenon known as the hydra effect (?). We therefore followed the approach
                       of (Wang et al., 2022), and performed edge patching - ablating the direct path term between model
                       components and logits. We present in Table 5 baseline loss, together with the loss after knocking out
                       one of the four model mechanisms. Each loss reported is aggregated over the relation dataset. We see
                       knocking out any individual component significantly harms loss in each case.


                       E.4        S UBJECT H EADS


subject            L21H9 PLAYS SPORT           L16H20         PLAYS      L22H17           PLAYS        L17H2 IN COUNTRY            L16H12 IN COUNTRY          L17H17 IN COUNTRY          L18H14 PROFESSOR
                                               SPORT                     SPORT                                                                                                           AT

Michael Jordan     basketball, shooting,       Basketball, basketball,   basketball, Basketball,       USA,      US,     Amer-                                Jordan, Jordan, ordan,     Chicago, Chicago, Illi-
                   shoot, Basketball, shot,    NBA                       NBA, basket, ho, asket-       ica, American, USA,                                    Nile                       nois
                   Shot, shoots                                          ball                          Chicago, Americans
David Beckham      Soccer, soccer, football,   Soccer, soccer, FIFA,                                   London, UK, England,
                   Football, Football, foot-   MLS                                                     British, London, Britain,
                   ballers, Soc                                                                        English
Roger Federer      tennis                      singles, ATP, tourna-     court, final, final, court,   Switzerland,      Swiss,    Swiss
                                               ment, tournaments, ten-   courts, Rac, serve            global, global
                                               nis
Stephen Hawking                                                                                        England, Britain, Lon-                                                            Cambridge, Cambridge,
                                                                                                       don, British, Brit, Eng-                                                          calculation, mathematic
                                                                                                       land, UK
Niels Bohr         energies, ATP, energy                                                                                           Swedish,       Sweden,     r                          Philosophy
                                                                                                                                   Swed, Å, Danish
The Colosseum      fight                                                                               Italy, Rome, Roman,         Italy, Italian, Italian,   Italy, Italian, Italian,
                                                                                                       Romans, Italian, Ital,      Rome, Ital, Milan          Rome, Ital, Roma
                                                                                                       Italian
The Taj Mahal                                                                                          India, Indian                                          Indian, Indian, Indians,
                                                                                                                                                              Pakistani, India, India,
                                                                                                                                                              Shah
The Eiffel Tower                                                                                       Paris, Paris, France,       France, Paris
                                                                                                       France, London, Lon-
                                                                                                       don


                       Table 6: Using head OV circuits as probes acting on the enriched subject representation’s final token
                       residual stream elicits interpretable attributes in the head category C as the top few DLA tokens. We
                       include the relation for which the head is a subject head for in the column titles. We only include
                       attributes the head is sufficiently confident about (> 1%). For instance, applying the head L21H9
                       to sports players usually elicits their sport. Applying it to The Colosseum elicits fight, and with
                       lower confidence boxing, which falls within the same category.


                                                                                                       21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                   1
                                                                                           L21H9
                                                                                           L22H17
                                                                                           L17H2
                                                  0.8                                      L16H12


                          attention to relation
                                                  0.6


                                                  0.4


                                                  0.2


                                                   0
                                                    0   0.2      0.4        0.6      0.8            1
                                                              attention to subject


Figure 14: Attention scores of several subject heads on prompts with subject Michael Jordan with
a range of different relations, pertaining to sport, country, language, etc. We see several interesting
attention patterns. L22H17 attends quite uniformly to the subject here, while other subject heads have
more variable attention patterns.


In Figure 14 we analyze the attention patterns of several subject heads, across a range of prompts
with a single fixed subject s, but different relationships r. We see significant attention to SUBJECT
no matter what prompt is given, i.e. these heads often extract attributes irrelevant to the relationship.
We find several kinds of interesting attention pattern. (1) Heads that always attend to the subject with
very high probability, independent of the relationship given in the prompt (e.g. Layer 22 Head 17
(L22H17)), for basketball players). This correlates with the attributes this head extracts, only the sport
of basketball, no other sports. Notably, this head does not have as high attention on non-basketball
sports players. (2a) Heads that pay variable attention to the subject, in a mostly uninterpretable way.
(2b) Heads paying variable attention to the subject, in an interpretable fashion, dependent on the
prompt (e.g. L17H2, which attends more if the prompt requests a country or city). These latter heads,
by virtue of attending from END to SUBJECT can only be influenced by the relation on the query side.
This is an instance of query composition Elhage et al. (2021), as suggested by Geva et al. (2023a).
We however note this mechanism is relatively unimportant among the studied examples – we only
found a handful of instances of this, all of which related to country attributes.


E.5   R ELATION H EADS


In this section, we provide further results on relation heads.


                                                                       22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E.5.1                              R ELATION HEADS PULL OUT MANY ATTRIBUTES IN THE SET R.


                                                                                              L13H31 AR=138.62                                1                                                              L13H31 AR=650.78
                    0.6                                                                       L14H24 AR=13.73                                                                                                L18H20 AR=12.09
                                                                                              L14H5 AR=15.86                                                                                                 L14H24 AR=35.86
                                                                                                                                             0.8
                                                                                              L18H9 AR=10.21                                                                                                 L23H12 AR=3.62
                    0.4                                                                       L26H17 AR=7.77                                                                                                 L14H29 AR=7.25
                                                                                                                                             0.6
DLA on Attribute


                                                                                                                         DLA on Attribute


                    0.2
                                                                                                                                             0.4



                     0
                                                                                                                                             0.2


                   −0.2                                                                                                                       0


                                                                                                                                            −0.2
                   −0.4



                          tennis   soccer   cricket basketball   golf   volleyball baseball   hockey gymnastics rugby                              England   France   Italy   Finland Germany Norway   USA   Ireland Australia Canada
                                                                 Attribute                                                                                                              Attribute



Figure 15: Relationship heads pull out many attributes consistently across a range different subjects
for prompts with relationship plays the sport of and is in the country of. The error
bars are standard deviation over subjects, and them beings small suggests that these heads do not
meaningfully depend on the subject. We also include the mean attention ratio of to RELATION over
SUBJECT for each head.


                                                                                                                        23
          Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


          E.5.2         R ELATION HEADS PRIMARY FUNCTION IS OFTEN TO BOOST ATTRIBUTES IN THE SET R.

prompt                                                      most important relation head                                          second most important relation head

Fact: Michael Jordan plays the sport of                     games (0), roles (1), role (2), genres (3), soccer (5), tennis (8),   football (2), Football (5), chess (8), Wrestling (9), baseball
                                                            sport (9), Role (10), lite (12), football (13), genre (14), ballet    (14), opera (16), football (17), switch (18), JavaScript (19),
                                                            (16), cricket (18), disciplines (21), athlet (23), games (26),        tennis (22), Football (26), JavaScript (31), guitar (34)
                                                            violin (27), basketball (30), bass (31), biology (33), sports
                                                            (34), afers (35), music (37), slots (40), slot (41), battles (42),
                                                            golf (43), Wrestling (46), volley (49)
Fact: The Eiffel Tower is in the country of                 territory (0), territories (1), countries (2), country (3), Eng-      abroad (0), country (1), countries (2), overseas (3), country
                                                            land (4), Kingdom (5), States (6), Region (7), Netherlands            (4), international (5), internationally (6), international (7),
                                                            (8), province (9), France (10), region (11), Province (12),           Country (8), expatri (9), foreigners (10), expatriate (11), for-
                                                            regions (13), place (14), Germany (15), provinces (16), Fin-          eign (12), France (13), national (15), national (16), France
                                                            land (17), Italy (18), Region (19), Norway (20), states (21),         (17), país (18), nationality (19), Country (20), nation (21),
                                                            America (22), area (23), Britain (24), Spain (25), States (26),       nations (22), export (23), Germany (24), foreign (25), nation-
                                                            Territory (27), USA (28), regions (29), Sweden (30), region           als (26), Germany (27), países (28), passport (29), exported
                                                            (31), Ireland (32), northern (33), country (34), Australia (35),      (30), International (31), visa (32), England (33), Interna-
                                                            Denmark (36), Canada (37), land (38), Arabia (39), place              tional (34), USA (35), embassy (36), Foreign (37), visas
                                                            (41), France (42), England (43), kingdom (44), areas (45),            (38), USA (39), travel (40), Foreign (41), Switzerland (42),
                                                            area (46), realm (47), Switzerland (48), homeland (49)                England (43), extrad (44), UK (45), Europe (47), travel (48),
                                                                                                                                  Belgium (49)
Fact: England has the capital city of                       city (0), cities (1), city (2), City (3), City (4), metropolitan      cities (0), towns (1), Cities (2), city (3), town (4), hometown
                                                            (5), urban (6), London (7), Cities (8), street (9), CITY (10),        (5), city (6), municipalities (7), town (8), City (9), CITY
                                                            London (11), streets (12), Mayor (13), municipal (14), NYC            (10), City (11), locations (12), metropolitan (13), Town (14),
                                                            (15), street (16), downtown (17), urban (18), Metropolitan            villages (15), Town (16), locations (17), ville (18), location
                                                            (19), metro (20), mayor (21), Municipal (22), Street (23),            (19), location (20), stown (21), centres (22), places (23),
                                                            Paris (24), nationwide (25), Urban (26), borough (27), ciudad         Sites (24), London (25), destinations (27), headquarters (28),
                                                            (28), Paris (29), Delhi (30), town (31), Metro (32), hometown         neighborhoods (29), capital (30), localities (31), metro (32),
                                                            (33), Dublin (34), suburbs (35), overseas (36), regional (37),        London (33), place (34), centers (35), sites (36), downtown
                                                            Mumbai (38), Street (39), Downtown (40), residents (41),              (37), sites (38), Location (39), located (40), Place (41), re-
                                                            Amsterdam (42), Philadelphia (43), capital (44), Chicago              gions (42), counties (43), venues (44), ports (45), develop
                                                            (45), Edinburgh (46), abroad (47), national (48), Madrid (49)         (46), ciudad (47), ville (48), apolis (49)
Fact: Michael Jordan plays in the league called the         bas (0), Draft (1), draft (4), NBA (6), fil (8), drafting (9), bas    player (0), players (1), league (2), championship (3), stadium
                                                            (10), draft (11), drafted (12), offseason (15), fil (16), MLB         (4), club (5), NFL (6), franchise (7), team (8), player (9),
                                                            (29), NHL (32), preseason (36), Steelers (41), cent (42), (49)        teams (10), clubs (11), NBA (12), fans (13), coaches (14),
                                                                                                                                  football (15), game (16), coach (17), soccer (18), coaching
                                                                                                                                  (19), Players (20), teammates (21), franch (22), leagues (23),
                                                                                                                                  squad (24), athletes (25), referee (26), training (27), athlete
                                                                                                                                  (28), games (29), hockey (30), tournament (31), basketball
                                                                                                                                  (32), team (33), Stadium (34), championships (35), rookie
                                                                                                                                  (36), Championship (37), baseball (38), ESPN (39), injury
                                                                                                                                  (40), preseason (41), club (42), competitive (43), roster (44),
                                                                                                                                  season (45), NCAA (46), teammate (47), Player (48),
Fact: Stephen Hawking is a professor at the university of   University (0), university (1), universities (2), University (3),
                                                            College (4), UK (5), Academic (6), UK (8), college (9), col-
                                                            leges (10), College (11), England (12), institute (13), ’s (14),
                                                            Univers (15), ’ (16), Institute (17), itself (18), British (19),
                                                            Univers (20), UCLA (21), Cambridge (22), Faculty (23), in-
                                                            stitution (25), Zealand (26), undergraduate (27), Britain (28),
                                                            Academy (29), (30), academy (31), Yale (32), academic (34),
                                                            England (35), Cambridge (36), overrightarrow (39), Harvard
                                                            (40), Enum (41), Oxford (42), achus (43), professors (44),
                                                            Ireland (45), School (47), Scotland (48), $’ (49)
Fact: Chicken has the primary macronutrient of              nutrients (0), nutrient (1), nutrition (2), dietary (3), vitamins     Quantity (0), iv (1), olean (2), carbon (3), leen (6), Judaism
                                                            (4), nutritional (5), sugars (6), carbohydrates (7), glucose (8),     (7), rice (9), organic (15), beef (25),electrons (42),
                                                            protein (9), carbohydrate (10), energy (11), proteins (12),
                                                            calories (13), iron (14), minerals (15), amino (16), vitamin
                                                            (17), metabolic (18), metabolism (19), Nutrition (20), Diet
                                                            (21), Protein (22), diet (23), diets (24), nutrients (25), lipids
                                                            (26), Vitamin (27), Energy (28), fatty (29), sugar (30), in-
                                                            sulin (31), calcium (32), energy (33), lipid (34), Energy (35),
                                                            protein (36), fats (37), nutrition (38), metabol (39), phospho-
                                                            rus (40), Proteins (41), Iron (42), carot (43), Protein (44),
                                                            glucose (45), iron (46), selenium (47), collagen (48), fat (49)


          Table 7: Some of the top few DLA tokens for the top two relation heads corresponding to a range
          of relations. Manually sampled relevant words from the top 50 output tokens, together with rank in
          brackets. There are many interesting things to note. For example, the top relation head for plays
          the sport of extracts both sports, as well as other things one can play - the category C of this
          head is wider than just sports.


          E.5.3         R ELATION HEADS ( MOSTLY ) DO NOT HAVE SIGNIFICANT INDIRECT EFFECT DEPENDENT
                        ON THE SUBJECT.

          We perform patching experiments where we patch the subject between two prompts with the same
          relationship on the top 5 relation head outputs, and measure the difference in performance. We find
          that for some relationships, performance is invariant. If the relation heads causally depended on
          specific features of the subject, we would expect to see a large decrease in performance.


                                                                                            24
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                                                                               0


                                         10
                                                                                                                                             −0.5

post-patched to-logit minus from-logit
                                          8                                                                                                   −1


                                                                                                                      post-patched logprob
                                                                                                                                             −1.5
                                          6


                                                                                                                                              −2

                                          4

                                                                                                                                             −2.5

                                          2
                                                                                                                                              −3


                                          0                                                                                                  −3.5



                                                                                                                                              −4
                                         −2
                                                  0        2          4         6          8           10        12                                     −3.5   −3          −2.5    −2      −1.5       −1        −0.5   0
                                                          pre-patched to-logit minus from-logit                                                                               pre-patched logprob



Figure 16: We patch the top 5 relation heads outputs for prompts with relation plays the sport
of between different subjects to study the indirect effect of relation heads. For this relationship,
we see that on average, performance does not increase for both a logit-diff between to-logit and
from-logit (left) and logprob based (right) metric. The gray line indicates no change.

                                                                                                                                                    p                       gp      p             p        p
                                         12
post-patched to-logit minus from-logit


                                                                                                                                             −0.2
                                         10
                                                                                                                      post-patched logprob


                                          8                                                                                                  −0.4


                                          6
                                                                                                                                             −0.6



                                          4
                                                                                                                                             −0.8


                                          2

                                                                                                                                              −1

                                          0

                                              0       2         4          6         8            10        12                                          −1          −0.8          −0.6        −0.4             −0.2
                                                          pre-patched to-logit minus from-logit                                                                               pre-patched logprob



Figure 17: We patch the top 5 relation heads outputs for prompts of form is in the country
of between different subjects to study the indirect effect of relation heads. We see that on average,
logprob does not decrease, but logit difference between the to-logit and from-logit decrease slightly.
We generally see that patching improves performance on low probability outputs. This suggests the
model has some ‘confidence’ feature that gets modified through patching. The gray line indicates no
change.

E.5.4                                             S UBJECT-R ELATION P ROPAGATION
In Pythia-2.8b, we found that relation heads generally did not privilege the correct attribute a
among the set R. When investigating a larger Pythia 6.9B model, we observed relation heads
frequently extract the correct attribute whilst attending only to RELATION, for a variety of different
subject/attributes. For example, with s plays the sport of prompts, we found attention head
L26H6 can extract basketball when given Michael Jordan as the subject, and soccer when
given David Beckham as the subject.
We hypothesize that there are two mechanisms here. Firstly some subject head attends from sport
to the subject, and propagates facts (including the sport and other facts about the subject). Then the
relationship head L26H6 receives both a large number of sports from the usual mechanism, but also a
boosted correct sport that was already moved to the same place in the sport residual stream.
We verified this hypothesis through ‘attention-knockout’, zero-ablating all attention from RELATION
to SUBJECT. This resulted in head L26H6 instead of extracting a consistent set of sports regardless of
the player, and not privileging the correct attribute a. This head remains the most important relation
head by DLA for a variety of plays the sport of prompts.


                                                                                                                  25
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


The general takeaway from this finding is that our set of mechanisms, may not be completely
universal (Olah et al., 2020) across model scale, and we should expect larger models to implement
more sophisticated circuits.

E.6     M IXED H EADS

E.6.1    I NSPECTING SORTED DLA
To illustrate the facts extracted by a selection of mixed heads and prompts, we investigate DLA by
source token, for all vocab tokens.
We note that for some heads C ≈ R, i.e. the head’s category of specialization is similar to the rela-
tionship r that is being investigated. For example, we show in Table 11 that L22H15 is specialized to
the categories of sport and communication, which overlaps significantly with the plays the sport
of prompts. Similarly L23H22 was found to be a countries and languages extractor, overlapping
significantly with the is in the country of prompts. With these heads, the correct attribute is
consistently one of the top tokens from SUBJECT, and high but not top from RELATION.
In many cases there is less overlap between C and R. For example L17H30 appears to specialize
in "players/things that can be played". This head does have the correct attribute for plays the
sport of prompts in the top tokens for the subject, but it gives a higher DLA for more generic
terms that also could reasonably fit within C ∩ S and C ∩ R (e.g. player and team). Understanding
the category of head specialization is therefore useful in interpreting this type of mixed head.


                                                 26
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  head     prompt                 subject                   relation                 total

  L22H15   Fact: Michael Jordan   0. basketball (0.397)     0. games (1.082)         0. basketball (1.427)
           plays the sport of     1. football (0.354)       1. basketball (1.026)    1. games (1.354)
                                  2. sports (0.344)         2. sports (0.990)        2. sports (1.340)
                                  3. soccer (0.336)         3. game (0.987)          3. game (1.267)
                                  4. footballers (0.327)    4. sport (0.948)         4. sport (1.264)
  L22H15   Fact: Mike Trout       0. baseball (0.522)       0. games (0.610)         0. baseball (1.127)
           plays the sport of     1. Baseball (0.447)       1. baseball (0.603)      1. players (0.992)
                                  2. MLB (0.434)            2. players (0.602)       2. sports (0.988)
                                  3. teammates (0.401)      3. Players (0.597)       3. Players (0.971)
                                  4. sports (0.388)         4. player (0.593)        4. player (0.957)
  L22H15   Fact: Tom Brady        0. football (0.893)       0. football (0.561)      0. football (1.456)
           plays the sport of     1. Football (0.810)       1. games (0.546)         1. Football (1.313)
                                  2. NFL (0.806)            2. players (0.522)       2. Football (1.305)
                                  3. Football (0.792)       3. player (0.518)        3. football (1.292)
                                  4. football (0.792)       4. Football (0.514)      4. NFL (1.198)
  L17H30   Fact: Michael Jordan   0. games (0.355)          0. players (1.371)       0. players (1.716)
           plays the sport of     1. players (0.352)        1. player (1.330)        1. player (1.663)
                                  2. player (0.338)         2. play (1.315)          2. play (1.596)
                                  ...                       ...                      ...
                                  23. basketball (0.233)    43. basketball (0.550)   34. basketball (0.782)
  L17H30   Fact: Mike Trout       0. players (0.229)        0. players (1.300)       0. players (1.513)
           plays the sport of     1. player (0.216)         1. player (1.260)        1. player (1.463)
                                  2. teams (0.187)          2. play (1.200)          2. play (1.333)
                                  3. games (0.185)          ...                      ...
                                  4. baseball (0.179)       55. baseball (0.488)     42. baseball (0.661)
  L17H30   Fact: Tom Brady        0. players (0.265)        0. players (1.428)       0. players (1.684)
           plays the sport of     1. player (0.247)         1. player (1.397)        1. player (1.638)
                                  2. Players (0.241)        2. play (1.365)          2. play (1.591)
                                  ...                       ...                      ...
                                  10. football (0.214)      31. football (0.692)     28. football (0.902)
  L18H25   Fact: Michael Jordan   0. skating (0.246)        0. sport (0.198)         0. skating (0.405)
           plays the sport of     1. skate (0.210)          1. Sport (0.192)         1. skate (0.354)
                                  2. Stadium (0.182)        2. tennis (0.184)        2. sport (0.331)
                                  ...                       ...                      ...
                                  9. basketball (0.151)     58. basketball (0.107)   19. basketball (0.257)
  L18H25   Fact: Mike Trout       0. Golf (0.045)           0. Sport (0.081)         0. Golf (0.097)
           plays the sport of     1. leaf (0.038)           1. sport (0.080)         1. Track (0.093)
                                  2. golf (0.037)           2. skiing (0.077)        2. golf (0.093)
                                  ...                       ...                      ...
                                  274. baseball (0.016)     129. baseball (0.036)    29. baseball (0.062)
  L18H25   Fact: Tom Brady        0. Formula (0.009)        0. Sport (0.333)         0. Sport (0.323)
           plays the sport of     1. luggage (0.008)        1. sport (0.327)         1. sport (0.315)
                                  2. Stadium (0.008)        2. skiing (0.308)        2. sports (0.304)
                                  ...                       ...                      ...
                                  646. football (0.004)     102. football (0.160)    70. football (0.168)
  L23H22   Fact: The Colosseum    0. Italy (0.960)          0. Italy (0.304)         0. Italy (1.257)
           is in the country of   1. Italian (0.954)        1. Italian (0.232)       1. Italian (1.179)
                                  2. Italian (0.914)        2. Ital (0.222)          2. Italian (1.125)
                                  3. Ital (0.860)           3. Rome (0.220)          3. Ital (1.076)
                                  4. Rome (0.722)           4. Italian (0.216)       4. Rome (0.938)
  L23H22   Fact:    The Eiffel    0. French (1.229)         0. France (0.416)        0. France (1.589)
           Tower is in the        1. France (1.176)         1. France (0.364)        1. French (1.531)
           country of             2. French (1.111)         2. Paris (0.347)         2. Paris (1.427)
                                  3. Paris (1.081)          3. French (0.305)        3. France (1.394)
                                  4. France (1.031)         4. Paris (0.300)         4. French (1.371)
  L23H22   Fact: The Taj Mahal    0. India (0.863)          0. India (0.248)         0. India (1.106)
           is in the country of   1. India (0.795)          1. Pakistan (0.223)      1. India (1.010)
                                  2. Indian (0.734)         2. India (0.219)         2. Pakistan (0.907)
                                  3. Pakistan (0.684)       3. istan (0.199)         3. Indian (0.851)
                                  4. Indian (0.645)         4. Arabia (0.198)        4. Indian (0.737)
  L26H8    Fact: The Colosseum    0. Rome (1.110)           0. Italian (0.109)       0. Rome (1.206)
           is in the country of   1. Italy (0.963)          1. Italy (0.109)         1. Italy (1.072)
                                  2. Italian (0.962)        2. Italian (0.106)       2. Italian (1.071)
                                  3. Italian (0.918)        3. Ital (0.099)          3. Italian (1.024)
                                  4. Ital (0.911)           4. Rome (0.095)          4. Ital (1.010)
  L26H8    Fact:    The Eiffel    0. French (1.953)         0. French (0.095)        0. French (2.048)
           Tower is in the        1. Paris (1.952)          1. French (0.090)        1. Paris (2.038)
           country of             2. Paris (1.845)          2. France (0.086)        2. Paris (1.926)
                                  3. French (1.829)         3. Paris (0.086)         3. French (1.919)
                                  4. France (1.815)         4. Paris (0.081)         4. France (1.901)
  L26H8    Fact: The Taj Mahal    0. Paris (0.211)          0. Spanish (0.007)       0. Paris (0.208)
           is in the country of   1. French (0.205)         1. Spain (0.007)         1. Paris (0.196)
                                  2. Paris (0.198)          2. Spain (0.007)         2. French (0.194)
                                  3. French (0.194)         3. Barcelona (0.007)     3. France (0.191)
                                  4. France (0.190)         4. Portuguese (0.007)    4. French (0.189)


Table 8: Sorted DLA over all vocab tokens, broken down by source tokens (SUBJECT or RELATION).
We note that for mixed heads where C ≈ R such as L22H15 (a head with a specialized category of
sports), the correct attribute is consistently one of the top tokens from SUBJECT, and high but not
top from RELATION. By contrast, for mixed heads with slightly different specializations, the correct
attribute is high but not top from both SUBJECT and RELATION.


                                                           27
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E.6.2                                                   S UBJECT-R ELATION P ROPAGATION WITH M IXED H EADS

In order to provide a clear distinction between the attributes extracted in the SUBJECT and RELATION
tokens, we also investigated knocking out attention from all baring the last RELATION tokens to
SUBJECT. This prevents the correct attribute from having already been moved into earlier RELATION
tokens.
We find that the DLA from the relation tokens increases significantly, which demonstrates that some
information about the subject had already propagated to earlier RELATION tokens. By isolating this
effect through attention knockout, we confirm that mixed heads where C ≈ R regularly result in the
attribute being the top token from SUBJECT and near, but not at, the top from RELATION.


                                    Head                            Prompt                                                                                                                          Subject                     Relation (Without Knockout)                                                                                   Relation (With Knockout)                                                                  Relation Change

                                    L22H15                          Fact: Michael Jordan plays the sport of                                                                                              0                                                                                                           1                                                                                        0                          -1
                                    L22H15                          Fact: Mike Trout plays the sport of                                                                                                  0                                                                                                           1                                                                                        3                          +2
                                    L22H15                          Fact: Tom Brady plays the sport of                                                                                                   0                                                                                                           0                                                                                        9                          +9
                                    L17H30                          Fact: Michael Jordan plays the sport of                                                                                             23                                                                                                          43                                                                                       52                          +9
                                    L17H30                          Fact: Mike Trout plays the sport of                                                                                                  4                                                                                                          55                                                                                      139                          +84
                                    L17H30                          Fact: Tom Brady plays the sport of                                                                                                   7                                                                                                          31                                                                                       37                          +6
                                    L18H25                          Fact: Michael Jordan plays the sport of                                                                                              9                                                                                                          58                                                                                       60                          +2
                                    L18H25                          Fact: Mike Trout plays the sport of                                                                                                277                                                                                                         129                                                                                       84                          -45
                                    L18H25                          Fact: Tom Brady plays the sport of                                                                                                 550                                                                                                         102                                                                                       93                          -9
                                    L23H22                          Fact: The Colosseum is in the country of                                                                                             0                                                                                                           0                                                                                       15                          +15
                                    L23H22                          Fact: The Eiffel Tower is in the country of                                                                                          1                                                                                                           0                                                                                        0                          0
                                    L23H22                          Fact: The Taj Mahal is in the country of                                                                                             0                                                                                                           0                                                                                        0                          0
                                    L26H8                           Fact: The Colosseum is in the country of                                                                                             1                                                                                                           1                                                                                        3                          +2
                                    L26H8                           Fact: The Eiffel Tower is in the country of                                                                                          4                                                                                                           2                                                                                        2                          0
                                    L26H8                           Fact: The Taj Mahal is in the country of                                                                                         22630                                                                                                       22594                                                                                    25454                          +2860
                                    L21H23                          Fact: The Colosseum is in the country of                                                                                            62                                                                                                           0                                                                                       77                          +77
                                    L21H23                          Fact: The Eiffel Tower is in the country of                                                                                         33                                                                                                           2                                                                                        4                          +2
                                    L21H23                          Fact: The Taj Mahal is in the country of                                                                                             1                                                                                                           2                                                                                        2                          0

                                    Mean                                                                                                                                                                  1311                                                                                                          1278                                                                                    1446                     +167


Table 9: The rank of the correct attribute from RELATION increases when we knock out attention
from earlier RELATION tokens to SUBJECT. This suggests significant subject-relation propagation
otherwise occurs of the correct fact.


E.7                                              MLP S

E.7.1                                                   ATTRIBUTES IN R ARE CONSISTENTLY BOOSTED BY MLP S


                                9                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          10

                                8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           DLA (sum over all MLP layers)
DLA (sum over all MLP layers)


                                7                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           8


                                6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            6
                                5


                                4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            4

                                3


                                2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           2

                                1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0
                                0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Budapest

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Oslo

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Copenhagen

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Vienna

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Dublin

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Auckland

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Warsaw

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Sydney

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Mumbai

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Melbourne

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Amsterdam

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Buenos Aires

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Istanbul

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Tokyo

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Stockholm

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Lisbon

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Jakarta

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Toronto

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Bangkok

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Hong Kong
                                    Cambodia

                                               Peru

                                                      Estonia

                                                                Albania

                                                                          Afghanistan

                                                                                        Nepal

                                                                                                Poland

                                                                                                         Bulgaria

                                                                                                                    Algeria

                                                                                                                               Lebanon

                                                                                                                                         Bangladesh

                                                                                                                                                      Jamaica

                                                                                                                                                                Ethiopia

                                                                                                                                                                           Kenya

                                                                                                                                                                                   Morocco

                                                                                                                                                                                             Iraq

                                                                                                                                                                                                    Austria

                                                                                                                                                                                                              Qatar

                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Finland

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Romania


                                                                                                                              Attribute                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Attribute



Figure 18: Many attributes in R are boosted by MLPs over a range of prompts with relations in the
country of (left) and has capital city (right), independent of which subject is given. Error
bars are standard deviation over different subjects, which are small. This suggests the direct effect of
the MLP does not causally depend on the subject.



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          28
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E.7.2                                               T HE PRIMARY DIRECT EFFECT OF MLP S IS OFTEN TO BOOST MANY ATTRIBUTES IN
                                                    THE SET R.


                                          Prompt                                                      Top MLP Logit Lens Tokens

                                          Fact: Michael Jordan plays the sport of                     Wrest (0), squash (1), skiing (4), lineback (11), surfing (12), rugby (13), Rugby (14), volley (15),
                                                                                                      Running (17), boxing (21), Baseball (22), cricket (27), Floor (28), cycling (29), shooting (30),
                                                                                                      Mixed (31), gardening (32), Golf (34), Forward (35) swimming (39), bridge (40), coward (42),
                                                                                                      paddle (43), impat (44), CLUDE (45), ping (46), escaping (47), contacting (48), flag (49)
                                          Fact: The Eiffel Tower is in the country of                 Niger (0), Burk (1), Georgia (2), Aust (3), Eston (4), Zimbabwe (5), Utt (6), Gren (7), Trin (8),
                                                                                                      Haiti (9), Lithuan (10), Guatemala (11), Lub (12), Hond (13), Liber (14), Equ (15), Bangladesh
                                                                                                      (16), Yug (17), Tun (18), Ly (19), Belf (20), Myanmar (21), Kenya (22), Hawai (23), Nepal
                                                                                                      (24), Sen (25), Ecuador (26), Yemen (27), Iraq (28), Cambodia (29), Chin (30), Afghanistan
                                                                                                      (31), Turk (32), Chad (33), Somalia (34), Alaska (35), Continuous (36), Tanzania (37), Sloven
                                                                                                      (38), Peru (39), Idaho (40), Bul (41), Aqu (42), Albany (43), fered (44), Norfolk (45), Byz (46),
                                                                                                      Kazakh (47), Tuc (48), Bulgaria (49)
                                          Fact: Stephen Hawking is a professor at the university of   Adelaide (0), Cape (5), Alaska (6), Cinc (7), Cincinnati (8), Hawai (12), Manchester (13), Manit
                                                                                                      (21), Cam (22), fered (23), Chester (24), Chel (25), Gib (26), icago (28), Manila (29), Sussex
                                                                                                      (31), Minn (33), Buenos (40), Ald (41), Ald (42), Malta (45), Calgary (46), Leicester (48)
                                          Fact: England has the capital city of                       Budapest (0), Oslo (1), Birmingham (2), Belfast (3), Cincinnati (4), Constantin (5), Sask
                                                                                                      (6), Manchester (7), Lancaster (8), Kingston (9), Vienna (10), Malta (11), Copenhagen (12),
                                                                                                      Guatemala (13), Byz (14), Fuk (15), Chester (16), Brighton (17), Ottawa (18), Trin (19), Helsinki
                                                                                                      (20), Sacramento (21), Adelaide (22), Omaha (23), Winnipeg (24), Lah (25), Newcastle (26),
                                                                                                      Mumbai (27), Concord (28), Manila (29), Prague (30), Warsaw (31), Newport (32), Lans (33),
                                                                                                      Hartford (34), Rochester (35), Glasgow (36), Bulgaria (37), Card (38), Pret (39), Derby (40),
                                                                                                      Richmond (41), Windsor (42), Buenos (43), Calgary (44), Leeds (45), Dublin (46), Tun (47),
                                                                                                      Lok (48), Hull (49), Jak (50)



Table 10: Top DLA tokens on the sum of all MLP layers tend to be attributes in the set R. Rank is
included in brackets. Often, they are attributes we did not pragmatically check through inclusion in
our dataset sets S and R. For instance, our set R for is in the country of did not include the
country of Burkina Faso, which is the rank 1 attribute pushed for by the MLP for the prompt The
Eiffel Tower is in the country of. The correct attribute a is not privileged among these,
and is often quite low in rank.


MLPs on END (mostly) do not have significant indirect effect dependent on the subject.

                                         12                                                                                                     0
post-patched to-logit minus from-logit


                                         10

                                                                                                                                               −1
                                          8
                                                                                                                        post-patched logprob


                                          6
                                                                                                                                               −2


                                          4


                                                                                                                                               −3
                                          2



                                          0
                                                                                                                                               −4

                                         −2


                                                                                                                                               −5
                                         −4
                                                     0          2          4            6       8       10         12                               −3.5   −3   −2.5        −2      −1.5     −1   −0.5   0
                                                              pre-patched to-logit minus from-logit                                                                    pre-patched logprob



Figure 19: We patch the all MLP outputs on END for prompts of form plays the sport of
between different subjects to study the indirect effect of MLPS on the END token. For this relationship,
we see that on average, performance does not increase for both a logit-diff between to-logit and
from-logit (left) and logprob based (right) metric. The grey line indicates no change.


Note that, for some relations, the MLP does have significant indirect effect. We do not explain these
cases, instead opting to only explain part of the function of the MLP through it’s direct effect.

E.8                                             C ATEGORY I DENTIFICATION

Here we try to better understand head categories, by inspecting the top head DLA tokens on a wider
distribution of factual recall prompts. We looked at top DLA tokens extracted from 10,000 randomly
selected prompts from the CounterFact dataset (Meng et al., 2023a). A summary of some of these


                                                                                                                     29
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


are included below for the top 3 Subject, Relation and Mixed heads. We find that head categories are
not quite aligned with S or R – heads are polysemantic (Elhage et al., 2022).
In Section 3.2, we saw the relation head L13H31 responded to both sports an countries. It may do
this because it appears to be specialized to locations/position/places, and most sports are also the start
of places (e.g. basketball can be the sport or the first token in basketball stadium.
We also note that some heads misfire, extracting irrelevant attributes, as well as relevant ones. L18H25
appears to be specialized to the category of transport and consumables. However, this head is the
8th most important mixed head across the plays the sport of and is in the country of
prompts (by DLA). Upon investigation we believe this is due to there being some cross-over between
sports and transport words, such as Golf (a car brand and also a sport), swimming (a means of
traveling and also a sport) and track (a railway track and also the sport of track and field).

 Head      Type       Theorized Categories         Top 50 Tokens

 L13H31    Relation   Location, positioning,       locations, location, places, cities, place, towns, locate, sites, languages, positions, located, spots, position, hometown,
                      places                       spot, locating, where, continents, loc, placement, territory, professions, city, states, site, town, headquarters, anywhere,
                                                   kingdom, countries, municipalities, metropolitan, wherever, roles, regions, country, territories, vicinity, camps, venues,
                                                   venue, centers, placed, destinations, france, residence, placing, finland, island, positioning
 L14H24    Relation   Location, direction, lan-    locations, location, anywhere, places, loc, located, wherever, somewhere, downtown, place, placement, english, regions,
                      guages                       nearby, east, everywhere, vicinity, positions, geographical, localization, north, zones, situated, languages, nearest,
                                                   southeast, locating, localities, sites, geographic, northeast, elsewhere, placed, south, locate, northwest, language,
                                                   proximity, locality, geography, locale, nearer, point, spots, outside, areas, travels, hebrew, centralized, centers
 L17H2     Subject    International relations,     france, french, paris, european, international, europeans, europe, german, germany, public, germans, london, global, eu,
                      politics                     england, uk, british, translated, franc, fran, worldwide, britain, monsieur, eur, europ, us, translations, globally, translation,
                                                   internationally, euro, franois, brit, translate, translator, russian, europa, europea, deutsch, russia, montreal, philippe,
                                                   publicly, canada, russians, translating, canadian, berlin, jacques, english
 L17H17    Subject    Countries, ethnicities,      arizona, alabama, ariz, tamil, indian, kerala, india, nigeria, japanese, pakistan, az, nigerian, japan, ala, pakistani, phoenix,
                      politicians                  seoul, poland, greek, ari, indians, italy, polish, tokyo, istanbul, delhi, athens, birmingham, punjab, cyprus, greece, turkish,
                                                   italian, turkey, hindu, niger, venice, lebanese, hawaiian, tampa, warsaw, turk, sic, hawaii, pak, ital, greeks, mumbai,
                                                   abama, tuc
 L18H20    Relation   Places, diplomacy            countries, city, country, nations, international, globally, diplomatic, abroad, worldwide, global, diplomats, ads, europe,
                                                   internationally, nation, governor, continents, campus, france, legislators, treaty, street, legislative, foreigners, diplomacy,
                                                   cities, european, overseas, ticket, national, expatri, diplomat, attendees, pases, foreign, capitol, germany, delegates, asia,
                                                   conference, nationals, student, expatriate, globe, americas, downtown, students, eur, faculty, australia
 L21H9     Subject    Hedonism,       wealth,      stock, wrest, beer, tennis, wrestling, coffee, gun, beers, brewery, soccer, brew, tenn, drink, atp, stocks, football, drunk,
                      sport, violence              guns, fighters, drank, fighter, drinking, alcohol, shooting, footballers, drinks, golf, firearm, drunken, shoot, wwe, fight,
                                                   fifa, alcoholic, beverage, brewing, play, firearms, bullets, nra, vince, caffeine, shooter, mma, starbucks, fighting, train,
                                                   beverages, shot, liquor
 L22H15    Mixed      Communication, sports        television, tv, games, football, soccer, broadcast, game, sports, broadcasting, players, sport, fifa, player, broadcasts,
                                                   basketball, radio, payment, hockey, baseball, footballers, tournament, tennis, league, tele, sporting, rugby, gamers, espn,
                                                   athletes, gaming, footballer, tournaments, athlet, payments, cameras, internet, playing, watches, athletic, camera, cricket,
                                                   stadium, play, athlete, aired, nfl, golf, advertising, gameplay, storage
 L23H22    Mixed      Countries,    languages,     chinese, china, greek, japanese, japan, beijing, french, russian, italian, spanish, france, mexican, italy, greece, russia,
                      ethnicity                    tokyo, greeks, shanghai, russians, finnish, ital, mexico, mex, german, spani, latino, dutch, germany, portuguese, moscow,
                                                   cyprus, taiwan, brazilian, spain, soviet, ukrainian, germans, swedish, brazil, quebec, guang, hispanic, zhang, jiang,
                                                   norwegian, ukraine, korean, paris, qing, belgian
 L26H8     Mixed      Places, culture, universi-   van, dutch, von, las, brazilian, los, filip, french, la, portuguese, han, brazil, hait, france, mexican, lap, italian, mexico,
                      ties                         paris, mex, portugal, louis, philippine, spanish, ital, chile, italy, sierra, spain, holland, manila, louisiana, netherlands, so,
                                                   philippines, jean, monsieur, portug, argentine, barcelona, spani, rio, ucla, argentina, lisbon, haiti, pierre, madrid, brasil,
                                                   buenos



Table 11: For a selection of important heads, we display the top 50 tokens that they output (by
maximum DLA) from a broader data set with 10,000 prompts. We also include hand written
categories that the head specializes in, based on human evaluation of the top 500 tokens that they
output. We note that subject, relation and mixed attention heads all seem to specialize to just a few
categories.


F       ATTENTION H EAD S UPERPOSITION
Our initial motivation for studying the factual recall set up was to find real world examples of attention
head superposition (Jermyn et al., 2023). In this section, we explain this motivation.
In mechanistic interpretability, we wish to explain the behavior of neural networks through under-
standing the representations and algorithms implemented in weights and activations. This requires a
notion of the ‘fundamental units’ of networks. It is a reasonable place to start to investigate the natural
structures we find in networks. In some cases, this seems very reasonable: non linear activations
produce a privileged basis in the space of neuron activations, which could result in feature representa-
tions being aligned to the neuron basis, and individual neurons being interpretable. Unfortunately,
we find that neurons are often polysemantic, encoding many different features. We hypothesize
this occurs due to superposition: the network is incentivized to encode more features than it has


                                                                           30
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


dimensions. It seems like the correct place to look for features is not in the neurons, but as directions
in the neuron activation space. Through a similar argument, we also expect that the residual stream of
a transformer stores features in superposition, which is termed bottleneck superposition. Much work
is being put into the problem of ‘solving’ superposition, and finding meaningful, interpretable and
sparsely activating directions in activation space (Cunningham et al., 2023).
A natural further question to ask is, where else are we studying the wrong fundamental units? In
language model interpretability, we often care about localising the computational graph of particular
behaviors. This often initially consists of a set of attention heads and MLP layers that “matter” for
a given task. But are attention heads themselves the correct unit of study? We know neurons are
not, is it possible that attention heads are also not? We have reason to believe the network may try
to introduce compression in attention heads themselves. We should expect that models may use a
mechanism like this to implement many more behaviors than they have heads. It is possible that each
head is individually polysemantic, and implements several distinct behaviors, but in any given context
a specific subset of heads work together, attend to the same place, and the output is the residual stream
times the weighted sum of their OV matrices. Is there meaningful structure on the set of (n_layers *
n_heads) attention heads? Can we productively think of attention heads as being in superposition
in certain contexts? This idea was first introduced by Jermyn et al. (2023), who suggested attention
head superposition as a phenomena, and thought they had found a toy example of it, which they later
thought was not quite attention head superposition.
There is some evidence in LLMs for attention head superposition – we often find many heads that
seem to be doing the same thing on some sub-distribution. For instance, why are there often several
induction heads? In the IOI circuit (Wang et al., 2022), why are there several name mover heads? Can
these be productively thought of as a single superposed name mover head? This could additionally
explain why negative name mover heads exist. The heads should only be thought of as a single
coherent unit, rather than the model learning a real circuit (name movers) and learning a weird
anti-circuit (negative name movers) on top.
Here is a theoretical example of head superposition. Say, we have 2 heads X and Y that extract
3 different things (depending on the context) A, B, C. X activations in contexts A and B, giving
+A+2B-2C. Y activates for A and C, giving A-2B+2C. Then, in the A context X+Y = 2A, in the
B context X+Y = A+2B-2C, and in the C context X+Y = A-2B+2C, and this works. We have
compressed 3 tasks into 2 heads. If the “relation propagation” hypothesis of Geva et al. (2023a)
were the primary story behind factual recall, factual recall may be a good place to hunt for attention
head superposition. Models likely know many more kinds of facts than they have heads, and so may
could use heads in combination to extract the correct fact. We however found that models did not use
enough relation propagation for this theoretical picture to hold up. Nevertheless, finding examples of
attention head superposition is still an interesting future direction.


                                                   31
