Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C OMPOSE AND C ONQUER : D IFFUSION -BASED 3D
D EPTH AWARE C OMPOSABLE I MAGE S YNTHESIS
 Jonghyun Lee1,2∗ , Hansam Cho1,2 , Youngjoon Yoo2 , Seoung Bum Kim1† , Yonghyun Jeong2†
 1
   Korea University, 2 NAVER Cloud
 {tomtom1103, chosam95, sbkim1}@korea.ac.kr
 {youngjoon.yoo,yonghyun.jeong}@navercorp.com


            (a) Foreground/Background object ordering. Samples are generated via two depth maps (top left, bottom left)
                       of foreground and background objects, with each object faithfully occluding each other.


                     (b) Localized global semantic injection. Given two exemplar images (top left, bottom left),
                         semantics of each image are injected onto a localized area in a disentangled manner.


              (c) Composition with Foreground/Background depth maps and global semantics. By mix & matching
                  depth maps and exemplar images, CnC generates samples with localized local & global conditions.

Figure 1: Compose and Conquer is able to localize both local and global conditions in a 3D depth
aware manner. For details on the figure, see Section 1.

                                                         A BSTRACT
            Addressing the limitations of text as a source of accurate layout representation
            in text-conditional diffusion models, many works incorporate additional signals
            to condition certain attributes within a generated image. Although successful,
            previous works do not account for the specific localization of said attributes ex-
            tended into the three dimensional plane. In this context, we present a conditional
            diffusion model that integrates control over three-dimensional object placement
            with disentangled representations of global stylistic semantics from multiple ex-
            emplar images. Specifically, we first introduce depth disentanglement training to
            leverage the relative depth of objects as an estimator, allowing the model to iden-
            tify the absolute positions of unseen objects through the use of synthetic image
            triplets. We also introduce soft guidance, a method for imposing global semantics
            onto targeted regions without the use of any additional localization cues. Our in-
            tegrated framework, C OMPOSE AND C ONQUER (C N C), unifies these techniques
            to localize multiple conditions in a disentangled manner. We demonstrate that our
            approach allows perception of objects at varying depths while offering a versatile
            framework for composing localized objects with different global semantics.
   *
       First Author. Work done during an internship at NAVER Cloud.
  †
       Corresponding Co-Authors.


                                                                  1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


1   I NTRODUCTION
Following the recent progress in text-conditional diffusion models (Rombach et al., 2022; Ramesh
et al., 2022; Saharia et al., 2022; Nichol et al., 2021), many subsequent studies have emerged to
address their inherent limitation in accurately representing the global layout of generated images.
These follow-up works enrich the text-based conditioning capabilities of diffusion models by in-
corporating additional conditions such as segmentation maps (Zeng et al., 2023; Goel et al., 2023),
depth maps (Zhang & Agrawala, 2023; Mou et al., 2023), bounding boxes (Li et al., 2023), and in-
painting masks (Yang et al., 2023). These modifications effectively retain the extensive knowledge
encapsulated in the pretrained priors.
Despite these advancements, two primary challenges persist in the current literature. Firstly, while
existing models are efficient in generating an object under locally constrained conditions like depth
maps and bounding boxes, which inherently capture structural attributes, they confine the genera-
tive space to a two-dimensional plane. This limitation makes them less adept at handling object
placement within a three-dimensional (3D) or z-axis (depth) perspective, and hence vulnerable to
generating images without properly reflecting the depth-aware placement of multiple objects. Sec-
ondly, the issue of applying global conditions, such as style and semantics, from multiple image
sources to specific regions of the target image in a controlled manner has yet to be resolved.
To address the existing limitations on local and global conditions and also enhance the capabilities
of image generation models, we introduce C OMPOSE AND C ONQUER (CnC). Our proposed CnC
consists of two building blocks: a local fuser and global fuser designed to tackle each problem.
First, the local fuser operates with a new training paradigm called depth disentanglement training
(DDT) to let our model understand how multiple objects should be placed in relation to each other
in a 3D space. DDT distills information about the relative placement of salient objects to the local
fuser by extracting depth maps from synthetic image triplets, originally introduced in the field of
image composition. Second, the global fuser employs a method termed soft guidance, which aids
our model in localizing global conditions without any explicit structural signals. Soft guidance
selectively masks out regions of the similarity matrix of cross-attention layers that attend to the
specific regions of each salient object.
Figure 1 demonstrates the main capabilities of our model trained on DDT and soft guidance. In
Figure 1(a), DDT lets our model infer relative depth associations of multiple objects within one
image, and generates objects that are placed in different depths of the z-axis with foreground objects
effectively occluding other objects. In Figure 1(b), we show that by applying soft guidance, our
model can localize global semantics in a disentangled manner. By utilizing the local and global
fuser simultaneously as demonstrated in Figure 1(c), our model gives users the ability to compose
multiple localized objects with different global semantics injected into each localized area, providing
a vast degree of creative freedom.
We quantitatively evaluate our model against other baseline models and gauge the fidelity of sam-
ples and robustness to multiple input conditions, and demonstrate that our model substantially out-
performs other models on various metrics. We also evaluate our model in terms of reconstruction
ability, and the ability to order objects into different relative depths. We shed light onto the use
of DDT, where we demonstrate that DDT dissipates the need to provide additional viewpoints of a
scene to infer the relative depth placement of objects. Furthermore, we show that soft guidance not
only enables our model to inject global semantics onto localized areas, but also prevents different
semantics from bleeding into other regions.
Our contributions are summarized as follows:
       • We propose depth disentanglement training (DDT), a new training paradigm that facilitates
         a model’s understanding of the 3D relative positioning of multiple objects.
       • We introduce soft guidance, a technique that allows for the localization of global condi-
         tions without requiring explicit structural cues, thereby providing a unique mechanism for
         imposing global semantics onto specific image regions.
       • By combining these two propositions, we present C OMPOSE AND C ONQUER (CnC), a
         framework that augments text-conditional diffusion models with enhanced control over
         three-dimensional object placement and injection of global semantics onto localized re-
         gions.


                                                  2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


2     R ELATED W ORK
Conditional Diffusion Models. Diffusion models (DMs) (Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015; Ho et al.,
2020) are generative latent variable models that are trained to reverse a forward process that grad-
ually transforms a target data distribution into a known prior. Proving highly effective in its ability
to generate samples in an unconditional manner, many following works (Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021;
Ho et al., 2022; Nichol et al., 2021; Rombach et al., 2022; Ramesh et al., 2022) formulate the diffu-
sion process to take in a specific condition to generate corresponding images. Out of said models,
Rombach et al. (2022) proposes LDM, a latent text-conditional DM that utilizes an autoencoder, ef-
fectively reducing the computational complexity of generation while achieving high-fidelity results.
LDMs, more commonly known as Stable Diffusion, is one of the most potent diffusion models open
to the research community. LDMs utilize a twofold approach, where an encoder maps x to its latent
representation z, and proceeds denoising z in a much lower, memory-friendly dimension. Once
fully denoised, a decoder maps z to the original image dimension, effectively generating a sample.

Beyond Text Conditions. While text-conditional DMs enable creatives to use free-form prompts,
text as the sole condition has limitations. Namely, text-conditional DMs struggles with localiz-
ing objects and certain semantic concepts with text alone, because text prompts of large web-scale
datasets used to train said models (Schuhmann et al., 2021) do not provide explicit localized de-
scriptions and/or semantic information. Addressing this limitation, many works have introduced
methods to incorporate additional conditional signals to the models while preserving its powerful
prior, e.g. freezing the model while training an additional module. Among these models, ControlNet
(Zhang & Agrawala, 2023) and T2I-Adapter (Mou et al., 2023) train additional modules that incor-
porate modalities such as depth maps and canny edge images to aid generation of localized objects.
However, these models only support a single condition, lacking the ability to condition multiple
signals or objects. Taking inspiration from ControlNet, Uni-ControlNet (Zhao et al., 2023) extends
its framework to accept multiple local conditions and a single global condition at once. Whereas the
works detailed above all leverage Stable Diffusion as a source of their priors, Composer (Huang
et al., 2023) operates in the pixel-space. Although being able to process multiple conditions at once,
both Composer and Uni-ControlNet struggle in processing incompatible conditions, or conditions
that overlap with each other. They also do not provide methods to localize global semantics onto
a localized region. In contrast, our approach directly addresses these challenges by proposing two
novel methods, depth disentanglement training and soft guidance, which enables the composition of
multiple local/global conditions onto localized regions.

3     M ETHODOLOGY: C OMPOSE AND C ONQUER
The architecture illustrated in Figure 2 shows the overall framework of our proposed method. CnC
consists of a local fuser, a global fuser, and components of a pretrained text-conditional DM. Our
local fuser captures the relative z-axis placements of images through depth maps, and our global
fuser imposes global semantics from CLIP image embeddings (Radford et al., 2021) on specified
regions. Explanations of the local and global fuser are detailed below.
3.1   G ENERATIVE P RIOR U TILIZATION

In line with earlier studies that incorporate additional condition signals (Li et al., 2023; Mou et al.,
2023; Zhang & Agrawala, 2023; Zhao et al., 2023), we use the LDM variant known as Stable
Diffusion (SD) as our source of prior. Specifically, SD utilizes a UNet (Ronneberger et al., 2015) like
structure, where noisy latent features consecutively pass through 12 spatial downsampling blocks,
one center block C, and 12 spatial upsampling blocks. Each block consists of either a ResNet (He
et al., 2016) block or Transformer (Vaswani et al., 2017) block, and for brevity, we respectively refer
to each group of the 12 blocks as the encoder E and decoder D. Inspired by ControlNet Zhang &
Agrawala (2023) and Uni-ControlNet Zhao et al. (2023), the Stable Diffusion architecture is utilized
twofold in our model, where we first freeze the full model and clone a trainable copy of the encoder
and center block, denoted E ′ and C ′ . We initialize the weights of the full model from SD, and the
weights of E ′ and C ′ from Uni-ControlNet. The cloned encoder E ′ and center block C ′ receives
localized signals from our local fuser, which acts as the starting point of our model. We detail our
model architecture, methodologies of the two building blocks and corresponding training paradigms
in the section below.


                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                           Local Fuser
                                                              Extracted Features
                         Fg.
                                                                                   [
                                                          [
                       Stream                                                                                         √
   Depth
                                     Extraction                                                          S ′ = (QK T / d) ⊗ M ′
                                       Layer                                                                      ⎡                ⎤
   Maps                                                                                                            1     ...    1
                         Bg.                                                           Convolution
                                                                                                                  ⎢ ..
                                                                                                                  ⎣.     ..
                                                                                                                            .
                                                                                                                                .. ⎥
                                                                                                                                 .⎦
                       Stream                                                                                      1     ...    1
                                                                                       Self-Attention
                                                                                                                         J             ϕ(M ) 1 − ϕ(M )
                                                                                       Cross-Attention
                              Fg.
                            Stream                                                                                                       0   1
    CLIP
   Image
                                                                        E′                 C′
 Embeddings                   Bg.
                            Stream                                                                        Q              1               1   0
                           Global Fuser
      zt                                                                                                                                 0   1
                                                                                                                         …

                                 concat(           …                           ) = yfull                                          K
      M                                           ytext       yfg       ybg


Figure 2: Model Architecture. Our model consists of a local fuser, a global fuser, and the cloned
encoder/center block {E ′ , C ′ }. The input depth maps are fed into the local fuser, producing four
latent representations of different spatial resolutions, which are incorporated into E ′ . The CLIP
image embeddings are fed into the global fuser, producing 2 extra tokens to be concatenated with the
text token embeddings. Masks M are flattened and repeated to produce M ′ = concat(J, φ(M ), 1 −
φ(M )), which serves as a source of soft guidance of the cross-attention layers.


3.2        L OCAL F USER
We first provide details on our local fuser, which incorporates depth maps extracted form a pretrained
monocular depth estimation network (Ranftl et al., 2020) as our local condition. Specifically, our
local fuser serves as a source of localized signals that are incorporated into the frozen SD blocks.
We also provide details on depth disentanglement training, and how synthetic image triplets are
leveraged as sources of relative depth placements of objects.

Synthetic Image Triplets. For a model to be able to represent overlapping objects with varied
scopes of depth during inference, the model needs to learn to recognize different elements obscured
by objects during training. Although straightforward in a 3D world, informing a model about objects
that are occluded by another in a 2D image is non-trivial, due to the fact that once the image is
captured, any spatial information about objects behind it is forever lost. To overcome this limitation,
we first adopt a process utilized in image composition (Fang et al., 2019) to generate synthetic image
triplets, which serves as training samples for our depth disentanglement training (DDT), detailed in
the next section. The synthetic image triplets {If , Ib , M } are derived from a single source image
Is ∈ RH×W ×3 , and is composed of the foreground image If ∈ RH×W ×3 , the background image
Ib ∈ RH×W ×3 , and a binary foreground object mask M ∈ {0, 1}H×W . The foreground image
If is derived using the Hadamard product of If = Is ⊗ M , leaving just the salient object of Is .
To generate Ib , we utilize Stable Diffusion’s inpainting module (Rombach et al., 2022). This is
achieved by inpainting the result of Is ⊗ (1 − M̃ ), where M̃ is the binary dilated M . Conceptually,
this process can be thought of as inpainting the depiction of Is without its salient object, effectively
letting our model see behind it. For details on this choice, see appendix A.2.

Depth Disentanglement Training. Once the synthetic image triplets {If , Ib , M } are prepared,
we proceed to extract the depth maps of If and Ib to train our local fuser, which we refer to as
depth disentanglement training (DDT). Our local fuser incorporates these two depth maps, which
passes through its own individual stream consisting of ResNet blocks, and are concatenated along
its channel dimension. Apart from previous works that directly fuse different local conditions before
entering a network, DDT first process each depth map of If and Ib in their own independent layers.
Reminiscent of early and late fusion methodologies of salient object detection (Zhou et al., 2021),
we consider DDT a variant of late fusion, where the network first distinguishes each representation
in a disentangled manner. Once concatenated, features containing spatial information about objects


                                                                        4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


(a) A beautiful dessert waiting to be shared by two people   (b) Diamond Minecraft block facing frontwards   (c) Cat knight, portrait, finely detailed armor, intricate
                                                                        on a green background                         design, silver, silk, cinematic lighting



Figure 3: Depth disentanglement training. Our model trained on DDT (Left) successfully rec-
ognizes that objects portrayed by the foreground depth map (Top left) should be placed closer that
the background depth map (Bottom left), and fully occludes objects that are larger. On the other
hand, when trained on just the depth maps of Is (Right), our model struggles to disentangle the
depth maps, resulting in either objects becoming fused (samples (a), (c)) or completely ignoring the
foreground object (sample (b)).

in varying depths are extracted along different resolutions by an extraction layer. These features are
then incorporated into the cloned and frozen SD blocks, which we provide additional details in our
appendix A.2. We formulate DDT to train our model because to represent overlapping objects with
varied depths during inference, the model needs to recognize the elements obscured by the salient
object. By providing our model with an explicit depth representation of what lies behind the salient
object—albeit synthetic—, our model is able to effectively distinguish the relative depths of multiple
objects. Figure 3 demonstrates the effect of training our model with DDT compared to training our
model on depth maps of Is , as done in previous works. Even though that our local fuser was trained
on depth maps that convey only the relative depth associations between the foreground salient object
and background depth maps, we find that our model extends to localizing different salient objects.

3.3      G LOBAL F USER
While our local fuser incorporates depth maps as a source of relative object placements, our global
fuser leverages soft guidance to localize global semantics onto specific regions. We use image em-
beddings derived from the CLIP image encoder (Radford et al., 2021) as our global semantic condi-
tion. This choice is informed by the training methodology of SD, which is designed to incorporate
text embeddings from its contrastively trained counterpart, the CLIP text encoder. The text em-
beddings ytext are integrated into the intermediate SD blocks through a cross-attention mechanism.
In this setup, the text embeddings serve as the context for keys and values, while the intermediate
noised latents act as the queries. Although prior works (Nichol et al., 2021; Ramesh et al., 2022;
Huang et al., 2023) have merged CLIP image embeddings with text embeddings within the cross-
attention layers of the DM, this approach lacks the provision of spatial grounding information. As a
result, the global semantics are conditioned on the entire generated image, lacking precise localiza-
tion capabilities. To overcome this limitation, our method leverages the binary foreground mask M
used to extract If in our synthetic image triplet.

Soft Guidance. In detail, we first project the image embeddings of Is and Ib using our global
fuser, which consists of stacked feedforward layers. The global fuser consists of separate fore-
ground/background streams, where each image embedding is projected and reshaped to N global
tokens each, resulting in yfg and ybg . Unlike our local fuser module, our global fuser doesn’t fuse
each stream within the feedforward layers. We instead choose to concatenate yfg and ybg directly
to ytext , where the extended context yfull = concat(ytext , λfg yfg , λbg ybg ) is utilized in the cross-
attention layers of our cloned and frozen modules. λfg and λbg denotes scalar hyperparameters that
control the weight of each token, which are set√ to 1 during training. In the cross-attention layers, the
similarity matrix S is given by S = (QK T / d) with Q = WQ · zt and K = WK · yfull , where zt
is a noised variant of z with the diffusion forward process applied t steps.
Once S is calculated, we apply soft guidance by first creating a Boolean matrix M ′ , which has the
same dimensionality of S. Given that S ∈ Ri×j , M ′ is defined as M ′ = concat(J, φ(M ), 1 −
φ(M )), where J ∈ 1i×j−2N denotes an all ones matrix, φ(M ) ∈ Bi×N denotes the reshaped,
flattened and repeated boolean mask M , and 1 − φ(M ) denotes the complement of φ(M ) of the
same shape. By overriding S with the Hadamard product S ′ = S ⊗ M ′ , the attention operation
softmax(S ′ ) · V is completed. Intuitively, soft guidance can be thought of as masking out parts of


                                                                                 5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


S where zt should not be attending to, e.g. forcing the cross-attention computations of yfg and ybg
to be performed only on its corresponding flattened values of zt . We find that by letting the tokens
of ytext attend to the whole latent and restricting the extra tokens, generated samples are able to stay
true to their text conditions while also reflecting the conditioned global semantics in their localized
areas, even though that spatial information of M is forfeited.

3.4   T RAINING
LDMs are optimized in a noise-prediction manner, utilizing a variation of the reweighted variational
lower bound on q(x0 ), first proposed by Ho et al. (2020). We extend this formulation and optimize
our model with Eq. 1 to learn the conditional distribution of p(z|y), where y denotes the set of
our conditions of depthmaps and image embeddings accompanied with CLIP text embeddings. As
mentioned above, we freeze the initial SD model while jointly optimizing the weights of the cloned
encoder E ′ , center block C ′ , and the local/globalh fuser modules, denoted ias θ′ .
                                                                               2
                         min
                          ′
                             L = Ez,ϵ∼N (0,I),t        ϵ − ϵ{θ,θ′ } (zt , t, y) 2                   (1)
                           θ



4     E XPERIMENTS
4.1   E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP
Datasets. Our synthetic image triplets If , Ib , M are generated from two distinct datasets: COCO-
Stuff (Caesar et al., 2018) and Pick-a-Pic (Kirstain et al., 2023). We refer the readers to Section 4.3
for our reasoning behind this choice. The COCO-Stuff dataset, with 164K images, has pixel-wise
annotations classifying objects into “things” (well-defined shapes) and “stuff” (background regions).
We leverage the fact that objects in the things category can be seen as the salient object, and create
M by setting each pixel of the indexed mask to 1 if it belongs to either one of the 80 things classes,
and 0 otherwise. Text prompts are randomly chosen from five available for each image. The Pick-
a-Pic dataset contains 584K synthetic image-text pairs generated by SD and its variants, and was
collected as an effort to train a preference scoring model. Each text prompt is paired with two
generated images, and holds a label denoting the preferred image in terms of fidelity and semantic
alignment to the given prompt. By only keep the preferred image and filtering out inappropriate
content, we end up with 138K image-text pairs. Because Pick-a-Pic doesn’t hold ground truth labels
for the salient object unlike COCO-Stuff, we utilize a salient object detection module (Qin et al.,
2020) to generate M . Combining these two datasets, we generate 302K synthetic image triplets
{If , Ib , M } through the process detailed in Section 3.2.

Implementation Details. For depth map representations, we utilize a monocular depth estimation
network (Ranftl et al., 2020), and the CLIP image encoder (Radford et al., 2021) for global semantic
conditions. Although formulated as a single model, we empirically find that training the local and
global fuser independently, and finetuning the combined weights lead to faster convergence. During
training, images are resized and center cropped to a resolution of 512 × 512. We train our local
fuser with the cloned E ′ and C ′ for 28 epochs, our global fuser for 24 epochs, and finetune the full
model for 9 epochs, all with a batch size of 32 across 8 NVIDIA V100s. During training, we set
an independent dropout probability for each condition to ensure that our model learns to generalize
various combinations. For our evaluation, we employ DDIM (Song et al., 2020) sampling with 50
steps, and a CFG (Ho & Salimans, 2021) scale of 7 to generate images of 768 × 768.

4.2   E VALUATION
Qualitative Evaluation. We demonstrate the results of our method compared to other baseline
models that incorporate either depth maps as a local condition, CLIP image embeddings as a global
condition, or both. The baseline models are listed in Table 1. GLIGEN (Li et al., 2023) and Con-
trolNet (Zhang & Agrawala, 2023) are trained to accept a single depth map as a local condition.
Uni-ControlNet (Zhao et al., 2023) and T2I-Adapter (Mou et al., 2023) are trained to accept a depth
map and an exemplar image as a source of CLIP image embeddings. In Figure 4, we show quali-
tative results of our model compared to models that accept both depth maps and exemplar images
as a source of global semantics. Since our model accepts two depth maps and two exemplar im-
ages, note that we condition the same images for each modality in Figure 4. While other models


                                                   6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


     Input
    Depth
  /Semantics


   Uni-
 ControlNet


   T2I-
  Adapter


 CnC (Ours)


   Prompt        German home by          Bioluminescent   A green glass bottle   Beautiful dancing      Animal made of          Coastal village
               the lake, trees, boats,    mushrooms                                  unicorns        scrap metal, auto parts,
                  glass windows                                                                            and flowers

Figure 4: Samples compared to other baseline models. Compared to others, CnC strikes a balance
between the given depth maps, exemplar images, and text prompts.
                                             DepthSemantics              Depth+Semantics
   Model/Condition
                                  CLIP                      CLIP                     CLIP
                  FID (↓) IS (↑)           FID (↓) IS (↑)           FID (↓) IS(↑)
                                 Score (↑)                Score (↑)                Score (↑)
      GLIGEN      18.887 29.602 25.815        -      -        -        -       -        -
     ControlNet   17.303 31.652 25.741        -      -        -        -       -        -
   Uni-ControlNet 19.277 31.287 25.620 23.632 28.364 24.096 18.945 28.218 24.839
    T2I-Adapter   20.949 31.485 26.736 35.812 23.254 23.666 30.611 23.938 24.579
        CnC       19.804 27.555 25.211 35.178 21.932 22.161 21.318 25.421 24.659
   CnC Finetuned 22.257 27.981 26.870 17.254 32.131 25.940 18.191 29.304 25.880

Table 1: Evaluation metrics on the COCO-Stuff val-set. We omit the results of semantics and
depth+semantics on GLIGEN and ControlNet due to the models not supporting these conditions.
Best results are in bold.

do grasp the ideas of each condition, it can be seen that our model exceeds in finding a balance
between the structural information provided by the depth maps and semantic information provided
by exemplar images and text prompts. Taking the first column as an example, Uni-ControlNet of-
ten fails to incorporate the global semantics, while T2I-Adapter often overconditions the semantics
from the exemplar image, ignoring textual cues such as “lake” or “boats”. Our approach adeptly
interweaves these aspects, accurately reflecting global semantics while also emphasizing text-driven
details and structural information provided by depth maps. For additional qualitative results, we
refer the readers to Figure 5.

Quantitative Evaluation. As our baseline metrics, we utilize FID (Heusel et al., 2017) and Incep-
tion Score (Salimans et al., 2016) to evaluate the quality of generated images, and CLIPScore (Hessel
et al., 2021) to evaluate the semantic alignment of the generated images to its text prompts. Table 1
reports the results evaluated on 5K images of the COCO-Stuff validation set. It can be seen that
while our model with the local and global fuser trained independently and joined during inference
(CnC, for brevity) shows adequate performance, our finetuned model excels in most metrics, except
for FID and IS of our depth-only experiment. This may be attributed to the fact that while baseline
models only take in a single depth map extracted from the validation image, our model takes in an
additional depth map with inpainted regions that may not reflect the prior distribution of the dataset.
The fact that our model has to process depth maps of conflicting localization information is another
possible explanation. Though all models report similar CLIPScores, given their shared generative
prior of SD, our finetuned model excels when generating from just an exemplar image, thanks to the
integration of soft guidance. We conclude that our finetuned model achieves substantial performance


                                                                         7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   A statue of a borzoi dog      A mythical mannequin dancing in the forest         Sailboat, oil painting                  A plate of pasta


      A portrait of a man                    Dramatic turtles flying             A statue of an adorable cat                A Photo of a raven


   A statue of a dog in a Greco roman hall                A giant dog in front of a pavilion                          A magician bunny
 Figure 5: Qualitative Results. Foreground/background conditions are on the left of each sample.

 Ground Truth      CnC (Ours)       Uni-ControlNet       T2I-Adapter           Ground Truth         CnC (Ours)       Uni-ControlNet      T2I-Adapter


                              COCO-Stuff                                                                       Pick-a-Pic
Figure 6: Qualitative reconstruction comparison. Samples are generated using conditions ex-
tracted from validation samples of COCO-Stuff (Left) and Pick-a-Pic (Right).

due to its additional finetuning phase, which enables the fusers to better adapt and understand each
other’s conditioning processes. See Section A.3 for results on the Pick-a-Pic validation set.
Reconstruction. We additionally report quantitative reconstruction metrics evaluated on COCO-
Stuff and Pick-a-Pic validation sets, listed in Table 2. For reconstruction, our model utilizes the
depth maps and CLIP image embeddings extracted from the image triplets of ground truth validation
images, and baseline models utilize the depth maps and CLIP image embeddings extracted from
the ground truth images, since they do not support more than one condition per modality. We
adopt LPIPS (Zhang et al., 2018) as our metric of perceptual similarity and SSIM (Wang et al.,
2004) as our metric of structural similarity. We also report the MAE of ground truth depth maps
and the depth maps extracted from its generated counterpart as an additional measure of structural
similarity, extended to the z-axis. Apart from the SSIM value of COCO-Stuff, we find that our model
outperforms other models by a large margin. As seen in Figure 6, we find that our model is able to
faithfully recreate objects in different localized areas while preserving its depth of field. While other
baseline models succeed in localizing objects, they struggle in synthesizing the depth perspective,
resulting in images looking relatively flat.
Ablation Study. The phenomenon known as concept bleeding (Podell et al., 2023) leads to dif-
ferent semantics to overlap with each other, resulting in unintentional results. Soft guidance allows


                                                                          8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


              Model/Condition        COCO-Stuff               Pick-a-Pic
                             SSIM(↑) LPIPS(↓) MAE(↓) SSIM(↑) LPIPS(↓) MAE(↓)
              Uni-ControlNet 0.2362    0.6539   0.1061 0.2506   0.6504   0.1111
               T2I-Adapter    0.1907   0.6806   0.1201 0.2238   0.6724   0.1270
                  CnC         0.2345   0.6621   0.1061 0.2436   0.6431   0.1080
              CnC Finetuned 0.2248     0.6509   0.0990 0.2690   0.6216   0.1027
    Table 2: Quantitative reconstruction metrics evaluated on COCO-Stuff and Pick-a-Pic val-sets.
                                                                                                   λfg
                                1.0           1.0             1.0            1.0             1.0


                                0.0           0.5             1.0            1.5             2.0
                                                                                                   λbg

Figure 7: The effect of soft guidance with conflicting semantics. We condition the same depth map
for each stream in the local fuser, and generate each sample with the prompt “An Igloo”. By fixing
λfg and increasing λbg , the effect of the background global semantics substantially increases. Soft
guidance prevents the two global semantics from bleeding into each other, e.g. concept bleeding,
effectively maintaining the semantics of the igloo.

global semantics to be conditioned onto localized regions while preventing this undesirable effect.
Figure 7 demonstrates this capability, where two contradicting semantics are localized. By fixing
λfg to 1 and steadily increasing λbg , the effects of the background semantics are amplified. However,
due to soft guidance, even as the background semantics intensify, the contradicting semantic of the
foreground object stays intact. Even though spatial information of M is lost during soft guidance, we
find that it faithfully creates a barrier for any semantics from bleeding in. For additional ablations,
see Section A.4.

4.3    D ISCUSSIONS
Dataset Choices. As mentioned in Section 4.1, the two datasets we employ to train our model are
very different from another. Namely, images in COCO-Stuff include everyday scenes while images
in Pick-a-Pic are fundamentally synthetic, being generated by variants of SD from prompts that
transcend any description of real life scenarios. This design choice is intentional: we first point to
the fact that most of our baseline models are trained on variants of MS-COCO (Lin et al., 2014).
These models show that training only on real images as a method to introduce new conditions are
adequate, but Kirstain et al. (2023) and Podell et al. (2023) report that COCO zero-shot FID is
negatively correlated with human preferences and visual aesthetics of generated images. Although
images from COCO and its variants do serve its purpose on introducing new conditions, we argue
that leveraging another dataset that aligns with the learnt prior of pretrained DMs provides a safety
net from prior drifting. By harnessing the detailed ground truth pixel-wise annotations of COCO-
Stuff and letting our model learn additional representations from its original prior provided by Pick-
a-Pic, we take advantage of the best of both worlds; providing a robust posterior of conditions while
staying true to the user-preferred prior of DMs.

5     C ONCLUSION & L IMITATIONS
We presented Compose and Conquer (CnC), a novel text-conditional diffusion model addressing two
main challenges in the field: three-dimensional placement of multiple objects and region-specific lo-
calization of global semantics from multiple sources. CnC employs two main components: the local
and global fuser, which respectively leverages the new Depth Disentanglement Training (DDT) and
soft guidance techniques. We show that DDT infers the absolute depth placement of objects, and soft
guidance is able to incorporate semantics on to localized regions. Evaluations on the COCO-stuff
and Pick-a-Pic datasets illustrates CnC’s proficiency in addressing these challenges, as demonstrated
through extensive experimental results. Since the current framework limits the number of available
conditions and the disentangled spatial grounds to the foreground and background, we leave the
further decomposition of images into depth portraying primitives and the middle ground to leverage
for future work.


                                                    9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We thank the ImageVision team of NAVER Cloud for their thoughtful advice and discussions. Train-
ing and experiments were done on the Naver Smart Machine Learning (NSML) platform (Kim et al.,
2018). This study was supported by BK21 FOUR.

E THICS STATEMENT
Diffusion models, as a type of generative model, have the potential to generate synthetic content that
could be used in both beneficial and potentially harmful ways. While our work aims to advance the
understanding and capabilities of these models, we acknowledge the importance of their responsi-
ble use. We encourage practitioners to consider the broader societal implications when deploying
such models and to implement safeguards against malicious applications. Specifically, the diffusion
model we utilize as a source of prior in our work is trained on the LAION (Schuhmann et al., 2021)
dataset, a web-scraped collection. Despite the best intentions of the dataset’s creators to filter out
inappropriate data, LAION includes content that may be inappropriate for models to internalize,
such as racial stereotypes, violence, and pornography. Recognizing these challenges, we underscore
the necessity of rigorous scrutiny in using such models to prevent the perpetuation of harmful biases
and misinformation.

R EPRODUCIBILITY STATEMENT
The source code and pretrained models can be found at https://github.com/tomtom1103/compose-
and-conquer.

R EFERENCES
Holger Caesar, Jasper Uijlings, and Vittorio Ferrari. Coco-stuff: Thing and stuff classes in context.
  In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 1209–
  1218, 2018.
Prafulla Dhariwal and Alexander Nichol. Diffusion models beat gans on image synthesis. Advances
  in neural information processing systems, 34:8780–8794, 2021.
Hao-Shu Fang, Jianhua Sun, Runzhong Wang, Minghao Gou, Yong-Lu Li, and Cewu Lu. Instaboost:
  Boosting instance segmentation via probability map guided copy-pasting. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision, pp. 682–691, 2019.
Vidit Goel, Elia Peruzzo, Yifan Jiang, Dejia Xu, Nicu Sebe, Trevor Darrell, Zhangyang Wang, and
  Humphrey Shi. Pair-diffusion: Object-level image editing with structure-and-appearance paired
  diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.17546, 2023.
Ian Goodfellow, Jean Pouget-Abadie, Mehdi Mirza, Bing Xu, David Warde-Farley, Sherjil Ozair,
  Aaron Courville, and Yoshua Bengio. Generative adversarial nets. Advances in neural information
  processing systems, 27, 2014.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image recog-
  nition. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp.
  770–778, 2016.
Jack Hessel, Ari Holtzman, Maxwell Forbes, Ronan Le Bras, and Yejin Choi. Clipscore: A
  reference-free evaluation metric for image captioning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.08718, 2021.
Martin Heusel, Hubert Ramsauer, Thomas Unterthiner, Bernhard Nessler, and Sepp Hochreiter.
 Gans trained by a two time-scale update rule converge to a local nash equilibrium. Advances in
 neural information processing systems, 30, 2017.
Jonathan Ho and Tim Salimans. Classifier-free diffusion guidance. In NeurIPS 2021 Workshop on
  Deep Generative Models and Downstream Applications, 2021.


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. Advances in
  neural information processing systems, 33:6840–6851, 2020.
Jonathan Ho, Chitwan Saharia, William Chan, David J Fleet, Mohammad Norouzi, and Tim Sali-
  mans. Cascaded diffusion models for high fidelity image generation. The Journal of Machine
  Learning Research, 23(1):2249–2281, 2022.
Lianghua Huang, Di Chen, Yu Liu, Yujun Shen, Deli Zhao, and Jingren Zhou. Composer: Creative
  and controllable image synthesis with composable conditions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.09778,
  2023.
Hanjoo Kim, Minkyu Kim, Dongjoo Seo, Jinwoong Kim, Heungseok Park, Soeun Park, Hyunwoo
  Jo, KyungHyun Kim, Youngil Yang, Youngkwan Kim, et al. Nsml: Meet the mlaas platform with
  a real-world case study. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.09957, 2018.
Yuval Kirstain, Adam Polyak, Uriel Singer, Shahbuland Matiana, Joe Penna, and Omer Levy.
  Pick-a-pic: An open dataset of user preferences for text-to-image generation. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2305.01569, 2023.
Yuheng Li, Haotian Liu, Qingyang Wu, Fangzhou Mu, Jianwei Yang, Jianfeng Gao, Chunyuan Li,
  and Yong Jae Lee. Gligen: Open-set grounded text-to-image generation. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 22511–22521, 2023.
Tsung-Yi Lin, Michael Maire, Serge Belongie, James Hays, Pietro Perona, Deva Ramanan, Piotr
  Dollár, and C Lawrence Zitnick. Microsoft coco: Common objects in context. In Computer
  Vision–ECCV 2014: 13th European Conference, Zurich, Switzerland, September 6-12, 2014,
  Proceedings, Part V 13, pp. 740–755. Springer, 2014.
Chong Mou, Xintao Wang, Liangbin Xie, Jian Zhang, Zhongang Qi, Ying Shan, and Xiaohu Qie.
  T2i-adapter: Learning adapters to dig out more controllable ability for text-to-image diffusion
  models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.08453, 2023.
Alex Nichol, Prafulla Dhariwal, Aditya Ramesh, Pranav Shyam, Pamela Mishkin, Bob McGrew,
  Ilya Sutskever, and Mark Chen. Glide: Towards photorealistic image generation and editing with
  text-guided diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.10741, 2021.
Li Niu, Wenyan Cong, Liu Liu, Yan Hong, Bo Zhang, Jing Liang, and Liqing Zhang. Mak-
  ing images real again: A comprehensive survey on deep image composition. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2106.14490, 2021.
Taesung Park, Ming-Yu Liu, Ting-Chun Wang, and Jun-Yan Zhu. Semantic image synthesis with
  spatially-adaptive normalization. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision
  and pattern recognition, pp. 2337–2346, 2019.
Dustin Podell, Zion English, Kyle Lacey, Andreas Blattmann, Tim Dockhorn, Jonas Müller, Joe
  Penna, and Robin Rombach. Sdxl: Improving latent diffusion models for high-resolution image
  synthesis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.01952, 2023.
Xuebin Qin, Zichen Zhang, Chenyang Huang, Masood Dehghan, Osmar R Zaiane, and Martin
  Jagersand. U2-net: Going deeper with nested u-structure for salient object detection. Pattern
  recognition, 106:107404, 2020.
Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual
  models from natural language supervision. In International conference on machine learning, pp.
  8748–8763. PMLR, 2021.
Aditya Ramesh, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alex Nichol, Casey Chu, and Mark Chen. Hierarchical text-
  conditional image generation with clip latents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.06125, 1(2):3, 2022.
René Ranftl, Katrin Lasinger, David Hafner, Konrad Schindler, and Vladlen Koltun. Towards robust
  monocular depth estimation: Mixing datasets for zero-shot cross-dataset transfer. IEEE transac-
  tions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence, 44(3):1623–1637, 2020.


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer. High-
  resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF confer-
  ence on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 10684–10695, 2022.

Olaf Ronneberger, Philipp Fischer, and Thomas Brox. U-net: Convolutional networks for biomed-
  ical image segmentation. In Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention–
  MICCAI 2015: 18th International Conference, Munich, Germany, October 5-9, 2015, Proceed-
  ings, Part III 18, pp. 234–241. Springer, 2015.

Chitwan Saharia, William Chan, Saurabh Saxena, Lala Li, Jay Whang, Emily L Denton, Kamyar
  Ghasemipour, Raphael Gontijo Lopes, Burcu Karagol Ayan, Tim Salimans, et al. Photorealistic
  text-to-image diffusion models with deep language understanding. Advances in Neural Informa-
  tion Processing Systems, 35:36479–36494, 2022.

Tim Salimans, Ian Goodfellow, Wojciech Zaremba, Vicki Cheung, Alec Radford, and Xi Chen.
  Improved techniques for training gans. Advances in neural information processing systems, 29,
  2016.

Christoph Schuhmann, Richard Vencu, Romain Beaumont, Robert Kaczmarczyk, Clayton Mullis,
  Aarush Katta, Theo Coombes, Jenia Jitsev, and Aran Komatsuzaki. Laion-400m: Open dataset of
  clip-filtered 400 million image-text pairs. arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.02114, 2021.

Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Eric Weiss, Niru Maheswaranathan, and Surya Ganguli. Deep unsupervised
  learning using nonequilibrium thermodynamics. In International conference on machine learn-
  ing, pp. 2256–2265. PMLR, 2015.

Jiaming Song, Chenlin Meng, and Stefano Ermon. Denoising diffusion implicit models. In Interna-
   tional Conference on Learning Representations, 2020.

Yizhi Song, Zhifei Zhang, Zhe Lin, Scott Cohen, Brian Price, Jianming Zhang, Soo Ye Kim, and
  Daniel Aliaga. Objectstitch: Generative object compositing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.00932,
  2022.

Roman Suvorov, Elizaveta Logacheva, Anton Mashikhin, Anastasia Remizova, Arsenii Ashukha,
  Aleksei Silvestrov, Naejin Kong, Harshith Goka, Kiwoong Park, and Victor Lempitsky.
  Resolution-robust large mask inpainting with fourier convolutions. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE/CVF winter conference on applications of computer vision, pp. 2149–2159, 2022.

Christian Szegedy, Vincent Vanhoucke, Sergey Ioffe, Jon Shlens, and Zbigniew Wojna. Rethink-
  ing the inception architecture for computer vision. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on
  computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 2818–2826, 2016.

Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez,
  Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. Advances in neural informa-
  tion processing systems, 30, 2017.

Zhou Wang, Alan C Bovik, Hamid R Sheikh, and Eero P Simoncelli. Image quality assessment:
  from error visibility to structural similarity. IEEE transactions on image processing, 13(4):600–
  612, 2004.

Binxin Yang, Shuyang Gu, Bo Zhang, Ting Zhang, Xuejin Chen, Xiaoyan Sun, Dong Chen, and
  Fang Wen. Paint by example: Exemplar-based image editing with diffusion models. In Pro-
  ceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 18381–
  18391, 2023.

Yu Zeng, Zhe Lin, Jianming Zhang, Qing Liu, John Collomosse, Jason Kuen, and Vishal M Patel.
  Scenecomposer: Any-level semantic image synthesis. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Confer-
  ence on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 22468–22478, 2023.

Lvmin Zhang and Maneesh Agrawala. Adding conditional control to text-to-image diffusion models.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.05543, 2023.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Richard Zhang, Phillip Isola, Alexei A Efros, Eli Shechtman, and Oliver Wang. The unreasonable
  effectiveness of deep features as a perceptual metric. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on
  computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 586–595, 2018.
Shihao Zhao, Dongdong Chen, Yen-Chun Chen, Jianmin Bao, Shaozhe Hao, Lu Yuan, and Kwan-
  Yee K Wong. Uni-controlnet: All-in-one control to text-to-image diffusion models. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 2023.
Tao Zhou, Deng-Ping Fan, Ming-Ming Cheng, Jianbing Shen, and Ling Shao. Rgb-d salient object
  detection: A survey. Computational Visual Media, 7:37–69, 2021.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A     A PPENDIX

A.1    E XTENDED R ELATED W ORK

Image Composition. Image composition (Niu et al., 2021) involves the task of blending a given
foreground with a background to produce a unified composite image. Traditional methods typically
follow a sequential pipeline comprising of object placement, image blending/harmonization, and
shadow generation. These steps aim to minimize the visual discrepancies between the two image
components. With the recent advances in generative models, notably GANs Goodfellow et al. (2014)
and DMs Ho et al. (2020), the image composition challenge has been reframed as a generative task.
While GAN-based models have led in terms of the number of research contributions, diffusion-based
models, as exemplified by works such as ObjectStitch Song et al. (2022) and Paint By Example Yang
et al. (2023), showcase the potential of DMs as a one-shot solution for image composition, offering a
departure from the multi-step traditional methods. However, it is essential to note that our approach
diverges from typical image composition. Rather than aiming to preserve the distinct identity of the
foreground and background, our model utilizes them as localized representations for text and global
semantics to fill. Although our work aims to solve an inherently different task, we draw parallels to
image compositioning in the way we leverage synthetic image triplets and handle the target image
to be generated.

A.2    D ETAILS ON C N C

Details on the Local Fuser. Depth disentanglement training (DDT) leverages synthetic image
triplets {If , Ib , M } in order to train the local fuser. DDT first incorporates the depth maps of If and
Ib in their own foreground/background streams, as shown in Figure 2. The features from the streams
are concatenated along their channel dimension, and features that incorporate both spatial features
about If and Ib are extracted in four spatial resolutions. Each extracted feature subsequently passes
through a zero convolution layer, and are finally incorporated into E ′ through feature denormaliza-
tion layers (Park et al., 2019), as done in Zhao et al. (2023). The frozen SD receives the localized
signals from E ′ and C ′ at its decoder D, integrated by residual skip connections. Denoting outputs
of the i-th blocks of E, D, and C as ei , di , and c respectively, and the corresponding outputs of E ′
and C ′ as e′ i , and c′ , the integration is captured as:


                      concat c + c′ , ej + e ′j            where i = 1, i + j = 13.
                                                                                                      (2)
                      concat di−1 , ej + e′j          where 2 ≤ i ≤ 12, i + j = 13.

Details on the Global Fuser. We provide an algorithm outlining the process of incorporating soft
guidance to the cross-attention layers to train the global fuser below.

Algorithm 1 Soft guidance for a single training timestep t
Require: Is , Ib , M , ytext , λfg = 1, λbg = 1, zt , CLIP IMAGE ENCODER, G LOBAL F USER,
   (E, C, D)(Frozen layers of SD)

 1: (Es , Eb ) ← CLIP IMAGE ENCODER(Is , Ib )
 2: (yfg , ybg ) ← G LOBAL F USER(Es , Eb )
 3: yfull ← concat(ytext , λfg yfg , λbg ybg )
 4: for all cross-attention layers in E, C, D do
 5:      (Q, K, V ) ← √(WQ · zt , WK · yfull , WV · yfull )
                    T
 6:      S ← (QK / d)                                                                         ▷ S ∈ Ri×j
 7:      J ← 1i×(j−2N )                                              ▷ Initialize J as an all ones matrix
 8:      φ(M ) ← Reshape, Flatten, Repeat(M )                                           ▷ φ(M ) ∈ Bi×N
 9:      M ′ ← concat(J, φ(M ), 1 − φ(M ))
10:      S′ ← S ⊗ M ′
11:      zt ← softmax(S ′ ) · V
12: end for


                                                      14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                   Masking          Inverse Masking



                 Mask                   Binary
               Extraction               Dilation                                                       Inpainting


      Is                         M                                        If                                        Ib


                            Figure 8: The process of generating our synthetic image triplets.

                            Is          M            LaMa Ib   LaMa Ib Depth          SD Ib   SD Ib Depth


Figure 9: Comparison of LaMa and SD for inpainting, and its corresponding depth maps. Although
images inpainted by LaMa seem to have their salient objects removed, their corresponding depth
maps contain artifacts of the salient object.


Inpainting of Is ⊗ (1 − M̃ ). To generate Ib in {If , Ib , M }, we utilize a variant of SD specifically
trained for inpainting, setting the target prompt as “empty scenery, highly detailed, no people”. We
also test LaMa (Suvorov et al., 2022), a widely adopted inpainting model, and gauge its suitability as
our inpainting module, focusing on the quality of the depth map of Ib . In Figure 9, we observe that
the Ib generated from LaMa exhibits certain artifacts that may not align well with the requirements
of our pipeline. A notable characteristic of LaMa is that the depth maps of Ib often retain the shape of
the salient object, which could impact the information relayed to the local fuser. On the other hand,
the SD inpainting module proves adept for the generation of Ib . Focusing on Ib of the first row of
Figure 9, it can be seen that certain objects that weren’t once present in Is has been generated. This
attribute of SD’s inpainting module deems attractive to leverage in depth disentanglement training:
to distill information about the relative placement of salient objects, it is critical for our model to
effectively see objects occluded by the salient object during training. For a visualization on the
synthetic image triplets generation pipeline, see Figure 8.

A.3        A DDITIONAL R ESULTS

More Quantitative Results. We provide additional quantitative results on the Pick-a-Pic valida-
tion set in Table 3. Following the trend on the COCO-Stuff validation set, our finetuned model
excels over other models in all metrics with the exception of the FID and IS values from our depth-
only experiment. Interestingly, when comparing results from the COCO-Stuff validation shown in
Table 1, we observe that the performance rankings of each model remain largely consistent. How-
ever, the specific values for FID and IS metrics deteriorate significantly, while the CLIP Scores see
notable improvement. One potential reason for this trend relates to the underlying nature of the pre-
trained models, such as Inception-V3 (Szegedy et al., 2016), used in these metrics. While both sets
of images being compared in this experiment are synthetic, these models are trained on real-world
images, inherently capturing real-world image features and patterns. The synthetic nature of the
Pick-a-Pic images might diverge considerably from these real-world expectations, thereby influenc-


                                                               15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    Model/Condition            Depth                Semantics              Depth+Semantics
                                    CLIP                      CLIP                     CLIP
                    FID (↓) IS (↑)           FID (↓) IS (↑)           FID (↓) IS(↑)
                                   Score (↑)                Score (↑)                Score (↑)
       GLIGEN       22.540 12.733 28.227        -      -        -        -       -        -
      ControlNet    21.183 13.685 28.112        -      -        -        -       -        -
     Uni-ControlNet 24.561 13.260 28.053 28.964 12.809 25.245 22.808 12.006 26.722
      T2I-Adapter   26.262 13.309 28.017 47.996 11.408 25.033 34.698 10.745 26.583
          CnC       28.192 11.460 27.347 36.272 10.353 24.301 25.524 11.131 27.109
     CnC Finetuned 32.155 11.512 28.274 26.042 12.838 27.681 22.484 12.602 28.094

Table 3: Evaluation metrics on the Pick-a-Pic val-set. We omit the results of semantics and
depth+semantics on GLIGEN and ControlNet due to the models not supporting these conditions.
Best results are in bold.

                                         Uni-ControlNet                       Uni-ControlNet   Uni-ControlNet
                  CnC (Ours)
                                         Sketch+Depth                          Canny+Depth     Canny+Sketch

Foreground
 Condition


Background
 Condition


 Foreground
  Condition


Background
 Condition



                                           Prompt: Golden retriever puppies


Figure 10: Comparing the ordering ability of localized conditions against Uni-ControlNet. Uni-
ControlNet reports that the combinations listed are the most effective, against other combinations of
7 local conditions.


ing the FID scores. Moreover, even if both datasets under comparison are synthetic, the variance
and distribution of features in the synthetic Pick-a-Pic dataset could be distinct enough from typical
real-world datasets to lead to the observed differences in FID and IS scores. This highlights the nu-
ances associated with evaluating models on synthetic versus real datasets and emphasizes the need
for careful consideration when drawing conclusions from such evaluations.

Ordering of localized objects. In Figure 10, we compare our model’s ability to place objects in
front of another through the use of local conditions against Uni-ControlNet. Uni-ControlNet is able
to take in 7 local conditions, and report that the local conditions pair listed in Figure 10 are the most
robust in handling conflicting conditions, i.e. two overlapping objects. Although some samples do
show the foreground local condition being placed in front of its counterpart, Uni-ControlNet often
fails in conveying a sense of depth in its samples, resulting in the two objects to be generated on the
same z-axis. On the other hand, even if the two depth maps conditioned have relatively same depth
values, our model is able to consistently occlude overlapping parts of the background depth map.

Additional details on Reconstruction. In Figure 11, we provide additional samples of the depth
maps extracted from the reconstruction experiment detailed in Section 4.2. Although depth maps
produced by MiDaS does not reflect the true metric depth of an object, comparing the depth maps
of the ground truth images and the reconstructed images shed light onto how well models reflects
the images and depth maps exposed to them during training. While the reconstructed depth maps
of baseline models hold the overall shape of an object, it can be seen that our model succeeds in
capturing the relative depth of regions relative to the salient object. Additionally, we elucidate our
choice in selecting MAE as a metric for gauging the quality of reconstruction. Although depth
maps produced by MiDaS do not predict metric depth as mentioned above, our model and baseline
models were trained to generate images based on image-depth map pairs. Comparing depth maps


                                                     16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 Ground Truth   CnC (Ours)   Uni-ControlNet   T2I-Adapter        Ground Truth   CnC (Ours)   Uni-ControlNet   T2I-Adapter


                      COCO-Stuff                                                       Pick-a-Pic


       Figure 11: Qualitative comparison of depth maps extracted from reconstructed images.

                                          COCO-Stuff                    Pick-a-Pic
           Model/Condition        FID (↓) IS (↑) CLIPScore (↑) FID (↓) IS (↑) CLIPScore (↑)
      Uni-ControlNet (Canny Edge) 17.119 30.440     25.726     21.955 12.469       28.517
       T2I-Adapter (Canny Edge) 20.051 28.449       25.850     30.547 12.230       28.412
       CnC (Canny Edge, Ours) 17.745 29.809         26.283     20.501 12.215       28.786

Table 4: Canny edge evaluation metrics on the COCO-Stuff and Pick-a-Pic val-set. Best results are
in bold.


can be thought of how well a model ”predicts” depth maps given ground truth depth maps, which
in turn gauges how well a model has learned the relationship between images and depth maps. In
Figure 12, we visualize the relationship between how similar the ground truth depth maps are to
the reconstructed depth maps in terms of MAE. Each set was randomly chosen from the top 50
pairs with the lowest/highest MAE values. It can be seen that the pairs with the lowest depth map
MAE scores directly result in the quality of reconstruction, with the reconstructed images faithfully
portraying the relative depth present in the ground truth images. On the other hand, the pairs with the
highest MAE scores result in sub-par reconstructed images. Taking the second row of Figure 12(b)
as an example, it can be seen that the reconstructed image fails in capturing the relative depth of the
tree and person present in the ground truth image.

A.4    A BLATION S TUDY

Ablation on different spatial conditions. The ability of our model to effectively order objects
into spatial regions stems from our depth disentanglement training, where the spatial information
of, and what lies behind the salient object is distilled into their respective streams of the local fuser.
To this end, it can be seen that our model can be trained on different types of local conditions, given
that the condition holds spatial information of an image. We explore the capabilities of our local
fuser, and show the effects of training on canny edges compared to depth maps in Figure 13. Canny
edges hold properties and biases different to that of depth maps, in the way that canny edges values
are binary, and trade off the ability to represent depth with more fine grained details. Because of
these properties, it can be seen that while DDT does learn the relative placement of objects even
with canny edges, using canny edges has its own pros and cons. Figure 13 (a) and (c) report cases
where using depth maps are preferred, while (b) and (d) report the opposite. We find that canny
edges often fail in generating a sense of depth, as seen in case (c) where the apples look relatively
flat. However, this property can be preferred when leveraging base images that are flat to begin
with. Figure 13(b) and (d) demonstrates such cases, where depth maps of flat base images (such
as posters and vector graphics) fail to capture spatial information, resulting in sub-par images. We
find that DDT is able to effectively leverage the inductive biases of a given representation, whether
it be canny edges or depth maps, and special cases might call for variants of our model trained on


                                                            17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    GT.        Recon.         GT. Depth    Recon. Depth        GT.    Recon.        GT. Depth       Recon. Depth


            COCO-Stuff Lowest Depth MAE                              COCO-Stuff Highest Depth MAE
                        (a)                                                       (b)


             Pick-a-Pic Lowest Depth MAE                             Pick-a-Pic Highest Depth MAE
                          (c)                                                      (d)


Figure 12: Qualitative comparison of depth map pairs with the lowest/highest MAE values from
each dataset. Each set was randomly chosen from the top 50 pairs of the lowest/highest MAE values
from COCO-Stuff and Pick-a-Pic, respectively.


                                                          18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                    (a) A hello kitty mecha in a dark underground facility


                                  (b) A tower of cheese in front of a cat propaganda poster


                                       (c) An apple {in front of/behind} another apple


                               (d) A neon sign of a dragon {in front of/behind} a bunny in a cup


Figure 13: Ablation study on canny edge as a representation for our Local Fuser. (a) and (c) report
cases where depth maps yield better images, while (b) and (d) report cases where canny edges might
be preferred.


                                                      19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    Input Depth           0.2              0.4                      0.6       0.8             1.0


  Input Semantics        1.2               1.4                      1.6       1.8             2.0
                                                                                                    λfg , λbg
                                             Prompt: A castle in the desert


Figure 14: Conflicting text and semantics. We condition the same depth map and exemplar image
to each foreground/background stream, and increase λfg , λbg with the same increments.


different representations. We additionally report the quantitative results of our local fuser trained on
canny edges, compared to other baseline models on the COCO-Stuff and Pick-a-Pic validation sets
in Table 4. We follow the same experimental setup of our main quantitative experiments detailed
in Section 4.2. We find the variant of our model trained on canny edges are comparable to other
baseline models, resulting in the best CLIPScore for COCO-Stuff, and the best Inception Score and
CLIPScore for Pick-a-Pic.

Conflicting Text & Semantics. We explore the use of conflicting text prompts and semantics, and
the effect of hyperparameters λfg and λbg used to determine the influence of each global semantic. In
Figure 14, same depth maps and exemplar images are conditioned to each foreground/background
stream to generate each sample. We fix the text prompt to “A castle in the desert”, which serves
as a semantic contradiction to the exemplar image of an empty icy tundra. The effects of steadily
increasing the hyperparameter values can be seen clearly, where the value of 1 strikes an adequate
balance between the effect of the text prompt and the global semantic. Although the effect of the
text prompt is nullified when the hyperparameters are set to larger values, it can be seen that the
shape of the original object stays intact due to the combination of the depth map and soft guidance.

Additional results on conflicting semantics. Figure 15 shows the full effect of the hyperparame-
ters λfg and λbg when conditioning two contradicting global semantics. The exemplar image for the
foreground global semantic is an image of flowing lava, and the background global semantic is an
image of a snowy field. By fixing the prompt with “A volcano” and increasing each hyperparameter
λ, the effect of each semantic is steadily amplified. Empirically, we observe that setting both λfg
and λbg to 1 yields results that are visually harmonious, which aligns with our training configura-
tion where each hyperparameter is set to 1. We also provide a metric to gauge our model’s ability
to localize global semantics. Given a foreground and background exemplar image Ifg.sem , Ibg.sem ,
the corresponding generated image Igen , and the mask utilized for soft guidance M , we leverage
the CLIP image encoder to measure how well each semantic is applied to Igen . The mask is uti-
lized to create two images, Igen ⊗ M and Igen ⊗ (1 − M ), and fed into the CLIP image encoder to
create two image embeddings. These embeddings are then compared with the embeddings of the
original exemplar images Ifg.sem and Ibg.sem via cosine similarity, and the average cosine similarity
can be utilized as a metric of how well each semantic is applied into each region of Igen . A high
average cosine similarity implies that each semantic has been faithfully applied to each region via
soft guidance. This characteristic can be seen in Figure 16, where two contradicting semantics of
a hot air balloon and a coral reef, are localized. The average cosine similarity steadily increases as
λbg increases, which reflects how much the effect of the coral reef increases as can be seen in the
generated images. The average cosine similarity drops sharply at λbg = 2.0, due to the model over
saturating the effect of the coral reef, resulting in a low fidelity sample.


                                                     20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                            0.0            0.5               1.0          1.5            2.0 λ
                                                                                               fg



                0.0


                0.5


                1.0


                1.5


                2.0


                 λbg
                                                      Prompt: A volcano



Figure 15: Conflicting semantics. The foreground global semantic image is an image of flowing
lava, and the background global semantic image is an image of a snowy field. We fix the text prompt
to “A volcano” and demonstrate the effects of hyperparameters λfg and λbg .


                                                 21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                      (                      ((
                                               ( (
                                      CosineSim.   CLIP                   CLIP(
                  Average
              Cosine Similarity   =                                       +                               /2
                                                                      (                      ((
                                               ( (
                                      CosineSim.   CLIP                   CLIP(
                                                                                                                            λfg
                                        1.0                1.0                   1.0                      1.0     1.0


                                        0.0                0.5                   1.0                      1.5     2.0
                                                                                                                            λbg
                  Average
                                      0.7089              0.7207              0.7372                  0.7731    0.6924
              Cosine Similarity


Figure 16: Additional results on the effect of soft guidance with conflicting semantics, and its re-
spective average cosine similarity scores. We condition the same depth image for each stream in the
local fuser, and generate samples without conditioning a prompt.


                            M                             Version 1                    Version 2 (Ours)         Version 3

 Foreground
   Image


Background
  Image


Figure 17: Depth map Ablations. We find that our model generalizes well to different versions
of depth maps. Version 1 refers to depth maps extracted from Is . Version 2 refers to depth maps
extracted from If . Version 3 refers to depth maps extracted from M ⊗ depthmap(If ).


                                                                 22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Depth map Ablations. The local fuser incorporates depth maps extracted from the synthetic im-
age triplets {If , Ib , M } during DDT. However, we find that our model is also able to generate
samples conditioned on different versions of depth maps, in which we demonstrate in Figure 17.
Version 1 refers to conditioning the foreground stream of the local fuser on the depth map extracted
from Is , instead of If . Version 2 refers to conditioning via how the local fuser was originally trained
with DDT, or conditioning the depth map of If . Version 3 refers to conditioning the local fuser on
M ⊗ depthmap(If ), or a masked version of the depth map of If . Pedagogically, the difference
between version 2 and 3 can be thought of as whether masking with M is done before or after the
extraction of the depth map of If . Although our model is trained on depth maps of version 2, the
sample generated by version 1 shows that our model has learned the relative positioning of objects
through its interaction with the background depth map. Because the foreground depth map of ver-
sion 1 retains additional depth cues of the ground, the generated sample retains this information and
places parts of the drum set over the ground. Interestingly, we also find that version 3 also generates
high fidelity samples, even though this form of depth maps are never found in the wild. This also can
be attributed to the relative depth estimation capabilities of our model paired with the background
depth map.


                                                   23
