Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


I NFORMING R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING AGENTS
BY G ROUNDING NATURAL L ANGUAGE TO
M ARKOV D ECISION P ROCESSES
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT

         While significant efforts have been made to leverage natural language to accelerate
         reinforcement learning, utilizing diverse forms of language efficiently remains
         unsolved. Existing methods focus on mapping natural language to individual
         elements of MDPs such as reward functions or policies, but such approaches limit
         the scope of language they consider to make such mappings possible. We present
         an approach for leveraging general language advice by translating it to a grounded
         formal language capable of expressing information about every element of an MDP
         and its solution including policies, plans, reward functions, and transition functions.
         We also introduce a new model-based reinforcement learning algorithm called
         RLang-Dyna-Q that is capable of leveraging all such advice. We demonstrate the
         generality of our approach in a number of experiments by informing agents with a
         variety of natural language advice, leading to significant performance gains.


1   I NTRODUCTION

Language serves as a powerful means for humans to share information about the world. Our grasp of
language allows us to learn more quickly or even skip learning altogether, as we can learn to perform
new tasks with ease by drawing upon the domain expertise of others in the form of advice. An open
question in reinforcement learning is how language advice can be leveraged to speed up learning
in Markov Decision Processes (MDPs), as learning to perform tasks tabula rasa is exceptionally
difficult—and often impossible—in the real world. While many methods of leveraging advice for
learning have emerged in the literature, a coherent theory of language grounding that can support the
use of language for reinforcement learning has not.
Virtually all research in language and RL attempts to ground language to individual elements of
MDPs such as policies (Liang et al., 2023; Vemprala et al., 2023; Wu et al., 2023; Andreas et al.,
2017), reward functions (Squire et al., 2015), and goals (Colas et al., 2020). The main drawbacks of
these works is that they restrict their approach to narrow fragments of natural language. For example,
a statement like “if a mug is tipped over, its contents will spill out” clearly refers to a transition
function, and mapping this information to a policy is not straightforward. For this reason, works that
ground language to policies primarily focus on imperative sentences that naturally correspond to
policies, plans, or reward functions. Likewise, works that ground language to transition functions
focus mainly on declarative sentences, which may provide information about the dynamics of a
domain. This consistent divergence in methodology suggests that not all language should be grounded
to the same component of an MDP, and that a general language grounding system for reinforcement
learning agents should be capable of grounding language to every element of an MDP and its solution.
We therefore propose a novel approach to grounding natural language for use in reinforcement learning
that formulates the language grounding problem as a machine translation task from natural language
to RLang (Rodriguez-Sanchez et al., 2023), a formal language designed to express information about
every element of an MDP and its solution. Our approach is akin to semantic parsing (Mooney,
2007)—a problem in natural language understanding that involves translating natural language into a
formal representation—as we think of RLang as a grounded formal language for MDPs that offers a
systematic means of expressing knowledge about a task. Such an approach calls for a learning agent
capable of leveraging all such MDP components, including a partial policy, reward function, plan,


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


and transition function. We therefore introduce RLang-Dyna-Q, a model-based tabular RL agent
based on Dyna-Q Sutton et al. (1998), that can effectively leverage such advice. We demonstrate the
strength and generality of our approach by grounding a variety of natural language advice to RLang
programs, which RLang-Dyna-Q can use to significantly improve performance, sometimes making it
possible to solve tasks that vanilla Dyna-Q cannot solve.

2     BACKGROUND
2.1   M ODEL -BASED R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING

Reinforcement learning tasks are typically modeled as Markov decision processes (MDPs), which
can be represented by a tuple ⟨S, A, R, T, γ⟩, where S is the set of states, A is the set of actions, R is
the reward function, T is the transition function, and γ is the discount factor. The goal of an agent
is to find a policy, π(a|s)—a function that selects an action for each state—which maximizes the
expected sum of discounted rewards:
                                        "∞                       #
                                         X
                                               t
                                    Eπ       γ R(st , at , st+1 ) .
                                             t=0

Value-based reinforcement learning algorithms rely on estimating the optimal action-value function
q∗ , defined as
                                    q∗ (s, a) = max qπ (s, a),
                                                        π
providing the expected return for taking action a in state s and subsequently following an optimal
policy (Sutton et al., 1998). Q-learning (Watkins, 1989) works to approximate q∗ by applying the
following update rule after taking roll-outs in the environment:

              Q(St , At ) ← Q(St , At ) + α Rt+1 + γ max Q(St+1 , a) − Q(St , At ) .
                                                               a

Building on Q-learning, Dyna-Q (Sutton et al., 1998) introduces an additional component: a model
of the environment. While Q-learning learns from direct interaction with the environment alone,
Dyna-Q builds an internal model of the environment and updates the action-value function using both
real and simulated roll-outs, enabling faster convergence to the optimal action-value function.

2.2   L ARGE L ANGUAGE M ODELS FOR M ACHINE T RANSLATION

Large Language Models (LLMs), often based on architectures like the Transformer (Vaswani
et al., 2017), are trained to predict the next token xt in a sequence given the preceding tokens
{x1 , x2 , ..., xt−1 } via the following objective:
                                       X
                                L=−          log P (xt |x1 , x2 , . . . , xt−1 ).
                                         t

In very large models, this objective results in emergent capabilities such as natural language under-
standing and generation, making them suitable for a variety of tasks beyond mere text completion
including question-answering, summarization, and more (Bubeck et al., 2023). One useful emergent
capability of LLMs is machine translation, the translation of text from one language to another.
While specialized neural machine translation systems are trained using a parallel corpus to maximize
the conditional probability P (y|x), where x is the source sequence and y is the target sequence
(Bahdanau et al., 2014), LLMs have achieved similar translation capabilities despite not being trained
explicitly on this objective (Brown et al., 2020). Furthermore LLMs have been shown to be proficient
at generating text in formal languages such as Python given a natural language prompt (Chen et al.,
2021; Li et al., 2023).

2.3   L EVERAGING F ORMAL S PECIFICATION L ANGUAGES FOR D ECISION -M AKING

Formal specification languages have long been a useful tool to inform decision-making agents. In
the field of classical planning, for example, it is standard to use the Planning Domain Description


                                                      2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 1: Selected MDP elements, corresponding RLang groundings, and natural language interpreta-
tions. The first column shows a component of the MDP, the second shows an RLang expression that
can inform it, and the last column contains a description of the expression.

    MDP Component              RLang Declaration                         Natural Language Inter-
                                                                         pretation
                               Policy build_bridge:
    Policy                       if at_workbench:                        If you are at a workbench,
    π : S × A → [0, 1]             Execute use                           use it. Otherwise, go to it.
                                 else:
                                   Execute go_to(workbench)
                               Plan gather_materials:                    Go to the wood and pick it
    Plan
                                 Execute go_to(wood)                     up, then go to the string and
    {A0 , A1 , ..., An }
                                 Execute pickup                          pick it up.
                                 Execute go_to(string)
                                 Execute pickup
                               Effect common_sense:                      Walking into walls will get
    Reward, Transition Func.
                                 if at(Wall) and A == walk:              you nowhere. Walking into
    Re : S × A × S → R
                                   Reward 0                              lava will kill you.
    Te : S × A × S → [0, 1]
                                   S’ -> S
                                 if at(Lava) and A == walk:
                                   Reward -1
                                   S’ -> S*0


Language (PDDL; Ghallab et al. 1998) and its probabilistic extension PPDDL (probabilistic PDDL;
Younes & Littman, 2004) to specify the complete dynamics of an environment. Other languages like
Linear Temporal Logic (LTL; Littman et al., 2017; Jothimurugan et al., 2019) and Policy Sketches
(Andreas et al., 2017) are sufficient for describing goals and hierarchical policies, respectively, for
instruction-following agents. While effective, one limiting factor of these formal languages is their
narrow scope. Natural language, by contrast, can be used to express information about nearly all the
elements of decision-making.
A recent formal language to emerge from the literature is RLang (Rodriguez-Sanchez et al., 2023).
While previous formal languages for decision-making narrowly focus on individual components of
an MDP such as a policy or reward function, RLang was designed to provide information about
every component of a structured Markov Decision Process and its solution. Formally, an RLang
specification is a set of RLang groundings G given by an RLang program P and an RLang vocabulary
V, which may include additional groundings for use across multiple MDPs. Some example RLang
programs and their natural language interpretations can be seen in Table 1. Crucially, advice specified
by RLang can be compiled directly into many components of an MDP—including policies, transition
functions, reward functions, and plans—for direct integration into existing RL agents.


3    G ROUNDING NATURAL L ANGUAGE TO MDP S

One major motivation for leveraging language advice in reinforcement learning is to supply agents
with the kinds of commonsense reasoning that language can easily express. Consider the LavaCrossing
environment in Figure 1. Any human playing the game would quickly learn that walking into the
lava squares kills you, or likewise that walking into walls will do nothing at all. For humans,
communicating this knowledge to others with language is natural, but leveraging such language
advice in reinforcement learning is a major unsolved problem. An alternative approach to supplying
common sense advice to RL agents involves specifying it in a formal language relevant to decision-
processes, which can more straightforwardly be used by a learning agent to improve learning. One
such formal language to emerge from the literature is RLang (Rodriguez-Sanchez et al., 2023), a
highly expressive language that was designed to capture information about every element of an MDP
and its solution.


                                                   3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                        Results
                                              20
                                                        Random                                     Effect main:
                                                        Dyna-Q
                                                                                                   if at(Lava) and A == forward:


                          Cumulative Reward
                                                        RLang-Dyna-Q-effect
                                              15
                                                                                                     S’ -> S*0
                                              10
                                                                                                     Reward -1
                                               5                                                   if at(Wall) and A == forward:
                                               0                                                     S’ -> S
                                                   0    3     6     9     12   15   18   21   24     Reward 0
                                                                  Episode Number



      (a) Lavacrossing                                 (b) Reward Curves                               (c) Grounded RLang Advice

Figure 1: LavaCrossing Experiment. The agent was given the following advice: “Walking into lava
will kill you. Walking into walls will do nothing.”


3.1     G ROUNDING NATURAL L ANGUAGE A DVICE TO RL ANG P ROGRAMS

We hypothesize that RLang is a sufficient representation for natural language advice in the context of
reinforcement learning, and formulate the language grounding problem as a machine translation task
from natural language to RLang. Our task is as follows: given an RLang vocabulary V for a given
MDP and a piece of natural language advice u, we seek a function ϕ : u × V → Pu , where Pu is an
executable RLang program capturing the advice in u.
We propose to do this translation using a pre-trained large language model in a two-stage pipeline by
1) identifying which RLang grounding type would best capture the language advice; and 2) few-shot
translating the advice into an RLang program. Stage 1, the selection stage, instructs the LLM to
classify a novel piece of advice u into RLang grounding types such as Effects, Policies, and Plans,
consulting a small number of example classifications in the prompt. We assume that each piece of
advice—which may contain multiple sentences—grounds to a single RLang grounding type. Stage 2,
the translation stage, instructs the LLM to translate u to an RLang program specifying the grounding
type given by Stage 1 using roughly 5 example translations in the prompt that were hand-engineered
to cover a wide range of RLang’s syntax. This pipeline effectively grounds the advice, yielding an
RLang program that may contain partial transition functions, reward functions, policies, and plans.
Our pipeline is illustrated in Figure 2.


Figure 2: Our pipeline for translating natural language advice to RLang. We extend the existing
RLang pipeline to include natural language translation and a Dyna-Q agent capable of leveraging all
forms of RLang advice.


3.2     RL ANG -DYNA -Q: A S INGLE AGENT FOR L EVERAGING A LL OF RL ANG

In the original RLang paper, the authors presented a number of RLang-enabled agents—including
ones based on Q-Learning, PPO (Schulman et al., 2017), and DOORmax (Diuk et al., 2008)—each
capable of leveraging individual RLang groundings to improve learning. However, leveraging general
language advice requires integrating potentially all RLang groundings into a single learning agent.
We therefore introduce RLang-Dyna-Q, a learning agent based on Dyna-Q (Sutton et al., 1998) that
is capable of simultaneously leveraging a partial policy, plan, reward function, and transition function
given by an RLang program. Dyna-Q is an appropriate core learning agent because integrating


                                                                                              4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


policies and dynamics is most natural in a model-based learning algorithm (see Algorithm 1, our
modifications to Dyna-Q are in blue).

Algorithm 1 RLang-Dyna-Q Agent
    Given: πRLang , TRLang , RRLang from an RLang program
    Initialize Q(s, a), T (s, a), R(s, a) for all s ∈ S, a ∈ A(s)
    loop
        s ← current (nonterminal) state
        With some prob. ϵ2 , we execute the plan or policy given by RLang, in that order
        a ← ϵ1 , ϵ2 -greedy(s, πRLang , Q)
        Execute action a; observe resultant state s′ , and reward r
        Q(s, a) ← Q(s, a) + α [r + γ maxa′ Q(s′ , a′ ) − Q(s, a)]
        T (s, a), R(s, a) ← s′ , r         (assuming deterministic environment)
        for i = 1 to N1 do
             s ← random previously observed state
             a ← random action previously taken in s
             s′ , r ← T (s, a), R(s, a)
             Q(s, a) ← Q(s, a) + α [r + γ maxa′ Q(s′ , a′ ) − Q(s, a)]
        end for
        for i = 1 to N2 do
             s ← random previously observed state
             a ← random action not previously taken in s
             Predict s′ , r using dynamics given by RLang
             s′ , r ← TRLang (s, a), RRLang (s, a)
             Q(s, a) ← Q(s, a) + α [r + γ maxa′ Q(s′ , a′ ) − Q(s, a)]
        end for
    end loop


4     E XPERIMENTS
We set forth two hypotheses: 1) RLang is an expressive grounding for natural language advice in
the context of RL; and 2) we can leverage natural language advice to improve the performance of a
learning agent by grounding natural language to RLang. To evaluate these hypotheses we ran two
sets of experiments: one for assessing the expressive power of RLang as a grounding for natural
language and another for assessing whether our language grounding pipeline can effectively improve
performance on an RL task.
In both sets of experiments we utilize custom environments from the Minigrid/BabyAI library
(Chevalier-Boisvert et al., 2023; 2018), a platform for studying the behavior of language-informed
agents. In a typical Minigrid environment, an agent might reason about opening and closing doors
using keys which may be hidden in other rooms, managing a small inventory of items, removing
obstacles like balls out of the way to reach other rooms or objects, and avoiding lava, all for the
ultimate purpose of reaching a goal. Minigrid environments are an ideal setting for our experiments
for three reasons: 1) they can be solved using tabular RL algorithms, which our informed, model-
based RLang-Dyna-Q agent is based on; 2) there are clear and obvious referents of language in
both the state and action spaces of these environments (e.g. keys, doors, and balls are represented
neatly in a discrete state space and skills such as walking towards objects are easy to implement); 3)
many objects are shared across environments enabling the reuse of a common RLang vocabulary for
referencing these objects, which makes it easier for our translation pipeline to ground novel advice.
For each environment, we provide a set of RLang groundings to the agent that act as targets for
natural language translation. These groundings include perception abstractions such as the objects
in the environment (e.g., yellow key, red door) and a short list of predicates for reasoning
with them (e.g., carrying(), reachable(), at()), as well as a single abstract action in the
form of a lifted skill for walking to any reachable object (go to()). All agents we run experiments
on, including the Random, Dyna-Q, and RLang-Dyna-Q agents, are given access to this lifted skill.
However, we do not provide the Dyna-Q agent with any perception abstractions, as including them
induces an equivalent state space in the tabular RL setting. Likewise, the Random agent does not


                                                  5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 2: User Study. We collected 10 pieces of advice from 10 undergraduate students for the
LockedRoom environment. For each piece of advice, 5 agent instances were run for 25 episodes on
the LockedRoom environment for 500 steps. The cumulative discounted reward for the 25 episodes is
in the first column along with a 95% confidence interval. The average percent increase in cumulative
discounted reward over the baseline is present in the second column. The second-to-last piece of
advice did not ground to a valid RLang program, so no experiment was run.

      Avg Cumula-    % improve-   Natural Language Advice
      tive Return    ment
      17.86 ± 2.36   —            No advice
      22.01 ± 0.71   +23.24       “Remember to toggle to open doors.”
      16.79 ± 1.75   −5.99        “You don’t need to carry keys to open the grey door.”
      17.22 ± 1.75   −3.60        “Identify the room with the red key, move to that room by opening the
                                  door. Pick up the key. Identify the room with the red door, proceed
                                  there. Open the red door. Find the green square and go there to finish
                                  the game.”
      23.55 ± 0.69   +31.86       “Move to the grey door, open it and enter the room until you get to the
                                  red key, pick it up. Exit the room and move towards the red door, open
                                  it and get into that room. Move to the green block and enter it.”
      23.93 ± 0.37   +33.99       “Go to the grey door. open the grey door. go to the red key. pick up the
                                  red key. go to the red door. open the red door. go to the green square.”
      24.07 ± 0.22   +34.77       “Pick up the red key after opening the grey door. Then walk to the red
                                  door, open it, and go to the goal.”
      17.57 ± 0.78   −1.63        “You cannot open the red door without a red key.”
      17.77 ± 0.54   −0.50        “Walking towards the red door is not very useful if it is closed.”
      —              —            “Go down until the second door on the left and pick up the key. Then
                                  exit the room and go down until the next door on the left and use it to
                                  open the door and get to the green box.”
      18.35 ± 1.93   +2.76        “Go to the room that has the red key, pick it up, and then go to the room
                                  with a red door. Enter the room, and go to the green goal object.”



consider the state when selecting an action. In Stage 2 of the translation pipeline, we provide the list
of available RLang groundings that can be referenced in an RLang program along with the language
advice. This prevents the LLM from hallucinating imaginary skills, objects, and predicates when
translating the advice into an RLang program. The LLM never interacts with the MDP directly.
The translation examples used in the prompts in both stages of translation did not change across
experiments, though these translations are vocabulary-specific and grounding advice to environments
outside of Minigrid will require domain-compatible example translations.


4.1    E VALUATING T RANSLATION P IPELINE AND RL ANG E FFICACY

To assess RLang’s ability to capture the breadth of general language advice, we ran a small user
study. After explaining the controls for navigation, opening and closing doors, and picking up
and dropping objects, we asked 10 undergraduate students to play the LockedRoom MiniGrid task
(pictured in Figure 3) until they felt they were proficient at it. Afterwards, we asked them to describe
in one or two sentences any advice they would give to an agent completing the task for the first time.
We collected their responses and ran them through our translation pipeline to arrive at the RLang
groundings in Table 3 of the Appendix. Of 10 pieces of advice collected, 9 were translated into
valid RLang programs, while 1 referenced groundings that did not exist (e.g. second left door).
We used the remaining valid RLang programs to inform 9 separate RLang-Dyna-Q agents that we
compared against a baseline Dyna-Q agent given no advice. With a few exceptions, providing advice
either did not meaningfully impact performance over the baseline or led to dramatic improvements
in performance (see Table 2). In the cases where advice did not impact performance, advice was
translated into a valid RLang program, but the program was missing a crucial step because it did
not have an appropriate RLang grounding to reference (e.g. it had no way of translating “the room
with the red key”). This is not a limitation of our pipeline, however, as a more expressive RLang
vocabulary file could be used to achieve such a translation (e.g. room with(red key) can
evaluate to grey door).


                                                     6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                      Figure 3: The initial state of the LockedRoom environment.



                                                                                                    Plan main:
                                                                         Results                      Execute go_to(blue_door)
                                                         Random                                       Execute toggle
                                                         Dyna-Q
                                                40
                                                                                                      Execute go_to(green_door)
                            Cumulative Reward


                                                         RLang-Dyna-Q-plan

                                                30                                                    Execute toggle
                                                20                                                    Execute go_to(grey_door)
                                                10
                                                                                                      Execute toggle
                                                                                                      Execute go_to(purple_door)
                                                 0
                                                     0    6   12    18     24   30   36   42   48     Execute toggle
                                                                   Episode Number



      (a) MultiRoom                                      (b) Reward Curves                              (c) Grounded RLang Advice

Figure 4: MultiRoom Experiment. The agent was given the following advice: “First go to the blue
door, then the green door, then the grey door, then the purple door.”



4.2   E VALUATING AGENT P ERFORMANCE G IVEN E XPERT A DVICE

We evaluated the strength of our grounding approach on four diverse Minigrid environments—
LavaCrossing, MultiRoom, MidMazeLava, and HardMaze—with the final two being custom en-
vironments that we engineered to make significantly more difficult for a tabular RL agent. For
each environment, we collected multiple pieces of natural language advice from human experts
and translated them into RLang programs using our two-stage pipeline. Each piece of advice was
translated to a single RLang grounding type, and each piece of advice contained multiple sentences.
We then ran our RLang-Dyna-Q agent on the environment with the translated RLang program. In one
environment where multiple pieces of advice were given that grounded to different RLang types (e.g.,
both plans and effects), we performed an ablation study by running separate agents utilizing only one
type of advice at a time—Effects, Plans, or Policies—to isolate the impact of each on performance.
This allowed us to empirically validate the benefit of a combined RLang-Dyna-Q agent that leverages
multiple types of advice simultaneously.
In all of the experiments, all forms of RLang-Dyna-Q significantly outperformed vanilla Dyna-Q. In
LavaCrossing (see Figure 1), the agent is tasked with reaching a goal while avoiding lava, and merely
advising the agent about the dangers of lava and uselessness of walking into walls greatly increases
performance. In the MultiRoom environment (see Figure 4), in which the agent must open a series
of doors to reach a goal, providing a plan in natural language significantly increased performance.
In MidMazeLava (see Figure 5) and HardMaze (see Figure 6), the agent is faced with significantly
more difficult tasks. In the former,the agent must unblock doors and open them with keys to reach
a goal while avoiding lava, and in the latter the agent must traverse through many rooms, bringing
keys across rooms to doors which must be unblocked to reach a goal. We collected paragraphs-worth
of advice for these environments, which we translated into RLang plans, policies, and effects. In
HardMaze, this language advice made it possible to solve the task, as the vanilla Dyna-Q agent did
no better than random.
In all experiments, 10 instances of each agent were run per experimental condition to generate a
95% confidence interval on their cumulative reward over 50 episodes (LavaCrossing was run for 25
episodes only). The number of timesteps per episode varied across environments.


                                                                                           7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                                    Results
                                                                                   Random
                                                                      40           Dyna-Q


                                                  Cumulative Reward
                                                                                   RLang-Dyna-Q-effect
                                                                                   RLang-Dyna-Q-policy
                                                                      30
                                                                                   RLang-Dyna-Q-plan
                                                                                   RLang-Dyna-Q-combined
                                                                      20


                                                                      10


                                                                         0

                                                                               0   6     12    18     24     30    36   42   48
                                                                                              Episode Number


                       (a) Initial State                                            (b) Reward Curves

   “Pick up the blue ball and drop it to your right. Then pick up the green key and unlock the
   green door. Then drop the key to your right.” “Some general advice: If you are carrying a
   key and its corresponding door is closed, open the door if you are at it, otherwise go to the
   door if you can reach it. Otherwise, drop any keys for doors you can’t reach. If you can reach
   the goal, go to it.” “Walking into lava will kill you. If you’re not at a door, toggling will do
   nothing. Trying to pick something up while you’re carrying something is pointless. Walking
   into walls will do nothing.”

                                           (c) Language Advice

Figure 5: MidMazeLava Experiment. Language advice given to the agent was grounded to RLang
effects, plans, and policies. The full translated RLang program is available in the appendix. All
RLang-Dyna-Q agents outperformed Dyna-Q on this task.



                                                                                                     Results
                                                                                                           Random
                                                                         2.0                               Dyna-Q
                                                     Cumulative Reward


                                                                                                           RLang-Dyna-Q-combined

                                                                         1.5


                                                                         1.0


                                                                         0.5


                                                                         0.0
                                                                               0    6    12     18     24     30   36   42   48
                                                                                              Episode Number


                  (a) HardMaze Initial State                                           (b) Reward Curves

   “Go and pick up the green ball, and drop it on your left, and then go pick up the blue key, and
   go to the blue door and open it up and drop the key on your left, and then go pick up the green
   key, and go to the green door to open it and drop the key on your left, and then go pick up the
   purple ball and drop it on your right.” “Nothing will happen if you walk towards the wall, or
   try to open a purple door without the purple key if it is locked. The applies for the yellow
   door and key as well as the red door and key.” “If you can reach the grey door and it is closed
   but you have the key, open it if you are at it or otherwise go to it. The same applies to the
   purple door, yellow door, and red door. Lastly, if you find the goal is reachable just go to the
   goal directly.”


                                           (c) Language Advice

Figure 6: HardMaze Experiment. Language advice given to the agent was grounded to RLang
effects, plans, and policies. The full translated RLang program is available in the appendix. Vanilla
Dyna-Q was not able to complete this task.



                                                                 8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


5   R ELATED W ORKS

Language Use in Reinforcement Learning Luketina et al. (2019) identify two variations of
language usage in the reinforcement learning literature. The first variation, language-conditional RL,
is one in which language use is a necessary component of the task. This includes environments where
agents must execute commands in natural language (Mirchandani et al., 2021), or otherwise deal with
language that is part of the MDP, e.g., in the observation or action space (Fulda et al., 2017; Kostka
et al., 2017). The second variation is language-assisted RL, in which natural language is used to
communicate task-related information to an agent that is not necessary for solving the task. In these
settings, language can be used to inform policy structure (Watkins et al., 2023), reward functions
(Goyal et al., 2019), transition dynamics (Narasimhan et al., 2018), or Q-functions (Branavan et al.,
2012).


Grounding Natural to Formal Languages for Planning and Learning The notion of grounding
natural language to a formal language for use in learning and planning is not new. Gopalan et al.
(2018) and Berg et al. (2020) translate natural language commands into Linear Temporal Logic
(LTL), which they use as reward functions for a learning agent or planning objectives, and Silver
et al. (2023) and Miglani & Yorke-Smith (2020) ground natural language into PDDL, which is fed to
a recurrent neural network to output solution plans. However, the advancement of large language
models (LLMs) has led to even more capable agents that for leveraging formal languages. In the
planning literature, Ahn et al. (2022); Huang et al. (2022); Song et al. (2023) use primitive formal
languages for executing policies on real robots or in embodied environments, Liu et al. (2023a); Xie
et al. (2023) translate natural language commands into PDDL plans with the help of LLMs, and Liu
et al. (2023b) proposed a modular system to ground natural language into LTL formulas. Code is also
a popular choice for formal languages: Liang et al. (2023); Vemprala et al. (2023); Wu et al. (2023)
use an LLM to generate Python functions as policies from natural language instructions; Singh et al.
(2022) also generates programs by prompting LLMs for code completion. For learning, more recent
works focus on reward design with LLMs for RL agents: Yu et al. (2023) specifies reward with LLMs
through code generation. Du et al. (2023) leverage commonsense reasoning for designing reward
functions.



6   D ISCUSSION AND C ONCLUSION

Natural language grounding (Steels & Hild, 2012) is a popular topic with critical implications for all
of AI. Just as RL is intended as a model of the totality of intelligent decision making, we propose that
its core formalisms offer a natural target for language grounding. If MDPs are a good model of human
decision-making, and humans invented language to share information that aids their decision-making,
then the appropriate target for language grounding should be an MDP, or a richer and perhaps more
structured decision process reflecting the complexity of human decision-making. One line of evidence
for this claim is the direct correspondence between parts of speech and elements of structured decision-
processes (Patel et al., 2020). For example, the object classes in Object Oriented MDPs (Diuk et al.,
2008) naturally correspond to the concept of common nouns requiring determiners to single out
class instances, and the parameters in Parameterized Action MDPs Masson et al. (2016) naturally
correspond to adverbs for modifying the execution of discrete macro-actions (verbs).
More practically, knowledge expressed in natural language has immense potential to inform rein-
forcement learning agents, and thereby alleviate the high sample complexity of having to learn tabula
rasa. We present a novel method for leveraging general natural language advice to expedite learning
in Markov Decision Processes by translating it into RLang, a formal language designed to specify
information about every element of an MDP and its solution. Our method can ground advice to
reward functions, transition functions, plans, and policies. We also introduce a modified Dyna-Q
agent capable of leveraging all of the types of information present in the partial MDP specification
output by RLang. Our findings show that our approach can leverage a wide variety of language
advice to accelerate learning.


                                                   9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Michael Ahn, Anthony Brohan, Noah Brown, Yevgen Chebotar, Omar Cortes, Byron David, Chelsea
 Finn, Chuyuan Fu, Keerthana Gopalakrishnan, Karol Hausman, Alex Herzog, Daniel Ho, Jasmine
 Hsu, Julian Ibarz, Brian Ichter, Alex Irpan, Eric Jang, Rosario Jauregui Ruano, Kyle Jeffrey, Sally
 Jesmonth, Nikhil J Joshi, Ryan Julian, Dmitry Kalashnikov, Yuheng Kuang, Kuang-Huei Lee,
 Sergey Levine, Yao Lu, Linda Luu, Carolina Parada, Peter Pastor, Jornell Quiambao, Kanishka
 Rao, Jarek Rettinghouse, Diego Reyes, Pierre Sermanet, Nicolas Sievers, Clayton Tan, Alexander
 Toshev, Vincent Vanhoucke, Fei Xia, Ted Xiao, Peng Xu, Sichun Xu, Mengyuan Yan, and Andy
 Zeng. Do as i can, not as i say: Grounding language in robotic affordances, 2022.
Jacob Andreas, Dan Klein, and Sergey Levine. Modular multitask reinforcement learning with policy
  sketches. In Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Machine Learning-Volume 70,
  pp. 166–175. JMLR. org, 2017.
Dzmitry Bahdanau, Kyunghyun Cho, and Yoshua Bengio. Neural machine translation by jointly
  learning to align and translate. arXiv preprint arXiv:1409.0473, 2014.
Matthew Berg, Deniz Bayazit, Rebecca Mathew, Ariel Rotter-Aboyoun, Ellie Pavlick, and Ste-
 fanie Tellex. Grounding Language to Landmarks in Arbitrary Outdoor Environments. In IEEE
 International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), 2020.
S.R.K. Branavan, D. Silver, and R. Barzilay. Learning to win by reading manuals in a monte-carlo
  framework. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, 43:661–704, apr 2012. doi: 10.1613/jair.
  3484. URL https://doi.org/10.1613%2Fjair.3484.
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are
  few-shot learners. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:1877–1901, 2020.
Sébastien Bubeck, Varun Chandrasekaran, Ronen Eldan, Johannes Gehrke, Eric Horvitz, Ece Kamar,
   Peter Lee, Yin Tat Lee, Yuanzhi Li, Scott Lundberg, Harsha Nori, Hamid Palangi, Marco Tulio
   Ribeiro, and Yi Zhang. Sparks of artificial general intelligence: Early experiments with gpt-4,
   2023.
Mark Chen, Jerry Tworek, Heewoo Jun, Qiming Yuan, Henrique Ponde de Oliveira Pinto, Jared
 Kaplan, Harri Edwards, Yuri Burda, Nicholas Joseph, Greg Brockman, et al. Evaluating large
 language models trained on code. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.03374, 2021.
Maxime Chevalier-Boisvert, Dzmitry Bahdanau, Salem Lahlou, Lucas Willems, Chitwan Saharia,
 Thien Huu Nguyen, and Yoshua Bengio. Babyai: A platform to study the sample efficiency of
 grounded language learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.08272, 2018.
Maxime Chevalier-Boisvert, Bolun Dai, Mark Towers, Rodrigo de Lazcano, Lucas Willems, Salem
 Lahlou, Suman Pal, Pablo Samuel Castro, and Jordan Terry. Minigrid & miniworld: Modular &
 customizable reinforcement learning environments for goal-oriented tasks. CoRR, abs/2306.13831,
 2023.
Cédric Colas, Ahmed Akakzia, Pierre-Yves Oudeyer, Mohamed Chetouani, and Olivier Sigaud.
  Language-conditioned goal generation: a new approach to language grounding for rl. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2006.07043, 2020.
Carlos Diuk, Andre Cohen, and Michael L Littman. An object-oriented representation for efficient
  reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the 25th international conference on Machine learning,
  pp. 240–247, 2008.
Yuqing Du, Olivia Watkins, Zihan Wang, Cédric Colas, Trevor Darrell, Pieter Abbeel, Abhishek
  Gupta, and Jacob Andreas. Guiding pretraining in reinforcement learning with large language
  models, 2023.
Nancy Fulda, Daniel Ricks, Ben Murdoch, and David Wingate. What can you do with a rock?
  affordance extraction via word embeddings, 2017.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


M. Ghallab, A. Howe, C. Knoblock, D. Mcdermott, A. Ram, M. Veloso, D. Weld, and D. Wilkins.
 PDDL—The Planning Domain Definition Language, 1998. URL http://citeseerx.ist.
 psu.edu/viewdoc/summary?doi=10.1.1.37.212.
Nakul Gopalan, Dilip Arumugam, Lawson Wong, and Stefanie Tellex. Sequence-to-Sequence
  Language Grounding of Non-Markovian Task Specifications. In Proceedings of Robotics: Science
  and Systems, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, 2018. doi: 10.15607/RSS.2018.XIV.067.
Prasoon Goyal, Scott Niekum, and Raymond J. Mooney. Using natural language for reward shaping
  in reinforcement learning, 2019.
Wenlong Huang, Pieter Abbeel, Deepak Pathak, and Igor Mordatch. Language models as zero-shot
 planners: Extracting actionable knowledge for embodied agents, 2022.
Kishor Jothimurugan, Rajeev Alur, and Osbert Bastani. A composable specification language for
  reinforcement learning tasks. In H. Wallach, H. Larochelle, A. Beygelzimer, F. d'Alché-Buc,
  E. Fox, and R. Garnett (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 32.
  Curran Associates, Inc., 2019.
Bartosz Kostka, Jaroslaw Kwiecieli, Jakub Kowalski, and Pawel Rychlikowski. Text-based adventures
  of the golovin AI agent. In 2017 IEEE Conference on Computational Intelligence and Games
  (CIG). IEEE, aug 2017. doi: 10.1109/cig.2017.8080433. URL https://doi.org/10.1109%
  2Fcig.2017.8080433.
Raymond Li, Loubna Ben Allal, Yangtian Zi, Niklas Muennighoff, Denis Kocetkov, Chenghao Mou,
  Marc Marone, Christopher Akiki, Jia Li, Jenny Chim, et al. Starcoder: may the source be with
  you! arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.06161, 2023.
Jacky Liang, Wenlong Huang, Fei Xia, Peng Xu, Karol Hausman, Brian Ichter, Pete Florence, and
  Andy Zeng. Code as policies: Language model programs for embodied control, 2023.
Michael L Littman, Ufuk Topcu, Jie Fu, Charles Isbell, Min Wen, and James MacGlashan.
 Environment-independent task specifications via gltl. arXiv preprint arXiv:1704.04341, 2017.
Bo Liu, Yuqian Jiang, Xiaohan Zhang, Qiang Liu, Shiqi Zhang, Joydeep Biswas, and Peter Stone.
  Llm+p: Empowering large language models with optimal planning proficiency, 2023a.
Jason Xinyu Liu, Ziyi Yang, Ifrah Idrees, Sam Liang, Benjamin Schornstein, Stefanie Tellex, and
  Ankit Shah. Lang2ltl: Translating natural language commands to temporal robot task specification,
  2023b.
Jelena Luketina, Nantas Nardelli, Gregory Farquhar, Jakob Foerster, Jacob Andreas, Edward
   Grefenstette, Shimon Whiteson, and Tim Rocktäschel. A survey of reinforcement learn-
   ing informed by natural language. In Proceedings of the Twenty-Eighth International Joint
  Conference on Artificial Intelligence, IJCAI-19, pp. 6309–6317. International Joint Confer-
   ences on Artificial Intelligence Organization, 7 2019. doi: 10.24963/ijcai.2019/880. URL
   https://doi.org/10.24963/ijcai.2019/880.
Warwick Masson, Pravesh Ranchod, and George Konidaris. Reinforcement learning with param-
 eterized actions. Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 30(1), Feb.
 2016. doi: 10.1609/aaai.v30i1.10226. URL https://ojs.aaai.org/index.php/AAAI/
 article/view/10226.
Shivam Miglani and N. Yorke-Smith. Nltopddl: One-shot learning of pddl models from natural lan-
  guage process manuals. 2020. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:
  231626460.
Suvir Mirchandani, Siddharth Karamcheti, and Dorsa Sadigh. ELLA: Exploration through learned
  language abstraction. In A. Beygelzimer, Y. Dauphin, P. Liang, and J. Wortman Vaughan (eds.),
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2021. URL https://openreview.
  net/forum?id=VvUldGZ3izR.
Raymond J Mooney. Learning for semantic parsing. In International Conference on Intelligent Text
  Processing and Computational Linguistics, pp. 311–324. Springer, 2007.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Karthik Narasimhan, Regina Barzilay, and Tommi Jaakkola. Grounding language for transfer in deep
  reinforcement learning, 2018.

Roma Patel, Rafael Rodriguez-Sanchez, and George Konidaris. On the relationship between structure
  in natural language and models of sequential decision processes. In Language in Reinforcement
  Learning Workshop at ICML 2020, 2020. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
 -KDnP4X1-0_.

R. Rodriguez-Sanchez, B.A. Spiegel, J. Wang, R. Patel, G.D. Konidaris, and S. Tellex. Rlang: A
  declarative language for describing partial world knowledge to reinforcement learning agents. In
  Proceedings of the Fortieth International Conference on Machine Learning, July 2023.

John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy
  optimization algorithms, 2017.

Tom Silver, Soham Dan, Kavitha Srinivas, Joshua B. Tenenbaum, Leslie Pack Kaelbling, and Michael
  Katz. Generalized planning in pddl domains with pretrained large language models, 2023.

Ishika Singh, Valts Blukis, Arsalan Mousavian, Ankit Goyal, Danfei Xu, Jonathan Tremblay, Dieter
   Fox, Jesse Thomason, and Animesh Garg. Progprompt: Generating situated robot task plans using
   large language models, 2022.

Chan Hee Song, Jiaman Wu, Clayton Washington, Brian M. Sadler, Wei-Lun Chao, and Yu Su.
  Llm-planner: Few-shot grounded planning for embodied agents with large language models, 2023.

Shawn Squire, Stefanie Tellex, Dilip Arumugam, and Lei Yang. Grounding english commands to
  reward functions. In Robotics: Science and Systems, 2015.

Luc Steels and Manfred Hild. Language grounding in robots. Springer Science & Business Media,
  2012.

Richard S Sutton, Andrew G Barto, et al. Introduction to Reinforcement Learning, volume 135. MIT
  press Cambridge, 1998.

Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Łukasz
  Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. Advances in neural information processing
  systems, 30, 2017.

Sai Vemprala, Rogerio Bonatti, Arthur Bucker, and Ashish Kapoor. Chatgpt for robotics: Design
  principles and model abilities, 2023.

Christopher John Cornish Hellaby Watkins. Learning from delayed rewards. 1989.

Olivia Watkins, Trevor Darrell, Pieter Abbeel, Jacob Andreas, and Abhishek Gupta. Teachable
  reinforcement learning via advice distillation, 2023.

Jimmy Wu, Rika Antonova, Adam Kan, Marion Lepert, Andy Zeng, Shuran Song, Jeannette Bohg,
  Szymon Rusinkiewicz, and Thomas Funkhouser. Tidybot: Personalized robot assistance with large
  language models. Autonomous Robots, 2023.

Yaqi Xie, Chen Yu, Tongyao Zhu, Jinbin Bai, Ze Gong, and Harold Soh. Translating natural language
  to planning goals with large-language models, 2023.

Håkan L. S. Younes and Michael L. Littman. Ppddl 1 . 0 : An extension to pddl for expressing
  planning domains with probabilistic effects. In PPDDL 1 . 0 : An Extension to PDDL for
  Expressing Planning Domains with Probabilistic Effects, 2004.

Wenhao Yu, Nimrod Gileadi, Chuyuan Fu, Sean Kirmani, Kuang-Huei Lee, Montse Gonzalez Arenas,
 Hao-Tien Lewis Chiang, Tom Erez, Leonard Hasenclever, Jan Humplik, Brian Ichter, Ted Xiao,
 Peng Xu, Andy Zeng, Tingnan Zhang, Nicolas Heess, Dorsa Sadigh, Jie Tan, Yuval Tassa, and Fei
 Xia. Language to rewards for robotic skill synthesis, 2023.


                                                12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A     A PPENDIX


A.1     P ROMPTS U SED FOR T RANSLATION P IPELINE


A.1.1    P ROMPT USED FOR S TAGE 1 OF THE TRANSLATION PIPELINE . G IVEN A NEW PIECE OF
         ADVICE , WE PROMPT THE LLM TO CLASSIFY IT AS AN E FFECT, P LAN , OR P OLICY.


    RLang is a formal language for specifying information about every element of a Markov
    Decision Process (S,A,R,T). Each RLang object refers to one or more elements of an MDP.
    Here is a description of three important RLang groundings:

    Policy: a direct function from states to actions, best used for more general com-
    mands.
    Effect: a prediction about the state of the world or the reward function.
    Plan: a sequence of specific steps to take.

    Your task is to decide which RLang grounding most naturally corresponds to a given piece of
    advice:
    Advice = “Don’t touch any mice unless you have gloves on.”
    Grounding: Effect
    Advice = “Walking into lava will kill you.”
    Grounding: Effect
    Advice = “First get the money, then go to the green square.”
    Grounding: Plan
    Advice = “Go through the door to the goal.”
    Grounding: Plan
    Advice = “If you have the key, go to the door, otherwise you need to get the key.”
    Grounding: Policy
    Advice = “If there are any closed doors, open them.”
    Grounding: Policy


                                                13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.1.2   P ROMPT USED FOR S TAGE 2 OF THE PIPELINE TO TRANSLATE A PIECE OF ADVICE INTO
        AN RL ANG PLAN .


   Your task is to translate natural language advice to RLang plan, which is a sequence of
   specific steps to take. For each instance, we provide a piece of advice in natural language, a
   list of allowed primitives, and you should complete the instance by filling the missing plan
   function. Don’t use any primitive outside the provided primitive list corresponding to each
   instance, e.g., if there is no ‘green door’ in the primitive list you must not use ‘green door’
   for the plan function.

  Advice = “Open the door with the key and go through it to the goal”
   Primitives = [‘Agent’, ‘Wall’, ‘GoalTile’, ‘Lava’, ‘Key’, ‘Door’, ‘Box’, ‘Ball’, ‘left’, ‘right’,
  ‘forward’, ‘pickup’, ‘drop’, ‘toggle’, ‘done’, ‘pointing right’, ‘pointing down’, ‘pointing left’,
  ‘pointing up’, ‘go to’, ‘step towards’, ‘yellow key’, ‘yellow door’, ‘agent’, ‘goal’, ‘at’,
  ‘in inventory’]
    Plan main:
      Execute go_to(yellow_key)
      Execute pickup
      Execute go_to(yellow_door)
      Execute toggle
      Execute go_to(goal)
  Advice = “Get the key behind the red door to open the grey door. Then drop the key to the
   left.”
   Primitives = [‘Agent’, ‘Wall’, ‘GoalTile’, ‘Lava’, ‘Key’, ‘Door’, ‘Box’, ‘Ball’, ‘left’, ‘right’,
  ‘forward’, ‘pickup’, ‘drop’, ‘toggle’, ‘done’, ‘pointing right’, ‘pointing down’, ‘pointing left’,
  ‘pointing up’, ‘go to’, ‘step towards’, ‘yellow key’, ‘yellow door’, ‘agent’, ‘goal’, ‘at’,
  ‘in inventory’]
    Plan main:
      Execute go_to(red_door)
      Execute toggle
      Execute go_to(grey_key)
      Execute pickup
      Execute go_to(grey_door)
      Execute toggle
      Execute left
      Execute drop


                                                 14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.1.3   P ROMPT USED FOR S TAGE 2 OF THE PIPELINE TO TRANSLATE A PIECE OF ADVICE INTO
        AN RL ANG POLICY.



   Your task is to translate natural language advice to RLang policy, which is a direct function
   from states to actions. For each instance, we provide a piece of advice in natural language, a
   list of allowed primitives, and you should complete the instance by filling the missing policy
   function. Don’t use any primitive outside the provided primitive list corresponding to each
   instance, e.g., if there is no ‘green door’ in the primitive list you must not use “green door’
   for the policy function.

  Advice = “If the yellow door is open, go through it and walk to the goal. Otherwise open the
  yellow door if you have the key.”
   Primitives = [‘Agent’, ‘Wall’, ‘GoalTile’, ‘Lava’, ‘Key’, ‘Door’, ‘Box’, ‘Ball’, ‘left’, ‘right’,
  ‘forward’, ‘pickup’, ‘drop’, ‘toggle’, ‘done’, ‘pointing right’, ‘pointing down’, ‘pointing left’,
  ‘pointing up’, ‘go to’, ‘step towards’, ‘yellow key’, ‘yellow door’, ‘agent’, ‘goal’, ‘at’, ‘car-
   rying’]
    Policy main:
      if yellow_door.is_open:
        Execute go_to(goal)
      elif carrying(yellow_key) and at(yellow_door) and not yellow_door.
      is_open:
        Execute toggle
  Advice = “If you don’t have the key, go get it.”
   Primitives = [‘Agent’, ‘Wall’, ‘GoalTile’, ‘Lava’, ‘Key’, ‘Door’, ‘Box’, ‘Ball’, ‘left’, ‘right’,
  ‘forward’, ‘pickup’, ‘drop’, ‘toggle’, ‘done’, ‘pointing right’, ‘pointing down’, ‘pointing left’,
  ‘pointing up’, ‘go to’, ‘step towards’, ‘grey key’, ‘red door’, ‘grey door’, ‘agent’, ‘pur-
   ple ball’, ‘at’, ‘carrying’]
    Policy main:
      if at(grey_key):
        Execute pickup
      elif not carrying(grey_key):
        Execute go_to(grey_key)
  Advice = “If you are carrying a ball and its corresponding box is closed, open the box if you
   are at it, otherwise go to the box if you can reach it.”
   Primitives = [‘Agent’, ‘Wall’, ‘GoalTile’, ‘Lava’, ‘Key’, ‘Door’, ‘Box’, ‘Ball’, ‘left’, ‘right’,
  ‘forward’, ‘pickup’, ‘drop’, ‘toggle’, ‘done’, ‘pointing right’, ‘pointing down’, ‘pointing left’,
  ‘pointing up’, ‘go to’, ‘step towards’, ‘green ball’, ‘green box’, ‘purple box’, ‘agent’, ‘pur-
   ple ball’, ‘at’, ‘reachable’, ‘carrying’]
    Policy main:
      if carrying(green_ball) and not green_box.is_open:
        if at(green_box):
          Execute toggle
        elif reachable(green_box):
          Execute go_to(green_box)
  Advice = “Drop any balls for boxes you can’t reach”
   Primitives = [‘Agent’, ‘Wall’, ‘GoalTile’, ‘Lava’, ‘Key’, ‘Door’, ‘Box’, ‘Ball’, ‘left’, ‘right’,
  ‘forward’, ‘pickup’, ‘drop’, ‘toggle’, ‘done’, ‘pointing right’, ‘pointing down’, ‘pointing left’,
  ‘pointing up’, ‘go to’, ‘step towards’, ‘green ball’, ‘green box’, ‘purple box’, ‘agent’, ‘pur-
   ple ball’, ‘at’, ‘reachable’, ‘carrying’]
    Policy main:
      if carrying(green_ball) and not reachable(green_box):
        Execute drop
      if carrying(purple_ball) and not reachable(purple_box):
        Execute drop


                                                 15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  Advice = “if you have any key for a door that you cannot reach, you should drop it”
   Primitives = [‘Agent’, ‘Wall’, ‘GoalTile’, ‘Lava’, ‘Key’, ‘Door’, ‘Box’, ‘Ball’, ‘left’, ‘right’,
  ‘forward’, ‘pickup’, ‘drop’, ‘toggle’, ‘done’, ‘pointing right’, ‘pointing down’, ‘pointing left’,
  ‘pointing up’, ‘go to’, ‘step towards’, ‘green ball’, ‘green box’, ‘purple box’, ‘agent’, ‘pur-
   ple ball’, ‘at’, ‘reachable’, ‘carrying’]
    Policy main:
      if carrying(green_key) and not reachable(green_door):
        Execute drop
      if carrying(purple_key) and not reachable(purple_door):
        Execute drop
      if carrying(red_key) and not reachable(red_door):
        Execute drop
  Advice = “Hey listen, you can open the door if you have the key and at the door when the
   door is closed”
   Primitives = [‘Agent’, ‘Wall’, ‘GoalTile’, ‘Lava’, ‘Key’, ‘Door’, ‘Box’, ‘Ball’, ‘left’, ‘right’,
  ‘forward’, ‘pickup’, ‘drop’, ‘toggle’, ‘done’, ‘pointing right’, ‘pointing down’, ‘pointing left’,
  ‘pointing up’, ‘go to’, ‘step towards’, ‘green ball’, ‘green box’, ‘purple box’, ‘agent’, ‘pur-
   ple ball’, ‘at’, ‘reachable’, ‘carrying’]
    Policy main:
      if carrying(purple_key) and not purple_door.is_open and at(
      purple_door):
        Execute toggle


                                                 16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.1.4    P ROMPT USED FOR S TAGE 2 OF THE PIPELINE TO TRANSLATE A PIECE OF ADVICE INTO
         AN RL ANG EFFECT.


   Your task is to translate natural language advice to RLang effect, which is a prediction about
   the state of the world or the reward function. For each instance, we provide a piece of advice
   in natural language, a list of allowed primitives, and you should complete the instance by
   filling the missing effect function. Don’t use any primitive outside the provided primitive list
   corresponding to each instance, e.g., if there is no ‘green door’ in the primitive list you must
   not use ‘green door’ for the effect function.

   Advice = “Don’t go to the door without the key”
   Primitives = [‘yellow door’, ‘goal’, ‘pickup’, ‘yellow key’, ‘toggle’, ‘go to’, ‘carrying’, ‘at’]
      Effect main:
        if at(yellow_door) and not carrying(yellow_key):
          Reward -1
  Advice = “Don’t walk into closed doors. If you’re tired, don’t go forward.”
   Primitives = [‘Agent’, ‘Wall’, ‘GoalTile’, ‘Lava’, ‘Key’, ‘Door’, ‘Box’, ‘Ball’, ‘left’, ‘right’,
  ‘forward’, ‘pickup’, ‘drop’, ‘toggle’, ‘done’, ‘pointing right’, ‘pointing down’, ‘pointing left’,
  ‘pointing up’, ‘go to’, ‘step towards’, ‘green ball’, ‘green box’, ‘purple box’, ‘agent’, ‘pur-
   ple ball’, ‘at’, ‘reachable’, ‘carrying’]
      Effect main:
        if at(yellow_door) and yellow_door.is_closed and A == forward:
          Reward -1
          S’ -> S
        elif tired() and A == forward:
          Reward -1
  Advice = “Walking into balls is pointless. You will die if you walk into keys. Trying to open
   a box when you aren’t near it will do nothing.”
   Primitives = [‘Agent’, ‘Wall’, ‘GoalTile’, ‘Lava’, ‘Key’, ‘Door’, ‘Box’, ‘Ball’, ‘left’, ‘right’,
  ‘forward’, ‘pickup’, ‘drop’, ‘toggle’, ‘done’, ‘pointing right’, ‘pointing down’, ‘pointing left’,
  ‘pointing up’, ‘go to’, ‘step towards’, ‘green ball’, ‘green box’, ‘purple box’, ‘agent’, ‘pur-
   ple ball’, ‘at’, ‘reachable’, ‘carrying’]

      Effect main:
        if at(Ball) and A == forward:
          Reward 0
          S’ -> S
        elif at(Key) and A == forward:
          Reward -1
          S’ -> S*0
        elif at(Box) and A == toggle:
          Reward 0
          S’ -> S


A.2     U SER S TUDY - T RANSLATED A DVICE


                                                  17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                       Table 3: Advice from the user study translated to RLang.

  Language Advice                                  RLang Translation
  “Remember to toggle to open doors.”              Policy main:
                                                     if at(yellow_door) and not
                                                     yellow_door.is_open:
                                                       Execute toggle
                                                     elif at(red_door) and not red_door.
                                                     is_open:
                                                       Execute toggle
                                                     elif at(purple_door) and not
                                                     purple_door.is_open:
                                                       Execute toggle
                                                     elif at(blue_door) and not
                                                     blue_door.is_open:
                                                       Execute toggle
                                                     elif at(green_door) and not
                                                     green_door.is_open:
                                                       Execute toggle
                                                     elif at(grey_door) and not
                                                     grey_door.is_open:
                                                       Execute toggle

  “You don’t need to carry keys to open the grey   Effect main:
  door.”                                             if at(grey_door) and carrying(
                                                     red_key):
                                                       S’ -> S
                                                       Reward -1
                                                     elif at(grey_door) and
                                                     carrying_something():
                                                       S’ -> S
                                                       Reward -1

  “Identify the room with the red key, move        Plan main:
  to that room by opening the door. Pick up          Execute go_to(red_key)
  the key. Identify the room with the red door,      Execute pickup
  proceed there. Open the red door. Find the         Execute go_to(red_door)
  green square and go there to finish the game.”     Execute toggle
                                                     Execute go_to(goal)

  “Move to the grey door, open it and enter the    Plan main:
  room until you get to the red key, pick it up.     Execute go_to(grey_door)
  Exit the room and move towards the red door,       Execute toggle
  open it and get into that room. Move to the        Execute go_to(red_key)
  green block and enter it.”                         Execute pickup
                                                     Execute go_to(grey_door)
                                                     Execute toggle
                                                     Execute go_to(red_door)
                                                     Execute toggle
                                                     Execute go_to(goal)

  “Go to the grey door. open the grey door. go     Plan main:
  to the red key. pick up the red key. go to the     Execute go_to(grey_door)
  red door. open the red door. go to the green       Execute toggle
  square.”                                           Execute go_to(red_key)
                                                     Execute pickup
                                                     Execute go_to(red_door)
                                                     Execute toggle
                                                     Execute go_to(goal)


                                                     18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                Table 4: Advice from the user study translated to RLang (continued).

  Language Advice                                 RLang Translation
  “Pick up the red key after opening the grey     Plan main:
  door. Then walk to the red door, open it, and     Execute go_to(grey_door)
  go to the goal.”                                  Execute toggle
                                                    Execute go_to(red_key)
                                                    Execute pickup
                                                    Execute go_to(red_door)
                                                    Execute toggle
                                                    Execute go_to(goal)

  “You cannot open the red door without a red     Effect main:
  key.”                                             if at(red_door) and not carrying(
                                                    red_key):
                                                      S’ -> S
                                                      Reward -1

  “Walking towards the red door is not very       Effect main:
  useful if it is closed.”                          if at(red_door) and not(red_door.
                                                    is_open) and A == forward:
                                                      S’ -> S
                                                      Reward -1

  “Go down until the second door on the left      Plan main:
  and pick up the key. Then exit the room and       Execute go_to(second_left_door)
  go down until the next door on the left and       Execute pickup
  use it to open the door and get to the green      Execute go_to(exit)
  box.”                                             Execute go_to(next_left_door)
                                                    Execute toggle
                                                    Execute go_to(green_box)

  “Go to the room that has the red key, pick      Plan main:
  it up, and then go to the room with a red         Execute go_to(red_key)
  door. Enter the room, and go to the green         Execute pickup
  goal object.”                                     Execute go_to(red_door)
                                                    Execute toggle
                                                    Execute go_to(goal)


                                                    19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.3    M ID M AZE L AVA - T RANSLATED A DVICE


   Advice: “Pick up the blue ball and drop it to your right. Then pick up the green key and
   unlock the green door. Then drop the key to your right. Some general advice: If you are
   carrying a key and its corresponding door is closed, open the door if you are at it, otherwise
   go to the door if you can reach it. Otherwise, drop any keys for doors you can’t reach. If you
   can reach the goal, go to it. Walking into lava will kill you. If you’re not at a door, toggling
   will do nothing. Trying to pick something up while you’re carrying something is pointless.
   Walking into walls will do nothing.”
      Plan main:
        Execute go_to(blue_ball)
        Execute pickup
        Execute right
        Execute drop
        Execute go_to(green_key)
        Execute pickup
        Execute go_to(green_door)
        Execute toggle
        Execute right
        Execute drop

      Policy main:
        if carrying(green_key) and not green_door.is_open:
          if at(green_door):
            Execute toggle
          elif reachable(green_door):
            Execute go_to(green_door)

        elif carrying(grey_key) and not grey_door.is_open:
          if at(grey_door):
            Execute toggle
          elif reachable(grey_door):
            Execute go_to(grey_door)

        elif reachable(goal):
          Execute go_to(goal)

        elif carrying(green_key) and not reachable(green_door):
          Execute drop

        elif carrying(grey_key) and not reachable(grey_door):
          Execute drop

      Effect main:
        if at(Lava) and A == forward:
          S’ -> S*0
          Reward -1
        if not at(Door) and A == toggle:
          S’ -> S
          Reward 0
        if carrying_something() and A == pickup:
          S’ -> S
          Reward 0
        if at(Wall) and A == forward:
          S’ -> S
          Reward 0


                                                 20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.4    H ARD M AZE L IGHT - T RANSLATED A DVICE


   Advice: “Go and pick up the green ball, and drop it on your left, and then go pick up the blue
   key, and go to the blue door and open it up and drop the key on your left, and then go pick up
   the green key, and go to the green door to open it and drop the key on your left, and then go
   pick up the purple ball and drop it on your right. Nothing will happen if you walk towards the
   wall, or try to open a purple door without the purple key if it is locked. The applies for the
   yellow door and key as well as the red door and key. If you can reach the grey door and it is
   closed but you have the key, open it if you are at it or otherwise go to it. The same applies to
   the purple door, yellow door, and red door. Lastly, if you find the goal is reachable just go to
   the goal directly.”
      Plan main:
        Execute go_to(green_ball)
        Execute pickup
        Execute left
        Execute drop
        Execute go_to(blue_key)
        Execute pickup
        Execute go_to(blue_door)
        Execute toggle
        Execute left
        Execute drop
        Execute go_to(green_key)
        Execute pickup
        Execute go_to(green_door)
        Execute toggle
        Execute right
        Execute drop
        Execute go_to(purple_ball)
        Execute pickup
        Execute right
        Execute drop

      Effect main:
        if at(Wall) and A == forward:
          Reward 0
          S’ -> S
        elif at(purple_door) and purple_door.is_locked and A == toggle and
         not carrying(purple_key):
          Reward 0
          S’ -> S
        elif at(yellow_door) and yellow_door.is_locked and A == toggle and
         not carrying(yellow_key):
          Reward 0
          S’ -> S
        elif at(red_door) and red_door.is_locked and A == toggle and not
        carrying(red_key):
          Reward 0
          S’ -> S


                                                 21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    Policy main:
      if reachable(grey_door) and carrying(grey_key) and grey_door.
      is_locked:
        if at(grey_door):
          Execute toggle
        else:
          Execute go_to(grey_door)

      elif reachable(purple_door) and carrying(purple_key) and
      purple_door.is_locked:
        if at(purple_door):
          Execute toggle
        else:
          Execute go_to(purple_door)

      elif reachable(yellow_door) and carrying(yellow_key) and
      yellow_door.is_locked:
        if at(yellow_door):
          Execute toggle
        else:
          Execute go_to(yellow_door)

      elif reachable(red_door) and carrying(red_key) and red_door.
      is_locked:
        if at(red_door):
          Execute toggle
        else:
          Execute go_to(red_door)

       elif reachable(goal):
         Execute go_to(goal)


B    A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENT: G ROUNDING C OMMANDS TO RL ANG P LANS
We compare our method to SayCan (Ahn et al., 2022), which uses the commonsense reasoning
capacity of LLMs to satisfy a natural language request by generating a simple plan consisting of a
series of pre-engineered high-level robot skills. Adopting the same
In this experiment we demonstrate that, in a simulated 3-dimensional physical environment, RLang
can express the full range of natural language instructions necessary for a robot to complete various
tasks. By grounding natural language instructions to RLang policies over this environment, we
achieve performance on par with the results from the open-source tasks that the original SayCan paper
evaluated on, showing that RLang can be easily substituted for the formal language that the SayCan
authors developed for this specific task, allowing for generalization without sacrificing performance.
Similar to the SayCan work, we assume that we are given a grounding tuple ⟨Π, S, A, ⟩, and a set
of skills Π, where each skill π ∈ Π performs an action with the robot arm to manipulate a block or
a bowl. We evaluate on the 8 unique tasks made available in the open-source version of SayCan,
running each task across 10 different randomly selected initial states, using both the native SayCan
language and RLang as the DSL for grounding natural language instructions to robot behavior.
Each task configuration that the original SayCan agent completes, is also completed by the RLang
agent. While their behavior on failure cases occasionally varied, these were generally caused by
errors in the vision model’s processing of shadows in the simulated environment. These generally
caused the textual scene description fed into GPT-3 to include a block where a bowl should be, and
occasionally incorrect color labels, which often provided the text-only planner with a nonsensical task
that was impossible to complete. Similarly, in cases where multiple action orders could satisfy the
request, the RLang and SayCan pipelines occasionally diverged in the order of actions. Nonetheless,
neither language grounding pipeline completed a task configuration that the other one did not.


                                                  22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                  (a) Initial state                                   (b) Completed state


           (c) Move 1                         (d) Move 2                          (e) Move 3

Figure 7: One configuration of the SayCan environment, and the action sequence to execute on the
instruction: “put all the blocks in the green bowl.”


Table 5: Success rates of SayCan and RLang-based instruction grounding rate on each task, out of 10
random initial states.

                 Instruction                                          SayCan    RLang
                 put all the blocks in different corners.                  10        10
                 move the block to the bowl.                                6         6
                 put any blocks on their matched colored bowls.             7         7
                 put all the blocks in the green bowl.                      7         7
                 stack all the blocks.                                      8         8
                 make the highest block stack.                              7         7
                 put the block in all the corners.                         10        10
                 clockwise, move the block through all the corners.        10        10


                                                   23
