Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


U NIFYING M ODEL -BASED AND M ODEL -F REE R EIN -
FORCEMENT L EARNING WITH E QUIVALENT P OLICY
S ETS
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                             A BSTRACT

         Model-based and model-free reinforcement learning (RL) each possess relative
         strengths that prevent either algorithm from strictly dominating the other. Model-
         based RL often offers greater data efficiency, as it can use models to evaluate
         many possible behaviors before choosing one to enact. However, because models
         cannot perfectly represent complex environments, agents that rely too heavily on
         models may suffer from poor asymptotic performance. Model-free RL avoids
         this problem at the expense of data efficiency. In this work, we seek a unified
         approach to RL that combines the strengths of both algorithms. To this end, we
         propose equivalent policy sets (EPS), a novel tool for quantifying the limitations
         of models for the purposes of decision making. Based on this concept, we propose
         Unified RL, a novel RL algorithm that uses models to constrain model-free RL to
         the set of policies that are not provably suboptimal, according to model-based
         bounds on policy performance. We demonstrate across a range of benchmarks
         that Unified RL effectively combines the relative strengths of both model-based
         and model-free RL, in that it achieves comparable data efficiency to model-based
         RL and exceeds the data efficiency of model-free RL, while achieving asymptotic
         performance similar or superior to that of model-free RL. Additionally, we show
         that Unified RL outperforms a number of existing state-of-the-art model-based
         and model-free RL algorithms, and can learn effective policies in situations where
         either model-free or model-based RL alone fail.


1   I NTRODUCTION

Recent successes in model-based reinforcement learning (MBRL) have demonstrated the enor-
mous value that learned representations of environmental dynamics (i.e., models) can confer to
autonomous decision making. For example, models allow agents to evaluate many possible future
behaviors, without requiring additional expensive and potentially dangerous environmental interac-
tions. This process is referred to as planning, and is a cornerstone of autonomous decision making.
Models also hold the potential to facilitate cross-task knowledge transfer (Killian et al., 2017) and
intelligent exploration (Lowrey et al., 2018; Sekar et al., 2020; Mehta et al., 2021; 2022). In practice,
MBRL algorithms often achieve higher data efficiency than their model-free counterparts (Deisen-
roth & Rasmussen, 2011; Heess et al., 2015; Gal et al., 2016a; Chua et al., 2018; Janner et al., 2019;
Hafner et al., 2019; 2020; Lin et al., 2023).
Although useful, models come with their own set of drawbacks. Because models typically posses
limited representational capacity, they will always fall short of capturing the full complexity of the
real environmental dynamics, which may help explain why MBRL often fails to match the asymp-
totic performance of model-free RL (MFRL) (Wang et al., 2019). This limitation of models is
exacerbated by the objective mismatch problem (Lambert et al., 2020): model-learning objectives
typically used in MBRL, which are based on some generic measure of accuracy, are often misaligned
with the overall goal of increasing reward, which has been shown to negatively impact MBRL per-
formance in practice (Agarwal et al., 2021).
Several recent approaches have attempted to address objective mismatch by deriving model-learning
objectives that are more aligned with the overall RL objective, to enable learned models to be more


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


useful for policy improvement (Joseph et al., 2013; Luo et al., 2018; Lambert et al., 2020; Ra-
jeswaran et al., 2020; Chow et al., 2020; Grimm et al., 2020; D’Oro et al., 2020; Eysenbach et al.,
2022; Ghugare et al., 2022). However, because practical models will always differ from the true dy-
namics by some degree, we hypothesize that over-reliance on models will invariably result in some
degree of suboptimality. For this reason, we take an alternative approach to addressing the objec-
tive mismatch problem. We seek to develop agents that understand the limitations of their models,
allowing them to switch to an alternative (e.g., a model-free) learning paradigm in situations where
models are not useful for policy improvement. We hypothesize that such an agent would enjoy the
benefits of both model-based and model-free learning. To this end, we propose equivalent policy
sets (EPS), a novel tool for quantifying the limitations of a model for estimating optimal behaviors.
We define the EPS as the set of all policies that are not provably suboptimal, using bounds on the
performance of candidate policies, computed using the model. Intuitively, the EPS captures the
usefulness of a particular model class for discerning optimal from suboptimal policies.
Based on the concept of the EPS, we propose Unified RL, a principled approach to combining MBRL
and MFRL that takes advantage of their relative strengths. Unified RL constrains the policy found
by MFRL (e.g., soft actor-critic) to lie within the set of non-provably suboptimal policies (the EPS).
Here, models are used as a sort of “pre-filtering” step that eliminates provably suboptimal policies
from consideration by MFRL. Unified RL leverages the ability of models to rapidly rule-out subopti-
mal candidate behaviors, while avoiding limitations on asymptotic performance that they introduce.
We show empirically that Unified RL is able to combine the benefits of both model-based and
model-free RL on a range of challenging continuous control benchmarks. Furthermore, we show
that Unified RL outperforms a wide range of state-of-the-art model-based and model-free RL algo-
rithms. Finally we show that Unified RL is robust to failure of either its model-based or model-free
components. Specifically, when distractors are introduced that prevent the agent from learning well-
aligned models, Unified RL continues to make learning progress using model-free policy updates.
On the other hand, when poorly selected model-free hyperparameters are used that cause MFRL to
fail, Unified RL resorts to MBRL.


2    BACKGROUND

We represent the environment with which the agent interacts as a Markov decision process (MDP)
with initial state distribution s0 ∼ p0 (s0 ), state transition dynamics st+1 ∼ T (st+1 |st , at ), reward
function rt ∼ R(rt |st , at ) for t ∈ {0, ..., T }, and discount factor γ ∈ [0, 1]. For simplicity, we
assume γ = 1 and hence ignore it in future exposition. We consider continuous control problems,
wherein the agent learns a policy π ∈ Π where π : S × A → [0, ∞) is a state-dependent probability
density function over a real-valued action space.
In this work, we formulate the RL problem in Bayesian terms, although the approach is not restricted
to using Bayesian algorithms. We are therefore concerned with the Bayesian posterior over state
transition and reward functions, given by p(w|D) = p(D|w)p(w)/p(D), where D is comprised of
data observed thus far in the environment, w denotes a parameter vector that parameterizes both
the state transition and reward functions, and p(w) is our prior. The prior represents our belief
about the dynamics before observing data D, and can be informed by domain-specific knowledge
or from previous tasks. In this work we do not assume that we possess any prior knowledge, and
therefore choose a generic prior (Sec. 3.2). We denote our models of the state transition function
and reward function, conditioned on a certain parameter vector w, as p(s′ |s, a, w) and p(r|s, a, w),
respectively. The distribution of trajectories τ given a particular policy π and parameters w is given
                                                  QT
by p(τ |π, w) = p(s0 )π(a0 |s0 )p(r0 |s0 , a0 , w) t=1 p(st |st−1 , at−1 , w)π(at |st )p(rt |st , at , w). Our
inferred posterior distribution over trajectories given the available data D and a policy π is given by
p(τ |D) = Ep(w|D) p(τ |π, w). We  hPdenote the iexpected return of π given a particular parameter
                                       T
vector w as J(π|w) = Ep(τ |π,w)        t=0 rt π, w . Finally, we define the Bayesian return of a policy
π to be the expected sum of rewards achieved by π, in expectation over our Bayesian posterior over
trajectories
                                                       " T            #
                                                         X
                                 J(π|D) = Ep(τ |D,π)          rt π, D .                                     (1)
                                                            t=0


                                                      2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


This is the quantity that our approach to Bayesian RL attempts to maximize. We refer to a policy that
maximizes the Bayesian return π ∗ ∈ arg maxπ∈Π J(π|D) as the Bayes-optimal policy. Similarly,
we refer to any policy π ∈ / arg maxπ∈Π J(π|D) as Bayes-suboptimal.
For many interesting model classes, exact Bayesian posteriors are intractable, and must therefore
be approximated with some tractable distribution family. We denote approximate posteriors with
q(w; θ) ∈ Q, where θ denotes the parameters of the distribution. For example, if q is a multivariate
normal distribution, θ may contain the mean vector and variance matrix. We henceforth refer to q as
our model, because it encodes our learned representation of (our posterior over) the environmental
dynamics.

3     U NIFYING M ODEL -BASED AND M ODEL -F REE R EINFORCEMENT
      L EARNING

Here we introduce the notion of equivalent pol-
icy sets (EPS) as a tool for quantifying the lim-             Unified RL Agent            Environment
itations of models for the purposes of approxi-
mating optimal policies. Subsequently, we de-                MBRL
scribe Unified Reinforcement Learning, which
builds on the concept of the EPS to combine the
strengths of model-based and model-free RL.                  MFRL


3.1   E QUIVALENT P OLICY S ETS

To achieve our ultimate goal of developing                            Data
agents that can flexibly switch between model-
free and model-based learning, agents must un-
derstand the limitations of models for evaluat-     Figure 1: Unified RL combines model-based and
ing and improving policies. To this end, we         model-free RL using the equivalent policy set
propose equivalent policy sets (EPS) as a tool      (EPS). At each iteration, data from a shared buffer
for quantifying the usefulness of a model for       are used to update a model-based policy and a
discerning optimal from suboptimal policies.        model-free policy. We then check whether the
More precisely, we define the EPS ΠE (θ, D) ⊆       model-free policy is contained within the EPS,
Π to be the set of policies that are not provably   that is, the set of policies that cannot be proven
Bayes-suboptimal, using a model with parame-        to be suboptimal, according to bounds on policy
ters θ and available data D. To prove the sub-      performance computed using the model. If the
optimality of a particular policy π, we use our     model-free policy is within the EPS, it is used to
model to compute a lower bound on (a function       collect another episode of data in the environment,
f of) the improvement in Bayesian return of a       which is added to the data buffer. Otherwise, the
new policy π ′ over π,                              model-based policy is used to collect more data.


                             L(π, π ′ , θ, D) ≤ f ((J(π ′ |D) − J(π|D))) ,                          (2)

where f is a monotonically increasing function. Although one could use any such L, in this work
we take L to be of the form

                         ′             p(D|w)p(w)     ′
                 L(π, π , θ, D) = E f             (J(π |w) − J(π|w))    ,                           (3)
                                         q(w; θ)

which we derive in the Sec. A.1 of the Appendix using Jensen’s inequality. This particular form of
L requires f to be concave, and is closely related to f -divergences, a generalization of the widely
used KL and Réyni divergences (Li & Turner, 2016; Wan et al., 2020). In the closely-related field
of variational inference, the effect of the choice of f is an active area of research, and gives rise
to various divergence metrics Kingma & Welling (2013); Burda et al. (2015); Li & Turner (2016);
Dieng et al. (2017); Chen et al. (2018); Wan et al. (2020). In this work we primarily consider
f = log, as this is the most well-studied choice of f Blei et al. (2017). L is tight (i.e., inequality
2 holds with equality) when q(w; θ) ∝ p(D|w)p(w)(J(π ′ |w) − J(π|w)). Note that, although L


                                                    3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


depends on the parameters θ of the approximate posterior q, inequality 2 bounds the exact difference
in Bayesian return between π ′ and π.
Inequality 2 allows us to prove the suboptimality of any policy π for which there exists a new policy
π ′ (in the same domain as π) such that L(π, π ′ , θ, D) > f (0), because this condition implies that π ′
achieves higher Bayesian return than π, and therefore π is not Bayes-optimal. We can therefore use
L to construct the EPS, which we define to be the set of all policies π for which there does not exist
a provably better π ′ ∈ Π, using model parameters θ and data D,


                           ΠE (θ, D) = {π : max
                                             ′
                                                L(π, π ′ , θ, D) ≤ f (0)} .                          (4)
                                              π ∈Π


Equivalent Policy Sets for Understanding the Limitations of Models In the limit of an infinitely
expressive model (that is, q can represent any posterior over w), L is tight, meaning that the EPS
reduces to a singleton set that contains only the Bayes-optimal policy. However, limitations in
modeling resources make this practically infeasible, and in general the model will always contain
some inaccuracies. Existing approaches to MBRL largely have not dealt with this problem, and
instead treat the model’s approximation of the optimal policy as ground-truth. This can result in
highly suboptimal policies, especially when the model is misaligned (Lambert et al., 2020; Agarwal
et al., 2021). The EPS addresses this problem by quantifying how inaccuracies in our imperfect
model translate into uncertainty about the optimal policy, where this uncertainty is represented as a
set of policies that may be optimal, according to our model. Limitations in model class prevent q
from matching the ideal posterior, causing L to be loose and thereby increasing the size of the EPS.
By maintaining this set, we avoid over-reliance on the model, and open the possibility of using an
alternative learning paradigm such as MFRL to choose a policy to deploy. This intuition provides
the basis for Unified RL, which we describe in the next section.

3.2   U NIFIED R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING

Unified RL builds on the concept of the EPS
                                                  Algorithm 1 Unified RL
introduced in the previous section, and is sum-
marized in Alg. 1 and Fig. 1. Unified RL           1: Given: initial dataset D
can be thought of as a model-free RL algo-         2: for each iteration do
rithm, where the policy is constrained to lie      3:     π M B , θ =MBRL(D)
within the EPS. Through this constraint, Uni-      4:     π M F =SAC(D)
fied RL is able to eliminate many provably sub-    5:     Estimate L̂(π M F , π M B , θ, D)
optimal policies from consideration, thus re-      6:     if L̂ > −∞ then
taining the data-efficiency benefits of MBRL.      7:          π = πM B
However, because Unified RL uses the model         8:     else
only to identify the set of policies that may be 9:            π = πM F
optimal rather than to estimate a single opti- 10:        end if
mal policy, it avoids over-reliance on the model, 11:     for time step t=0,...,T do
and thus avoids the objective mismatch prob- 12:               at ∼ π(at |st )
lem associated with typical MBRL approaches. 13:               st+1 , rt = env.step(at )
Constraining the model-free policy to lie within 14:           D ← D ∪ {st , at , rt , st+1 }
the EPS does not in principle prevent MFRL 15:            end for
from discovering the Bayes-optimal policy, as 16: end for
the Bayes-optimal policy will always lie within
the EPS regardless of the model used to compute the EPS.
We take a simple approach to combining model-based and model-free RL using the EPS, and leave
more complex variants to future work. Before each episode, an MBRL and an off-policy MFRL
algorithm use the available data D to compute what we refer to as the model-based policy π M B and
the model-free policy π M F , respectively. Subsequently, the agent checks whether the model-free
policy is within the EPS; that is, it checks whether or not a lower bound can be constructed using the
model that proves that the model-based policy achieves higher Bayesian return than the model-free
policy. If the model-free policy is within the EPS, the agent executes it in the real environment to
collect one episode of new data. If not, the agent instead executes the model-based policy, which
is guaranteed to be within the EPS. The new data are then added to the shared data buffer, and the


                                                     4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


entire process repeats. Note that this approach does not require the EPS to be represented explicitly.
Instead, the EPS is maintained implicitly in the sense that the lower bound in equation 2 provides
a condition that allows one to check whether a given policy is within the EPS. We describe the
individual components of our approach in more detail below, with additional details in Sec. A.2 of
the Appendix.

Model-Based RL The MBRL component of our algorithm proceeds in two distinct steps: model
training and policy training. During the model training step, we estimate the posterior parameters θ
by fitting a Bayesian LSTM dynamics model to our environmental data D, by maximizing an evi-
dence lower bound on data log likelihood (Kingma et al., 2015; Gal & Ghahramani, 2016b;a),

                                                                 
                             |D| T
                                          (i)    (i) (i) (i)
                            X   X
 Lmodel (θ, D) = Ew∼q(w;θ)        log p(st+1 , rt |s≤t , a≤t , w) − DKL q(w; θ)||p(w) . (5)
                                 i=1 t=1


Specifically, we use the binary dropout formulation of Bayesian LSTMs (Gal & Ghahramani,
2016a), wherein sampling a weight from the posterior w ∼ q(w; θ) is accomplished by sampling a
binary dropout mask from a fixed Bernoulli distribution (Gal & Ghahramani, 2016b). In this for-
mulation, the prior p(w) is approximately a Normal distribution, while the posterior is a Bernoulli
                                              (i)  (i) (i)
Gal et al. (2016b). Our dynamics model p(st+1 , rt |s≤t , a≤t , w) is a Gaussian distribution over
next state st+1 and reward rt with a diagonal covariance matrix, given the states s≤t and actions
a≤t at all previous timesteps. The choice to represent state transition dynamics as Gaussians with
diagonal covariance matrices is similar to past work (Gal et al., 2016a; Chua et al., 2018; Gam-
boa Higuera et al., 2018; Chow et al., 2020; Eysenbach et al., 2022; Freed et al., 2023), with the
primary difference being that our dynamics model is recurrent. Specifically, we use an LSMT dy-
namics model, as we found this to yield more stable gradient-based policy optimization compared
to a simple feed-forward MLP.
During the policy training step, we train a Tanh-Gaussian policy (Haarnoja et al., 2018) to maximize
the expected cumulative reward predicted by our model. Depending on the environment, we found
that one of two methods yielded the best results. In both methods, we start by sampling a set of
weights from our approximate posterior (which corresponds to sampling a set of dropout masks). In
the first method, for each weight, we sample a set of initial states from the initial state distribution,
which we assume to be known. Subsequently, we sample a full T -length trajectory, starting from
each initial state, by iteratively sampling actions from the policy, followed by a reward and state
transition from the model. Given a batch of sampled trajectories, we compute the policy loss as the
negative total reward along the trajectory averaged across sampled trajectories, plus a policy entropy
bonus. Similar to Gamboa Higuera et al. (2018), we found that gradient clipping stabilized policy
optimization and improved results. We refer to this method as full-trajectory policy training, because
full-length trajectories are rolled out.
The second method of policy training that we employ is identical to that used by Hafner et al.
(2019), with the slight modification that trajectories are sampled using various dropout masks, and
trajectories are sampled in raw state space as opposed to latent space. In summary, states are sampled
uniformly from the data buffer, and trajectory segments of length H = 16 are sampled starting from
those states. Value estimates are then computed using a critic network and the predicted trajectory
rewards. The critic is then updated to produce more accurate value estimates, and the policy is
updated to produce higher value estimates. In either case, the dropout mask that we use to sample
a particular trajectory is held constant during the entire trajectory; this is to reflect the fact that
even though there is uncertainty in the dynamics model parameters w, the parameters do not change
during a single trajectory (Gal & Ghahramani, 2016a).

Model-Free RL We use Soft Actor-Critic (Haarnoja et al., 2018) as the off-policy MFRL compo-
nent of our algorithm. We found that standard SAC performed poorly when run off-policy; therefore,
we incorporate two modifications suggested by Ball et al. (2023) that we found yielded superior off-
policy performance while preserving SAC’s on-policy performance. Specifically, we used layer
normalization in our Q networks, and omit the entropy term from the Q network loss.


                                                   5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Lower Bound Estimation Using the posterior parameters θ obtained during the model learning
process and f = log, it is possible to compute a Monte-Carlo estimate of L as

                                   K
                                   X           p(D|wi )p(wi )
                                                                     ˆ M B |wi ) − J(π

                                                                                   ˆ M F |wi ) ,
      L̂(π M F , π M B , θ, D) =         log                  + log J(π                            (6)
                                   i=1
                                                 q(wi ; θ)
for w1 , ..., wK ∼ q(w; θ). Here, p(D|wi ) is the probability of all state transitions and rewards
                                          ˆ M B |w)i and J(π
in the dataset given parameters wi , and J(π               ˆ M F |wi ) are themselves Monte-Carlo
estimates of the expected return for the model-based and model-free policies respectively, computed
by rolling out a batch of M trajectories from the model using parameters wi and policies π M B and
π M F , respectively. More details on the estimation of this bound are provided in Sec. A.2 of the
Appendix.
We review some useful properties of L̂. As K → ∞ and M → ∞, by the law of large numbers,
L̂ → L. However, for K → ∞ and finite M , by Jensen’s inequality, L̂ ≤ L. This property does not
change our algorithm in principle, because L̂ for finite M is still a lower bound on log(J(π M B |D)−
J(π M F |D)). The only practical implication in using L̂ in place of L is that the algorithm becomes
more conservative, preferring model-free RL more often, as it becomes more difficult to prove that
the model-based policy achieves a higher Bayesian return. When K is also finite, L̂ is stochastic,
and we can no longer say it is strictly a lower bound on log(J(π M B |D) − J(π M F |D)), though on
average it is. Practically, the stochasticity of L̂ injects some randomness into policy selection. We
did not find this to be an issue as long as a large enough value of K and M were used.
To check if the model-free policy is in the EPS, we must check whether
                                                                       L̂(π M B , π M F , θ, D) >

log(0) = −∞. Note that in equation 6, all terms except log J(π   ˆ  M  B          ˆ M F |wi )
                                                                         |wi ) − J(π
will be defined and finite. However,           ˆ M B |wi ) − J(π
                                            as J(π            ˆ M F |wi ) → 0 from the right,
          MB              MF

log J(π       |wi ) − J(π     |wi ) → −∞. Therefore, this term dominates L̂ when the model-
free policy is on or near the boundary of the relevant set, allowing us to simply check whether
 ˆ M B |wi ) − J(π
J(π               ˆ M F |wi ) > 0, ∀i = 1, ..., K. This property is particularly convenient because
it allows us to ignore the log p(D|wi ) term, which would normally require calling the model on the
entire dataset.

4     E XPERIMENTS
Our experiments seek to answer three questions:
        1. Can Unified RL successfully combine the strengths of model-based and model-free RL?
        2. Does Unified RL perform favorably compared to state-of-the-art prior work?
        3. Is Unified RL effective in situations where either MBRL or MFRL alone fail?
We address questions 1 and 2 in Sec. 4.1, and question 3 in Sec. 4.2 and Sec. 4.3. In our experiments,
we consider a range of challenging continuous control tasks from the OpenAI gym benchmark
suite Brockman et al. (2016), Deepmind Control Suite (DMC) Tassa et al. (2018), and the ROBEL
robotics benchmark suite Ahn et al. (2020). Specifically, we consider OpenAI gym Hopper, Walker,
Ant, and Half-Cheetah, as well as DMC Cartpole Swingup and ROBEL DClawTurnFixed. We make
two modifications to the standard environments for the sake of simplicity. First, we disabled early
episode termination in the OpenAI gym tasks, as early termination has been shown to cause issues
for MBRL (Wang et al., 2019). Second, we focus on short time horizon tasks; specifically, we
consider episodes of length T = 100 for all OpenAI gym and DMC tasks, except for Hopper and
Cartpole, which we considered episodes of length T = 200. We found that these episodes were
sufficiently long to allow agents to learn the desired behaviors.

4.1     DATA E FFICIENCY AND A SYMPTOTIC P ERFORMANCE

To empirically evaluate the effectiveness of Unified RL at combining the strengths of model-based
and model- free RL, we compare Unified RL to its constituent model-based and model-free compo-


                                                        6
  Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                            Ant                                                                                 Hopper                                                                            Walker

                      600                                                                             800                                                                           400

Mean Episode Return


                                                                                Mean Episode Return


                                                                                                                                                              Mean Episode Return
                      400                                                                                                                                                           300
                                                                                                      600

                                                                                                                                                                                    200
                      200
                                                                                                      400
                                                                                                                                                                                    100
                        0
                                                                                                      200
                                                                                                                                                                                              0
                      200
                            0    0.2    0.4      0.6    0.8     1.0                                         0         0.2     0.4      0.6     0.8      1.0                                        0      0.2   0.4      0.6    0.8    1.0
                                        Million Steps                                                                         Million Steps                                                                     Million Steps
                                       Half Cheetah                                                                         DClawTurnFixed                                                                       Cartpole
Mean Episode Return


                                                                     Mean Episode Return


                                                                                                                                                                        Mean Episode Return
                      600                                                                  1000                                                                                               60

                                                                                                      500
                      400                                                                                                                                                                     40

                                                                                                        0
                      200                                                                                                                                                                     20
                                                                                                      500
                        0
                                                                                                                                                                                               0
                                                                                           1000
                            0    0.2    0.4      0.6    0.8    1.0                                          0     0.08        0.16     0.24    0.32    0.40                                        0      0.2   0.4      0.6    0.8    1.0
                                        Million Steps                                                                         Million Steps                                                                     Million Steps
                                URL           SAC             MBRL                                              ALM              DDPG                SVG                                           TD3             HL            PPO


  Figure 2: Training curves on benchmark tasks. Solid lines indicate the average return per episode
  across 5 runs, while shaded regions denote 95% confidence intervals. We find that Unified RL
  successfully combines the strengths of both model-based and model-free RL. In environments where
  either MBRL or SAC strictly dominates the other, Unified RL at least matches the better of these
  two algorithms. In situations where MBRL learns faster initially but is eventually surpassed by
  SAC, Unified RL achieves higher performance than either algorithm alone. Additionally, Unified
  RL also performs favorably compared to the other baselines, and is the only algorithm we tested that
  consistently performs well across all tasks.


  Table 1: Mean episode return on benchmark tasks. Reported below are episodes returns averaged
  across the entire training process for 5 distinct random seeds, with 95% confidence intervals. The
  final column is the average rank that each algorithm achieves across all environments. We find that
  Unified RL often achieves higher mean episode return compared to either MBRL or SAC, indicating
  that Unified RL is able to combine the strengths of both algorithms. Additionally, Unified RL is the
  only algorithm we tested that performed consistently well across all tasks, being the most high-
  ranking algorithm on average.
                                          Ant             Hopper                                         Walker                 Half Cheetah          Cartpole                                         DClawTurnFixed      Avg Rank
                      Unified RL       493 ± 9.9        750 ± 2.4                                      267 ± 5.9                571 ± 3.5            66.7 ± 0.3                                          963 ± 11           2.33
                        SAC            457 ± 7.9         633 ± 14                                      229 ± 2.1                 540 ± 12            67.5 ± 0.9                                          970 ± 11             3.5
                       MBRL             311 ± 10         705 ± 16                                     253.2 ± 0.8                263 ± 48            64.6 ± 0.2                                          989 ± 16             4.5
                        ALM             188 ± 77        563 ± 6.2                                      127 ± 7.6                 520 ± 27            31.5 ± 2.9                                         −177 ± 111           7.33
                       DDPG             76 ± 6.4         542 ± 42                                      293 ± 21                  422 ± 34            25.3 ± 3.7                                          877 ± 17            6.83
                        SVG             443 ± 15         684 ± 14                                      163 ± 6.6                582 ± 21             65.0 ± 0.3                                         −705 ± 14            4.83
                        TD3            204 ± 3.8         632 ± 27                                      250 ± 4.2                 412 ± 23            32.6 ± 7.8                                          902 ± 26            5.83
                         HL             319 ± 12        616 ± 4.5                                      280 ± 19                 569 ± 8.2            66.6 ± 1.8                                          889 ± 29            4.16
                        PPO             85 ± 1.6         582 ± 18                                      356 ± 12                  104 ± 16            69.2 ± 0.1                                         −404 ± 56            5.16



  nents alone. We also compare to several prior state-of-the-art approaches: Aligned Latent Models
  (ALM) (Ghugare et al., 2022), Deep Deterministic Policy Gradient (DDPG) (Lillicrap et al., 2015),
  Twin Delayed DDPG (TD3) (Fujimoto et al., 2018), Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) (Schul-
  man et al., 2017), Stochastic Value Gradient (SVG) (Heess et al., 2015), and Hybrid Learning (HL)
  (Pinosky et al., 2023). DDPG, TD3, and PPO are state-of-the-art model-free methods. ALM, SVG
  and HL are high-performing algorithms that combine aspects of model-based and model-free RL.
  We report our results in two ways. First, we show mean episode return vs. number of environmental
  steps in Fig. 2. Here, solid lines indicate average episode return averaged across 5 independent
  random seeds, while shaded regions denote 95% confidence intervals. Second, we report the average
  episode return across the entire training process for each algorithm, which is equivalent to area
  under the learning curve normalized by number of training episodes, in Table ??. This statistic
  is relevant because it blends both data efficiency and asymptotic performance into a single scalar


                                                                                                                                7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


performance metric. Here again we report the average return across 5 random seeds, with 95%
confidence intervals.
Our first observation is that Unified RL succeeds at combining the strengths of its two constituent
algorithms. In cases where one algorithm strictly dominates, such as Hopper and Walker, we see
that Unified RL does at least as well as the better-performing constituent. Moreover, we find that
in environments such as Ant and Half-Cheetah, where MBRL learns rapidly initially but is eventu-
ally surpassed by SAC, Unified RL achieves higher performance than either algorithm alone. This
finding indicates that Unified RL enables a synergy between MBRL and MFRL that is superior to
simply running both algorithms separately and picking the best one at each timestep. We addition-
ally observe that of all the algorithms we tested, Unified RL was unique in that it performed well
across all tasks. Interestingly, ALM seemed to suffer from instability, possibly due to issues in Q
learning caused by the shorter episode lengths that we use in our experiments.


                                                8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


4.2   ROBUSTNESS TO M ODEL M ISALIGNMENT

One of our central claims is
that Unified RL helps avoid the              Ant with Distractors                Ant with Detuned SAC
objective mismatch problem by        300                                  400


                                   Mean Episode Return


                                                                        Mean Episode Return
allowing the agent to switch         200                                  300
to MFRL when the model is            100
                                                                          200
misaligned (that is, ill-suited        0
to helping the agent improve         100                                  100

its policy). To test this claim,     200                                    0
we evaluate Unified RL on a          300
                                         0  2000 4000 6000 8000 10000         0  2000 4000 6000 8000 10000
task that we designed to in-                      # Episodes                           # Episodes
duce model misalignment in                                    URL     SAC       MBRL
MBRL. Recall that distractors
are components of the obser- Figure 3: Unified RL is robust to both failures in model-based and
vation that are predictable but model-free RL. (Left) We induce model misalignment by intro-
task-irrelevant. Distractors ex- ducing distractors into the observations of the Ant environment,
acerbate model misalignment, which prevents model-based RL from learning effectively. We
because typical model-learning find that, in this situation, Unified RL matches the performance
objectives do not prioritize of model-free RL, indicating that Unified RL is robust to failure
the modeling of task-relevant of model-based RL. (Right) We induce failure of model-free RL
observation components over (SAC) by increasing the entropy bonus to a suboptimal value. In
the task-irrelevant distractors. this situation, we find that Unified RL matches the performance of
This results in models that model-based RL, indicating that Unified RL is robust to failure of
do not accurately represent the model-free RL.
task-relevant components. In
our experiments, we appended
time-dependent sinusoids of fixed frequency to the observations. Sinusoids were grouped together
into groups of 10, where all 10 sinusoids in a group had the same phase. Each group was assigned
a random phase, preventing the model from simply memorizing the distractors. Five such groups
were appended to the observations. The hyperparameters used for SAC, MBRL, and Unified RL for
this experiment were identical to those used in the original Ant environment.
The reward curves for this experiment are shown in Fig. 3. We observe that MBRL utterly fails to
make learning progress in the presence of distractors, while MFRL is relatively unphased. Unified
RL performs slightly better than MFRL, indicating that it is able to effectively fall back on MFRL
when its model is misaligned.

4.3   ROBUSTNESS TO FAILURES OF M ODEL -F REE RL

We do not expect MFRL to always achieve higher asymptotic performance than MBRL in all en-
vironments; for example, MFRL may fail to escape a poor local minimum or have poorly tuned
hyperparameters. Unified RL has the advantage over other approaches such as MBRL with Model-
Free Fine Tuning Nagabandi et al. (2018), which runs MBRL for a manually specified number of
episodes before switching to MFRL, in that Unified RL only switches to MFRL when the model-
based policy isn’t provably superior. Therefore, in situations where MFRL fails to learn effectively,
we expect Unified RL to utilize model-based learning exclusively. To test this claim, we compare the
performance of Unified RL to MBRL and SAC in the Ant environment, where the entropy penalty
for both SAC and the SAC component of Unified RL was set far higher than its ideal value. As
expected, this prevented SAC from learning effectively, both alone and within Unified RL. Indeed
we found that Unified RL recognized that SAC was ineffective at solving the task, instead relied
exclusively on MBRL.

5     R ELATED W ORK
Similar to Duff (2002); Deisenroth & Rasmussen (2011); Gal et al. (2016a); Chua et al. (2018);
Gamboa Higuera et al. (2018); Mehta et al. (2021; 2022), we consider a Bayesian formulation of
MBRL. The characteristic feature of these approaches is an explicit representation of uncertainty in
their estimate of the environmental dynamics. Gal et al. (2016a), Depeweg et al. (2017), and Gam-


                                                         9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


boa Higuera et al. (2018) are most similar to our approach, in that they use Bayesian neural networks
(BNNs) to represent beliefs over dynamics, and learn policies by backpropagating gradients through
model rollouts.
Several recent approaches have been proposed for combining model-based and model-free RL. For
example, Hybrid Learning (Pinosky et al., 2023) used a learned dynamics model to determine an op-
timal time to switch between a planned action sequence and a policy learned using MFRL. Stochastic
Value Gradients (Heess et al., 2015) proposed a spectrum of policy gradient algorithms that range
from model-free methods with value functions to model-based methods without value functions.
Finally, Model-Based RL with Model-Free Fine Tuning initialized MFRL with a policy trained for a
fixed number of episodes using MBRL. The primary drawback to these approaches that is addressed
in our work is that they use hard-coded or heuristic methods for selecting which learning modality to
use in a given situation, rather than switching based on a measure of the model’s ability to contribute
to policy improvement.
Recent approaches for improving model alignment in MBRL optimized policies with respect to
lower bounds similar to L. For example, Luo et al. (2018) considered iteratively constructing lower
bounds that hold locally in policy space, which is then optimized jointly with respect to both the
model and policy. Eysenbach et al. (2022) and Ghugare et al. (2022) considered jointly optimizing
a global lower bound on policy performance with respect to both the model and policy parameters.
Chow et al. (2020) proposed an EM algorithm to jointly improve the model and the policy with
respect to a variational lower bound. One fundamental limitation of these approaches is that they do
not address the suboptimalities introduced by the fact that models have limited representational ca-
pacity. In environments with complex dynamics that the model class is ill-suited to represent, a lower
bound on policy performance may differ significantly from the true objective we wish to optimize
(i.e., L will be a loose bound for the true objective J), resulting in a poorly aligned policy-learning
objective and suboptimal policies. Our approach builds on these ideas, but takes a fundamentally
different approach: rather than using the model to approximate a single optimal policy, we maintain
a set of policies that may be optimal, which is then refined by model-free RL, thereby avoiding
over-reliance on potentially inaccurate models.

6   L IMITATIONS
Our approach has a few limitations that are worth noting. First, our approach does not incorporate
intelligent exploration, and simply assume that the best policy at any given iteration is the ideal
policy to collect new data, be it model-based or model-free. This assumption is potentially disad-
vantageous in environments that require extensive exploration, where short-term reward should be
sacrificed for the purposes of information gain. This limitation could potentially be circumvented
with a slight modification to the bound in equation 3 to include an exploration bonus corresponding
to an approximation of the amount of information gained by executing a particular policy, similar to
that used in Houthooft et al. (2016).
Another important limitaiton is that because Unified RL maintains two separate (model-based and
model-free policies, but only collects data from one in a given episode, at least one of the two policies
will be performing some amount of off-policy learning. This restricts our choice of model-free RL
algorithm to off-policy algorithms, such as SAC or Q-learning. Even though SAC is in principle an
off-policy algorithm, we found standard SAC to perform poorly when learning off-policy, requiring
modifications to the Q learning process (Sec. 3.2) (Ball et al., 2023). This limitation could potentialy
be avoided by modifying the Unified RL algorithm to maintain one policy, that is updated with
model-free RL, but constrained to lie within the equivalent policy set. This could be accomplished
by incorporating a constraint into the model-free policy updates, similar to a trust region as used in
PPO (Schulman et al., 2017).

7   D ISCUSSION AND F UTURE W ORK
In this work, we propose equivalent policy sets (EPS), which we define as the set of policies that
are not provably Bayes-suboptimal, according to bounds on policy performance constructed using
a model. The EPS provides a valuable tool for quantifying how inaccuracies in the model translate
into uncertainty in their estimate of the optimal policy. Using this tool, agents can better understand


                                                   10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


in what situations models are useful, and when models should be abandoned in favor of model-
free learning updates. Based on this concept, we proposed Unified RL, a novel RL algorithm that
combines the relative strengths of model-based and model-free RL. Unified RL can be thought
of as a model-free RL algorithm, where the enacted policy is constrained to lie within the EPS.
Unified RL retains the data-efficiency benefits of model-based approaches by leveraging models
to rule out provably suboptimal policies. However, by maintaining a set of candidate policies that
may be optimal according to the model, which is then refined using MFRL, Unified RL avoids
over-reliance on models and leverages the asymptotic performance benefits of MFRL. We show
empirically on a wide range of challenging continuous control RL benchmarks that Unified RL
successfully combines the strengths of both MBRL and MFRL, often exceeding the performance
of either algorithm alone. We also find that Unified RL outperforms a number of state-of-the-art
model-based and model-free prior approaches. Finally, we show that Unified RL learns effective
policies in situations where either model-based or model-free RL alone fail.
In this work, we explore one strategy for combining MFRL and MBRL using the EPS, wherein the
agent chooses between a model-based and model-free policy at each iteration. However, other alter-
native approaches exist, which we plan to explore in future work. One alternative that more tightly
integrates the model-based and model-free components would be to incorporate the EPS constraint
directly into the model-free learning updates. We also plan to explore using latent dynamics mod-
els, similar to those used in Dreamer, for Unified RL, as they have been shown to scale well to
high-dimensional observation spaces and complex dynamics Hafner et al. (2019; 2020); Lin et al.
(2023).


R EFERENCES
Rishabh Agarwal, Marlos C Machado, Pablo Samuel Castro, and Marc G Bellemare. Contrastive
  behavioral similarity embeddings for generalization in reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2101.05265, 2021.

Michael Ahn, Henry Zhu, Kristian Hartikainen, Hugo Ponte, Abhishek Gupta, Sergey Levine, and
 Vikash Kumar. ROBEL: Robotics benchmarks for learning with low-cost robots. In Conference
 on robot learning, pp. 1300–1313. PMLR, 2020.

Philip J Ball, Laura Smith, Ilya Kostrikov, and Sergey Levine. Efficient online reinforcement learn-
  ing with offline data. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.02948, 2023.

David M Blei, Alp Kucukelbir, and Jon D McAuliffe. Variational inference: A review for statisti-
  cians. Journal of the American statistical Association, 112(518):859–877, 2017.

Greg Brockman, Vicki Cheung, Ludwig Pettersson, Jonas Schneider, John Schulman, Jie Tang, and
  Wojciech Zaremba. Openai gym. arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.01540, 2016.

Yuri Burda, Roger Grosse, and Ruslan Salakhutdinov. Importance weighted autoencoders. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1509.00519, 2015.

Liqun Chen, Chenyang Tao, Ruiyi Zhang, Ricardo Henao, and Lawrence Carin Duke. Variational
  inference and model selection with generalized evidence bounds. In International conference on
  machine learning, pp. 893–902. PMLR, 2018.

Yinlam Chow, Brandon Cui, MoonKyung Ryu, and Mohammad Ghavamzadeh. Variational model-
  based policy optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.05443, 2020.

Kurtland Chua, Roberto Calandra, Rowan McAllister, and Sergey Levine. Deep reinforcement learn-
  ing in a handful of trials using probabilistic dynamics models. Advances in neural information
  processing systems, 31, 2018.

Marc Deisenroth and Carl E Rasmussen. PILCO: A model-based and data-efficient approach to
 policy search. In Proceedings of the 28th International Conference on machine learning (ICML-
 11), pp. 465–472, 2011.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Stefan Depeweg, José Miguel Hernández-Lobato, Finale Doshi-Velez, and Steffen Udluft. Learning
  and policy search in stochastic dynamical systems with Bayesian neural networks. In Interna-
  tional Conference on Learning Representations, 2017. URL https://openreview.net/
  forum?id=H1fl8S9ee.
Adji Bousso Dieng, Dustin Tran, Rajesh Ranganath, John Paisley, and David Blei. Variational
  inference via χ upper bound minimization. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  30, 2017.
Pierluca D’Oro, Alberto Maria Metelli, Andrea Tirinzoni, Matteo Papini, and Marcello Restelli.
  Gradient-aware model-based policy search. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial
  Intelligence, volume 34, pp. 3801–3808, 2020.
Michael O’Gordon Duff. Optimal Learning: Computational procedures for Bayes-adaptive Markov
 decision processes. University of Massachusetts Amherst, 2002.
Benjamin Eysenbach, Alexander Khazatsky, Sergey Levine, and Russ R Salakhutdinov. Mismatched
  no more: Joint model-policy optimization for model-based rl. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 35:23230–23243, 2022.
Benjamin Freed, Siddarth Venkatraman, Guillaume Adrien Sartoretti, Jeff Schneider, and Howie
  Choset. Learning temporally abstractworld models without online experimentation. 2023.
Scott Fujimoto, Herke Hoof, and David Meger. Addressing function approximation error in actor-
  critic methods. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 1587–1596. PMLR, 2018.
Yarin Gal and Zoubin Ghahramani. A theoretically grounded application of dropout in recurrent
  neural networks. Advances in neural information processing systems, 29, 2016a.
Yarin Gal and Zoubin Ghahramani. Dropout as a Bayesian approximation: Representing model
  uncertainty in deep learning. In international conference on machine learning, pp. 1050–1059.
  PMLR, 2016b.
Yarin Gal, Rowan McAllister, and Carl Edward Rasmussen. Improving PILCO with Bayesian neural
  network dynamics models. In Data-efficient machine learning workshop, ICML, volume 4, pp.
  25, 2016a.
Yarin Gal et al. Uncertainty in deep learning, 2016b.
Juan Camilo Gamboa Higuera, David Meger, and Gregory Dudek. Synthesizing neural network
  controllers with probabilistic model-based reinforcement learning. In 2018 IEEE/RSJ Inter-
  national Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), pp. 2538–2544, 2018. doi:
  10.1109/IROS.2018.8594018.
Raj Ghugare, Homanga Bharadhwaj, Benjamin Eysenbach, Sergey Levine, and Russ Salakhutdinov.
  Simplifying model-based rl: Learning representations, latent-space models, and policies with one
  objective. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.
Christopher Grimm, André Barreto, Satinder Singh, and David Silver. The value equivalence princi-
  ple for model-based reinforcement learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  33:5541–5552, 2020.
Tuomas Haarnoja, Aurick Zhou, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Soft actor-critic: Off-policy
  maximum entropy deep reinforcement learning with a stochastic actor. In International confer-
  ence on machine learning, pp. 1861–1870. PMLR, 2018.
Danijar Hafner, Timothy Lillicrap, Jimmy Ba, and Mohammad Norouzi. Dream to control: Learning
  behaviors by latent imagination. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2019.
Danijar Hafner, Timothy P Lillicrap, Mohammad Norouzi, and Jimmy Ba. Mastering atari with
  discrete world models. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2020.
Nicolas Heess, Gregory Wayne, David Silver, Timothy Lillicrap, Tom Erez, and Yuval Tassa. Learn-
  ing continuous control policies by stochastic value gradients. Advances in neural information
  processing systems, 28, 2015.


                                                12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Sepp Hochreiter and Jürgen Schmidhuber. Long short-term memory. Neural computation, 9(8):
  1735–1780, 1997.
Rein Houthooft, Xi Chen, Yan Duan, John Schulman, Filip De Turck, and Pieter Abbeel. Vime:
  Variational information maximizing exploration. Advances in neural information processing sys-
  tems, 29, 2016.
Michael Janner, Justin Fu, Marvin Zhang, and Sergey Levine. When to trust your model: Model-
 based policy optimization. Advances in neural information processing systems, 32, 2019.
Joshua Joseph, Alborz Geramifard, John W. Roberts, Jonathan P. How, and Nicholas Roy. Rein-
  forcement learning with misspecified model classes. In 2013 IEEE International Conference on
  Robotics and Automation, pp. 939–946, 2013. doi: 10.1109/ICRA.2013.6630686.
Taylor W Killian, Samuel Daulton, George Konidaris, and Finale Doshi-Velez. Robust and effi-
  cient transfer learning with hidden parameter markov decision processes. Advances in neural
  information processing systems, 30, 2017.
Diederik P Kingma and Max Welling.           Auto-encoding variational bayes.      arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1312.6114, 2013.
Durk P Kingma, Tim Salimans, and Max Welling. Variational dropout and the local reparameteri-
  zation trick. Advances in neural information processing systems, 28, 2015.
Nathan Lambert, Brandon Amos, Omry Yadan, and Roberto Calandra. Objective mismatch in
  model-based reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.04523, 2020.
Yingzhen Li and Richard E Turner. Rényi divergence variational inference. Advances in neural
  information processing systems, 29, 2016.
Timothy P Lillicrap, Jonathan J Hunt, Alexander Pritzel, Nicolas Heess, Tom Erez, Yuval Tassa,
  David Silver, and Daan Wierstra. Continuous control with deep reinforcement learning. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1509.02971, 2015.
Jessy Lin, Yuqing Du, Olivia Watkins, Danijar Hafner, Pieter Abbeel, Dan Klein, and Anca Dragan.
  Learning to model the world with language. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.01399, 2023.
Kendall Lowrey, Aravind Rajeswaran, Sham Kakade, Emanuel Todorov, and Igor Mordatch. Plan
  online, learn offline: Efficient learning and exploration via model-based control. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1811.01848, 2018.
Yuping Luo, Huazhe Xu, Yuanzhi Li, Yuandong Tian, Trevor Darrell, and Tengyu Ma. Algorithmic
  framework for model-based deep reinforcement learning with theoretical guarantees. In Interna-
  tional Conference on Learning Representations, 2018.
Viraj Mehta, Biswajit Paria, Jeff Schneider, Stefano Ermon, and Willie Neiswanger. An experimen-
  tal design perspective on model-based reinforcement learning. In International Conference on
  Learning Representations, 2021.
Viraj Mehta, Ian Char, Joseph Abbate, Rory Conlin, Mark Boyer, Stefano Ermon, Jeff Schneider,
  and Willie Neiswanger. Exploration via planning for information about the optimal trajectory.
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:28761–28775, 2022.
Anusha Nagabandi, Gregory Kahn, Ronald S. Fearing, and Sergey Levine. Neural network dy-
  namics for model-based deep reinforcement learning with model-free fine-tuning. In 2018
  IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pp. 7559–7566, 2018. doi:
  10.1109/ICRA.2018.8463189.
Allison Pinosky, Ian Abraham, Alexander Broad, Brenna Argall, and Todd D Murphey. Hybrid
  control for combining model-based and model-free reinforcement learning. The International
  Journal of Robotics Research, 42(6):337–355, 2023.
Aravind Rajeswaran, Igor Mordatch, and Vikash Kumar. A game theoretic framework for model
  based reinforcement learning. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 7953–7963.
  PMLR, 2020.


                                                13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy
  optimization algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347, 2017.

Ramanan Sekar, Oleh Rybkin, Kostas Daniilidis, Pieter Abbeel, Danijar Hafner, and Deepak Pathak.
  Planning to explore via self-supervised world models. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning, pp. 8583–8592. PMLR, 2020.

Nitish Srivastava, Geoffrey Hinton, Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever, and Ruslan Salakhutdinov.
  Dropout: a simple way to prevent neural networks from overfitting. The journal of machine
  learning research, 15(1):1929–1958, 2014.

Yuval Tassa, Yotam Doron, Alistair Muldal, Tom Erez, Yazhe Li, Diego de Las Casas, David Bud-
  den, Abbas Abdolmaleki, Josh Merel, Andrew Lefrancq, et al. Deepmind control suite. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1801.00690, 2018.

Neng Wan, Dapeng Li, and Naira Hovakimyan. f-divergence variational inference. Advances in
  neural information processing systems, 33:17370–17379, 2020.

Tingwu Wang, Xuchan Bao, Ignasi Clavera, Jerrick Hoang, Yeming Wen, Eric Langlois, Shunshi
  Zhang, Guodong Zhang, Pieter Abbeel, and Jimmy Ba. Benchmarking model-based reinforce-
  ment learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.02057, 2019.


A     A PPENDIX

A.1    D ERIVATION OF L OWER B OUND IN EQUATION 3

The difference in Bayesian return between policies π ′ and π is given by
                                          Z
                                             p(D|w)p(w)
                 J(π ′ |D) − J(π|D) =                   (J(π ′ |w) − J(π|w)) dw.                      (7)
                                           W    p(D)

By introducing an approximate posterior q(w; θ), we can write the above expression as an expecta-
tion over q,

                                                  p(D|w)p(w)
                  J(π ′ |D) − J(π|D) = Eq                     (J(π ′ |w) − J(π|w)) .                  (8)
                                                  q(w; θ)p(D)
Let f˜ be a concave, monotonically increasing function. Taking f˜ of both sides and applying Jensen’s
inequality, we arrive at arrive at a lower bound on f˜(J(π ′ |D) − J(π|D)),


             ˜     ′                ˜      p(D|w)p(w)      ′
             f (J(π |D) − J(π|D)) = f Eq               (J(π |w) − J(π|w))                             (9)
                                           q(w; θ)p(D)

                                        ˜  p(D|w)p(w)      ′
                                  ≥ Eq f               (J(π |w) − J(π|w)) .                          (10)
                                           q(w; θ)p(D)

Finally, to arrive at L, we define a new concave monotonically increasing function f (x) =
f˜(p(D)x) and substitute this into the above expression to eliminate the constant p(D) term,


              ˜     ′                           p(D|w)p(w)     ′
              f (J(π |D) − J(π|D)) ≥ Eq f                  (J(π |w) − J(π|w))                        (11)
                                                   q(w; θ)
                                   = L(π, π ′ , θ, D).                                               (12)
To prove that π ′ achieves higher Bayesian return than π, it is sufficient to show that L(π, π ′ , θ, D) >
f˜(0) = f (0), thus the data likelihood term p(D) is irrelevant in constructing the EPS.


                                                     14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.2     I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS

A.2.1    M ODEL A RCHITECTURE AND T RAINING
The dynamics model we used for all tasks consisted of a single linear input layer, followed by
a single-directional, single-layer LSTM cell Hochreiter & Schmidhuber (1997), followed by two
linear layers, and an output layer. The output layer consisted of four separate output heads, one each
for state mean, reward mean, state standard deviation, and reward standard deviation. The standard
deviation output heads used softplus activations to ensure their output was positive, while the mean
layers did not an activation function. ReLU activations were used for all other layers other than the
LSTM cell. State means were represented as learned deltas from previous states. That is, the state
mean output predicts the mean in the difference between the current and last state. All inputs (states
and actions) and outputs (state deltas and rewards) of the dynamics model were normalized before
each period of model training to be of mean zero and unit variance.
Before each layer other than the initial input layer, including each internal layer within the LSTM
cell, a binary dropout mask Srivastava et al. (2014) was applied, which was used by Gal & Ghahra-
mani (2016a) and Gal & Ghahramani (2016b) to represent uncertainty in neural network parame-
ters. Crucially, both in training and when sampling rollouts, the dropout mask is held fixed across
all timesteps in a trajectory Gal & Ghahramani (2016b), while different dropout masks are sampled
across trajectories. The dynamics model was trained with the following loss computed on a batch of
trajectories sampled from the data buffer:
                         B    T
                     1 XX                                                               η
          Lmodel =             (log p(st+1 |st , at , wi ) + log p(rt |st , at , wi )) + ||W ||22   (13)
                     B i=1 t=0                                                          N

where B = 100 is the batch size, T is the episode length, wi is the dropout mask corresponding
to the ith trajectory, η is a factor that determines the length-scale of the prior Gal & Ghahramani
(2016b), N is the number of trajectories in the training dataset, Mand W is the set of all learnable
parameters in the network.

A.2.2    P OLICY A RCHITECTURE
Both model-based RL and SAC use a Tanh-Gaussian MLP policy with three layers with Tanh activa-
tions between layers. Policies used in MBRL have 1024 units in their hidden layers, while policies
used for SAC have 256. The policies have two output heads, one for mean and one for standard
deviation. The mean output head uses no activation function, while the standard deviation head
uses either a softplus activation to ensure that standard deviation is positive, or a sigmoid activation
to force the standard deviation to be bounded. To force samples from the policy to fall within the
specified action range of the environment, samples are passed through a tanh function.

A.2.3    C RITIC A RCHITECTURE
The critic network used for SAC was a state-action value function, while the critic used for MBRL
was a state value function. In either case, critics consisted of 3 layers with ReLU activations between
layers, with 256 units in each hidden layer.

A.2.4    L OWER B OUND E STIMATION
As discussed in Sec. A.2.4, to check whether the model-free policy π M F is within the EPS, we need
                     ˆ M B |wi ) − J(π
only check whether J(π               ˆ M F |wi ) > 0, ∀i = 1, ..., K, where J(π|w
                                                                                ˆ     i ) is a Monte-
Carlo estimate of J(π|wi ), the expected return for policy π given dynamics model parameters wi .
In the dropout formulation of BNNs, sampling wi corresponds to sampling a dropout mask, so we
                                                                   ˆ
use wi to denote a particular dropout mask. Therefore, to compute J(π|w  i ), we sample one dropout
mask, and sample M state-action-reward trajectories from our dynamics model and policy, from
timesteps t = 0 to T using that dropout mask, and average the return across those trajectories:

                                                     T
                                        ˆ         1 X
                                        J(π|wi) =       rt ,                                        (14)
                                                  M t=0


                                                   15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


for at ∼ π(at |st ), rt ∼ p(rt |st , at , wi ), and st+1 ∼ p(st+1 |st , at , wi ). Note that the dropout mask
wi is held constant across timesteps.

A.2.5    H YPERPARAMETERS
Table 2 contains the hyperparameters used for Unified RL for each task.

        • K=Number of dropout masks sampled when computing L̂ (equation 6)
        • M =Number of trajectories sampled when computing L̂ (equation 6)
        • Policy training: whether the model-based policy is trained using full-trajectory policy train-
          ing or Dreamer-style policy training, as described in Sec. 3.
        • σmax : In some cases, we found it useful to bound the maximum value that the policy
          standard deviation could take, by placing a sigmoid activation on the standard deviation
          output of the policy and multiplying by a constant. We refer to this upper bound as σmax
        • αM B : entropy bonus used for the model-based policy training
        • αM F : entropy bonus used for SAC
        • Automatic Entropy Tuning (MB policy): whether automatic entropy tuning is used for the
          model-based policy (makes αM B irrelevant)
        • Automatic Entropy Tuning (MF policy): whether automatic entropy tuning is used for the
          SAC policy (makes αM F irrelevant)
        • T: episode length

We additionally found it necessary to provide SAC with enough on-policy data by enforcing that at
least one out of every 10 episodes was run using the MFRL policy.


                              Table 2: Hyperparameters used in Unified RL
   Environment     K     M        Policy Training   σmax        αM B   αM F   Automatic    Automatic    T     η
                                                                              Entropy      Entropy
                                                                              Tuning (MB   Tuning (MF
                                                                              policy)      policy)
       Ant         50      5         Dreamer        None         0.2     -    False        True         100   200
     Hopper        50    100      Full trajectory   None         0.2    0.2   False        False        200   100
     Walker        50    100      Full trajectory    0.1         0.2    0.2   False        False        100   100
  Half Cheetah     50      5         Dreamer        None         0.1     -    False        True         100   100
     Cartpole      50   default      Dreamer        None         0.2     -    False        True         200   100
 DClaw-TurnFixed   50     10      Full Trajectory   None         0.2    0.2   False        False        40    200


                                                           16
