Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


M INDAGENT : E MERGENT G AMING I NTERACTION
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review


Figure 1: The MindAgent system for gaming interactions. MindAgent enables complex task planning in a
multi-agent system and provides a human-AI collaboration infrastructure across various domains.


                                           A BSTRACT

        Large Language Models (LLMs) can perform complex scheduling in a multi-agent
        system and can coordinate agents to complete sophisticated tasks that require
        extensive collaboration. However, despite the introduction of numerous gaming
        frameworks, the community lacks adequate benchmarks that support the implemen-
        tation of a general multi-agent infrastructure encompassing collaboration between
        LLMs and human-NPCs. We propose a novel infrastructure—MindAgent—for
        evaluating planning and coordination capabilities in the context of gaming interac-
        tion. In particular, our infrastructure leverages an existing gaming framework to (i)
        require understanding of the coordinator for a multi-agent system, (ii) collaborate
        with human players via instructions, and (iii) enable in-context learning based on
        few-shot prompting with feedback. Furthermore, we introduce CuisineWorld, a
        new gaming scenario and its related benchmark that supervises multiple agents
        playing the game simultaneously and measures multi-agent collaboration efficiency.
        We have conducted comprehensive evaluations with a new auto-metric collabo-
        ration score CoS for assessing the collaboration efficiency. Finally, MindAgent
        can be deployed in real-world gaming scenarios in a customized VR version of
        CuisineWorld and adapted in the broader “Minecraft” gaming domain as showed
        in Figure 1. Our work involving LLMs within our new infrastructure for general-
        purpose scheduling and coordination can elucidate how such skills may be obtained
        by learning from large language corpora.



                                                 1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


1    I NTRODUCTION

Large language Models (LLMs) have been driving the effort to develop general intelligent machines
(Bubeck et al., 2023; Mirchandani et al., 2023). Although they are trained using large text corpora,
their superior problem-solving capacity is not limited to canonical language processing domains.
LLMs can potentially tackle complex tasks that were previously presumed exclusive to human experts
or domain-specific algorithms. Recent research has shown the possibility of using LLMs to generate
complex plans for robots and game AI (Liang et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2023b;a; Yao et al., 2023;
Huang et al., 2023), marking an important milestone for LLMs as general-purpose intelligent agents.
In this paper, we investigate the planning capacity of LLMs in the context of multi-agent systems
(Stone & Veloso, 2000). Compared to planning for a single agent, which has been studied extensively
(Wang et al., 2023b;a), multi-agent planning imposes much higher problem-solving complexity due
to an action space that grows exponentially with respect to the number of agents. The planner must
simultaneously control multiple agents, avoid possible conflicts, and coordinate agents into achieving
a shared goal that requires potentially sophisticated collaboration. To understand to what extent
LLMs can acquire multi-agent planning skills, we first develop a new benchmark, CuisineWorld,
which is illustrated in Figure 1.
To incorporate agent AIs into video games, we design MindAgent, an infrastructure inspired by
multi-agent task allocation optimization theories, to facilitate the multi-agent planning capabilities of
LLMs. Our infrastructure enables LLMs to perform complex coordination and scheduling of multiple
agents in order to achieve task completion. We conduct comprehensive evaluations with recently
introduced LLMs, including GPT-4, Claude, and LLaMA, playing our CuisineWorld game within our
MindAgent interactive multi-agent planning framework, leading to the following key observations:
1) Zero shot multi-agent planning: Powerful pretrained LLMs like GPT-4 are capable of scheduling
multiple agents (ranging from 2 to 4) to complete dishes, even by collaborating with human players,
by merely reading game instructions and recipes; 2) Planning with advanced prompting: We can
significantly boost multi-agent planning performance by leveraging an emergent in-context learning
ability (Brown et al., 2020; Wei et al., 2021) by adding only a few expert demonstrations (from
different games) to the prompt, explaining the rationale of certain actions as in Chain-of-Thought
prompting (Wei et al., 2022), and providing on-the-fly feedback to the LLMs during planning; and
3) Generalization: LLMs can potentially be generalist multi-agent planners as they are able to
generalize in order to coordinate a growing number of agents and perform well in new game domains
such as Minecraft.
The main contributions of our work are as follows:
• We develop a new gaming scenario and related benchmark based on a multi-agent virtual kitchen
  environment, CuisineWorld. It adopts a minimal text-based game format and supports planning
  tasks with various structures and challenges, making it an ideal test bed for the emergent multi-agent
  planning (i.e., scheduling and coordination) capacity of LLMs.
• We introduce MindAgent, an infrastructure for interactive multi-agent planning with LLMs. which
  demonstrates the in-context learning of the multi-agent planning capacity of LLMs and offers
  several prompting techniques to facilitate their planning ability, including providing few-shot
  demonstrations, planning rationals, and environmental feedback.
• We conduct extensive evaluations of our benchmark with multiple LLMs and prompting settings.
  Our experimental results validate its potential in helping develop generalist multi-agent planners.
• We deploy MindAgent in real-world gaming scenarios and demonstrate its ability to power human-
  AI interactions.
Compared to canonical domain-specific automated planning systems, although multi-agent planning
with LLMs is more likely to be bottlenecked by high computational cost, context length limitations,
non-optimal plans, etc., it can potentially improve planning performed by in-context learning from
data without fine-tuning, seamlessly adapt to new planning problems across different domains, and
offer a more flexible interface to human collaborators. Ultimately, our investigation into the leveraging
of LLMs for general-purpose scheduling and coordination can elucidate how such skills may be
acquired by learning from large text corpora, and is potentially instrumental to the future development
of more effective LLM-based planners.


                                                   2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


2    R ELATED W ORK

Multi-Agent Coordination. The field of multi-agent collaboration boasts a comprehensive body of
literature. Traditionally, such collaborations have been modeled using the MDP/POMDP frameworks
(Lowe et al., 2017; Rashid et al., 2020; Jain et al., 2019; Wu et al., 2021; Gao et al., 2023). However,
there has been a recent shift towards using LLMs for these collaborations. For instance, Zhang et al.
(2023b) delved into how LLMs might communicate and cooperate in a watch-and-help (WAH) task.
Meanwhile, Zhang et al. (2023a) investigated a two-agent collaboration game inspired by the simpler
dynamics of the two-agent Overcooked-style game. Notably, their research mainly concentrated on
the task success rate, with most studies typically anchored to a single task objective. By contrast,
we emphasize the importance of collaboration efficiency in scenarios encompassing multiple task
objectives. Further, our research uniquely focuses on evaluating the collaborative efficiency of two
or more agents. Additionally, while other works such as that of Park et al. (2023); Wu et al. (2021)
simulate each agent individually, we employ a centralized system. This not only significantly reduces
the number of API calls but also reduces context length, making it more appropriate for use in gaming
applications.
Planning With LLMs. A number of works leverage LLMs to perform task planning (Huang et al.,
2022a; Wang et al., 2023a; Yao et al., 2023; Li et al., 2023), specifically the LLMs’ WWW-scale
domain knowledge and emergent zero-shot planning abilities to perform complex task planning and
reasoning. Recent robotics research also leverages LLMs to perform task planning (Ahn et al., 2022;
Huang et al., 2022b; Liang et al., 2022) by decomposing natural language instruction into a sequence
of subtasks, either in the natural language form or in Python code , then using a low-level controller
to execute these subtasks. Additionally, Huang et al. (2022b), Liang et al. (2022), and Wang et al.
(2023b) also incorporate environmental feedback to improve task performance.
Benchmarks Using Games. Numerous games have been developed to study task planning (Baker
et al., 2022; Carroll et al., 2019; Bakhtin et al., 2022), yet only a handful delve into multi-agent
collaborations. Even within this limited subset, the focus predominantly remains on two-agent
interactions where responsibilities are unevenly distributed between the agents (Wan et al., 2022;
Puig et al., 2020)—it is common for one player to assume a dominant role while the other provides
support. By contrast, our work assumes the equal apportion of responsibilities across agents, and we
expand our investigation to encompass collaborations involving more than two agents, even including
human players. While some previous studies have ventured into multi-task settings, none has delved
into scenarios where agents must compete for resources to complete multiple distinct tasks with
varied levels of difficulty within a single episode. Additionally, our work differs from that of Carroll
et al. (2019) in that our game settings feature a diverse array of tools and task objectives, thereby
generating an exponentially larger task space. A comparison between our work and other related
studies can be found in the Appendix E.1.

3    T HE C UISINE W ORLD G AME

We introduce CuisineWorld as a novel and flexible game for multi-agent scheduling and coordination
in a virtual kitchen environment. In this game, a multi-agent system must supervise multiple agents
and coordinate them, with the goal of completing as many dish orders as possible. The game is
equipped with a textual interface since our focus is on evaluating LLM-based planning agents. Our
modularized design separates tasks and game engines, allowing inclusion of more tasks (dish types)
and domains (“kitchen” implementation via text-based engine, Unity, Minecraft, etc.).
Tasks and Reward. A task in CuisineWorld is a dish order, ranging from the most basic
tunaSashimi, which can be made by simply chopping raw tuna meat, to sophisticated dishes like
porkPasta requiring various cooking tools. In a game episode with a maximum of T steps, in
every task interval τint , a new task or dish order will be added to the active task list. A task will be
regarded completed and be removed from the active task list when a suitable dish has been placed on
the serving table. On the contrary, a task will be deemed to have failed and be removed from the list
after its lifetime τlft , which depends on the complexity of the dish, is exceeded. Along with the tasks,
the game provides rewards and penalties or feedback on certain occasions, e.g. when a task is just
completed, when infeasible commands are dispatched, etc. We support five different actions 1) goto
2) get 3) put 4) activate 5) noop. The state space contains descriptions of the environment and agents.
Due to space limitations, we refer the reader to additional details in Appendix D.


                                                   3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 2: The MindAgent Infrastructure. Planning Skill and Tool Use: The game environment requires diverse
planning skills and tool use to complete tasks. It generates relevant game information and converts the game
data into a structured text format that the LLMs can process. LLM: The main workhorse of our infrastructure
makes decisions, thus serving as a dispatcher for the multi-agent system. Memory History: A storage utility for
relevant information. Action Module: Extracts actions from text inputs and convertd them into domain-specific
language and validates DSLs so that they cause no errors during execution.

Collaboration Score (CoS). We need to evaluate to what extent the dispatcher (played by an
LLM) can coordinate multiple agents to complete dish orders across a variety of scenarios. We are
particularly interested in the question: Can the dispatcher continue to coordinate the agents into
efficient collaborations with decreasing τint ; i.e., as more dish orders are flooding in? Our hypothesis
is that an ideal dispatcher should be capable of coordinating the agents until there are way more tasks
than the system can handle. Therefore, we introduce a collaboration score (CoS), defined as
                     M
                 1 X                     Number of completed tasks τint,(i)
        CoS =                                                                                         (1)
                M i=1 Number of completed tasks τint,(i) + Number of failed tasks τint,(i)

where M is the total number of τint intervals evaluated. Effectively, CoS is the average task completion
rate across different τint conditions. In our default setting, we use M = 5. While the actual values of
τint depend on the game level, we ensure that they span a wide range of difficulties including both
relaxed and intense scenarios.
In summary, CuisineWorld is a game that emulates a virtual kitchen in which several robotic agents
are commanded to use various cooking tools and ingredients to prepare as many dish orders as
possible in a limited period of time. To necessitate collaboration, new orders will keep flooding in
while the existing ones should be completed before their expiration times. Therefore, LLMs must
properly coordinate the agents to maximize overall productivity. CuisineWorld offers game levels
with a wide range of planning difficulty: dishes with different complexity (number of ingredients and
tools involved), number of agents, order frequency and lifetime, etc., making it a useful test bed for
LLM-based multi-agent planning.

4 T HE M INDAGENT G AMING AI I NFRASTRUCTURE
Our first foray into the challenging CuisineWorld benchmark is an interactive multi-agent planning
framework with LLMs. It facilitates in-context learning and adopts a minimalist design for the
purposes of demonstrating the emergent scheduling and coordination capacity while also bringing in
exploratory prompting techniques that facilitate better planning and inform future approaches in this
domain. Our MindAgent infrastructure comprises prompt, current state, and memory components, as
shown in Figure 2 with details illustrated as follows:
Prompt incorporates four distinct sub-components: recipes, general instructions, inference knowl-
edge, and a one-shot demo. Recipes outline hierarchical procedures for preparing various dishes
at a given level. They specify the ingredients necessary for each intermediate or final product, the
appropriate tools, and the expected post-cooking outcome. Instructions detail the foundational


                                                      4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


rules of CuisineWorld, delineating the array of actions agents can undertake within the game and
enumerating the characteristics of every tool available in the current kitchen scenario. Moreover, they
inform agents about the base ingredients retrievable from storage, as well as all potential intermediate
products they can procure. Agents are also explicitly advised to remain cautious about feedback
from the environment. Inference Knowledge encapsulates insights and helpful hints for the agent,
which when utilized appropriately can guide agents to sidestep potential errors and improve their
collaborative efficiency. One-shot Demo presents a step-by-step demonstration of the preparation of
a distinct dish, different from other dishes at the current level, spanning several time steps, each of
which is incorporated as part of the prompt. The demonstration illustrates the major procedures for
cooking a dish in CuisineWorld, including obtaining ingredients, putting ingredients into different
tools, transporting intermediate ingredients, and delivering the final dish to the serving table. More
details of prompt please find in Appendix A.
Current State provides a snapshot of the prevailing observations from the environment. It encom-
passes information such as the locations of agents, the objects currently in the possession of agents,
the tools that are accessible within the environment, the ingredients present within each tool, and the
tools that are actively in use. Moreover, it includes optional feedback from the environment, triggered
when agent actions violate the rules of the environment; for instance, when assigning two distinct
actions to the same agent.
Memory archives the history of interaction with the environment. Specifically, it chronicles the state
of the environment and the state of the agents at every time step.
In addition to the prompt modules, other modules are implemented to help interface between LLMs
and CuisineWorld. Action Extraction employs a regular expression matching procedure to distill
agent actions from the textual output of the LLMs. This module is indispensable because LLM output
is not always clean, but may include information reflecting its internal thought processes or even
issue apologies for prior missteps in reaction to environmental feedback. Action Validation utilizes a
look-ahead checking mechanism. This module parses the proposed actions, assessing their feasibility.
If an action is deemed unexecutable, an error message is returned.
4.1   I NFRASTRUCTURE M ECHANISMS

Assuming a multi-agent system with N agents, the system must complete a sequence of P different
tasks. Each task has Mp different sub-tasks. Furthermore, the number and types of tasks are unknown
at the beginning of the episode. The environment will sample a task for the agents to finish during
a given interval. The agents must complete the designated task along with other tasks in the task
queue. Additionally, each task has an expiration time, after which the task will be marked as a failure.
The objective of the multi-agent system is to finish as many tasks as possible and fail as few tasks as
possible within a given time frame.
To find optimal task planning, scheduling, and allocations. We define qpim and cpim as quality and
cost, respectively, in the context of allocating agent i to work on sub-task m of task p in the episode.
For example, if the agent successfully executes an action towards the goal, it will receive a positive
quality q. For every action, there is an associated cost c. Then the combined utility for the sub-task is

                    q     − cpim , if agent i can execute sub-task m of task p in the episode
         upim = pim                                                                                   (2)
                    −∞               otherwise.
We define the assignment of sub-task m to agent i as

                           1, agent i is assigned to sub-task m of task p in the episode
               vpim =                                                                                 (3)
                           0 otherwise.
The goal is to maximize the utility of the episode subject to a time constraint. We define the execution
time for task m by agent i for task p in the episode as τpim , and the maximum time allowed to execute
the task as Tmax , we express the task decomposition and assignment problem as
                     P X Mp
                       N X
                     X
           arg max                   upim vpim ,                                                     (4)
               v
                     p=1 i=1 m=1
                         P P P
            subject to      p    i     m τP
                                          pim vpim   ≤ Tmax
                                            i vpim   ≤1                 ∀m ∈ M, ∀p ∈ P               (5)
                                              vpim   ∈ {0, 1}   ∀i ∈ N, ∀m ∈ M, ∀p ∈ P.


                                                     5
 Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024

                                     level_7                                                                      level_8                                                        level_9
               1.0                                                                     1.0                                                                 1.0
                        2-agent
                        3-agent
                        4-agent
               0.8                                                                     0.8                                                                 0.8



success rate


                                                                        success rate


                                                                                                                                            success rate
               0.6                                                                     0.6                                                                 0.6

               0.4                                                                     0.4                                                                 0.4

               0.2                                                                     0.2                                                                 0.2

               0.0                                                                     0.0                                                                 0.0
                       6            8             10           12                                 6           8       10         12        14                    7.5   10.0 12.5 15.0 17.5 20.0 22.5
                 task interval                         task interval                        task interval
 Figure 3: Collaboration efficiency curves on several levels. More level results can be found in the Figure 21 of
 Appendix E.

                                   very simple                                          simple                              intermediate                                   advanced
                                                                                                                                                                                                 Average
                        level 0         level 1    level 7          level 2             level 4       level 8     level 3     level 9   level 10                 level 5   level 11   level 12
        2 Agents           0.727        0.706          0.682        0.687                0.664        0.504        0.764      0.725        0.701                  0.661     0.692      0.559      0.673
        3 Agents           0.781        0.778          0.780        0.528                0.600        0.455        0.822      0.771        0.815                  0.689     0.733      0.570      0.694
        4 Agents           0.771        0.761          0.761        0.505                0.592        0.626        0.848      0.744        0.790                  0.692     0.675      0.534      0.692

 Table 1: Agent CoS performance scores on very simple, simple, intermediate, and advanced tasks for various
 numbers of agents.



 Since this problem cannot be solved in polynomial time, we tackle it by leveraging LLMs.
Our prompt design choices try to help an LLM system solve Equation 4. In practice, we reformulate
the equation with qualities or rewards expressed in natural language as environmental feedback.
For example, when the agent successfully collects an item, the environment emits a signal “collect
finish”. When the dispatcher assigns a different task to the same agent, the environment emits a signal
“agent IDs cannot be the same”. As rewards are not immediately observable, we borrow spirits from
temporal difference learning. State-action history is accumulated into the memory history. Due to
context length limits, it is infeasible to fit the entire history into the context window. We select a fixed
horizon history as part of the prompt. We further express the constraints of the system in natural
language and repeat important constraints multiple times if necessary.


  5                  E XPERIMENTS AND R ESULTS

 We have conducted extensive experiments in CuisineWorld. We first introduce the experiment settings
 and then present an analysis of our empirical results. We report LLM settings in Appendix C. Our
 experiments focused on addressing the following research questions:
 Q1: How efficiently can the model dispatch multiple agents?
 Q2: Can the model dispatch agents for dynamic, on-the-fly goals across different tasks?
 Q3: How do various components of the input prompt influence the model’s performance?
 Q4: How do other LLMs perform compared to GPT-4?
 Q5: To what extent can the existing methods collaborate with human users?
 Q6: What is the human perception of collaborating with numerous intelligent agents?


  5.1                E XPERIMENTAL R EGIMEN I: LLM S D ISPATCH M ULTI -AGENTS (NPC)

 Collaboration Efficiency (Q1, Q2). Figure 3 and Table 1 report the performance of our system
 under different settings. Please find the full results and visualizing figures in Appendix E .
 Findings. As shown in Figure 3, in general, increasing the number of agents from 2 to 3 will increase
 the overall performance. However, when increasing more, the overall performance might drop due to
 the complexity of multi-agent collaborations, as is corroborated by computing CoS by levels: As
 shown in the tables, the CoS is the highest when there are two agents in two cases. The CoS is the
 highest when there are three agents in seven cases. The CoS is the highest when there are four agents
 in three cases. Second, we observe that the system performance degrades with more agents under
 less demanding conditions, indicating that the LLM dispatcher struggles with fewer tasks.


                                                                                                                  6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


(a) Collaboration score: The col- (b) Perceived enjoyment: Hu- (c) Perceived productivity: Play-
laboration score is higher if more  mans enjoy the game more if they       ers think collaborating with AI
agents are collaborating with hu- collaborate with the right number        agents will improve productivity.
man players, although the differ- of agents.
ence is insignificant.
            Figure 4: Human Evaluations. Full results can be found in Figure 27 of Appendix G.3.


5.2     E XPERIMENTAL R EGIMEN II: H UMAN AND M ULTI -NPC S WITH LLM S

5.2.1    E XPERIMENTAL S ETTING
We conducted a user study in our gaming environment that addresses Q5 and Q6. The user study
evaluates the LLM dispatcher’s ability to collaborate with humans, where participants are collabo-
rating with 1, 2, and 3 agents or working alone on the virtual cooking tasks. We consider the most
general setting, where the LLM works on the unseen task, as Level 3.

5.2.2    E XPERIMENT D ESIGN
Hypotheses. The user study tests the following hypotheses:

• H1: Task productivity. Participants have higher productivity when collaborating with AI agents.
• H2: Task productivity with more agents. Participants have higher productivity when collaborat-
  ing with more AI agents.
• H3: Perception of the AI agents. Participants have higher perceived task efficiency and more fun
  playing the game as a consequence of the collaboration.

Manipulated Variables. We use a within-subject design for our experiment. Every user tries to
finish the task solo or collaborates with different numbers of agents with varying competency. We
randomize the order of the treatment to mitigate practice effects, fatigue effects, and carryover effects.

• Single agent: Participants work on the task by themselves.
• LLM-powered multi-agent system: Participants collaborate with the multi-agent AI system
  powered by an LLM.
• Random agent: Random agents execute random actions from a pool of valid actions. Participants
  collaborate with random AI agents.

We recruited 12 subjects for our study, including 2 females and 10 males. We used ANOVA to test
the effects of different experimental conditions on collaboration performance and the subjective
perceptions. Tukey HSD tests were conducted on all possible pairs of experimental conditions.
Findings. As showed in Figure 4 and Figure 27, we found significant effects on the team collaboration
success rate F (4, 55) = 28.11, p < 0.001. Post-hoc comparisons using Tukey HSD tests revealed
that the team comprising the human player with LLM agents achieves a higher success rate than
the human working alone (p < 0.001) across different numbers of agents, thus confirming H1.
Although collaborating with more agents had a higher success rate, it was not significantly different
from collaborating with one, two, or three agents (p = 0.774 and p = 0.231, respectively). We
observed that human players have more fun playing the game when collaborating with LLM-powered
AI agents than when playing alone (p = 0.0126). Players felt that collaboration with AI agents leads
to higher productivity (p = 0.0104), thus confirming H3. Additionally, when playing with AI agents,
human players take their actions based on other players’ actions (p = 0.00266). Human players
also found that AI agents are more predictable than random agents (p < 0.001). Further insights
from player feedback highlighted an intriguing trade-off: while greater numbers of agents improved
overall task success rates, this reduced the enjoyment of the game. Often, players felt sidelined and


                                                     7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024

          2 agent      GPT-4 (full)     GPT-4 w/ only few-step       GPT-4 w/o inference knowledge          GPT-4 w/o feedback
          CoS             0.764                  0.710                                0.714                           0.311
                                             Table 2: Additional ablation on Level 3

    level 3   4agent using 4agent demo       4agent using 2agent demo           3agent using 3agent demo     3agent using 2agent demo
    CoS                   0.848                          0.851                            0.822                           0.775
                          Table 3: Using different numbers of agents as one-shot demonstrations


less involved. Thus, game developers should adjust AI performance to maintain player engagement
and fun. As suggested by Yuan et al. (2022), aligning human values with AIs is a promising approach.
The visualization figures of CuisineWorld showed in Appendix E.2.


6       A NALYSIS AND E MERGENT G AMING A BILITIES

6.1       A BLATION S TUDY FOR M ULTI -AGENTS

Study of the Prompt Components (Q3). In Table 2, we elucidate the performance of LLM
dispatchers with certain components of the prompt omitted. We chose level 3 as the basis for
our ablation study. It was selected because it displayed a clear correlation between an increased
number of agents and improved performance, serving as a stable benchmark for evaluating the LLM’s
coordination capabilities. We recognize that the LLM may not perform consistently across all levels
on the challenging CuisineWorld benchmark. When performance is variable or poor on certain levels,
it can obscure the effects of ablation studies due to multiple confounding factors. Details about
the prompt can be found in the appendices. Specifically, for these tests, we excluded individual
components such as the inference knowledge, reduced the prompt example to a mere two steps
instead of the complete demonstration, and evaluated the model without environmental feedback.
Findings. Table 2 indicates a significant drop in performance when environmental feedback is
excluded, underscoring its pivotal role in the efficacy of the LLM dispatcher. Replaying action
sequences reveals that, without feedback, the LLM dispatcher tends to repeat mistakes and gets
stuck in specific states for prolonged durations. Another key takeaway is that a succinct two-step
demonstration of input and output format can still achieve impressive performance for unseen
tasks with dynamic objectives. Notably, in these two-step instances, there is no explicit guide
to finishing any tasks, yet the model does not merely complete the task but continually performs
additional tasks within the same episode. Furthermore, we observe that integrating human-crafted
inference knowledge bolsters the performance of the LLM dispatcher. Lastly, even with few-shot
demonstrations involving fewer agents, the LLM dispatcher retains satisfactory performance, as
shown in Table 3. Despite some impressive findings, we also observe several drawbacks through
our experiments. 1) GPT-4 heavily relies on feedback, without feedback its performance drops
significantly as indicated in our Table 2. 2) GPT-4 is sensitive to prompt inputs as indicated in Table 2,
without inference knowledge, the performance will drop.
Study of the Performance of other LLMs (Q4). To study how other LLMs perform on our tasks, we
tested the collaboration performance of GPT-3.5, Claude-2, and LLaMA2, and Table 4 summarizes
the results. For a fair comparison, all tests employed identical prompt inputs.
Findings. We observed that while other LLMs tend to underperform, models such as Claude-2 still
manage to complete the task to a considerable extent.

6.2       E MERGENT A BILITIES

Across our experiments, our MindAgent framework exhibits the following emergent properties:
Emergent Collaboration Task Understanding. As shown in Table 2, especially in the few-step
ablation entries, GPT-4 exhibits its proficiency even when not provided with a full demonstration


                             2 agents                                    3 agents                                   4 agents
          GPT-4     Claude-2    LLaMA2    ChatGPT   GPT-4    Claude-2        LLaMA2    ChatGPT    GPT-4    Claude-2    LLaMA2     ChatGPT
 CoS      0.686     0.3125          0        0       0.822       0.372          0         0       0.848     0.473          0         0

                                         Table 4: Performance of other LLMs on Level 3


                                                                         8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


            (a) Multi-Agent                    (b) Human-NPC                            (c) VR
Figure 5: (a) Alex and Steve are collaborating to kill different animals. (b) A human player instructs the agents
to perform certain actions. (c) A human player collaborating with agents in VR.

                   GPT-4 Minecraft      τint,(1)   τint,(2)    τint,(3)   τint,(4)   τint,(5)   CoS
                   Performance          0.195      0.381       0.704      0.792      0.833      0.581
                         Table 5: Performance of MindAgent framework in Minecraft


of specific tasks. To clarify, a “full few-shot demo” typically refers to a comprehensive demonstra-
tion of a task, detailing each step and procedure involved. By contrast, we provide GPT-4 with
only a partial demonstration or a glimpse of the task executing only two steps. Yet, despite this
limited input, GPT-4’s performance is remarkable. This underscores GPT-4’s impressive emer-
gent zero-shot multi-agent planning abilities. Beyond simply completing unseen tasks, GPT-4
also demonstrates adaptability by dynamically prioritizing multiple different tasks as they arise,
emphasizing its emergent multi-task, on-the-fly planning skills.
Emergent Multi-agent Reasoning Abilities. Referring to Table 3, GPT-4 has the ability to deploy
more agents based on demonstrations of fewer agents. For instance, it can effectively dispatch 4
agents having only seen demonstrations involving 2 agents. However, performance is better when 4
agents use 2-agent demos compared to 4-agent demos, possibly because the task suits 2 or 4-agent
teams. With 4 agents, the model can create two independent teams of two, showcasing its ability to
allocate tasks and plan for more agents than previously experienced.

7    N OVEL G AME A DAPTATION
In line with our ongoing efforts to create collaborative, in-game, multi-agent systems, we integrated
our infrastructure into Minecraft (Figure 5). In this adaptation, we designed several unique cooking
tasks where two in-game agents, Alex and Steve, must cook various types of meat as shown in Ap-
pendix F.2. After cooking, they must deposit the meats into a chest. See Table 5 for the experimental
results, and see Appendix F.3 for additional visualizations. The action details of Minecraft please
take the reference in Appendix F.4. We provide more details for transfering to Minecraft in F.1.
Incorporating game-specific domain knowledge into the system is crucial to games where domain-
specific knowledge plays an important part. In CuisineWorld and Minecraft, we inject domain-specific
knowledge (such as recipes) directly into the context, which the LLMs utilize to inform the decision-
making and collaboration strategies. This demonstrates the feasibility of adapting MindAgent to
other domains where specific knowledge plays a crucial role. In addition, techniques like Retrieval-
Augmented Generation (RAG) and Fine Tuning could be pivotal in further developing MindAgent’s
capabilities to handle such domain-specific complexities.


8    C ONCLUSION
We have introduced MindAgent, an infrastructure for multi-agent collaboration through LLMs across
multiple gaming domains. We investigated its multi-agent planning capabilities, and we deployed our
infrastructure into real-world video games that demonstrate its multi-agent and human-AI collabora-
tion effectiveness. Additionally, we presented CuisineWorld, a text-based multi-agent collaboration
benchmark that provides a new auto-metric Collaboration Score (CoS) to quantify collaboration
efficiency. In this work, we mainly introduce the interpretable human-NPCs communication in
collaborative games, which is a promising direction for enhancing multi-agents cooperation as the
interactive way forward. Beyond its practical applications, we anticipate that our work will guide the
development of future gaming systems in which human-AI collaboration is seamless and intuitive.
We are optimistic that our insights and findings will catalyze the design of games that are both
technologically advanced and significantly more engaging and enjoyable for players.


                                                           9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Michael Ahn, Anthony Brohan, Noah Brown, Yevgen Chebotar, Omar Cortes, Byron David, Chelsea
 Finn, Chuyuan Fu, Keerthana Gopalakrishnan, Karol Hausman, Alex Herzog, Daniel Ho, Jasmine
 Hsu, Julian Ibarz, Brian Ichter, Alex Irpan, Eric Jang, Rosario Jauregui Ruano, Kyle Jeffrey,
 Sally Jesmonth, Nikhil Joshi, Ryan Julian, Dmitry Kalashnikov, Yuheng Kuang, Kuang-Huei Lee,
 Sergey Levine, Yao Lu, Linda Luu, Carolina Parada, Peter Pastor, Jornell Quiambao, Kanishka
 Rao, Jarek Rettinghouse, Diego Reyes, Pierre Sermanet, Nicolas Sievers, Clayton Tan, Alexander
 Toshev, Vincent Vanhoucke, Fei Xia, Ted Xiao, Peng Xu, Sichun Xu, Mengyuan Yan, and Andy
 Zeng. Do as i can and not as i say: Grounding language in robotic affordances. In arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2204.01691, 2022. 3

Bowen Baker, Ilge Akkaya, Peter Zhokov, Joost Huizinga, Jie Tang, Adrien Ecoffet, Brandon
  Houghton, Raul Sampedro, and Jeff Clune. Video pretraining (vpt): Learning to act by watching
  unlabeled online videos. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:24639–24654,
  2022. 3

Anton Bakhtin, Noam Brown, Emily Dinan, Gabriele Farina, Colin Flaherty, Daniel Fried, Andrew
  Goff, Jonathan Gray, Hengyuan Hu, et al. Human-level play in the game of diplomacy by
  combining language models with strategic reasoning. Science, 378(6624):1067–1074, 2022. 3, 23

Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are
  few-shot learners. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:1877–1901, 2020. 2

Sébastien Bubeck, Varun Chandrasekaran, Ronen Eldan, Johannes Gehrke, Eric Horvitz, Ece Kamar,
   Peter Lee, Yin Tat Lee, Yuanzhi Li, Scott Lundberg, et al. Sparks of artificial general intelligence:
   Early experiments with gpt-4. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.12712, 2023. 2

Micah Carroll, Rohin Shah, Mark K Ho, Tom Griffiths, Sanjit Seshia, Pieter Abbeel, and Anca
 Dragan. On the utility of learning about humans for human-ai coordination. Advances in neural
 information processing systems, 32, 2019. 3, 23, 24

Marc-Alexandre Côté, Akos Kádár, Xingdi Yuan, Ben Kybartas, Tavian Barnes, Emery Fine, James
 Moore, Matthew Hausknecht, Layla El Asri, Mahmoud Adada, et al. Textworld: A learning
 environment for text-based games. In Computer Games: 7th Workshop, CGW 2018, Held in Con-
 junction with the 27th International Conference on Artificial Intelligence, IJCAI 2018, Stockholm,
 Sweden, July 13, 2018, Revised Selected Papers 7, pp. 41–75. Springer, 2019. 23

Xiang Deng, Yu Gu, Boyuan Zheng, Shijie Chen, Samuel Stevens, Boshi Wang, Huan Sun, and
  Yu Su. Mind2web: Towards a generalist agent for the web. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.06070, 2023.
  14

Xiaofeng Gao, Ran Gong, Yizhou Zhao, Shu Wang, Tianmin Shu, and Song-Chun Zhu. Joint mind
  modeling for explanation generation in complex human-robot collaborative tasks. In 2020 29th
  IEEE international conference on robot and human interactive communication (RO-MAN), pp.
  1119–1126. IEEE, 2020. 24

Xiaofeng Gao, Qiaozi Gao, Ran Gong, Kaixiang Lin, Govind Thattai, and Gaurav S Sukhatme.
  Dialfred: Dialogue-enabled agents for embodied instruction following. IEEE Robotics and
  Automation Letters, 7(4):10049–10056, 2022. 23

Yiming Gao, Feiyu Liu, Liang Wang, Zhenjie Lian, Weixuan Wang, Siqin Li, Xianliang Wang, Xian-
  han Zeng, Rundong Wang, Jiawei Wang, et al. Towards effective and interpretable human-agent
  collaboration in moba games: A communication perspective. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.11632,
  2023. 3

Qiuyuan Huang, Jae Sung Park, Abhinav Gupta, Paul Bennett, Ran Gong, Subhojit Som, Baolin Peng,
  Owais Khan Mohammed, Chris Pal, Yejin Choi, et al. Ark: Augmented reality with knowledge
  interactive emergent ability. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.00970, 2023. 2


                                                  10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Wenlong Huang, Pieter Abbeel, Deepak Pathak, and Igor Mordatch. Language models as zero-shot
 planners: Extracting actionable knowledge for embodied agents. In Kamalika Chaudhuri, Stefanie
 Jegelka, Le Song, Csaba Szepesvari, Gang Niu, and Sivan Sabato (eds.), Proceedings of the 39th
 International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 162 of Proceedings of Machine Learning
 Research, pp. 9118–9147. PMLR, 17–23 Jul 2022a. URL https://proceedings.mlr.
 press/v162/huang22a.html. 3
Wenlong Huang, Fei Xia, Ted Xiao, Harris Chan, Jacky Liang, Pete Florence, Andy Zeng, Jonathan
 Tompson, Igor Mordatch, Yevgen Chebotar, Pierre Sermanet, Noah Brown, Tomas Jackson, Linda
 Luu, Sergey Levine, Karol Hausman, and Brian Ichter. Inner monologue: Embodied reasoning
 through planning with language models. In arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.05608, 2022b. 3
Unnat Jain, Luca Weihs, Eric Kolve, Mohammad Rastegari, Svetlana Lazebnik, Ali Farhadi, Alexan-
  der G Schwing, and Aniruddha Kembhavi. Two body problem: Collaborative visual task comple-
  tion. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
  pp. 6689–6699, 2019. 3
Unnat Jain, Luca Weihs, Eric Kolve, Ali Farhadi, Svetlana Lazebnik, Aniruddha Kembhavi, and
 Alexander Schwing. A cordial sync: Going beyond marginal policies for multi-agent embodied
  tasks. In Computer Vision–ECCV 2020: 16th European Conference, Glasgow, UK, August 23–28,
 2020, Proceedings, Part V 16, pp. 471–490. Springer, 2020. 23
Guohao Li, Hasan Abed Al Kader Hammoud, Hani Itani, Dmitrii Khizbullin, and Bernard Ghanem.
  Camel: Communicative agents for” mind” exploration of large scale language model society. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2303.17760, 2023. 3
Jacky Liang, Wenlong Huang, Fei Xia, Peng Xu, Karol Hausman, Brian Ichter, Pete Florence, and
  Andy Zeng. Code as policies: Language model programs for embodied control. In arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2209.07753, 2022. 2, 3
Xiao Liu, Hao Yu, Hanchen Zhang, Yifan Xu, Xuanyu Lei, Hanyu Lai, Yu Gu, Hangliang Ding,
  Kaiwen Men, Kejuan Yang, et al. Agentbench: Evaluating llms as agents. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2308.03688, 2023. 14
Xinzhu Liu, Xinghang Li, Di Guo, Sinan Tan, Huaping Liu, and Fuchun Sun. Embodied multi-agent
  task planning from ambiguous instruction. Proceedings of robotics: science and systems, New
  York City, NY, USA, pp. 1–14, 2022. 23
Ryan Lowe, Yi I Wu, Aviv Tamar, Jean Harb, OpenAI Pieter Abbeel, and Igor Mordatch. Multi-agent
  actor-critic for mixed cooperative-competitive environments. Advances in neural information
  processing systems, 30, 2017. 3
Suvir Mirchandani, Fei Xia, Pete Florence, Brian Ichter, Danny Driess, Montserrat Gonzalez Arenas,
  Kanishka Rao, Dorsa Sadigh, and Andy Zeng. Large language models as general pattern machines.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.04721, 2023. 2
Aishwarya Padmakumar, Jesse Thomason, Ayush Shrivastava, Patrick Lange, Anjali Narayan-Chen,
  Spandana Gella, Robinson Piramuthu, Gokhan Tur, and Dilek Hakkani-Tur. Teach: Task-driven
  embodied agents that chat. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
  volume 36, pp. 2017–2025, 2022. 23
Joon Sung Park, Joseph C O’Brien, Carrie J Cai, Meredith Ringel Morris, Percy Liang, and
  Michael S Bernstein. Generative agents: Interactive simulacra of human behavior. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2304.03442, 2023. 3, 23
Xavier Puig, Tianmin Shu, Shuang Li, Zilin Wang, Yuan-Hong Liao, Joshua B Tenenbaum, Sanja
  Fidler, and Antonio Torralba. Watch-and-help: A challenge for social perception and human-ai
  collaboration. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.09890, 2020. 3, 23
Tabish Rashid, Mikayel Samvelyan, Christian Schroeder De Witt, Gregory Farquhar, Jakob Foerster,
  and Shimon Whiteson. Monotonic value function factorisation for deep multi-agent reinforcement
  learning. The Journal of Machine Learning Research, 21(1):7234–7284, 2020. 3


                                               11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Mohit Shridhar, Xingdi Yuan, Marc-Alexandre Côté, Yonatan Bisk, Adam Trischler, and Matthew
 Hausknecht. Alfworld: Aligning text and embodied environments for interactive learning. arXiv
 preprint arXiv:2010.03768, 2020. 23
Peter Stone and Manuela Veloso. Multiagent systems: A survey from a machine learning perspective.
  Autonomous Robots, 8:345–383, 2000. 2
Alane Suhr, Claudia Yan, Charlotte Schluger, Stanley Yu, Hadi Khader, Marwa Mouallem, Iris
  Zhang, and Yoav Artzi. Executing instructions in situated collaborative interactions. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1910.03655, 2019. 23
Jack Urbanek, Angela Fan, Siddharth Karamcheti, Saachi Jain, Samuel Humeau, Emily Dinan, Tim
  Rocktäschel, Douwe Kiela, Arthur Szlam, and Jason Weston. Learning to speak and act in a
  fantasy text adventure game. arXiv preprint arXiv:1903.03094, 2019. 23
Yanming Wan, Jiayuan Mao, and Josh Tenenbaum. Handmethat: Human-robot communication
  in physical and social environments. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:
  12014–12026, 2022. 3, 23
Guanzhi Wang, Yuqi Xie, Yunfan Jiang, Ajay Mandlekar, Chaowei Xiao, Yuke Zhu, Linxi Fan, and
 Anima Anandkumar. Voyager: An open-ended embodied agent with large language models. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2305.16291, 2023a. 2, 3, 14
Zihao Wang, Shaofei Cai, Anji Liu, Xiaojian Ma, and Yitao Liang. Describe, explain, plan and select:
  Interactive planning with large language models enables open-world multi-task agents. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2302.01560, 2023b. 2, 3
Jason Wei, Maarten Bosma, Vincent Y Zhao, Kelvin Guu, Adams Wei Yu, Brian Lester, Nan Du,
  Andrew M Dai, and Quoc V Le. Finetuned language models are zero-shot learners. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2109.01652, 2021. 2
Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Fei Xia, Ed Chi, Quoc V Le, Denny
  Zhou, et al. Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:24824–24837, 2022. 2
Sarah A Wu, Rose E Wang, James A Evans, Joshua B Tenenbaum, David C Parkes, and Max
  Kleiman-Weiner. Too many cooks: Bayesian inference for coordinating multi-agent collaboration.
  Topics in Cognitive Science, 13(2):414–432, 2021. 3, 23, 24
Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao.
  ReAct: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models. In International Conference on
  Learning Representations (ICLR), 2023. 2, 3, 14
Luyao Yuan, Xiaofeng Gao, Zilong Zheng, Mark Edmonds, Ying Nian Wu, Federico Rossano,
  Hongjing Lu, Yixin Zhu, and Song-Chun Zhu. In situ bidirectional human-robot value alignment.
  Science robotics, 7(68):eabm4183, 2022. 8
Ceyao Zhang, Kaijie Yang, Siyi Hu, Zihao Wang, Guanghe Li, Yihang Sun, Cheng Zhang, Zhaowei
  Zhang, Anji Liu, Song-Chun Zhu, et al. Proagent: Building proactive cooperative ai with large
  language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.11339, 2023a. 3
Hongxin Zhang, Weihua Du, Jiaming Shan, Qinhong Zhou, Yilun Du, Joshua B Tenenbaum, Tianmin
  Shu, and Chuang Gan. Building cooperative embodied agents modularly with large language
  models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.02485, 2023b. 3, 23


                                                 12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                                Appendix for
                    MindAgent: Emergent Gaming Interaction

A    P ROMPT E XAMPLES
We provide some examples of prompts for CuisineWorld. Figure 6 shows an example of the system
prompt info. Figure 7 shows an example of a partial demonstration.


                         Figure 6: The MindAgent system prompt example.


                  Figure 7: The MindAgent system partial one-shot demo example.


                                               13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B     P ROMPT E NGINEERING D ETAILS
Our initial approach began with a simple and generic prompt, designed to be as neutral as possible.
This baseline prompt was tested across all models, including GPT-4, Claude, and other LLMs in our
study. We observed that only GPT-4 and Claude were able to generate reasonable planning responses
with this initial prompt. Consequently, we refined our prompt engineering efforts to better suit these
two models, aiming to optimize their performance and response quality.
For the other LLMs, we also attempted individual prompt engineering. However, these efforts did not
yield significant improvements in their responses compared to the initial trial. After several rounds
of testing and refinement, we concluded that further prompt customization for these models did not
result in notably better outcomes.
As a result, we decided to use a consistent prompt across all LLMs for the final comparison. This
decision was made to maintain uniformity in testing conditions, despite the prompts being more
closely tuned to GPT-4 and Claude. We believe this approach offers a reasonable balance between
fairness and practicality in evaluating the capabilities of different LLMs under similar conditions.

C     LLM S ETTINGS
We perform experiments on CuisineWorld through OpenAI APIs and Anthropic APIs. All GPT-4
experiments employ the gpt-4-0613 model, and all Chat-GPT experiments employ gpt-3.5-turbo-0613.
For the Llama 2 experiments, we use the hugging face inference endpoints Llama-2-70b-chat-hf. We
set the temperature for all experiments to 0.1 following Wang et al. (2023a). We report the average
results over three episodes.

D     C UISINE W ORLD TASK D ETAILS
D.1   C UISINE W ORLD TASK D EFINITIONS

We follow prior work (Yao et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2023; Deng et al., 2023) to interactively evaluate
LLMs as planning agents. Overall, the interactive evaluation can be formulated as a Markov
Decision Process (S, A, T , R, G), with state space S, action space A (effectively indicating all the
possible schedules that can be made at a single time step), transition dynamics T , reward function
R, and task instruction space G. Note that, although there are multiple agents inside CuisineWorld
that can be coordinated, asmentioned above, we adopt a centralized planning scheme and thereby
formulate our game as a single-agent, fully-observable decision-making problem. An illustration of
the state & action space and the possible tasks of our game can be found in Figure 1 of the paper.
State Space S. In a CuisineWorld virtual kitchen, there are two types of entities: location and
agent. For each entity, the game will provide a set of descriptions, and the aggregated descriptions of
all entities will be the state returned by the game. A location can be storage, where one can obtain
ingredients and dispense waste, a serving table, onto which one should put the completed, or a cooking
tool; e.g., pan or blender. We offer up to two descriptions for each location: inside(location,
items), indicating what items (some ingredients, completed dishes, etc.) are now inside the location,
and occupy(location), suggesting location is now being used and cannot be touched; e.g.,
an activated blender. An agent is an entity that can be dispatched to complete the task, and we
provide up to three descriptions for each agent: at(location, agent), indicating that agent
is now at location, hold(agent, items), suggesting what items agent is holding, and
occupy(agent), implying agent is now operating a tool, e.g., chopping some fruits, and will
not respond to any dispatching command. The set of tool distributions can be found in Table 23.
Action Space A. An action in CuisineWorld is a list of dispatching commands. Given N agent
entities, a total of N commands must be generated. The agent provides the following commands
(also tabulated in Table 14):

1. goto(agent, location), to let agent move to location;
2. get(agent, location, item), to let agent get a specific item from location;
3. put(agent, location), to put whatever agent is holding into location;


                                                 14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


4. activate(agent, location), to let agent turn on location if it is a cooking tool, e.g.
   blender;

5. noop(agent), to have agent perform no actions in this round of dispatching.

Note that, to avoid the possible confusion of multiple agents being dispatched to operate with the
same location, the dispatcher also must properly order the dispatching commands as they will be
executed sequentially.


D.2      I MPLEMENTING C UISINE W ORLD

The implementation of CuisineWorld mostly follows the spirit of Overcooked!, a renowned video
game. Therefore, we refer to many of its game mechanisms while simplifying some of them;
e.g., we skip low-level control and assume all agent entities have access to all location at
any time. Specifically, we crawled the rules and recipes from the community-contributed wiki1 of
Overcooked! streamlined them, and made necessary modifications, ending up with the basic version
of CuisineWorld comprising 10 types of location (serving table, storage, and 8 different cooking
tools), 27 types of ingredients, and 33 unique dishes. We grouped the dishes based on their difficulty
(primarily based on the number of cooking tools involved) to design and implement 12 game levels,
which are further categorized into 4 classes: entry, simple, intermediate, and advanced, with 3 levels
each. Note that the recipes, dishes, and levels can be easily extended to incorporate more challenging
tasks.


D.3      TASK G RAPH V ISUALIZATION

In CuisineWorld, we provide tasks of different complexities to holistically evaluate the multi-agent
system’s performance. Additionally, the environment is highly customizable and extendable. Users
only need only modify the JSON files to add more tasks or modify existing tasks. In the following
sebsections, we visualize different CuisineWorld task graphs.


D.3.1      L EVEL 0 – V ERY S IMPLE


                                         Figure 8: Salmon Meatcake



   1
       https://steamcommunity.com/sharedfiles/filedetails/?id=1769729191


                                                     15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D.3.2   L EVEL 1 – V ERY S IMPLE


    (a) Salmon Meatcake               (b) Lamb Meatcake      (c) Lobster Meatcake


D.3.3   L EVEL 2 – S IMPLE


  (a) Salmon Sashimi           (b) Tuna Sashimi           (c) Mixed Sashimi


                                              16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D.3.4    L EVEL 3 – I NTERMEDIATE


                          (a) Salmon Sushi                    (b) Tuna Sushi


D.3.5    L EVEL 4 – S IMPLE


(a) Tomato Salad (b) Lettuce Salad     (c) Tomato Lettuce Salad         (d) Tomato Cucumber Salad


                                                 17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D.3.6    L EVEL 5 – A DVANCED


        (a) Tomato Pasta                   (b) Beef Pasta                 (c) Pork Pasta



D.3.7    L EVEL 6 – U NUSED


        (a) Pepperoni Pizza              (b) Hawaiian Pizza            (c) Chicken Pizza



D.3.8    L EVEL 7 – V ERY S IMPLE


 (a) Onion Potato Carrot Soup       (b) Onion Potato Leek Soup   (c) Onion Broccoli Cheese Soup


                                                18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D.3.9     L EVEL 8 – S IMPLE


        (a) Beef Dumpling             (b) Pork Dumpling   (c) Salmon Dumpling


D.3.10     L EVEL 9 – I NTERMEDIATE


        (a) Cheeseburger                (b) MaxJr            (c) Hopper


                                              19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D.3.11   L EVEL 10 – I NTERMEDIATE


      (a) Burrito de Pastor           (b) Burrito de Pollo   (c) Burrito de Asada


D.3.12   L EVEL 11 – A DVANCED


      (a) Burrito de Pastor           (b) Burrito de Pollo   (c) Burrito de Asada


      (d) Salmon Sushi                                           (e) Tuna Sushi


                                              20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D.3.13     L EVEL 12 – A DVANCED


         (a) Potato Salad                   (b) French Fries   (c) Smashed Potato


                                             21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E       A DDITIONAL R ESULTS IN C UISINE W ORLD

The following tables report additional performance results for several different numbers of agents
and task complexity levels, performance of other LLMs, and additional ablation results.


                              very simple                            simple                             intermediate                           advanced
     2-agent                                                                                                                                                                Avg.
                    level 0     level 1        level 7   level 2     level 4    level 8     level 3       level 9    level 10      level 5     level 11        level 12
 GPT4 τint,(1)      18/54        18/56         12/31      14/34      12/30      3/30        10/26         7/20           7/23      6/23         6/21           10/36        0.318
 GPT4 τint,(2)      18/31        17/34         10/23      13/26      12/22      9/22        10/17         8/11           6/12      5/13         4/14            8/21        0.486
 GPT4 τint,(3)      18/25        19/25         10/17      16/18      11/18      6/16        11/13          6/8           7/10      8/10          9/9            8/17        0.709
 GPT4 τint,(4)      18/18        18/19         12/12      11/14      11/12      7/11        12/12          8/8            9/9       6/7          8/9           11/12        0.912
 GPT4 τint,(5)      18/18        17/17         12/12      11/13      11/13       9/9        11/11          4/5            7/7       8/8          8/8            9/12        0.937
    CoS             0.727        0.706         0.682      0.687      0.664      0.504       0.764         0.725          0.701     0.661        0.692          0.559        0.673

                                                  Table 6: 2 agents performance on different tasks

                              very simple                          simple                           intermediate                             advanced
     3-agent                                                                                                                                                              Average
                    level 0     level 1     level 7      level 2   level 4     level 8    level 3       level 9     level 10     level 5     level 11     level 12
 GPT4 τint,(1)      21/55       24/55       16/33        17/33      9/28       6/32        12/25         5/20        8/21        7/22          7/22         9/26           0.368
 GPT4 τint,(2)      20/31       25/33       11/22         4/24     13/24       7/21        14/20         9/12        9/13        7/14          8/14        10/23           0.549
 GPT4 τint,(3)      22/25       21/26       17/17        11/20      9/17       4/15        13/14          8/8        12/12        7/7          9/10        10/16           0.791
 GPT4 τint,(4)      22/22       20/21       14/14         9/13      7/10       6/10        10/10          6/7        10/10        5/8           7/8        11/13           0.846
 GPT4 τint,(5)      20/20       15/16       11/12        10/14     10/11        8/9        12/12          6/6         8/8         5/5           8/8        6/10            0.914
    CoS             0.781       0.778       0.780        0.528     0.600       0.455       0.822         0.771       0.815       0.689         0.733       0.570           0.694

                                                  Table 7: 3 agents performance on different tasks

                              very simple                          simple                           intermediate                             advanced
     4-agent                                                                                                                                                              Average
                    level 0     level 1     level 7      level 2   level 4     level 8    level 3       level 9     level 10     level 5     level 11     level 12
 GPT4 τint,(1)      22/54       18/55       17/34        13/34      8/28        9/33       16/27         5/20        8/23        5/22          8/22       8/35             0.349
 GPT4 τint,(2)      24/32       21/33       14/24        14/25     12/24       11/22       16/19         7/12        9/15        7/14          6/12       12/23            0.590
 GPT4 τint,(3)      23/25       23/26       13/18        11/19     10/17       11/17       15/17          8/9       11/11         7/8          10/11       9/17            0.785
 GPT4 τint,(4)      22/22       21/22       14/14         7/15     10/13       10/12       12/13          9/9       10/10         6/7           8/8        9/13            0.875
 GPT4 τint,(5)      14/18       20/20       14/14        7/13       9/11         7/8       12/12          5/5         7/7         6/6           3/5        7/10            0.859
    CoS             0.771       0.761       0.761        0.505     0.592       0.626       0.848         0.744      0.790        0.692         0.675      0.534            0.692

                                                  Table 8: 4 agents performance on different tasks

                                 2 agent                                                  3 agent                                                    4 agent
            GPT-4     Claude-2        LLaMA           ChatGPT       GPT-4      Claude-2       LLaMA          ChatGPT           GPT-4       Claude-2      LLaMA         ChatGPT
 τint,(1)   10/26        3/24              0             0/24       12/25        5/26               0             0/24         16/27         9/25              0           0/24
 τint,(2)   10/17        3/16              0             0/15       14/20        4/16               0             0/15         16/19         4/15              0           0/15
 τint,(3)   11/18        3/12              0             0/12       13/14        3/12               0             0/12         15/17         4/12              0           0/12
 τint,(4)   11/13         3/9              0             0/9        10/10        5/11               0              0/9         12/13         6/11              0            0/9
 τint,(5)   11/11         4/6              0             0/6        12/12         5/7               0              0/6         12/12          6/7              0            0/6
 CoS        0.686       0.3125             0              0         0.822        0.372              0               0          0.848         0.473             0             0

                                                  Table 9: Performance of other LLMs on Level 3

                          2 agent         GPT-4       GPT-4 w/ few-step        GPT-4 w/o inference knowledge                 GPT-4 w/o feedback
                          τint,(1)        10/26               8/26                              8/25                                   4/25
                          τint,(2)        10/17              11/19                              9/17                                   4/17
                          τint,(3)        11/13              11/13                             10/12                                   4/12
                          τint,(4)        12/12               9/11                              8/9                                     1/9
                          τint,(5)        11/11              10/10                              9/9                                     5/7
                          CoS             0.764              0.710                             0.714                                   0.311

                                                           Table 10: Additional ablation results

  level 3            4agent using 4agent demo                   4agent using 2agent demo                3agent using 3agent demo               3agent using 2agent demo
  GPT4 τint,(1)                      16/27                                 14/27                                    12/25                                  11/25
  GPT4 τint,(2)                      16/19                                 16/20                                    14/20                                  11/19
  GPT4 τint,(3)                      15/17                                 15/16                                    13/14                                  12/14
  GPT4 τint,(4)                      12/13                                 13/13                                    10/10                                  12/12
  GPT4 τint,(5)                      12/12                                 12/12                                    12/12                                  11/11
  CoS                                0.848                                 0.851                                    0.822                                  0.775
                                                Table 11: Using different numbers of agents demos


                                                                                     22
 Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024

                                                                               model                                                       level 1            level 4
                                                                               RL Performance                                              0.451                  0.598
                                                                               Ours(GPT4 τi nt(4))                                         0.947                  0.917
                                                  Table 12: Performance of masked PPO with 2 agents in level 1 and level 4.

                                                  level_0                                                                        level_1                                                                           level_2
               1.0                                                                                   1.0
                                                                                                                                                                                     0.8
success rate


                                                                                      success rate


                                                                                                                                                                      success rate
               0.8                                                                                   0.8
                                                                                                                                                                                     0.6
               0.6                                                        2-agent                    0.6
                                                                          3-agent                                                                                                    0.4
               0.4                                                        4-agent                    0.4                                                                             0.2
                     3           4            5        6        7        8        9                        3        4        5        6        7        8         9                                  6        8        10         12        14
                                              task interval                                                                  task interval                                                                    task interval
                                                  level_3                                                                        level_4                                                                           level_5
               1.0                                                                                                                                                                   1.0
                                                                                                     0.8
success rate


                                                                                      success rate


                                                                                                                                                                      success rate
               0.8                                                                                                                                                                   0.8
                                                                                                     0.6                                                                             0.6
               0.6
                                                                                                     0.4                                                                             0.4
               0.4                                                                                                                                                                   0.2
                     6               8            10       12        14           16                           6             8            10       12             14                             8       10       12   14    16        18   20
                                              task interval                                                                  task interval                                                                    task interval
                                                  level_7                                                                        level_8                                                                           level_9
               1.0                                                                                   1.0                                                                             1.0
success rate


                                                                                      success rate


                                                                                                                                                                      success rate
                                                                                                     0.8                                                                             0.8
               0.8
                                                                                                     0.6
                                                                                                                                                                                     0.6
               0.6                                                                                   0.4
                                                                                                                                                                                     0.4
                                                                                                     0.2
               0.4
                             6                    8         10            12                                   6             8            10       12             14                       7.5   10.0 12.5 15.0 17.5 20.0 22.5
                                              task interval                                                                  task interval                                                                    task interval
                                                  level_10                                                                       level_11                                                                         level_12
               1.0                                                                                   1.0
                                                                                                                                                                                     0.8
success rate


                                                                                      success rate


                                                                                                                                                                      success rate
               0.8                                                                                   0.8
                                                                                                                                                                                     0.6
               0.6                                                                                   0.6
                                                                                                                                                                                     0.4
               0.4                                                                                   0.4
                                                                                                                                                                                     0.2
                         8               10       12       14       16       18                                8        10       12       14       16        18                                      6        8        10         12        14
                                              task interval                                    task interval                                                                                                  task interval
                                                                         Figure 21: Collaboration results on different tasks


  E.1                C OMPARISON B ETWEEN C UISINE W ORLD AND R ELATED B ENCHMARKS

                                                                                                                     Object Tool Maximum Collabo- Human         Procedural
   Benchmark                                                                        Multi-task
                                                                                                                   Interaction Use Agents ration in-the-loop Level Generation
   ALFWorld (Shridhar et al., 2020)                                                                   ✓                  ✓                ✓           1                              ✗                    ✗                       ✗
   WAH (Puig et al., 2020)                                                                            ✓                  ✓                ✗           2                              ✓                    ✓                       ✗
   TextWorld (Côté et al., 2019)                                                                    ✓                  ✓                ✓           1                              ✗                    ✗                       ✓
   Generative Agents (Park et al., 2023)                                                              ✓                  ✓                ✓          25                              ✗                    ✗                       ✓
   EMATP (Liu et al., 2022)                                                                           ✓                  ✓                ✓           2                              ✓                    ✗                       ✗
   Overcooked-AI (Carroll et al., 2019)                                                               ✗                  ✓                ✓           2                              ✓                    ✓                       ✗
   HandMeThat (Wan et al., 2022)                                                                      ✓                  ✓                ✓           2                              ✓                    ✗                       ✗
   DialFRED (Gao et al., 2022)                                                                        ✓                  ✓                ✓           2                              ✓∗                   ✗                       ✗
   TEACH (Padmakumar et al., 2022)                                                                    ✓                  ✓                ✓           2                              ✓∗                   ✗                       ✗
   CerealBar (Suhr et al., 2019)                                                                      ✗                  ✗                ✗           2                              ✓                    ✗                       ✗
   LIGHT (Urbanek et al., 2019)                                                                       ✓                  ✗                ✗         1369                             ✗                    ✓                       ✓
   Diplomacy (Bakhtin et al., 2022)                                                                   ✗                  ✗                ✗           7                              ✓                    ✓                       ✗
   CordialSync (Jain et al., 2020)                                                                    ✗                  ✓                ✗           2                              ✓                    ✗                       ✗
   CoELA (Zhang et al., 2023b)                                                                        ✓                  ✓                ✗           2                              ✓                    ✓                       ✗
   TooManyCooks (Wu et al., 2021)                                                                     ✓                  ✓                ✓           2                              ✓                    ✓                       ✗
   CuisineWorld (Ours)                                                                                ✓                  ✓                ✓             4+                            ✓                   ✓                       ✓


 Table 13: Comparison between CuisineWorld and other related benchmarks. ∗ : Notably, even though multiple
 agents can be present, the second agent is limited to communicating with the first agent. The second agent
 cannot interact with the environment in an active gaming capacity.

 Table 13 compares CuisineWorld against related benchmarks along the following criteria:
 • Multi-task: The benchmark contains multiple different tasks.


                                                                                                                                 23
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


• Object Interaction: Agents must manipulate or engage with different items or environmental
  elements to achieve certain goals with irreversible actions.
• Tool Use: Completing tasks necessitates the use of specific tools by the agents.
• Maximum Agents: Denotes the upper limit of agents that can be present in any experiment.
• Collaboration: Many tasks mandate teamwork and collaboration between different agents.
• Human in-the-loop: The framework allows humans to join the game and collaborate actively with
  the agents.
• Procedural Level Generation: There is flexibility in adding new tasks, making the game dynamic
  and adaptable.
Compared to other benchmarks like Wu et al. (2021); Carroll et al. (2019), we have the following
differences:
Enhanced Kitchen Layouts: We have diversified the layout of kitchens by incorporating a wider range
of tools (both in types and quantities) and ingredients. This approach differs from Wu et al. (2021)
and Carroll et al. (2019), where the emphasis is not on the variety of kitchen tools and ingredients.
For example, in Carroll et al. (2019), there are only two types of ingredients and two types of tools.
In Wu et al. (2021), there are two types of ingredients, and two types of tools. In comparision, there
are 27 unique ingredients, and 10 tools in CuisineWorld.
Complex Task Design: Our benchmark includes a broader spectrum of recipes, varying significantly
in difficulty levels. This variation is not just in terms of the number of tools and ingredients required
but also in the intermediate steps involved in each recipe. We invite you to refer to Figure 23 for a
detailed illustration. This aspect of task complexity, particularly in the context of high-level planning,
is not extensively explored in Carroll et al. (2019) and Wu et al. (2021). In Wu et al. (2021); Carroll
et al. (2019) there are very limited number of dishes, 1 and 3 respectively. However, in CuisineWorld,
there are 33 unique dishes.
Multi-Dish Episodes and Collaborative Strategy Assessment: We require agents to complete multiple
dishes within a single episode, with the types of dishes varying to challenge and assess the collab-
orative strategies of the agents. Our level design ensures that there are shared intermediate steps
among the types of dishes in a single episode. The system is tasked with multiple different goals at
the same time. This approach allows us to use metrics like ‘Collaborative Score’ (CoS) to evaluate
how agents collaborate to achieve higher dish throughput. This dynamic aspect of collaboration,
especially in the context of dish expiration and shared tasks, offers a new dimension to the study of
multi-agent cooperation, which is distinct from the environments in Carroll et al. (2019) and Wu et al.
(2021). In Carroll et al. (2019) the goal is to finish as many dishes as possible in a limited amount
of time. In Wu et al. (2021), the goal is to finish one dish in the least amount of time. Both of them
do not consider the density of the tasks (interval between dish orders coming to the kitchen) and
its effect on coordination. As we mentioned earlier, this concpet (changing density of the tasks and
measuring collaboration proficiency upon it) is at heart of CuisineWorld and our CoS metric, and it
has demonstrated its effectiveness of benchmarking collaboration between LLMs and human-NPCs
(as indicated in the abstract).

E.2   V ISUALIZING C UISINE W ORLD

To implement CuisineWorld into a real-world game system, we built on top of Gao et al. (2020).
In our game, as visually depicted in Figure 22, players are given the opportunity to engage in
collaborative interactions with NPCs. This introduces a unique dynamic to the gameplay, enabling
users to experience a more immersive cooperative environment. Additionally, the game’s interface is
versatile, providing players multiple ways to interact within the game world. They can either use a
standard keyboard setup, which is conventional and likely familiar to most PC gamers, or immerse
themselves even further using a Virtual Reality (VR) device. This VR functionality ensures a more
tactile and realistic interaction, as players can physically move, gesture, and engage with the NPCs
and other in-game elements in the 3D environment.


                                                   24
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    Multi-agent
    Human-agent
    VR Interaction


Figure 22: (Top) A multi-agent collaboration example in CuisineWorld; the three agents are preparing a mixed
juice together. (Middle) A human player as the head chef instructing the agents to cook mixed juice. (Bottom) A
human player collaborating with collaborative agents in VR.


Unlike the step-by-step nature of the text version, the real-time virtual game operates continuously.
To align the LLM’s processing with this dynamic environment, we implemented a system where the
LLM checks user actions at regular intervals during the game loop, referred to as “time steps”. These
time steps are defined as 0.1 seconds. Then we can ensure LLM can respond to user actions in a
timely manner, matching the pace of the real-time game.
In the real-time version, human players control their agents directly through keyboard inputs, resulting
in low-level actions like moving or picking up items. However, the LLM-agent operates on a higher,
more temporally-extended level of atomic actions. To bridge this gap, when the LLM checks user
actions, it doesn’t just read the keyboard inputs. Instead, it assesses changes in the high-level game
state, such as the agent’s location, and the status of tools and ingredients. This assessment allows the
LLM to infer the temporally extended actions that align with its text-based decision-making process.
Implementing this required a simple inverse dynamics model through checking state changes to
translate low-level actions into high-level atomic actions, facilitating a seamless transition from the
text game to the real-time virtual game.
Regarding the specific query about the ‘GoTo’ action, we utilized the A* pathfinding algorithm,
integrated into the Unreal Engine, to facilitate this movement.


                                                      25
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E.3    A DDITIONAL C UISINE W ORLD D ETAILS

                                                                             1    2        3            4
      Type     Arguments          Description
                              Move agent to               Num. of        8        14                8       3
      goto
                agent                                       tools
               location       location
                 agent                                    Num. of    6           15             7       5
      get      location
                              agent obtain item             ings.
                              from location
                (item)
                                                          Num. of        8       11            10           4
      put
                agent   agent put everything                steps
               location it holds to location
                agent          agent turn on             Max. mix    6           15             7       5
 activate
               location        location
                                                              size
      noop       agent       not dispatching agent       Figure 23: Dish distribution over the number of
       Table 14: Action space in CuisineWorld.           tools and ingredients (ings.) involved, cooking
                                                         steps, and maximum mixture size as in the recipe.


E.4    TASK I NTERVAL C OMPUTATION

In our approach, we initially construct a task graph delineating subgoals, which serves as the
foundation for our computations. We then apply breadth-first search in a single-agent context to
determine the optimal task sequence. This sequence is a key component for calculating task intervals
in multi-agent collaboration scenarios. For each tool requiring activation, we incorporate its activation
wait time into the respective task intervals. Additionally, for each new connection in the task graph,
we increase the total task interval time by tripling the edge time. We assume each subgoal requires at
least, goto, get and put 3 actions. The cumulative task interval is subsequently adjusted by a scaling
factor of 0.3 and the variable τ . We pick the value tau ranging from 1.0, 1.5, 2.0, 2.5 and 3.0 to
represent different task difficulties. This process enables us to effectively compute task intervals
tailored for multi-agent collaborative environments of varied difficulties.

E.5    C OMMON FAILURE MODES

Through replaying actions, we have identified the following common failure modes for GPT-4 agents:
1) Inability to Prioritize Task Order: Occasionally, the LLM overlooks the task at the top of the queue,
leading to the expiration of that task. 2) Difficulty Understanding the ’Occupy()’ State Instruction: In
CuisineWorld, agents must wait for varying timesteps before cooking is completed, with the wait
time dependent on the specific tool used. If agents attempt to remove ingredients immediately after
activating a tool, the action fails. Instead of continuing to wait, the agents may shift their focus
to other tasks, which slows down overall progress. 3) Challenges in Allocating Agents to Correct
Subgoals: When multiple dishes are being prepared concurrently, the agents often struggle to allocate
themselves effectively to the appropriate subgoals.

E.6    R ATIONAL FOR C O S M ETRIC
• In the kitchen scenario as demonstrated in CuisineWorld, hypothetically, when the dish order come
  very rarely (with a large interval), no matter if there is any collaboration, high success rate can
  easily attained as there is sufficient time.
• However, as we reduce the interval, more and more dish order are flooding in. If the agents
  (and humans) are able to collaborate well, the productivity will be high, or namely, they can still
  manage to maintain a decent success rate. On the contrary, teams with poor collaborate will likely
  suffer from a substantial drop on success rate as the interval gets smaller. The same collapse will
  ultimately happen to a good collaborative team too when the interval gets too small, but good
  collaboration can always sustain longer.
• Therefore, it makes sense to use the averaged success rate across different intervals as an indicator
  of the collaboration proficiency. More importantly, such metric asks for a game setting where the
  dish order will keep coming, in a changing interval, which also aligns with the original Overcooked!
  game experiences.


                                                   26
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


F     M INECRAFT
F.1   T RANSFER TO M INECRAFT

To transfer MindAgent from CuisineWorld to Minecraft requires modifications on both games and
the model. On the LLM side, we update the background knowledge of the model. This included: 1)
Action Space Explanation: We provided the LLM with detailed information about the possible actions
and interactions within the Minecraft environment. 2) Recipe and Tool Definitions: We also included
definitions of recipes, tools, and ingredients specific to Minecraft. We believe these modifications
are reasonable and necessary, as without these knowledge, it’s very difficult for model to operate in
an unknown environments. On the game development side, we dedicated efforts to: Text-to-Game
Interaction Translation: We developed code to translate text-based interactions and commands from
the LLM into actionable inputs within the game environment. This translation layer was key to
bridging the gap between the LLM’s text-based outputs and the game’s interactive elements.

F.2   TASK G RAPHS

In Figure 24 we visualize the task graphs for different tasks in Minecraft.


       (a) Cooking chicken in Minecraft                    (b) Cooking mutton in Minecraft


        (c) Cooking steak in Minecraft                           (d) Cooking porkchop in Minecraft
                                Figure 24: Task Visulization in Minecraft


                                                  27
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


F.3              G AMEPLAY V ISUALIZATION

We visualize Minecraft gameplay in Figure 25.
      Multi-agent
      Human-agent
      VR Interaction


Figure 25: (Top) A multi-agent collaboration example in Minecraft. At left Alex and Steve are killing different
animals and at right they are cooking meat in a furnace together. (Middle) A human player instructing the agents
to perform certain actions. (Bottom) A human player collaborating with agents in VR.


F.4              ACTION D ETAILS FOR M INDCRAFT

We define the following actions for the multi-agent system in our Minecraft game: 1) goto(agent,
location); 2) killMob(agent, mobType); 3) mineBlock(agent, blockType); 4)
putFuelFurnace(agent, fuelType), to put the item from agent’s inventory to the furnace’s
bottom slot. 5) putItemFurnace(agent, itemType), to put the item from agent’s inventory
to the furnace’s top slot; 6) takeOutFurnace(agent), take out the cooked item from the furnace
7) putInChest(agent, itemType).
The state space in Minecraft contains the following: 1) nearby blocks for each agent, 2) nearby
entities for each agent, 3) each agent’s inventory, 4) items inside the furnace, 5) items inside the chest,
and 6) the human player’s inventory if a human player is involved.
To ensure reproducibility, we modify the game mechanism. A killed mob will respawn nearby, and a
mined block will also respawn nearby.


                                                      28
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


G     A DDITIONAL I NFORMATION ON H UMAN E VALUATION
G.0.1    H UMAN DATA C OLLECTION
Measurement. In the background, we collect the numbers of failed and successful tasks during a
participant’s interaction with the game system. Additionally, we record the entire action history of
players and intelligent agents. After each episode, the participants must complete a survey about
their engagement with the system on a 5-point Likert chart. Our objective measure is intended to
evaluate the human-AI teaming performance, and the subjective measure is designed to evaluate
users’ perceptions of the system. The human evaluation interface can be found in Appendix G.

G.1     H UMAN E VALUATION I NTERFACE

We use the human evaluation interface to test the human’s perception of collaborative agents. This
gives us a more controlled environment so users’ perception of collaborative agents does not depend
on their ability to control the keyboard and mouse, and their perception of collaborative agents does
not depend on the latency and rate limits of GPT-4. Figure 26 shows the interface welcome screen,
human evaluation examples, and examples of human instructions.


                                                 29
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   (a) Human evaluation interface welcome screen                     (b) Human evaluation example


         (c) Human evaluation example                                   (d) Human instructions

Figure 26: Human evaluation interface welcome screen (a), evaluation examples (b)–(c), and instructions to the
human participants (d).


                                                     30
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


G.2   H UMAN E VALUATION Q UESTIONNAIRE


                                             31
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


G.3    A DDITIONAL R ESULTS ON H UMAN E VALUATION


(a) Collaboration score:                (b) Perceived enjoyment:               (c) Perceived more fun:
The collaboration score is higher if    Humans enjoy the game more if they     Players enjoy the game more be-
more agents are collaborating with      collaborate with the right number of   cause of collaboration with compe-
human players, although the differ-     agents.                                tent agents.
ence is not significant.


(d) Perceived Assisting:                (e) Perceived dependability:           (f) Perceived Predictability:
There is no significant difference in   When collaborating with more           There is no difference in terms of
terms of human perceptions of help-     agents, players depend on the          the predictability of agent behav-
fulness when collaborating with         agents more.                           iors when collaborating with more
more agents, even though the task                                              agents.
success rate is higher.


                  (g) Perceived productivity:               (h) Perceived Trust:
                  Players think collaborating with AI       There is no difference in terms of
                  agents will improve productivity.         trust when collaborating with more
                                                            agents.

                                  Figure 27: Full results of human evaluations


H     F ULL I NTERACTION H ISTORY
The full interaction history for finishing one dish in level 9 showed as the below.
The a v a i l a b l e a c t i o n s a r e :
1) goto : goto a t o o l l o c a t i o n
2 ) g e t : g e t some o b j e c t from a t o o l
3 ) p u t : p u t some o b j e c t i n t o a t o o l
4 ) a c t i v a t e : a c t i v a t e t h e t o o l t o cook a l l i n g r e d i e n t s
inside the tool into a d i f f e r e n t tools
5 ) noop : n o t p e r f o r m i n g any a c t i o n s
Sometimes t h e s y s t e m w i l l g i v e you e r r o r m e s s a g e s .
P l e a s e c o n s i d e r t h e s e e r r o r m e s s a g e s when e x e c u t i n g a c t i o n s .


                                                         32
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


You n e e d t o s p e c i f y a c t i o n f o r a l l o f t h e a g e n t s , ** e x c e p t human * * .
They a l l h a v e d i f f e r e n t a g e n t numbers .
Do n o t a s s i g n a c t i o n s t o t h e same a g e n t more t h a n o n c e .

When t h e t o o l s r e a c h i t s c a p a c i t y , you n e e d t o t a k e s t u f f o u t .
O t h e r w i s e , you c a n n o t p u t i t e m s i n s i d e .
When you a r e h o l d i n g o b j e c t s , you c a n n o t g e t any more o b j e c t s .
When you a r e h o l d i n g o b j e c t s , you c a n n o t a c t i v a t e t o o l s .
A f e r you c o o k e d a r e q u i r e d d i s h , you n e e d t o p u t i t i n t o t h e s e r v i n g t a b l e .
You c a n o n l y p i c k up o b j e c t s from t h e t o o l l o c a t i o n ,
i f you a r e l o c a t e d a t t h e t o o l l o c a t i o n .
When you a c t i v a t e any t o o l s ,
make s u r e a l l t h e i t e m s i n s i d e t h e t o o l a r e r e s p e c t i n g t h e r e c i p e s .
O t h e r w i s e , you w i l l cook w a s t e . Avoid w a s t e a t a l l c o s t .
*** You s h o u l d mix s a l a d i n t h e m i x e r .
To make s a l a d you s h o u l d chop v e g g i e s f i r s t . ***
*** I f t h e t o o l i s o c c u p i e d , i n d i c a t e d by t h e o c c u p y ( ) p r e d i c a t e ,
you c a n n o t g e t o b j e c t s from i t o r p u t o b j e c t s i n t o i t . ***
*** The f o o d o r d e r s a r e k e e p coming .
You s h o u l d f i n i s h a s many d i s h e s a s p o s s i b l e
and f i n i s h e v e r y d i s h a s s o o n a s p o s s i b l e .
P l e a s e d e l i v e r t h e o r d e r t o t h e s e r v e r i n g t a b l e when i t i s f i n i s h e d . ***
*** The d i s h w i l l e x p i r e a f t e r t h e l i f e t i m e r e a c h e s 0
and i t ’ s n o t a t t h e s e r v e r i n g t a b l e .
P l e a s e a v o i d t h i s . *** Here a r e t h e r e c i p e s :

Cook p o r k M e a t c a k e a t :
 −− l o c a t i o n : b l e n d e r
 −− w i t h i n g r e d i e n t s :         pork ,        flour ,
Cook l e t t u c e S l i c e a t :
 −− l o c a t i o n : c h o p b o a r d
 −− w i t h i n g r e d i e n t s :         lettuce ,
Cook t o m a t o S l i c e a t :
 −− l o c a t i o n : c h o p b o a r d
 −− w i t h i n g r e d i e n t s :         tomato ,
Cook s a u t e e d B e e f a t :
 −− l o c a t i o n : pan
 −− w i t h i n g r e d i e n t s :         beef ,
Cook c h e e s e B u r g e r a t :
 −− l o c a t i o n : m i x e r
 −− w i t h i n g r e d i e n t s :         cheese ,        sauteedBeef ,              bread ,
Cook MaxJr a t :
 −− l o c a t i o n : m i x e r
 −− w i t h i n g r e d i e n t s :         lettuceSlice ,            sauteedBeef ,
cheese ,            bread ,
Cook Hopper a t :
 −− l o c a t i o n : m i x e r
 −− w i t h i n g r e d i e n t s :         tomatoSlice ,           lettuceSlice ,
sauteedBeef ,                bread ,
The f o l l o w i n g o b j e c t s a r e   available :
 − −1) c h e e s e
 − −2) l e t t u c e
 − −3) l e t t u c e S l i c e
 − −4) Hopper
 − −5) MaxJr
 − −6) t o m a t o
 − −7) s a u t e e d B e e f
 − −8) p o r k
 − −9) p o r k M e a t c a k e


                                                     33
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  − −10) c h e e s e B u r g e r
  − −11) f l o u r
  − −12) t o m a t o S l i c e
  − −13) b r e a d
  − −14) b e e f
The o b j e c s t s a r e c o o k e d u s i n g t o o l s o r a r e j u s t b a s e i n g r e d i e n t s .
Among them , t h e f o l l o w i n g a r e b a s e i n g r e d i e n t s :
  − −1) c h e e s e
  − −2) l e t t u c e
  − −3) t o m a t o
  − −4) p o r k
  − −5) f l o u r
  − −6) b r e a d
  − −7) b e e f
You c a n o n l y o b t a i n b a s e i n g r e d i e n t s from t h e s t o r a g e i n i t i a l l y .
Additional rules :
You c a n p l a c e up t o i n f i n i t e i t e m i n t o t h e s t o r a g e 0
You c a n p l a c e up t o 5 i t e m i n t o t h e pan0
You c a n p l a c e up t o 5 i t e m i n t o t h e pan1
You c a n p l a c e up t o 5 i t e m i n t o t h e m i x e r 0
You c a n p l a c e up t o 5 i t e m i n t o t h e m i x e r 1
You c a n p l a c e up t o 1 i t e m i n t o t h e c h o p b o a r d 0
You c a n p l a c e up t o 1 i t e m i n t o t h e c h o p b o a r d 1
You c a n p l a c e up t o i n f i n i t e i t e m i n t o t h e s e r v i n g t a b l e 0
** Only ** t h e f o l l o w i n g t o o l s a r e a v a i l a b l e :
s t o r a g e 0 , pan0 , pan1 , mixer0 , mixer1 , c h o p b o a r d 0 , c h o p b o a r d 1 , s e r v i n g t a b l e 0 ,
You c a n n o t p i c k up t h e s e t o o l s .
You c a n o n l y u s e t h o s e t o o l s a t t h e c o r r e s p o n d i n g l o c a t i o n .



T h e r e a r e 2 a g e n t s a v a i l a b l e , s o you c a n e x e c u t e 2 a c t i o n s a t a t i m e .
T h i s i s an e x a m p l e you c a n u s e a s a r e f e r e n c e f o r a d i f f e r e n t l e v e l .
*** You must f o l l o w t h e f o r m a t below f o r a c t i o n s
−game s t a t e :
c u r r e n t game l e v e l : l e v e l 1
current dishes :
        name : p o r k M e a t c a k e l i f e t i m e : 17
c u r r e n t game s t e p : 0
maximum game s t e p s : 30

−agent s t a t e :
a t ( agent0 , s e r v i n g t a b l e 0 )
h o l d ( a g e n t 0 , None )
a t ( agent1 , s e r v i n g t a b l e 0 )
h o l d ( a g e n t 1 , None )

−kitchen state :
i n s i d e ( s t o r a g e 0 , None )
i n s i d e ( s e r v i n g t a b l e 0 , None )
i n s i d e ( b l e n d e r 0 , None )

−accomplished task :

−action :

goto agent0 storage0
goto agent1 storage0


                                                      34
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


−game s t a t e :
c u r r e n t game l e v e l : l e v e l 1
current dishes :
        name : p o r k M e a t c a k e l i f e t i m e : 16
c u r r e n t game s t e p : 1
maximum game s t e p s : 30

−agent s t a t e :
a t ( agent0 , s t o r a g e 0 )
h o l d ( a g e n t 0 , None )
a t ( agent1 , s t o r a g e 0 )
h o l d ( a g e n t 1 , None )

−kitchen state :
i n s i d e ( s t o r a g e 0 , None )
i n s i d e ( s e r v i n g t a b l e 0 , None )
i n s i d e ( b l e n d e r 0 , None )

−accomplished task :

−action :

get agent0 flour storage0
get agent1 pork storage0

−game s t a t e :
c u r r e n t game l e v e l : l e v e l 1
current dishes :
        name : p o r k M e a t c a k e l i f e t i m e : 15
c u r r e n t game s t e p : 2
maximum game s t e p s : 30

−agent s t a t e :
a t ( agent0 , s t o r a g e 0 )
hold ( agent0 , f l o u r )
a t ( agent1 , s t o r a g e 0 )
hold ( agent1 , pork )

−kitchen state :
i n s i d e ( s t o r a g e 0 , None )
i n s i d e ( s e r v i n g t a b l e 0 , None )
i n s i d e ( b l e n d e r 0 , None )

−accomplished task :

−action :

goto agent0 blender0
goto agent1 blender0

−game s t a t e :
c u r r e n t game l e v e l : l e v e l 1
current dishes :
        name : p o r k M e a t c a k e l i f e t i m e : 14
c u r r e n t game s t e p : 3
maximum game s t e p s : 30

−agent s t a t e :


                                                      35
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


a t ( agent0 , blender0 )
hold ( agent0 , f l o u r )
a t ( agent1 , blender0 )
hold ( agent1 , pork )

−kitchen state :
i n s i d e ( s t o r a g e 0 , None )
i n s i d e ( s e r v i n g t a b l e 0 , None )
i n s i d e ( b l e n d e r 0 , None )

−accomplished task :

−action :

put agent0 blender0
put agent1 blender0

−game s t a t e :
c u r r e n t game l e v e l : l e v e l 1
current dishes :
        name : p o r k M e a t c a k e l i f e t i m e : 13
c u r r e n t game s t e p : 4
maximum game s t e p s : 30

−agent s t a t e :
a t ( agent0 , blender0 )
h o l d ( a g e n t 0 , None )
a t ( agent1 , blender0 )
h o l d ( a g e n t 1 , None )

−kitchen state :
i n s i d e ( s t o r a g e 0 , None )
i n s i d e ( s e r v i n g t a b l e 0 , None )
i n s i d e ( b l e n d e r 0 , f l o u r&p o r k )

−accomplished task :

−action :

goto agent0 storage0
activate agent1 blender0

−game s t a t e :
c u r r e n t game l e v e l : l e v e l 1
current dishes :
        name : p o r k M e a t c a k e l i f e t i m e : 12
c u r r e n t game s t e p : 5
maximum game s t e p s : 30

−agent s t a t e :
a t ( agent0 , s t o r a g e 0 )
h o l d ( a g e n t 0 , None )
a t ( agent1 , blender0 )
h o l d ( a g e n t 1 , None )

−kitchen state :
i n s i d e ( s t o r a g e 0 , None )
i n s i d e ( s e r v i n g t a b l e 0 , None )
i n s i d e ( blender0 , porkMeatcake )


                                                      36
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


occupy ( b l e n d e r 0 )

−accomplished task :

−action :

get agent0 flour storage0
noop agent1

−game s t a t e :
c u r r e n t game l e v e l : l e v e l 1
current dishes :
        name : p o r k M e a t c a k e l i f e t i m e : 11
c u r r e n t game s t e p : 6
maximum game s t e p s : 30

−agent s t a t e :
a t ( agent0 , s t o r a g e 0 )
hold ( agent0 , f l o u r )
a t ( agent1 , blender0 )
h o l d ( a g e n t 1 , None )

−kitchen state :
i n s i d e ( s t o r a g e 0 , None )
i n s i d e ( s e r v i n g t a b l e 0 , None )
i n s i d e ( blender0 , porkMeatcake )

−accomplished task :

−action :

goto agent0 blender0
get agent1 blender0

−game s t a t e :
c u r r e n t game l e v e l : l e v e l 1
current dishes :
        name : p o r k M e a t c a k e l i f e t i m e : 10
        name : p o r k M e a t c a k e l i f e t i m e : 17
c u r r e n t game s t e p : 7
maximum game s t e p s : 30

−agent s t a t e :
a t ( agent0 , blender0 )
hold ( agent0 , f l o u r )
a t ( agent1 , blender0 )
hold ( agent1 , porkMeatcake )

−kitchen state :
i n s i d e ( s t o r a g e 0 , None )
i n s i d e ( s e r v i n g t a b l e 0 , None )
i n s i d e ( b l e n d e r 0 , None )

−accomplished task :

−action :

put agent0 blender0
goto agent1 servingtable0


                                                      37
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


−game s t a t e :
c u r r e n t game l e v e l : l e v e l 1
current dishes :
        name : p o r k M e a t c a k e l i f e t i m e : 9
        name : p o r k M e a t c a k e l i f e t i m e : 16
c u r r e n t game s t e p : 8
maximum game s t e p s : 30

−agent s t a t e :
a t ( agent0 , blender0 )
h o l d ( a g e n t 0 , None )
a t ( agent1 , s e r v i n g t a b l e 0 )
hold ( agent1 , porkMeatcake )

−kitchen state :
i n s i d e ( s t o r a g e 0 , None )
i n s i d e ( s e r v i n g t a b l e 0 , None )
i n s i d e ( blender0 , f l o u r )

−accomplished task :

−action :

goto agent0 storage0
put agent1 servingtable0

−game s t a t e :
c u r r e n t game l e v e l : l e v e l 1
current dishes :
        name : p o r k M e a t c a k e l i f e t i m e : 15
c u r r e n t game s t e p : 9
maximum game s t e p s : 30

−agent s t a t e :
a t ( agent0 , s t o r a g e 0 )
h o l d ( a g e n t 0 , None )
a t ( agent1 , s e r v i n g t a b l e 0 )
h o l d ( a g e n t 1 , None )

−kitchen state :
i n s i d e ( s t o r a g e 0 , None )
i n s i d e ( s e r v i n g t a b l e 0 , None )
i n s i d e ( blender0 , f l o u r )

−accomplished task :
porkMeatcake ,

−action :

get agent0 pork storage0
goto agent1 blender0

I n t h i s game , T h e r e a r e 2 a g e n t s a v a i l a b l e and no human ,
s o you s h o u l d c o n t r o l a l l t h e 2 a g e n t s , and p l a n 2 a c t i o n s a t a t i m e .



[[ user ]]


                                                      38
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


− e x e c u t i o n e r r o r messages :
   −− [ ]
−execution suggestions :
   −− [ ]
−game s t a t e :
c u r r e n t game l e v e l : l e v e l 9
current dishes :
        name : MaxJr l i f e t i m e : 17
c u r r e n t game s t e p : 0
maximum game s t e p s : 60

−agent s t a t e :
a t ( agent0 , s e r v i n g t a b l e 0 )
h o l d ( a g e n t 0 , None )
a t ( agent1 , s e r v i n g t a b l e 0 )
h o l d ( a g e n t 1 , None )

−kitchen state :
i n s i d e ( s t o r a g e 0 , None )
i n s i d e ( pan0 , None )
i n s i d e ( pan1 , None )
i n s i d e ( mixer0 , None )
i n s i d e ( mixer1 , None )
i n s i d e ( c h o p b o a r d 0 , None )
i n s i d e ( c h o p b o a r d 1 , None )
i n s i d e ( s e r v i n g t a b l e 0 , None )

−accomplished task :


−action :

[[ assistant ]]

goto agent0 storage0
goto agent1 storage0

[[ user ]]

− e x e c u t i o n e r r o r messages :
   −− [ ]
−execution suggestions :
   −− [ ]
−game s t a t e :
c u r r e n t game l e v e l : l e v e l 9
current dishes :
        name : MaxJr l i f e t i m e : 16
c u r r e n t game s t e p : 1
maximum game s t e p s : 60

−agent s t a t e :
a t ( agent0 , s t o r a g e 0 )
h o l d ( a g e n t 0 , None )
a t ( agent1 , s t o r a g e 0 )
h o l d ( a g e n t 1 , None )

−kitchen state :
i n s i d e ( s t o r a g e 0 , None )


                                                   39
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


i n s i d e ( pan0 , None )
i n s i d e ( pan1 , None )
i n s i d e ( mixer0 , None )
i n s i d e ( mixer1 , None )
i n s i d e ( c h o p b o a r d 0 , None )
i n s i d e ( c h o p b o a r d 1 , None )
i n s i d e ( s e r v i n g t a b l e 0 , None )

−accomplished task :


−action :

[[ assistant ]]

get agent0 lettuce storage0
get agent1 beef storage0

[[ user ]]

− e x e c u t i o n e r r o r messages :
   −− [ ]
−execution suggestions :
   −− [ ]
−game s t a t e :
c u r r e n t game l e v e l : l e v e l 9
current dishes :
        name : MaxJr l i f e t i m e : 15
c u r r e n t game s t e p : 2
maximum game s t e p s : 60

−agent s t a t e :
a t ( agent0 , s t o r a g e 0 )
hold ( agent0 , l e t t u c e )
a t ( agent1 , s t o r a g e 0 )
hold ( agent1 , beef )

−kitchen state :
i n s i d e ( s t o r a g e 0 , None )
i n s i d e ( pan0 , None )
i n s i d e ( pan1 , None )
i n s i d e ( mixer0 , None )
i n s i d e ( mixer1 , None )
i n s i d e ( c h o p b o a r d 0 , None )
i n s i d e ( c h o p b o a r d 1 , None )
i n s i d e ( s e r v i n g t a b l e 0 , None )

−accomplished task :


−action :

[[ assistant ]]

goto agent0 chopboard0
goto agent1 pan0

[[ user ]]



                                                   40
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


− e x e c u t i o n e r r o r messages :
   −− [ ]
−execution suggestions :
   −− [ ]
−game s t a t e :
c u r r e n t game l e v e l : l e v e l 9
current dishes :
        name : MaxJr l i f e t i m e : 14
c u r r e n t game s t e p : 3
maximum game s t e p s : 60

−agent s t a t e :
a t ( agent0 , chopboard0 )
hold ( agent0 , l e t t u c e )
a t ( a g e n t 1 , pan0 )
hold ( agent1 , beef )

−kitchen state :
i n s i d e ( s t o r a g e 0 , None )
i n s i d e ( pan0 , None )
i n s i d e ( pan1 , None )
i n s i d e ( mixer0 , None )
i n s i d e ( mixer1 , None )
i n s i d e ( c h o p b o a r d 0 , None )
i n s i d e ( c h o p b o a r d 1 , None )
i n s i d e ( s e r v i n g t a b l e 0 , None )

−accomplished task :


−action :

[[ assistant ]]

put agent0 chopboard0
put agent1 pan0

[[ user ]]

− e x e c u t i o n e r r o r messages :
   −− [ ]
−execution suggestions :
   −− [ ]
−game s t a t e :
c u r r e n t game l e v e l : l e v e l 9
current dishes :
        name : MaxJr l i f e t i m e : 13
c u r r e n t game s t e p : 4
maximum game s t e p s : 60

−agent s t a t e :
a t ( agent0 , chopboard0 )
h o l d ( a g e n t 0 , None )
a t ( a g e n t 1 , pan0 )
h o l d ( a g e n t 1 , None )

−kitchen state :
i n s i d e ( s t o r a g e 0 , None )
i n s i d e ( pan0 , b e e f )


                                                   41
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


i n s i d e ( pan1 , None )
i n s i d e ( mixer0 , None )
i n s i d e ( mixer1 , None )
i n s i d e ( chopboard0 , l e t t u c e )
i n s i d e ( c h o p b o a r d 1 , None )
i n s i d e ( s e r v i n g t a b l e 0 , None )

−accomplished task :


−action :

[[ assistant ]]

activate agent0 chopboard0
activate agent1 pan0

[[ user ]]

− e x e c u t i o n e r r o r messages :
   −− [ ]
−execution suggestions :
   −− [ ]
−game s t a t e :
c u r r e n t game l e v e l : l e v e l 9
current dishes :
        name : MaxJr l i f e t i m e : 12
c u r r e n t game s t e p : 5
maximum game s t e p s : 60

−agent s t a t e :
a t ( agent0 , chopboard0 )
h o l d ( a g e n t 0 , None )
a t ( a g e n t 1 , pan0 )
h o l d ( a g e n t 1 , None )

−kitchen state :
i n s i d e ( s t o r a g e 0 , None )
i n s i d e ( pan0 , s a u t e e d B e e f )
o c c u p y ( pan0 )
i n s i d e ( pan1 , None )
i n s i d e ( mixer0 , None )
i n s i d e ( mixer1 , None )
i n s i d e ( chopboard0 , l e t t u c e S l i c e )
i n s i d e ( c h o p b o a r d 1 , None )
i n s i d e ( s e r v i n g t a b l e 0 , None )

−accomplished task :


−action :

[[ assistant ]]

goto agent0 storage0
get agent1 pan0

[[ user ]]



                                                       42
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


− e x e c u t i o n e r r o r messages :
   −− [ ’ pan0 i s o c c u p i e d , t h e r e f o r e a g e n t 1 c a n n o t g e t o b j e c t s from t h e t o o l ’ ]
−execution suggestions :
   −− [ ]
−game s t a t e :
c u r r e n t game l e v e l : l e v e l 9
current dishes :
        name : MaxJr l i f e t i m e : 11
c u r r e n t game s t e p : 6
maximum game s t e p s : 60

−agent s t a t e :
a t ( agent0 , s t o r a g e 0 )
h o l d ( a g e n t 0 , None )
a t ( a g e n t 1 , pan0 )
h o l d ( a g e n t 1 , None )

−kitchen state :
i n s i d e ( s t o r a g e 0 , None )
i n s i d e ( pan0 , s a u t e e d B e e f )
i n s i d e ( pan1 , None )
i n s i d e ( mixer0 , None )
i n s i d e ( mixer1 , None )
i n s i d e ( chopboard0 , l e t t u c e S l i c e )
i n s i d e ( c h o p b o a r d 1 , None )
i n s i d e ( s e r v i n g t a b l e 0 , None )

−accomplished task :


−action :

[[ assistant ]]

get agent0 cheese storage0
noop agent1

[[ user ]]

− e x e c u t i o n e r r o r messages :
   −− [ ]
−execution suggestions :
   −− [ ]
−game s t a t e :
c u r r e n t game l e v e l : l e v e l 9
current dishes :
        name : MaxJr l i f e t i m e : 10
c u r r e n t game s t e p : 7
maximum game s t e p s : 60

−agent s t a t e :
a t ( agent0 , s t o r a g e 0 )
hold ( agent0 , cheese )
a t ( a g e n t 1 , pan0 )
h o l d ( a g e n t 1 , None )

−kitchen state :
i n s i d e ( s t o r a g e 0 , None )
i n s i d e ( pan0 , s a u t e e d B e e f )


                                                       43
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


i n s i d e ( pan1 , None )
i n s i d e ( mixer0 , None )
i n s i d e ( mixer1 , None )
i n s i d e ( chopboard0 , l e t t u c e S l i c e )
i n s i d e ( c h o p b o a r d 1 , None )
i n s i d e ( s e r v i n g t a b l e 0 , None )

−accomplished task :


−action :

[[ assistant ]]

goto agent0 mixer0
get agent1 pan0

[[ user ]]

− e x e c u t i o n e r r o r messages :
   −− [ ]
−execution suggestions :
   −− [ ]
−game s t a t e :
c u r r e n t game l e v e l : l e v e l 9
current dishes :
        name : MaxJr l i f e t i m e : 9
        name : MaxJr l i f e t i m e : 17
c u r r e n t game s t e p : 8
maximum game s t e p s : 60

−agent s t a t e :
a t ( agent0 , mixer0 )
hold ( agent0 , cheese )
a t ( a g e n t 1 , pan0 )
hold ( agent1 , sauteedBeef )

−kitchen state :
i n s i d e ( s t o r a g e 0 , None )
i n s i d e ( pan0 , None )
i n s i d e ( pan1 , None )
i n s i d e ( mixer0 , None )
i n s i d e ( mixer1 , None )
i n s i d e ( chopboard0 , l e t t u c e S l i c e )
i n s i d e ( c h o p b o a r d 1 , None )
i n s i d e ( s e r v i n g t a b l e 0 , None )

−accomplished task :


−action :

[[ assistant ]]

put agent0 mixer0
goto agent1 chopboard0

[[ user ]]



                                                       44
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


− e x e c u t i o n e r r o r messages :
   −− [ ]
−execution suggestions :
   −− [ ]
−game s t a t e :
c u r r e n t game l e v e l : l e v e l 9
current dishes :
        name : MaxJr l i f e t i m e : 8
        name : MaxJr l i f e t i m e : 16
c u r r e n t game s t e p : 9
maximum game s t e p s : 60

−agent s t a t e :
a t ( agent0 , mixer0 )
h o l d ( a g e n t 0 , None )
a t ( agent1 , chopboard0 )
hold ( agent1 , sauteedBeef )

−kitchen state :
i n s i d e ( s t o r a g e 0 , None )
i n s i d e ( pan0 , None )
i n s i d e ( pan1 , None )
i n s i d e ( mixer0 , c h e e s e )
i n s i d e ( mixer1 , None )
i n s i d e ( chopboard0 , l e t t u c e S l i c e )
i n s i d e ( c h o p b o a r d 1 , None )
i n s i d e ( s e r v i n g t a b l e 0 , None )

−accomplished task :


−action :

[[ assistant ]]

goto agent0 storage0
get agent1 chopboard0

[[ user ]]

− e x e c u t i o n e r r o r messages :
   −− [ ’ a g e n t 1 i s h o l d i n g o b j e c t s , t h e r e f o r e c a n n o t g e t o b j e c t s from t h e t o o l ’ ]
−execution suggestions :
   −− [ ]
−game s t a t e :
c u r r e n t game l e v e l : l e v e l 9
current dishes :
        name : MaxJr l i f e t i m e : 7
        name : MaxJr l i f e t i m e : 15
c u r r e n t game s t e p : 10
maximum game s t e p s : 60

−agent s t a t e :
a t ( agent0 , s t o r a g e 0 )
h o l d ( a g e n t 0 , None )
a t ( agent1 , chopboard0 )
hold ( agent1 , sauteedBeef )

−kitchen state :


                                                       45
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


i n s i d e ( s t o r a g e 0 , None )
i n s i d e ( pan0 , None )
i n s i d e ( pan1 , None )
i n s i d e ( mixer0 , c h e e s e )
i n s i d e ( mixer1 , None )
i n s i d e ( chopboard0 , l e t t u c e S l i c e )
i n s i d e ( c h o p b o a r d 1 , None )
i n s i d e ( s e r v i n g t a b l e 0 , None )

−accomplished task :


−action :

[[ assistant ]]

get agent0 bread storage0
put agent1 mixer0

[[ user ]]

− e x e c u t i o n e r r o r messages :
   −− [ ’ a g e n t 1 i s n o t l o c a t e d i n mixer0 ’ ]
−execution suggestions :
   −− [ ]
−game s t a t e :
c u r r e n t game l e v e l : l e v e l 9
current dishes :
        name : MaxJr l i f e t i m e : 6
        name : MaxJr l i f e t i m e : 14
c u r r e n t game s t e p : 11
maximum game s t e p s : 60

−agent s t a t e :
a t ( agent0 , s t o r a g e 0 )
hold ( agent0 , bread )
a t ( agent1 , chopboard0 )
hold ( agent1 , sauteedBeef )

−kitchen state :
i n s i d e ( s t o r a g e 0 , None )
i n s i d e ( pan0 , None )
i n s i d e ( pan1 , None )
i n s i d e ( mixer0 , c h e e s e )
i n s i d e ( mixer1 , None )
i n s i d e ( chopboard0 , l e t t u c e S l i c e )
i n s i d e ( c h o p b o a r d 1 , None )
i n s i d e ( s e r v i n g t a b l e 0 , None )

−accomplished task :


−action :

[[ assistant ]]

goto agent0 mixer0
goto agent1 mixer0



                                                       46
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


[[ user ]]

− e x e c u t i o n e r r o r messages :
   −− [ ]
−execution suggestions :
   −− [ ]
−game s t a t e :
c u r r e n t game l e v e l : l e v e l 9
current dishes :
        name : MaxJr l i f e t i m e : 5
        name : MaxJr l i f e t i m e : 13
c u r r e n t game s t e p : 12
maximum game s t e p s : 60

−agent s t a t e :
a t ( agent0 , mixer0 )
hold ( agent0 , bread )
a t ( agent1 , mixer0 )
hold ( agent1 , sauteedBeef )

−kitchen state :
i n s i d e ( s t o r a g e 0 , None )
i n s i d e ( pan0 , None )
i n s i d e ( pan1 , None )
i n s i d e ( mixer0 , c h e e s e )
i n s i d e ( mixer1 , None )
i n s i d e ( chopboard0 , l e t t u c e S l i c e )
i n s i d e ( c h o p b o a r d 1 , None )
i n s i d e ( s e r v i n g t a b l e 0 , None )

−accomplished task :


−action :

[[ assistant ]]

put agent0 mixer0
put agent1 mixer0

[[ user ]]

− e x e c u t i o n e r r o r messages :
   −− [ ]
−execution suggestions :
   −− [ ]
−game s t a t e :
c u r r e n t game l e v e l : l e v e l 9
current dishes :
        name : MaxJr l i f e t i m e : 4
        name : MaxJr l i f e t i m e : 12
c u r r e n t game s t e p : 13
maximum game s t e p s : 60

−agent s t a t e :
a t ( agent0 , mixer0 )
h o l d ( a g e n t 0 , None )
a t ( agent1 , mixer0 )
h o l d ( a g e n t 1 , None )


                                                       47
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


−kitchen state :
i n s i d e ( s t o r a g e 0 , None )
i n s i d e ( pan0 , None )
i n s i d e ( pan1 , None )
i n s i d e ( mixer0 , c h e e s e&b r e a d&s a u t e e d B e e f )
i n s i d e ( mixer1 , None )
i n s i d e ( chopboard0 , l e t t u c e S l i c e )
i n s i d e ( c h o p b o a r d 1 , None )
i n s i d e ( s e r v i n g t a b l e 0 , None )

−accomplished task :


−action :

[[ assistant ]]

activate agent0 mixer0
goto agent1 chopboard0

[[ user ]]

− e x e c u t i o n e r r o r messages :
   −− [ ]
−execution suggestions :
   −− [ ]
−game s t a t e :
c u r r e n t game l e v e l : l e v e l 9
current dishes :
        name : MaxJr l i f e t i m e : 3
        name : MaxJr l i f e t i m e : 11
c u r r e n t game s t e p : 14
maximum game s t e p s : 60

−agent s t a t e :
a t ( agent0 , mixer0 )
h o l d ( a g e n t 0 , None )
a t ( agent1 , chopboard0 )
h o l d ( a g e n t 1 , None )

−kitchen state :
i n s i d e ( s t o r a g e 0 , None )
i n s i d e ( pan0 , None )
i n s i d e ( pan1 , None )
i n s i d e ( mixer0 , c h e e s e B u r g e r )
i n s i d e ( mixer1 , None )
i n s i d e ( chopboard0 , l e t t u c e S l i c e )
i n s i d e ( c h o p b o a r d 1 , None )
i n s i d e ( s e r v i n g t a b l e 0 , None )

−accomplished task :


−action :

[[ assistant ]]

get agent0 mixer0


                                                       48
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


get agent1 chopboard0

[[ user ]]

− e x e c u t i o n e r r o r messages :
   −− [ ]
−execution suggestions :
   −− [ ]
−game s t a t e :
c u r r e n t game l e v e l : l e v e l 9
current dishes :
        name : MaxJr l i f e t i m e : 2
        name : MaxJr l i f e t i m e : 10
c u r r e n t game s t e p : 15
maximum game s t e p s : 60

−agent s t a t e :
a t ( agent0 , mixer0 )
hold ( agent0 , cheeseBurger )
a t ( agent1 , chopboard0 )
hold ( agent1 , l e t t u c e S l i c e )

−kitchen state :
i n s i d e ( s t o r a g e 0 , None )
i n s i d e ( pan0 , None )
i n s i d e ( pan1 , None )
i n s i d e ( mixer0 , None )
i n s i d e ( mixer1 , None )
i n s i d e ( c h o p b o a r d 0 , None )
i n s i d e ( c h o p b o a r d 1 , None )
i n s i d e ( s e r v i n g t a b l e 0 , None )

−accomplished task :


−action :

[[ assistant ]]

goto agent0 mixer0
put agent1 mixer0

[[ user ]]

− e x e c u t i o n e r r o r messages :
   −− [ ’ a g e n t 1 i s n o t l o c a t e d i n mixer0 ’ ]
−execution suggestions :
   −− [ ]
−game s t a t e :
c u r r e n t game l e v e l : l e v e l 9
current dishes :
        name : MaxJr l i f e t i m e : 1
        name : MaxJr l i f e t i m e : 9
        name : c h e e s e B u r g e r l i f e t i m e : 12
c u r r e n t game s t e p : 16
maximum game s t e p s : 60

−agent s t a t e :
a t ( agent0 , mixer0 )


                                                   49
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


hold ( agent0 , cheeseBurger )
a t ( agent1 , chopboard0 )
hold ( agent1 , l e t t u c e S l i c e )

−kitchen state :
i n s i d e ( s t o r a g e 0 , None )
i n s i d e ( pan0 , None )
i n s i d e ( pan1 , None )
i n s i d e ( mixer0 , None )
i n s i d e ( mixer1 , None )
i n s i d e ( c h o p b o a r d 0 , None )
i n s i d e ( c h o p b o a r d 1 , None )
i n s i d e ( s e r v i n g t a b l e 0 , None )

−accomplished task :


−action :

[[ assistant ]]

put agent0 mixer0
goto agent1 mixer0

[[ user ]]

− e x e c u t i o n e r r o r messages :
   −− [ ’ p u t t i n g c h e e s e B u r g e r i n t o m i x e r 0 w i l l r e s u l t i n w a s t e ’ ]
−execution suggestions :
   −− [ ]
−game s t a t e :
c u r r e n t game l e v e l : l e v e l 9
current dishes :
        name : MaxJr l i f e t i m e : 0
        name : MaxJr l i f e t i m e : 8
        name : c h e e s e B u r g e r l i f e t i m e : 11
c u r r e n t game s t e p : 17
maximum game s t e p s : 60

−agent s t a t e :
a t ( agent0 , mixer0 )
hold ( agent0 , cheeseBurger )
a t ( agent1 , mixer0 )
hold ( agent1 , l e t t u c e S l i c e )

−kitchen state :
i n s i d e ( s t o r a g e 0 , None )
i n s i d e ( pan0 , None )
i n s i d e ( pan1 , None )
i n s i d e ( mixer0 , None )
i n s i d e ( mixer1 , None )
i n s i d e ( c h o p b o a r d 0 , None )
i n s i d e ( c h o p b o a r d 1 , None )
i n s i d e ( s e r v i n g t a b l e 0 , None )

−accomplished task :


−action :


                                                      50
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


[[ assistant ]]

goto agent0 servingtable0
put agent1 mixer0

[[ user ]]

− e x e c u t i o n e r r o r messages :
   −− [ ]
−execution suggestions :
   −− [ ]
−game s t a t e :
c u r r e n t game l e v e l : l e v e l 9
current dishes :
        name : MaxJr l i f e t i m e : 7
        name : c h e e s e B u r g e r l i f e t i m e : 10
c u r r e n t game s t e p : 18
maximum game s t e p s : 60

−agent s t a t e :
a t ( agent0 , s e r v i n g t a b l e 0 )
hold ( agent0 , cheeseBurger )
a t ( agent1 , mixer0 )
h o l d ( a g e n t 1 , None )

−kitchen state :
i n s i d e ( s t o r a g e 0 , None )
i n s i d e ( pan0 , None )
i n s i d e ( pan1 , None )
i n s i d e ( mixer0 , l e t t u c e S l i c e )
i n s i d e ( mixer1 , None )
i n s i d e ( c h o p b o a r d 0 , None )
i n s i d e ( c h o p b o a r d 1 , None )
i n s i d e ( s e r v i n g t a b l e 0 , None )

−accomplished task :


−action :

[[ assistant ]]

put agent0 servingtable0
goto agent1 storage0

[[ user ]]

− e x e c u t i o n e r r o r messages :
   −− [ ]
−execution suggestions :
   −− [ ]
−game s t a t e :
c u r r e n t game l e v e l : l e v e l 9
current dishes :
        name : MaxJr l i f e t i m e : 6
c u r r e n t game s t e p : 19
maximum game s t e p s : 60



                                                      51
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


−agent s t a t e :
a t ( agent0 , s e r v i n g t a b l e 0 )
h o l d ( a g e n t 0 , None )
a t ( agent1 , s t o r a g e 0 )
h o l d ( a g e n t 1 , None )

−kitchen state :
i n s i d e ( s t o r a g e 0 , None )
i n s i d e ( pan0 , None )
i n s i d e ( pan1 , None )
i n s i d e ( mixer0 , l e t t u c e S l i c e )
i n s i d e ( mixer1 , None )
i n s i d e ( c h o p b o a r d 0 , None )
i n s i d e ( c h o p b o a r d 1 , None )
i n s i d e ( s e r v i n g t a b l e 0 , None )

−accomplished task :
cheeseBurger ,


                                                   52
