Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


I SHA: I NCREMENTAL S UCCESSIVE H ALVING
FOR H YPERPARAMETER O PTIMIZATION
WITH B UDGET C ONSTRAINTS

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT
         Hyperparameter optimization (HPO) is indispensable for achieving optimal perfor-
         mance in machine learning tasks. While some approaches focus on sampling more
         promising hyperparameter configurations, methods based on the successive halving
         algorithm (SHA) focus on efficiently evaluating hyperparameter configurations
         through the adaptive allocation of evaluation resources and stopping unpromising
         candidates early. Yet, SHA comes with several hyperparameters itself, one of
         which is the maximum budget that can be allocated to evaluate a single hyperpa-
         rameter configuration. Asynchronous extensions of SHA (ASHA) devise a strategy
         of autonomously increasing the maximum budget and simultaneously allowing
         for better parallelization. However, while working well in practice with many
         considered hyperparameter configurations, there are limitations to the soundness of
         these adaptations when the overall budget for HPO is limited. This paper provides
         a theoretical analysis of ASHA in applications with budget constraints. We propose
         incremental SHA (iSHA), a synchronous extension of SHA, allowing to increase
         the maximum budget. A theoretical and empirical analysis of iSHA shows that
         soundness is maintained while guaranteeing to be more resource-efficient than
         SHA. In an extensive set of experiments, we also demonstrate that, in general,
         iSHA performs superior to ASHA and progressive ASHA.


1    I NTRODUCTION
Hyperparameter optimization (HPO) is a crucial step in the process of engineering machine learning
(ML) applications, as optimal performance can only be obtained if parameterized ML algorithms are
tuned to the task at hand (Feurer & Hutter, 2019; Bischl et al., 2021). Such a task is specified in the
form of a dataset D and a loss function ℓ. Typically, HPO is carried out in a trial-and-error fashion by
evaluating ℓ on the given data D for various candidate hyperparameter configurations.
In the early days of HPO, grid search and random search (Bergstra et al., 2011) have been the main
tools. However, they can be criticized for their disability in finding an optimal hyperparameter
configuration as well as their computational cost. In the age of deep learning, a highly efficient HPO
method is inevitable, as evaluating hundreds or even thousands of configurations is prohibitive. To
address this challenge, several HPO methods have been proposed to improve sampling or evaluation
efficiency. For the former, the methods mainly focus on Bayesian Optimization (Hutter et al., 2011),
whereas, for the latter, the HPO problem is extended by a budget parameter. Using this parameter, the
optimizer can specify for which budget a hyperparameter configuration should be evaluated. This
area of the HPO literature is also referred to as multi-fidelity optimization.
Probably the simplest procedure in this area is the Successive Halving Algorithm (SHA), which
first evaluates a set of candidates for a minimum starting budget R0 , discards the worse half and
continues evaluation with the better half for a doubled budget. This procedure is repeated until a
maximum budget of R is reached. Thus, concentrating the budget on more promising hyperparameter
configurations, the reliability of the evaluations is gradually increased, but also the cost of their
evaluations. In contrast, less promising solutions are discarded early on with little budget.
However, for the user of such an HPO method, there are again new hyperparameters to be set: the
number of hyperparameter configurations in the starting set n, the minimum starting budget R0 , and


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


the maximum budget R. Furthermore, in a generalization of SHA, there is an additional reduction
parameter η, which specifies that only 1/η of the configurations are considered for the next higher
budget level. For Hyperband (Li et al., 2018), a heuristic is presented to achieve a satisfactory
result with different n and R0 , Li et al. (2020) propose an approach that does not need to specify
the maximum budget R in advance. This is accomplished by an asynchronous extension of SHA
(ASHA), in which decisions about candidate evaluations for larger budgets are made asynchronously,
allowing for higher parallelization. This approach has recently been further developed into PASHA
(Bohdal et al., 2022) that progressively increases the budget if the ranking of the configurations in the
top two high-fidelity sets has not stabilized.
However, asynchronous decision-making comes at the risk of mistakenly promoting hyperparameter
configurations to the next budget level. While Li et al. (2020) invoke the law of large numbers to
argue that this is not an issue, the problem remains in the case of finite budget constraints, where only
a limited number of hyperparameter configurations can be considered.
Contributions. To shed light on these limitations, propose potential remedies, and further improve
the reliability of these HPO tools, we analyze ASHA and progressive ASHA (PASHA) (Bohdal et al.,
2022) from a theoretical and empirical viewpoint. Our contributions can be summarized as follows:
• We provide the first theoretical results for ASHA, analyzing its capabilities in setups with con-
  straints on the overall budget. These findings are accompanied by empirical evidence for a set of
  HPO benchmarks.
• We propose an incremental (synchronous) extension of SHA (iSHA) that still allows one to increase
  the maximum allocatable budget R during an HPO run but makes decisions synchronously.
• A theoretical and empirical analysis of iSHA is provided, finding iSHA to be theoretically sound
  relative to the original SHA, while being provably more resource-efficient.
• In an extensive empirical study, we compare iSHA to the original SHA, and PASHA embedded
  into the Hyperband framework. We find iSHA to give more robust results compared to PASHA,
  often yielding higher quality hyperparameter configurations, while being more resource-efficient
  than SHA.

2    H YPERPARAMETER O PTIMIZATION
Hyperparameter optimization (HPO) deals with the problem of finding a suitable parameterization
λ of an ML algorithm A with a corresponding hyperparameter space Λ for a given task. When
facing a typical supervised ML setting, we consider an instance space X and a target space Y, and
elements x ∈ X to be (non-deterministically) associated with elements y ∈ Y via a joint probability
distribution P . We assume to be given a (training) dataset D = {x(i) , y (i) }N
                                                                               i=1 ⊂ X × Y from a
dataset space D. An ML algorithm A is a mapping from the dataset space D and the hyperparameter
space Λ to a hypothesis space H := {h : X → Y} ⊆ Y X , i.e.,
                                   A : D × Λ → H, (D, λ) 7→ h .
The ultimate goal of HPO is to find a parameterization λ∗ of A, resulting in a hypothesis that
minimizes the generalization error (risk R) with respect to some loss function ℓ : Y × Y → R:
                                                       Z

         R h = A(D, λ) = E(x,y)∼P ℓ(y, h(x)) =                      ℓ(y, h(x)) dP (x, y) .
                                                           (x,y)∈X ×Y

Since the generalization error cannot be computed directly, it is estimated by splitting the data D into
a training and validation set, Dtrain and Dval , and computing the validation error:

                    λ̂ ∈ arg min EDtrain ,Dval E(x,y)∈Dval ℓ(y, A(Dtrain , λ)(x)) .
                           λ∈Λ

To ease notation, we summarize the expectation as ℓ̂(λ).
As the computation of ℓ̂ for a λ might be costly w.r.t. the available resources (e.g., wall-clock time,
number of used data points, etc.), in multi-fidelity HPO, the validation error is usually determined
for a certain resource allocation, and thus, its actual value depends on the resources used. Hence,
we denote by ℓ̂r (λ) the validation error of A with parameterization λ and resource allocation r.
Obviously, the choice of r involves a tradeoff: The more resource units are used, the more accurate
the estimate, but the more costly its calculation, and vice versa.


                                                   2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Roughly speaking, a multi-fidelity HPO method seeks to find an appropriate parameterization λ of A,
while preferably using as few resources as possible, and/or allocating at most a maximum assignable
budget R to the evaluation of a hyperparameter configuration λ during the search. For convenience,
we assume that R is an element of N ∪ {∞}, where R = ∞ means that resources are not restricted.
We define ℓ̂∗ (λ) := limr→R ℓ̂r (λ) for any λ ∈ Λ and ν∗ := inf λ∈Λ ℓ̂∗ (λ). The goal of an HPO
method is then to identify an HPC λ belonging to arg minλ∈Λ ℓ̂∗ (λ) − ν∗ .


3    S UCCESSIVE H ALVING AND H YPERBAND

The successive halving algorithm (SHA) (Karnin et al., 2013) solves the non-stochastic best arm
identification problem within a fixed budget and was already applied successfully to HPO by Jamieson
& Talwalkar (2016a). As a preparation step, a set of n hyperparameter configurations is sampled.
Then, starting from a minimum budget R0 for which all the n candidates are evaluated, it iteratively
discards the worse half and continues to evaluate the remaining candidates with doubled budget. This
procedure is repeated until either only a single hyperparameter configuration is left or a maximum
allocatable budget R is reached. Typically, n is chosen such that at least one candidate reaches the
final iteration of the algorithm. A budget level for which hyperparameter configurations are evaluated
is also referred to as rung in the following. Furthermore, we write that a hyperparameter configuration
is promoted to the next rung if it was not discarded and thus considered in the next iteration of SHA.
While SHA allows allocating exponentially more budget on the more promising hyperparameter
configurations, its final performance crucially depends on its parameterization. The parameters n,
R and R0 need to be chosen with care and depending on the task. Starting with too-low an initial
budget R0 , we face the problem of rejecting actually promising hyperparameter configurations too
early, namely those that require more budget, e.g., more data or more training iterations, to perform
well enough to remain in the set of promising candidates. In particular, this is typically the case for
more complex models, which are known to have more capacity to learn more complex relationships
between input space and target space. It is also true for models that are regularized to avoid overfitting.
While those models typically need some budget to start to perform well enough, oftentimes, they
eventually outperform unregularized candidates resulting in overfitting behavior.
The Hyperband (HB) algorithm (Li et al., 2018) comes with a heuristic of how to choose different
values for n and R0 , and subsequently uses SHA as a subroutine. This way, different allocation
strategies are considered for the tradeoff between (i) considering many configurations n starting with
a rather small R0 , and (ii) giving some configurations more budget from the beginning. The latter is
motivated by the fact that in machine learning, some hyperparameter configurations may require a
larger amount of resources to show off their better performance. We refer to each call of SHA as a
bracket (Li et al., 2018), for which the set of hyperparameters is sampled uniformly at random and
given to SHA as an input.


4    R ELATED W ORK

To achieve state-of-the-art performance, hyperparameter optimization (HPO) is an inevitable step in
the machine learning process, dealing with finding the most suitable hyperparameter configuration
(HPC) of a machine learning algorithm for a given dataset and performance measure. Considering
HPO as a black-box optimization problem, various methods can be used to tackle this problem (Feurer
& Hutter, 2019; Bischl et al., 2021). Arguably, straightforward solutions include a grid search and a
random search. However, both are rather expensive, and thus, methods emerged to improve sample
efficiency and evaluation efficiency. While former methods are mostly centered around Bayesian
optimization (Frazier, 2018; Hutter et al., 2011), the latter emerged in the branch of multi-fidelity
optimization.
In multi-fidelity optimization, the goal is to distribute the budget for evaluating hyperparameter
configurations in a way that more budget is concentrated on the more promising configurations and
less so on inferior candidates. The Successive Halving algorithm (SHA), initially proposed by Karnin
et al. (2013) and later used by Jamieson & Talwalkar (2016b;a) for HPO, devises a powerful HPO
method, which has been incorporated as a subroutine in the well-known HPO method Hyperband
(Li et al., 2018). Hyperband has been extended in various directions such as improving its sampling


                                                    3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


efficiency (Falkner et al., 2018; Awad et al., 2021; Mallik et al., 2023) and introducing shortcuts in
the evaluation process (Mendes et al., 2021).


                                    Algorithm 1 Incremental Successive-Halving Algorithm (iSHA)
                                      Input: S set of HPCs, r, maximum resource R, reduction
                                      factor η, (Ck )k old sequence of HPCs, (Lk )k old sequence of
                                      losses
                                      Initialize: S0 ← S, ñ = |C0 |, n = |S0 | + |C0 |, s = logη (R)
                                      for k ∈ {0, 1, . . . , s} do
                                          nk = ⌊n/η k ⌋ − ⌊ñ/η k ⌋ , rk = rη k
                                          pull each arm in Sk for rk times
                                          if k ≤ s − 1 then
                                              Sk+1 ← keep the best ⌊n/η k+1 ⌋ − ⌊ñ/η k+1 ⌋ arms
                                      from Sk ∪ Ck \Ck+1
                                          else
Figure 1: Illustration of how                 Sk+1 ← keep the best ⌊n/η k+1 ⌋ arms from Sk ∪ Ck
iSHA continues a previously               end if
conducted SHA run.                    end for
                                      Output: Remaining configuration

But also SHA has been subject to improvements. In (Li et al., 2020), SHA was extended to asyn-
chronous SHA (ASHA), which helps to better leverage parallel computing resources by promoting
candidates asynchronously to the next rung. Simultaneously, the maximum budget R can be adapted
on-the-fly. Progressive ASHA (PASHA) proposed by Bohdal et al. (2022) builds on ASHA and
incorporates a mechanism to only introduce higher rungs where necessary. While both ASHA and
PASHA have been extensively studied empirically, a thorough (theoretical) analysis of the costs of
the asynchronous promotion scheme is still lacking. Also, these empirical studies have considered
comparably large setups with vast amounts of resources. In our study, we consider small-scale setups
and analyze the behavior of ASHA and PASHA in that scope.


5   I NCREMENTAL S UCCESSIVE H ALVING

Due to the static budget setting in SHA, the execution of SHA cannot simply be continued for an
adapted parameterization, e.g., a higher maximum allocatable budget R. By re-running SHA from
scratch, however, knowledge about previously evaluated hyperparameter configurations (HPCs) is
discarded and resources already allocated are wasted.
As another extreme, ASHA and PASHA allow to dynamically increase the maximum allocatable
budget R, devising a scheme for asynchronous promotions to higher rungs. However, as we show in
Sections 6 and 7.2, the asynchronous promotions in ASHA and PASHA can be erroneous and thus
impede the identification of the optimal hyperparameter configurations.
With incremental successive halving (iSHA), we propose a middle ground for budget-constrained
scenarios, i.e., scenarios in which we cannot rely on the law of large numbers as required by Li et al.
(2020). Similar to ASHA and PASHA, we allow the maximum allocatable budget to be increased
after an SHA run, making SHA in principle stateful. Algorithm 1 translates this into pseudocode.
Differences from the original SHA are highlighted in blue. While Algorithm 1 also covers the case of
ASHA, adding a single configuration at a time, we assume |S| + |C0 | = |C0 | · η for our theoretical
and empirical analysis.
In Figure 1 we see the mechanism underlying iSHA to continue a previously conducted run of
SHA that resulted in the rungs C0 , C1 and C2 . The initially sampled set of HPCs C0 is padded with
newly sampled HPCs S0 to initially achieve the same number of HPCs as if SHA had been restarted.
However, only the new configurations are executed (following the typical SHA budget allocation)
and finally compared with the previous configurations from C0 . The already promoted configuration
in C1 from the previous SHA run will remain and only the required number of configurations will be
promoted, i.e., S1 , such that the size of the union of C1 and S1 matches the size of the second rung if
SHA had been restarted. This mechanism is then iteratively continued for subsequent rungs.


                                                   4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Intuitively speaking, the strategy of iSHA is to continue a previous SHA run in the most efficient, and
thus, resource-saving way. However, similarly to ASHA and PASHA, this efficiency may come at
the cost of a potential drop in performance, as previously made decisions cannot be revoked. More
specifically, in the worst case, all promotions of the previous run would not have occurred if we had
known the complete set of candidate HPCs from the start. Only filling up the rungs leaves less space
for the desired candidates to be promoted to the highest rung.
Nevertheless, we prove in the next section that we are still able to identify near-optimal solutions with
a high probability, which will be confirmed by empirical results in Section 7.2 later on. Furthermore,
we demonstrate that this robustness gives iSHA an edge over ASHA and PASHA when it comes to
the quality of returned hyperparameter configurations in settings with limited budget.


6     T HEORETICAL R ESULTS

We split the theoretical results into three parts. First, we provide a theoretical analysis of ASHA.
Second, we give some theoretical guarantees for iSHA, our extension of SHA, and third, we extend
these guarantees to an incremental extension of Hyperband. Since the Successive Halving algorithm
solves a multi-armed bandit problem (Jamieson & Talwalkar, 2016b), in the following analysis, we
will stick to the notation and terms of multi-armed bandits. Multi-arm bandit problems are transferred
to HPO by (a) considering a hyperparameter configuration λ as an arm i and (b) when drawing an
arm i for k times, observing the loss ℓi,k (compare to Section 2).
In the same spirit as in (Jamieson & Talwalkar, 2016b; Li et al., 2018), we need the following
assumption as a prerequisite for the theoretical analyses of the next subsections.
Assumption 6.1. For each arm i ∈ N, the limit νi := limt→∞ ℓi,t exists.

Moreover, we denote the convergence speed by γ(t) ≥ supi |ℓi,t − νi |, ∀t ∈ N.

6.1   T HEORETICAL A NALYSIS OF ASHA

We now analyze ASHA (Li et al., 2020), which, to the best of our knowledge, is the only algorithm
with a similar goal of more efficient resource use as our proposed incremental SH variant.
Theorem 6.2 (Necessary Budget for ASHA). Fix n arms and assume ν1 ≤ . . . ≤ νn . Let
                                                            ν |rung        −ν1
                                       n
                                                                    |
     zASHA = (⌊logη (n)⌋ + 1) · n · max maxk∈[K] η −k γ −1 ⌊ k−12/η⌋+1           ,
                                                                                     o
                                         η −K maxi∈rungK \{1} γ −1 νi −ν

                                                                      2
                                                                        1
                                                                                      ,

where K ≤ ⌊logη (n)⌋ is the top rung of ASHA. If ASHA is run with some budget B ≥ zASHA , then
the best arm 1 is returned.

The dependence is linear-logarithmic in n, and the limit gap from the best arm to the other arms
occurs in the inverted convergence rate γ −1 . The first term in the maximum makes sure that the best
arm reaches the top rung K, while the second term makes sure that the best arm will eventually be
returned. As a corollary of the proof of Theorem 6.2 (see Section C), we obtain the following result.
Corollary 6.3 (Worst Case Promotion Costs). Assume all rungs to be full, i.e., no promotion is
possible, and the top rung K only contains the current incumbent arm. If at that time a new best arm
(configuration) î is sampled, then promoting î to the sole solution of the new top rung K + 1 requires
the sampling of η K − 1 additional arms (HPCs) and a total of η K+1 many jobs.

From these results, we can draw two major conclusions. The more configurations have already been
considered in ASHA when î enters the pool of considered hyperparameter configurations, i.e., the
later in the process, the more budget needs to be spent to promote î to the top rung. Particularly, in a
scenario with a limited budget, e.g., limited by the overall budget or by the number of configurations
to be sampled, ASHA fails to return î, if the required budget for promoting the best configuration
exceeds the remaining budget. A similar result can be shown for PASHA.


                                                   5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


6.2    T HEORETICAL A NALYSIS OF I NCREMENTAL S UCCESSIVE H ALVING

For iSHA (Algorithm 1), we first prove a lower bound on the budget to return a nearly optimal arm
(configuration). The proof is given in Appendix B.1.
Theorem 6.4 (Necessary Budget for iSHA). Fix n arms from which ñ arms were already promoted,
and assume ν1 ≤ · · · ≤ νn . For any ϵ > 0 let
            ziSHA =η⌈logη (n)⌉ · maxi=2,...,n i 1 + min R, γ −1 max 4ϵ , νi −ν

                                                                             2
                                                                               1
                                                                                      .
If any of the iSHA is run with some budget B ≥ zC−SH , then an arm ı̂ is returned that satisfies
νı̂ − ν1 ≤ ϵ/2.
Further, we can specify the improvement of iSHA over the costly re-run of SH.
Theorem 6.5 (Improvement of number of pulls of iSHA in comparison to SHA). Fix n arms, a
maximal size of R, r and η. Assume that we have already run SHA on ñ arms and the same values
for B, r, and η. Let η− = η − 1 and s+ = s + 1. If we ran SHA, iSHA over s rounds with the above
variables, we have
                                                                         +
               #{total pulls of iSHA}       (s+ )(ñR + η s )(η− ) − (η s − 1)(2R + n)
                 #{total pulls of SH} ≤ 1 −                                            .
                                             (s+ )(nR + η s )(η− ) − (η s+ − 1)(R + n)
Again, as a corollary of the proof of Theorem 6.5 (see Section Appendix B.2), we obtain the following
result regarding the “limit case”, i.e., if we would increase the maximum size R infinitely often, or,
equivalently, the number of possible rungs s infinitely often.
Corollary 6.6. If we run iSHA and SHA infinitely many times with
       (i) an ever-increasing maximum size R, and
      (ii) such that the newly sampled number of configurations in each new run of iSHA fulfills
           |S| + |C0 | = |C0 | · η, where C0 is the number of configurations in the previous run,
then the ratio of total pulls of iSHA and total pulls of SHA converges to 1 − η −1 .
Note that a comparison similar to Theorem 6.5 is difficult to make, since ASHA does not include the
parameter R.

6.3    I NCREMENTAL -H YPERBAND

Like the original version of SHA and its extensions ASHA and PASHA, we can also employ iSHA as
a subroutine in Hyperband. To this end, Hyperband needs to be made incremental in itself, as done
in Algorithm 2 in the appendix, which we call iHB (incremental Hyperband). In the following, we
provide a theoretical analysis of this incremental version of Hyperband with iSHA as a subroutine.
Figure 2 illustrates how every Hyperband bracket is updated after increasing the maximum budget R.
An optimal hyperparameter configuration λ∗ as defined above may not always exist. Even if it does, it
could be infeasible to search for it as our hyperparameter configuration space is usually very large or
even infinite. Therefore, we will relax our goal and seek to find a configuration that is at least “nearly
optimal”, akin to the literature on HPO problems: For ϵ > 0, we call λ̂ an ϵ-optimal configuration iff
νλ̂ − νλ∗ ≤ ϵ. To ensure that the search for such a configuration does not resemble the search for a
needle in a haystack, we need an assumption which guarantees that the probability of the existence of
an ϵ-optimal configuration in our sampled set of configurations is high enough.
Assumption 6.7. The proportion of ϵ-optimal configurations in Λ is α ∈ (0, 1).
Note that we now have at least one ϵ-optimal configuration in a sampled set of configurations with
probability at least 1 − δ, if the sample size is at least ⌈log1−α (δ)⌉ for a fixed failure probability
δ ∈ (0, 1). With this, we can state the following theorem, the proof of which is given in Appendix B.3.
Theorem 6.8. Let η, R, α and δ be fixed such that
                                                                           P⌊Lη,R ⌋+1
              n                                                  ⌊Lη,R ⌋                 logη (k)  o
   R ≥ max log1−α (δ) (η− ) + 1, ηγ̄ −1 Lη,Lη,R + 4 +                    − k=1

                                                                   2            ⌊Lη,R ⌋ + 1
                                                             n
   for γ̄ −1 := maxs=0,...,⌊Lη,R ⌋ maxi=2,...,ns i 1 + min R, γ −1 max 4ϵ , νi −ν
                                                                                       1

                                                                                    2

and Lη,R = logη (R), then iHB finds an ϵ-optimal configuration with probability at least 1 − δ.


                                                    6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                              ...

                                                                 ...

                                                      ...


Figure 2: Illustration of how the brackets of incremental hyperband are arranged and filled up when
the maximum budget R is increased.


To conclude, despite the incremental extension of Hyperband, we can maintain the theoretical
guarantees of the original Hyperband. Although promotions in iSHA are also to some extent
performed asynchronously, we can still identify the best arm when doing promotions in a batch,
provided a sufficiently large batch size.

7     E MPIRICAL E VALUATION
In addition to the theoretical results of the previous section, we evaluate iSHA empirically and
compare it to PASHA (Bohdal et al., 2022), and SHA (Jamieson & Talwalkar, 2016a).
We are especially interested in the following two research questions:
RQ1 Is iSHA able to retain the quality of returned HPCs as compared to applying SHA from scratch?
RQ2 How does the proposed iSHA compare to the state-of-the-art algorithm PASHA?

7.1   E XPERIMENT S ETUP

In our experimental evaluation, we compare iSHA, to PASHA, and SHA as subroutines embedded in
Hyperband to answer the research questions RQ1 and RQ2. Note that we do not include ASHA as it
was demonstrated to perform inferior to PASHA in (Bohdal et al., 2022). To this end, we conduct an
extensive set of experiments tackling various HPO tasks, considering various types of learners and
two different fidelity parameters: the number of epochs and the fraction of the training data used for
fitting a model.
As a benchmark library, we use YAHPO Gym (Pfisterer et al., 2022), which provides fast-to-evaluate
surrogate benchmarks for HPO with particular support for multi-fidelity optimization, rendering it
a perfect fit for our study. From YAHPO Gym, we select the benchmarks listed in Table 1. All the
benchmarks consist of several datasets, which are referred to as benchmark instances, allowing for a
broad comparison. Due to space limitations, we only present a summary of the results here, whereas
detailed results can be found in Appendix D.
Furthermore, we set the initial max size Rt−1 = 16 and increase it after the first run by a factor of η
to Rt = η Rt−1 , as this is a budget that is supported by all benchmark scenarios. Since ASHA and
PASHA automatically increase the maximum budget depending on the observed performances, we
only ensure an upper limit of Rt for both to ensure a fair comparison. As a termination criterion, we
use that the number of HPCs would exceed the pool size of the Hyperband bracket. For benchmarks
considering a fraction of the training dataset as fidelity parameter, we translate a budget r by r/Rt
into a fraction between 0 and 1.
Furthermore, we repeat each combination of algorithm, η, and benchmark instance for 30 seeds
resulting in a total amount of 30 × 3 × 2 × 378 = 68, 040 hyperparameter optimization runs. We
computed all experiments on a single workstation equipped with 2xIntel Xeon Gold 5122 and 256GB
RAM. The code and data will be made publicly available via GitHub.


                                                  7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 1: List of considered benchmarks from YAHPO-Gym with the type of learner, number of
considered datasets, objective function, and the type of budget that can be used as a fidelity parameter.

                                    Benchmark              Model             # Inst.                     Objective           Fidelity
                                    lcbench            neural network          34                       val_accuracy         epochs
                                   rbv2_svm                SVM                106                            acc             fraction
                                  rbv2_ranger          random forest          119                            acc             fraction
                                 rbv2_xgboost            XGBoost              119                            acc             fraction


                                       overall, eta=2                                                                   overall, eta=3
                              PASHA                                                               0.5
                   0.2
Rel. Performance


                                                                               Rel. Performance
                              iSHA                                                                0.0
                   0.0                                                                            0.5
                   0.2                                                                            1.0
                   0.4                                                                            1.5        PASHA
                   0.6                                                                            2.0        iSHA
                         0.650 0.675 0.700 0.725 0.750 0.775 0.800                                        0.80       0.82      0.84       0.86    0.88
                                         Rel. Budget                                                                        Rel. Budget

Figure 3: Scatter plots relating the performance on the y-axis and the consumed budget on the x-axis
to the performance achieved and budget consumed by SHA. Note that the ranges for the performance
and budget vary from η = 2 (left) to η = 3 (right). For the relative budget lower is better whereas for
relative performance higher is better.


7.2                 E MPIRICAL R ESULTS

In Figure 3 we present the performance of the finally chosen hyperparameter configuration and the
budget spent by the Hyperband optimizer in relation to the performance of the solution returned and
the budget consumed by SHA. Hence, a relative performance of 0.0 means that the solution quality
matches the one returned by SHA, a larger (smaller) value an improvement (degradation) w.r.t. SHA.
The relative budget denotes the share of the budget that SHA consumes by re-running from scratch.
Therefore, a relative budget of 1 means that the consumed budget is on par with the budget of SHA.
A lower relative budget correspondingly means that less budget was consumed.
As can be seen, our iSHA extension robustly yields competitive performance to re-running SHA
from scratch for a larger maximum assignable budget R, while substantially reducing the consumed
budget to roughly 75% for η = 2 and 84.5% for η = 85%. Regarding RQ1, we can confirm that
iSHA retains the quality of returned HPCs.
On the contrary, the performance and budget consumption of PASHA shows a lot of variance,
including variations in all possible directions: improvements and degradations in performance, using
more or less budget than iSHA. Since higher rungs are only introduced in PASHA whenever necessary,
i.e., if the soft ranking over the configurations of the last two rungs changes, PASHA has the potential
to reduce the consumed budget even more than iSHA does. However, there is no guarantee that
PASHA will use less budget than iSHA, and also in terms of performance, PASHA is clearly less
robust.


Table 2: Aggregated statistics across benchmark instances comparing the performance and budget to
natively applying SHA. Differences in accuracy larger than 0.001 are considered for improvements
or degradations. (left: η = 2, right: η = 3)

          η=2                   Performance               Budget                    η=3                       Performance                    Budget
         Approach             Impr Degr Tie            Mean     Std                Approach                 Impr Degr Tie                 Mean     Std
             PASHA             21      69     288      0.7521   0.0274                 PASHA                 24        88      266    0.8483     0.0145
              iSHA              7      14     357      0.7520     0.0                   iSHA                 9         14      355    0.8443       0.0



                                                                         8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                    PASHA vs iSHA - overall, eta=2
                                               210
                                                                                      PASHA vs iSHA - overall, eta=3
                                                                                                                 222
        200          199                              PASHA                            208                              PASHA
                                       168            iSHA                200                                           iSHA
        150                                           Tie                                                156            Tie
                                                                          150
                                                                                116
Count


                                                                  Count
              108
        100                                                               100
                              71
                                                                                                54
         50                                                                50
                                                      0                                                                 0
          0                                                                 0
                Performance                  Budget                               Performance                  Budget

Figure 4: Bar charts counting the number of datasets for which either PASHA or iSHA performed best
with respect to performance and accumulated budget for evaluating hyperparameter configurations.
The plots show the results for η = 2 on the left and η = 3 on the right.


This is again confirmed by the results in Table 2, where we simply count the number of benchmark
instances for which an improvement, degradation, or tie w.r.t. the performance of SHA is obtained.
While PASHA gives the most improvements in terms of performance for both values of η, it also
comes with the most performance degradations which even outnumber the improvements by a factor
of 3 to 4. Furthermore, we provide the average and the standard deviations for the relative budget
consumed across the benchmark instances. On average, for both values of η, iSHA consumes the
least budget, whereas, for PASHA, the standard deviation is an order of magnitude larger compared
to the other approaches.
In a direct comparison between PASHA and iSHA, we compare the quality of the finally returned
hyperparameter configurations to each other in Figure 4. Furthermore, we compare the accumulated
budget of the two approaches and count how many times either of the two performed better than the
other one. For the performance comparison, we only consider differences in performance larger than
0.001 as better performance. From the plots we can see that on the majority of the datasets iSHA
performs better than PASHA for both performance and accumulated budget and independent of the
choice for η. However, the savings in the budget are a little more pronounced in the case of η = 3.
From these results, we can conclude that iSHA is a robust and more resource-efficient incremental
version of SHA, and the theoretical guarantees given in the previous section can be validated in
practice as well. PASHA is able to reduce the consumed budget drastically, and its heuristic nature
may allow one to achieve substantial reductions in budget, albeit these improvements are not obtained
consistently. Overall, we find iSHA to perform way more robust in general, and as detailed in the
appendix, compare favorably in a direct comparison to PASHA.



8        C ONCLUSION AND F UTURE W ORK

In this paper, we proposed an extension to the well-known HPO method Successive Halving (SHA),
called Incremental Successive Halving (iSHA), aiming to improve its efficiency when the max size
hyperparameter R of SHA needs to be increased post-hoc. We derived theoretical guarantees on the
quality of the final choice, as well as on the saved budget, when a previous SHA run is continued.
Furthermore, we provide the first theoretical analysis of asynchronous SHA, emphasizing the price
that needs to be paid for the asynchronous promotions. In an empirical study, we also find that iSHA
yields results similar to the much more expensive baseline variant of SHA and often better results
than the current state-of-art among the asynchronous variants of SHA. In fact, our approach only
requires the budget of the sole run with the increased max size.
In future work, we plan to combine our SHA extensions with more sophisticated strategies for
sampling hyperparameter configurations, as for example done by Awad et al. (2021) or Falkner et al.
(2018) and HyperJump, to improve iHB’s efficacy and efficiency even further. Another interesting
avenue of future research is outlined by PriorBand where a prior distribution is incorporated for
sampling new hyperparameter configurations (Mallik et al., 2023).


                                                              9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Noor H. Awad, Neeratyoy Mallik, and Frank Hutter. DEHB: evolutionary hyberband for scalable,
  robust and efficient hyperparameter optimization. In Proceedings of the Thirtieth International
 Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pp. 2147–2153, 2021.
James Bergstra, Rémi Bardenet, Yoshua Bengio, and Balázs Kégl. Algorithms for hyper-
  parameter optimization. In John Shawe-Taylor, Richard S. Zemel, Peter L. Bartlett, Fer-
  nando C. N. Pereira, and Kilian Q. Weinberger (eds.), Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems 24: 25th Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Sys-
  tems 2011. Proceedings of a meeting held 12-14 December 2011, Granada, Spain, pp.
  2546–2554, 2011. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2011/hash/
  86e8f7ab32cfd12577bc2619bc635690-Abstract.html.
Bernd Bischl, Martin Binder, Michel Lang, Tobias Pielok, Jakob Richter, Stefan Coors, Janek Thomas,
  Theresa Ullmann, Marc Becker, Anne-Laure Boulesteix, et al. Hyperparameter optimization:
  Foundations, algorithms, best practices and open challenges. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.05847,
  2021.
Ondrej Bohdal, Lukas Balles, Beyza Ermis, Cédric Archambeau, and Giovanni Zappella. Pasha:
  Efficient hpo with progressive resource allocation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.06940, 2022.
Stefan Falkner, Aaron Klein, and Frank Hutter. BOHB: robust and efficient hyperparameter opti-
  mization at scale. In Proceedings of the 35th International Conference on Machine Learning,
  volume 80 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 1436–1445. PMLR, 2018.
Matthias Feurer and Frank Hutter. Hyperparameter optimization. In Frank Hutter, Lars Kotthoff,
 and Joaquin Vanschoren (eds.), Automated Machine Learning - Methods, Systems, Challenges,
 The Springer Series on Challenges in Machine Learning, pp. 3–33. Springer, 2019. doi: 10.1007/
 978-3-030-05318-5\_1. URL https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-05318-5_1.
Peter I. Frazier. A tutorial on bayesian optimization. CoRR, abs/1807.02811, 2018. URL http:
  //arxiv.org/abs/1807.02811.
Frank Hutter, Holger H. Hoos, and Kevin Leyton-Brown. Sequential model-based optimization for
  general algorithm configuration. In Learning and Intelligent Optimization - 5th International
  Conference, volume 6683 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pp. 507–523. Springer, 2011.
Kevin Jamieson and Ameet Talwalkar. Non-stochastic best arm identification and hyperparameter
  optimization. In Proceedings of the 19th International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and
  Statistics, volume 51 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 240–248. PMLR, 2016a.
Kevin G. Jamieson and Ameet Talwalkar. Non-stochastic best arm identification and hyperparameter
  optimization. In Arthur Gretton and Christian C. Robert (eds.), Proceedings of the 19th Interna-
  tional Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, AISTATS 2016, Cadiz, Spain, May 9-11,
  2016, volume 51 of JMLR Workshop and Conference Proceedings, pp. 240–248. JMLR.org, 2016b.
  URL http://proceedings.mlr.press/v51/jamieson16.html.
Zohar Karnin, Tomer Koren, and Oren Somekh. Almost optimal exploration in multi-armed bandits.
  In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 1238–1246. PMLR, 2013.
Liam Li, Kevin Jamieson, Afshin Rostamizadeh, Ekaterina Gonina, Jonathan Ben-Tzur, Moritz Hardt,
  Benjamin Recht, and Ameet Talwalkar. A system for massively parallel hyperparameter tuning.
  Proceedings of Machine Learning and Systems, 2:230–246, 2020.
Lisha Li, Kevin Jamieson, Giulia DeSalvo, Afshin Rostamizadeh, and Ameet Talwalkar. Hyperband:
  A novel bandit-based approach to hyperparameter optimization. Journal of Machine Learning
  Research, 18(185):1–52, 2018.
Neeratyoy Mallik, Edward Bergman, Carl Hvarfner, Danny Stoll, Maciej Janowski, Marius Lindauer,
  Luigi Nardi, and Frank Hutter. Priorband: Practical hyperparameter optimization in the age of
  deep learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.12370, 2023.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Pedro Mendes, Maria Casimiro, and Paolo Romano. Hyperjump: Accelerating hyperband via risk
  modelling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.02479, 2021.
Florian Pfisterer, Lennart Schneider, Julia Moosbauer, Martin Binder, and Bernd Bischl. YAHPO
  gym - an efficient multi-objective multi-fidelity benchmark for hyperparameter optimization.
  In International Conference on Automated Machine Learning, AutoML 2022, volume 188 of
  Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 3/1–39. PMLR, 2022.


                                             11
