Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D IFFERENTIABLE L EARNING OF G ENERALIZED
S TRUCTURED M ATRICES FOR E FFICIENT D EEP N EU -
RAL N ETWORKS

 Changwoo Lee, Hun-Seok Kim
 University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA
 {cwoolee, hunseok}@umich.edu



                                            A BSTRACT
         This paper investigates efficient deep neural networks (DNNs) to replace dense
         unstructured weight matrices with structured ones that possess desired properties.
         The challenge arises because the optimal weight matrix structure in popular neu-
         ral network models is obscure in most cases and may vary from layer to layer
         even in the same network. Prior structured matrices proposed for efficient DNNs
         were mostly hand-crafted without a generalized framework to systematically learn
         them. To address this issue, we propose a generalized and differentiable frame-
         work to learn efficient structures of weight matrices by gradient descent. We first
         define a new class of structured matrices that covers a wide range of structured ma-
         trices in the literature by adjusting the structural parameters. Then, the frequency-
         domain differentiable parameterization scheme based on the Gaussian-Dirichlet
         kernel is adopted to learn the structural parameters by proximal gradient descent.
         On the image and language tasks, our method learns efficient DNNs with struc-
         tured matrices, achieving lower complexity and/or higher performance than prior
         approaches that employ low-rank, block-sparse, or block-low-rank matrices.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) for large language models (LLMs) (Vaswani et al., 2017; Devlin
et al., 2018; Radford et al., 2019; Brown et al., 2020) and vision tasks (Dosovitskiy et al., 2020;
Touvron et al., 2021) have shown great success in various domains in recent years. The size of the
DNNs, however, has increased on an extraordinary scale – up to 70 Billion parameters in the single
model Zhao et al. (2023) – requiring an unprecedented amount of computing resources and energy to
deploy the DNN-based services. Fortunately, under certain conditions, the weight matrices of DNNs
trained by stochastic gradient descent (SGD) naturally have well-defined preferred structures, such
as low-rank matrices (Yaras et al., 2023; Huh et al., 2022; Gunasekar et al., 2017). However, iden-
tifying such structures to lower the effective complexity of weight matrices in recent models such
as Transformers Vaswani et al. (2017) remains a challenging problem. Also, it mostly relies on the
existing human-designed / hand-crafted structured matrices without a unified systematic approach.
Hence prior works have focused on investigating new classes of structured matrices for DNNs (Li
et al., 2015; Dao et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2022). Notably, each structured matrix is defined dis-
jointedly from other formats. For example, neither the block-sparse matrix format nor the low-rank
matrix format of the same number of parameters is a subset of another, and yet there is no unified
representation that describes both well. Moreover, the structure description and the implementation
complexity of the structured matrix are in non-differentiable discrete spaces.
In this paper, we investigate (locally) optimal structures of the weight matrices as well as a differen-
tiable training method to learn them, attempting to answer the following two questions:

      1. Is there a universal format that represents a wide range of structured matrices?
      2. Can the structure of such matrices be learned efficiently, if it exists?

Contributions. Tackling the above two questions, we introduce a generalized and differentiable
structured matrix format. The main contributions of this work can be summarized as follows.


                                                   1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


1) We propose a Generalized Block-low-rank (GBLR) matrix format, which includes many impor-
tant structures such as Low-Rank (LR), Block Sparse (BSP), and Block-low-rank (BLR) matrices
under some practical conditions. The new structured matrix format consists of two types of param-
eters: one guiding the structure of the matrix and the other specifying the content or the values of
matrix elements. We show that the LR, BSP and BLR formats are special cases of the GBLR matrix.
We also show that the GBLR format is closed under the interpolation between existing GBLR ma-
trices in the structural parameter space, which we believe is a strong evidence that the GBLR format
is able to capture undiscovered structured matrix formats.
2) We introduce a differentiable parameterization of the structural parameters – widths and locations
of blocks – of the GBLR format. The structural parameters are defined in the frequency domain,
and are processed by the proposed Gaussian-Dirichlet (Gaudi) function followed by inverse Fast
Fourier Transform (IFFT) to the format named Gaudi-GBLR. We show that the derivatives of the
Gaudi function with respect to the structural parameters exist almost everywhere, even when the
width is zero.
3) We propose a practical learning algorithm based on the proximal gradient descent to train compact
neural networks with Gaudi-GBLR matrices. The proposed method is extensively evaluated on
the Vision Transformers (ViT) (Dosovitskiy et al., 2020) and MLP-Mixer (Tolstikhin et al., 2021),
outperforming prior approaches using hand-designed structured matrices.

2     P RELIMINARIES
Notation. We use ⊙ to indicate   √ the elementwise (Hadamard) product of two matrices. The imag-
inary unit is denoted by ı = −1. The normalized sinc function is defined by sinc(x) = sinπxπx
where sinc(0) := 1. The (element-wise) floor function is denoted by ⌊·⌋. The index of elements in
a matrix or vector starts from zero (instead of one), following the convention of Cooley & Tukey
(1965). Also, In = {0, 1, . . . , n} denotes the index set from 0 to n.
Assumption. For simplicity, we assume the weights are square matrices. Extension to rectangular
matrix cases is discussed in Appendix A.3.

2.1   B LOCK - RELATED M ATRICES .

A block B ∈ R|R|×|C| of a matrix W ∈          High-rank Blocks   Low-rank Blocks        High-rank Region
Rn×n is a submatrix of W with consec-
utive cyclic row and column indices. For
example, R can be {n − 2, n − 1, 0, 1} if
|R| = 4. Also, we say two blocks B1 and
B2 overlap if they have shared elements
of W .                                                                                      Overlap
                                                     BSP               BLR            GBLR (Ours)
Two well-known block-structured matri-
ces are a block sparse (BSP) matrix and       Figure 1:  Comparison of block-sparse, block-low-rank,
a block-low-rank (BLR)(Amestoy et al., and our proposed Generalized block-low-rank matri-
2015) matrix. Informally speaking, a ma- ces.
trix is block-sparse when non-zero ele-
ments are gathered in blocks and such blocks are sparse in the matrix. A block-low-rank matrix
is composed of non-overlapping equally-partitioned low-rank blocks. Figure 1 illustrates the BSP
and BLR matrices as well as our proposed generalized block-low-rank matrix, which we introduce
in Section 3.1. We present the formal definitions of the block-sparse and block-low-rank matrices in
Appendix A.1.

2.2   S TRUCTURED M ATRIX

We say a matrix W ∈ Rn×n is structured if, for any x ∈ Rn , the matrix-vector product (MVP)
y = W x requires significantly less number of multiplications than n2 . For instance, LR, BSP,
and BLR matrices are structured because the number of multiplications for MVP is determined by
their (low) rank or sparsity. Although a general sparse matrix reduces the complexity of MVP to
be a sub-quadratic function of n, it is excluded in our discussion of structured matrices because


                                                  2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                     During Training                                                         After Training
                                                                     Row Structural Params                     Column Structural Params


                                                                  Address


                                                                            Write


                                                                                                                                   Address
                                                                                                                   Read
                                          Zero-padded Block
                                                                                      Cropped Content Params


Figure 2: Left: An example of a GBLR matrix with 4 blocks. A block is generated from the
structural parameters (wR , lR ), (wC , lC ) and the content parameters (u, v), where (wR , lR ) and
(wC , lC ) form binary masks m(wR ,lR ) and m(wC ,lC ) , respectively. Note that overlapped regions
can have a rank higher than one. Right: Efficient Matrix-Vector Product computations using cropped
content parameters and structural parameters. The structural parameters locate the input and output
indices/addresses to read and write.


processing moderately sparse matrices (10∼50% density) in conventional hardware such as GPUs
does not reduce the actual run-time due to its unstructured positions of non-zero elements (Chen
et al., 2022).

3     P ROPOSED M ETHOD

We are interested in training a deep neural network (DNN) f under a computational cost constraint:
                                   X
                            min         L(f (x), y) s.t. cost(f ) ≤ B,                         (1)
                                f
                                       x,y∼D

where the first term is the cross-entropy loss for a classification task at a data point x and a label
y, and the constraint cost(f ) is the number of multiplications to compute the neural network output
f (x). Our method learns weight matrices of DNNs in a generalized structured matrix format in a
differentiable manner.

3.1   G ENERALIZED B LOCK -L OW-R ANK (GBLR) M ATRIX

We introduce a concept of a generalized structured matrix format that explains multiple popular
structure matrices used in DNN training. The idea is that a block in a matrix can be expressed by a
sum of rank-1 blocks, i.e., a rank-r block is a sum of r rank-1 blocks at the same position. In this
manner, LR, BSP, and BLR matrices can be expressed under a unified framework (Theorem 1).
To be specific, our proposed structured matrix format is a generalized version of Block-Low-Rank
(BLR) matrices. An n-by-n Generalized Block-Low-Rank (GBLR) matrix W is obtained by over-
lapping multiple rank-1 blocks of different sizes at arbitrary locations, as depicted in Figure 2 (Left).
The locations of the blocks as well as their element values are learned simultaneously from training
data without explicit size or location restrictions.
                                                R       C           R          C                          R    C
Suppose there are K blocks: B1 ∈ Rw1 ×w1 , B2 ∈ Rw2 ×w2 , . . . , BK ∈ RwK ×wK . Each block
Bk has two parameter sets: 1) the structural parameters that identify the position of the block in the
row and column index set In−1 = {0, 1, . . . , n − 1}, and 2) the content parameters which specify
the actual values of matrix elements.
Configuration of structural parameters. The position of a block is given by the indices of the
rows and columns it occupies in the n × n matrix. Hence, the placement of a rectangle block can
be identified by four numbers: width and location in terms of the row or column indices. Hence,
we use a location parameter l and a width parameter w as the structural parameters of a block.


                                                              3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 2 (Left) illustrates a block of size wR × wC in an n × n matrix at location (lR , lC ). The
row (column) index set of a block is the sequence of numbers from lR (lC ) to lR + wR (lC + wC )
where the addition is a cyclic/modulo addition. For each block Bk for k = 1, . . . , K, we have four
parameters: (wkR , lkR ) for the row and (wkC , lkC ) for the column. We use the notation ϕR     R R
                                                                                           k = (wk , lk )
and ϕk = (wk , lk ) to represent the tuple of width and location for the row (ϕk ) and column (ϕC
     C       C C                                                                    R
                                                                                                     k ).

Based on the structural parameter wkC and lkC , one can construct an n-dimensional binary mask that
has wkC ∈ In consecutive ones starting from lkC ∈ In−1 in the cyclic order:
                                       1 if lkC ≤ j + an < lkC + wkC

       mϕCk [j] = m(wkC ,lkC ) [j] =                                 , j ∈ In−1 , a ∈ {0, 1},   (2)
                                       0 otherwise
where a ∈ {0, 1} is necessary to make the order cyclic. We call the mask in Eq. 2 the boxcar mask
since the non-zero elements are located consecutively. The boxcar mask is used to select wkC (cyclic)
consecutive non-zero elements of an n-dimensional vector. The mask for the rows mϕR    k
                                                                                         is obtained
                        R       R
in the same way from wk and lk .
Configuration of content parameters. To represent the values of a rank-1 block Bk , we use two
n-dimensional vectors uk and vk as content parameters along with the boxcar masks mϕR              k
                                                                                                     , mϕCk .
All these parameters (ϕR
                       k , ϕC
                            k , u k , v k ) are  learned  during  the DNN   training simultaneously.    Since
the boxcar masks mϕR k
                       and  m    C
                                ϕk  guide    the  location of the block in the n × n  matrix, u k and  vk are
element-wise multiplied with the boxcar masks:
                             ZeroPad(Bk ) = (mϕR
                                               k
                                                 ⊙ uk )(mϕCk ⊙ vk )T ,
where the resulting n × n matrix is a zero-padded block. Ideally, we expect the mask to expand
/ shrink and shift to find the right subset of the elements of a content parameter, while the content
parameter updates the value of the elements selected by the mask.
Now we formally define the Generalized Block-low-rank (GBLR) format, which is the sum of K
zero-padded blocks:
                   XK                              K
                                                   X                            T
                              T              T
            W =       (mϕRk
                            m ϕ C ) ⊙ (u k vk  ) =     m  R
                                                         ϕk ⊙ u k   m  C
                                                                      ϕk ⊙ v k    .     (3)
                                    k
                     k=1                                 k=1
                                                          1
                                                             PK      R       C
A GBLR matrix is associated with an average width w̄ = 2K      k=1 wk + wk .
Definition 1. Let GBLR(n, K, s) be the set of matrices obtained by Eq. 3 for the average width less
                                    1
                                      PK      R      C
than or equal to s ≥ 0, i.e., w̄ = 2K   k=1 wk + wk ≤ s. A matrix W is an (n, K, s)-GBLR if
W ∈ GBLR(n, K, s).
We use the notation ϕ(W ) := (w(W ), l(W )) to indicate the collection of the struc-
tural parameters of W , where w(W ) = {w1R , w1C , w2R , w2C , . . . , wK          R    C
                                                                                     , wK } and l(W ) =
  R C R C                     R C
{l1 , l1 , l2 , l2 , . . . , lK , lK }. We simply use ϕ := ϕ(W ) if W is clearly inferred in the context.
Efficiency. Once the structural parameters are fixed, it is unwise to store and use two n-dimensional
content parameters for each block Bk because only wkR elements of uk and wkC elements of vk
are non-zero according to the boxcar masks in Eq. 3. Hence, one can store and use the cropped
content parameters ulR :lR +wR and vlC :lC +wC for MVP between an input x ∈ Rn (which can be
also cropped from lC to lC + wC ) and a block B, as described below and in Figure 2 (Right):
                  ZeroPad(B)x = (m(wR ,lR ) ⊙ u)(m(wC ,lC ) ⊙ v)T x
                                   = ZeroPad ulR :lR +wR (vlTC :lC +wC xlC :lC +wC ) ,


which requires only wR + wC multiplications. Hence, the number of multiplications (denoted by
FLOPs) for multiplying W ∈ GBLR(n, K, s) with x ∈ Rn is bounded by 2Ks:
                                          K
                                          X
                              FLOPs =         (wkR + wkC ) = 2K w̄ ≤ 2Ks.                                (4)
                                          k=1

Expressiveness. Low-rank (LR), block sparse (BSP), and block-low-rank (BLR) matrices are pop-
ular structured matrices in the DNN literature, and they are special cases of the GLBR matrix under
mild conditions. Proofs and formal definitions of LR, BSP, and BLR matrices are in Appendix A.1


                                                     4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Theorem 1. Let n, K, s be positive integers satisfying Ks ≥ n. Then any n-by-n rank- Ks   n matri-
            K
ces and (n, s , s)-block-sparse matrices are (n, K, s)-GBLR. Also, any (n, K, s, 1)-block-low-rank
matrices are (n, K, s)-GBLR if K = (n/s)2 .

More importantly, a new structured matrix obtained by interpolating the structural parameters of two
(n, K, s)-GBLR matrices is still (n, K, s)-GBLR, based on Theorem 2. Therefore, a new type of
structured matrices can be derived from a set of GBLR matrices.
Theorem 2 (Closed under structural interpolation). Given two n × n matrices W , Z ∈
GBLR(n, K, s), and α ∈ [0, 1], consider the following combination between the structural pa-
rameters:
               w′ = ⌊αw(W ) + (1 − α)w(Z)⌋,           l′ = ⌊αl(W ) + (1 − α)l(Z)⌋.
A matrix Y generated by Eq. 3 with the structural parameter (w′ , l′ ) is a (n, K, s)-GBLR matrix,
Y ∈ GBLR(n, K, s).

Theorem 1 and Theorem 2 tell us that (n, K, s)-GBLR matrices cover a wide range of popular
existing structured matrices and also undiscovered ones. In the following section, we introduce a
differentiable tool to find/learn structured matrices in GBLR(n, K, s).

3.2   G AUSSIAN -D IRICHLET (G AUDI ) M ASK

The matrix structure in the GBLR format is determined by the width and location parameters. We
aim to extract/learn these structural parameters from training data using stochastic gradient descent.
In order to do so, the non-differentiability of the boxcar mask parameters needs to be handled.
To tackle this issue, we introduce a Dirichlet-kernel-based parameterization of the boxcar to explic-
itly parameterize the width w and location l in the expression. Consider a boxcar mask of length n,
width w, and location l. Let m̂(w,l) be the discrete Fourier transform (DFT) of the mask m(w,l) .
The frequency-domain representation of the boxcar mask is given by
                                                      w−1                              k

                                                                              l sinc w n
                                                                                          eıπk( n ) (5)
                         k                        k
                                                      X           k         k                  1−w
                    −2πı n l                 −2πı n l       −2πıj n    −2πı n
    m̂(w,l) [k] = e          m̂(w,0) [k] = e              e         =e         w      k
                                                      j=0
                                                                                 sinc n
                       k
             = e−2πı n l dw [k],
                   sinc(w k )
where dw [k] := w sinc kn eıπk( n ) is the Dirichlet kernel of order n (Bruckner et al., 1997) in
                                1−w

                        (n)
the discrete domain In−1 = {0, 1, . . . , n − 1}.
Furthermore, we propose a smooth version of the                1.0                           Boxcar
Dirichlet-kernel-based mask by convolving the time-                                          Gaudi, σ = 1.0
                                                               0.8                           Gaudi, σ = 2.0
domain boxcar mask with the Gaussian-shape function.                                         Gaudi, σ = 5.0

It is obtained in the frequency domain by element-wise
                                                               0.6                           Gaudi, σ = 10.0


                                                     k2
multiplying the Gaussian function gσ [k] = exp − 2σ    2
                                                               0.4


with the standard deviation σ > 0 to the Dirichlet kernel.     0.2

We call the resulting function the Gaussian-Dirichlet          0.0
(Gaudi) function dσw :                                               0   100   200   300    400        500


             dσw [k] := gσ [k] · dw [k],                      Figure 3: Comparison between Boxcar
                                           k
                                                              mask and Gaudi masks in the time do-
            m̃σ(w,l) := IDFT(dσw · e−2πı n l ),         (6)   main with different smoothing factors
                                                              σ. The Gaudi mask converges to the
where k = [0, 1, . . . , n − 1]. And we call the mask gener-  Boxcar mask as σ grows.
ated by a Gaudi function m̃σ(w,l) the Gaudi mask, where
the parameter σ controls the smoothness. Note that as
σ → ∞, the Gaudi mask converges to the boxcar mask (Lemma 5). Figure 3 visualizes the time-
domain Gaudi mask approaching the boxcar mask.
A useful property of the Gaudi mask is that one can obtain exact derivatives with respect to the width
parameter, even when the width is zero. To show it, we relax the domain of widths and locations to
the continuous interval [0, n] (see Appendix A.4).


                                                  5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Theorem 3. Let n < ∞ be a finite positive integer. For any σ ∈ (0, ∞] and w, l ∈ [0, n], the
derivatives of the Gaudi mask m̃σ(w,l) with respect to w and l are bounded almost everywhere:
                                 ∂ m̃σ(w,l)                  ∂ m̃σ(w,l)
                                                  < ∞,                        < ∞.
                                    ∂w        2                  ∂l       2

Especially when w = 0, the derivative with respect to w is neither divergent nor zero.
Corollary 4. For any l ∈ [0, n] and σ ∈ (0, ∞], the norm of the derivative of the Gaudi mask
                                                                                        ∂ m̃σ
m̃σ(w,l) with respect to w at w = 0 is well-defined and greater than zero, i.e., 0 <        (w,l)
                                                                                           ∂w           < ∞.
                                                                                                    2

To allow learning the mask structural parameters in a differentiable manner, we plug the Gaudi mask
(Eq. 6) into Eq. 3 as the mask of GBLR matrices to model Gaussian-Dirichlet GBLR (Gaudi-
GBLR) with parameters θ = (ϕ, U , V , σ):
                                                   K
                                                   X                               T
                     W θ = W (ϕ,U ,V ,σ) =               m̃σϕR ⊙ uk     m̃σϕC ⊙ vk .                     (7)
                                                             k                  k
                                                   k=1

In practice, one can use small σ ≈ 1 at the beginning of the training process to update the corre-
sponding (unmasked) content parameters which are more than necessary, then gradually increase
σ to adjust the content parameters with a tighter mask. Since the purpose of using a Gaudi mask
is to learn structural parameters of the GBLR matrix by Gradient Descent, Gaudi-GBLR matrices
are later replaced by GBLR matrices once the structural parameters are found/learned. To compute
MVP using GBLR matrices, one can use the cropped content parameters and inputs, as we discussed
in Section 3.1-efficiency, without constructing masks at all. Hence, during the inference, there is no
overhead to compute Gaudi masks.

3.3   L EARNING G AUDI -GBLR FOR E FFICIENT N EURAL N ETWORKS

We now introduce an algorithm to learn the structural pa-     Algorithm 1 GBLR Learning by PGD
rameters of Gaudi-GBLR matrices. The goal of the learn-
ing algorithm is to identify Gaudi-GBLR matrix struc-          1: repeat
tures (i.e., their parameters) that allow computationally      2:    (x1 , y1 ), . . . , (xM , yM ) ∼ D
                                                                            1
                                                                               PM           θ
efficient DNNs. Our discussion is centered around a two-       3:    ℓ← M          i=1 L(f (xi ), yi )
layered multi-layer perceptron (MLP) for ease of under-        4:    for trainable p ∈ θ do
standing. However, the technique can be applied to gen-        5:        p ← p − η · AdamW(∇ℓ)
eral DNNs that incorporate linear layers.                      6:    end for
                                                               7:    for k = 1, 2, . . . , K do
Now let us consider a two-layered MLP f θ with a Gaudi-        8:        wk ← clip0,n (Sηλ (wk ))
                          θ     θ           T     θ
GBLR weight matrix W : f (x) = h a(W x + b). 9:                      end for
We initially relax the domain of w ∈ In and l ∈ In−1 10: until converge
of the Gaudi mask to the real-valued space w, l ∈ [0, n]
as we discuss in Appendix A.4. Due to the property of
Gaudi-GBLR matrices Eq. 4, the computational cost constraint on the DNN f θ in Problem (1) can be
replaced by a constraint on the sum of the width parameters of W θ . Specifically, we find the width
                                                                                     PK
parameters w = {w1R , w1C , . . . , wK
                                     R    C
                                       , wK } of W θ satisfying ∥w∥1 ≤ B since k=1 wkR + wkC =
∥w∥1 . To solve the problem with Gradient Descent, we relax this ℓ1 -norm constrained problem to a
unconstrained one using the method of Lagrange multiplier:
                                    X
                           min            L(f θ (x), y) + λ∥w∥1 , λ ≥ 0.                               (8)
                             θ
                                 (x,y)∼D

The resulting computational budget is implicitly constrained by a hyperparameter λ ≥ 0.
Theorem 3 guarantees the derivatives of the widths and locations of the Gaudi-GBLR matrix in
f θ can be obtained with any positive smoothing parameter σ > 0 so that we can safely learn the
parameters in the continuous domain [0, n]. Specifically, we update the width parameter w in the
ℓ1 -norm term in Problem (8) by Proximal Gradient Descent (PGD):
                            wt+1 = clip0,n (Sηλ (wt − η∇L(f θ (x), y))),                                 (9)


                                                         6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                    sign(x) · (|x| − µ) if x > µ
where Sµ (x) =                                        is the element-wise soft shrinkage function and
                    0                    otherwise
clip0,n (·) clamps the elements of the inputs to [0, n]. In practice, the gradient is calculated with an
adaptive optimizer such as AdamW (Loshchilov & Hutter, 2017) (see Line 5 in Algorithm 1). The
overall process is summarized in Algorithm 1. Although Problem (8) is non-linear, our experimental
results show that PGD can attain good local optima with an adaptive optimizer and the initializa-
tion method we propose in Appendix A.2. A practical learning method for the width and location
parameters defined in the discrete spaces In and In−1 is discussed in Appendix A.5.


4     E XPERIMENTS

We evaluate our proposed method by replacing the weight matrices of Vision Transformers (ViT)
(Dosovitskiy et al., 2020), and MLP-Mixer (Tolstikhin et al., 2021) with Gaudi-GBLR matrices. For
the experiment, we set the number of blocks K equal to the number of columns of the matrix n. We
also evaluate alternative schemes for comparisons where the weights are replaced by popular hand-
designed structured matrix formats such as Low-Rank (LR), Block-Sparse-plus-Low-Rank (BSP-
LR), and Block-low-rank (BLR). For LR matrices, we use singular vector decomposition to find the
best rank-s approximation of the given matrix for the predefined rank of s. Pixelfly (Chen et al.,
2022) and Monarch (Dao et al., 2022) are schemes that use BSP-LR and BLR matrices respectively.
We set the structural parameters of these alternative schemes to exhibit similar computational costs
for MVP compared to our proposed scheme. Note that the structural parameter sets for LR, BSP-
LR, and BLR do not change across different layers in the neural network. We denote the number
of multiplications by FLOPs, and use 8 NVIDIA A40 GPUs in our experiments. The detailed
experimental settings are described in Appendix A.7. Our source code is available at https:
//github.com/changwoolee/Gaudi-GBLR.

4.1   F INE - TUNING R ESULTS

Vision Task. We use the pre-trained weights of the                                                 ViT-B Finetuned
ViT-Base on ImageNet and initialize the parameters of
                                                           ImageNet Validation Accuracy (%)


                                                                                              79
the Gaudi-GBLR matrices by Algorithm 2 in Section
A.2. The ViTs with Gaudi-GBLR matrices were fine-                                             78
tuned on ImageNet (Russakovsky et al., 2015). Dur-                                            77
ing the initialization, we set the computational bud-
                                                                                              76
get of all matrices in the network the same. For a fair                                             Dense
comparison, the same set of hyperparameters was used                                          75    Low Rank
throughout our fine-tuning experiments.                                                             Monarch (BLR) (Dao et al.,22)
                                                                                              74    Gaudi-GBLR (Ours)
The highest accuracy is achieved by Gaudi-GBLR in                0.26 0.28 0.30 0.32 0.34 0.36 0.38
ViT-Base with a patch size of 16 × 16 on the ImageNet                       Relative FLOPs
validation dataset after fine-tuning it for 35 epochs. Figure 4: ImageNet accuracy after fine-
Figure 4 shows that Gaudi-GBLR preserves the accu- tuning ViT-Base weights replaced with
racy well when the complexity is reduced to 30% of structured weight matrices. Dense: the
the original ‘Dense’ model which does not use struc- original ViT-Base model.
tured matrices (its FLOPs count is normalized to 1).
The other hand-designed approaches exhibit more significant accuracy degradations for the same
complexity reduction. Overall, Gaudi-GBLR strikes better Accuracy-FLOPs trade-offs than LR or
Monarch approaches. The higher accuracy for a similar FLOPs count quantifies the gain from the
learned structured matrices. In addition to ViT, we also tested GBLR matrices on ResNet (He et al.,
2016). Readers interested in further details can find the results in Appendix A.8.
Language Task.         We test the GBLR matrix to Table 1: Perplexity by weight type of GPT-
the weights of the pre-trained GPT-2 (Radford et al., 2 after fine-tuning on WikiText103.
2019). We compare our method to LR and BLR
(Monarch) matrices. We evaluated the perplexity of       Weight Type   Perplexity (↓) Relative FLOPs
WikiText103 (Merity et al., 2016) validation set af-     Dense                 19.36            100%
                                                         Low Rank              19.48          43.75%
ter 10 epochs of fine-tuning on the training set. The    Monarch               20.56          43.75%
perplexity of each model is in Table 1. Our method       Gaudi-GBLR            19.24           43.7%


                                                   7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                             Dense           LR        Monarch (BLR)(Dao et al.,22)                      Pixelfly (BSP+LR)(Chen et al.,22)         Gaudi-GBLR (Ours)
                                ViT-S, CIFAR-10            70
                                                                  ViT-S, CIFAR-100            86 MLP-Mixer-S, CIFAR-10                      MLP-Mixer-S, CIFAR-100
                                                                                                                                       64
                      87.5
       Accuracy (%)
                                                           65                                 84                                       62
                      85.0
                                                           60                                                                          60
                      82.5                                                                    82
                              0.2       0.3 0.4      0.5        0.2           0.4       0.6                  0.2      0.4     0.6              0.2      0.4     0.6
                                    Relative FLOPs                     Relative FLOPs                          Relative FLOPs                    Relative FLOPs

      Figure 5: Accuracy-Cost trade-off of models trained from scratch on CIFAR-10/100 dataset.

       Table 2: ImageNet accuracies and GFLOPs                                                           Query          Key          Value      MLP FC1
       on a 224 × 224 image of ViT-Base models                                                                                                               MLP FC2


                                                                                              Layer 0
       trained from scratch with dense matrices and
                                                                                                                                                            Rank=403
       Gaudi-GBLR matrices.
                                                                                                         Rank=42     Rank=69        Rank=124    Rank=378


                Model                             Acc. (%)            GFLOPs


                                                                                              Layer 5
                ViT-Base                             78.57               17.2
                                                                                                                                                            Rank=377
                w/ Gaudi-GBLR                        78.51               5.65
                                                                                                         Rank=88     Rank=146       Rank=206    Rank=408

       Table 3: FLOPs by type of linear lay-
                                                                                              Layer 11
       ers with Gaudi-GBLR matrix of ViT-Base
       trained on ImageNet. Units in 103 FLOPs.                                                                                                             Rank=700

                                                                                                         Rank=10     Rank=29        Rank=89     Rank=618

             Layer Type                    Min          Max               Avg
                                                                                                                                      1
             Query                          4.2         67.6              29.0           Figure 6: Mask patterns of weights for
             Key                           11.6         87.6              42.1           Query, Key, Value, FC1 and FC2 in Layer 0,
             Value                         34.2        135.5              95.0           5, and 11 (out of 0 ∼ 11). The brighter, the
             MLP-FC1                      359.8        910.2             597.7           more overlapped blocks. The numbers below
             MLP-FC2                      349.4      1,175.2             756.6           indicate the rank of the matrix (max: 768).


achieved the lowest perplexity, outperforming the dense baseline and utilizing the smallest number
of FLOPs.

4.2          T RAINING F ROM S CRATCH

We train ViTs (Dosovitskiy et al., 2020) and MLP-Mixers (Tolstikhin et al., 2021) with structured
weight matrices on CIFAR-10&100 (Krizhevsky et al., 2009) by Algorithm 1 from randomly-
initialized content parameters. We set σ = 1 for the first epoch and gradually increase it to 100 until
the training process ends (see Appendix A.7). In Figure 5, we study the accuracy-FLOPs trade-off
using CIFAR10/100 datasets when the models are trained from scratch (i.e., not fine-tuned from
pre-trained weights). As in the ImageNet fine-tuning experiment, Gaudi-GBLR achieves superior
accuracy-FLOPs trade-offs outperforming the other hand-designed structured matrices.

4.3          A NALYSIS ON L EARNED G AUDI -GBLR M ATRICES

In this section, we study the learned Gaudi-GBLR matrices in terms of computational budget al-
location, and mask patterns. The analysis is based on ViT-Base Gaudi-GBLR matrices trained on
ImageNet from scratch by following the same σ adaptation rule used in CIFAR10/100 experiments.
The accuracy and FLOPs of the ViT-Base with Gaudi-GBLR is reported in Table 2.
Learned Computational Budget Allocation. The proposed learning framework automatically
allocates the computational budget to all linear layers of ViT-Base during the training process given
by Algorithm 1. The algorithm finds a well-balanced (not necessarily equal) allocation for each
matrix to meet the overall cost budget while minimizing the loss function. As a result, Gaudi-GBLR
weight matrices in the network have unequal widths requiring different FLOPs for each MVP. Table
3 summarizes the min/max/average FLOPs statistics collected for different types of linear layers.
Within an Attention layer, the weights for Values have the highest budget whereas Queries and
Keys use a smaller budget. The smallest layer uses only about 4,200 FLOPs for MVP involving a


                                                                                        8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


768 × 768 matrix and a 768 × 1 vector. The FLOPs assigned to the linear layer of channel MLPs
(MLP-FC1 and MLP-FC2 in Table 3) vary significantly. Although the size of the weight matrix
used in the MLPs are 4× larger than the ones used for Value, the MLP-FC2-type layers use 7.96×
FLOPs than the Value-type layers in average.
Visualization. Figure 6 visualizes the locations of the blocks in exemplary Gaudi-GBLR weight
matrices of ViT-Base trained from scratch. We select the first, middle, and the last layers of different
types: linear layers for Query, Key, Values in Attention modules, and two linear layers (FC1 and
FC2) in MLPs. Bright colors in Figure 6 highlight regions where masks are overlapped. Interest-
ingly, the resulting matrix is neither BSP nor BLR. It is observed that blocks are concentrated in a
small number of regions. We believe this is related to the Multi-Head (Vaswani et al., 2017) scheme
of the ViT. Each weight matrix of an attention layer is a collection of weights for multiple heads.
Because some heads are more important than others, more blocks are allocated to those regions. No-
tice the rank of matrices obtained from the GBLR framework differs significantly across different
layers and matrix types (Values, Queries, and Keys).


5    R ELATED W ORKS

Structured Matrices for DNNs. Prior works have focused on manually designing suitably struc-
tured matrices for DNNs since explaining the structure of every weight matrix in practical DNNs
such as Transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017) is challenging. Hsu et al. (2022) used weighted low-rank
decomposition for the weights of language models. Butterfly matrices (Li et al., 2015; Dao et al.,
2019) were adopted in the form of Block-Sparse (BSP) format (Pixelfly) by Chen et al. (2022),
and also in the form of Block-low-rank (BLR) format (Monarch) by Dao et al. (2022). In contrast,
our method learns the structure of weight matrices from the training data. Layer-wise Low-Rank
DNN Compression has been studied in terms of Augmented Lagrangian Multiplier (Idelbayev &
Carreira-Perpinán, 2020), subspace grouping (Liebenwein et al., 2021), and quadratic programming
(Li & Shi, 2018). However, they work only on the low-rank format, and involve multiple loops and
SVD at every iteration, whereas ours can find layer-wise structure and budget in a single loop.
Mask Learning. For neuron pruning/selection, a binary mask with surrogate gradient has been
adopted to learn its pattern. Jang et al. (2016) and Maddison et al. (2017) propose alternative distri-
butions close to the Bernoulli distribution, which allow the continuous gradient. Movement Pruning
(Sanh et al., 2020) utilizes Straight-Through Estimator (STE) (Hinton, 2012; Bengio et al., 2013;
Zhou et al., 2016) to pass the gradient through the Top-k function. Lin et al. (2017) adopts deep rein-
forcement learning to select the input-dependent mask. On the contrary, our mask design solves the
non-existing gradient problem by Gaudi-function-based parameterization in the frequency domain.
One-shot Neural Architecture Search. Neural Architecture Search (NAS) (Zoph & Le, 2016;
Liu et al., 2018) seeks the optimal neural network structures from training data. To improve search
efficiency, Pham et al. (2018); Liu et al. (2018) adopt the one-shot NAS technique that selects sub-
network candidates from a super-network. Our method also falls into a similar category of finding a
small-sized neural network in the scope of a structured matrix format.
Frequency-domain Learning. DiffStride (Riad et al., 2022) learns a stride of the pooling operation
for images by cropping a rectangular region of the frequency response of an image. They utilize an
approximated boxcar mask for a differentiable stride. Although DiffStride shares similar compo-
nents with Gaudi masks, the fundamental difference is in the design of the mask. We parameterize
the mask in the frequency domain where widths and locations inherit the exact gradient.


6    C ONCLUSION

We propose a generalized and differentiable framework for learning structured matrice for efficient
neural networks by gradient descent. We introduce a new generalized format of structured matrices
and parameterize the structure in the frequency domain by the Gaussian-Dirichlet (Gaudi) function
with a well-defined gradient. Effective learning algorithms are provided for our framework showing
flexibility and differentiability to find expressive and efficient structures from training data in an end-
to-end manner. Evaluation results show that the proposed framework provides the most efficient and
accurate neural network models compared to other hand-designed popular structured matrices.


                                                    9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


7   R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT
The authors make the following efforts for reproducibility: 1) We release our code at https:
//github.com/changwoolee/Gaudi-GBLR, 2) we provide the detailed settings and hyper-
parameters in Section 4, A.5, and A.7, and 3) the proofs of all theorems, lemmas, and corollaries are
presented in Section A.1.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
We thank Sara Shoouri, Pierre Abillama, Andrea Bejarano-Carbo, and Mingyu Yang for the insight-
ful feedback on the paper. This work was supported in part by COGNISENSE, one of seven centers
in JUMP 2.0, a Semiconductor Research Corporation (SRC) program sponsored by DARPA.

R EFERENCES
Patrick Amestoy, Cleve Ashcraft, Olivier Boiteau, Alfredo Buttari, Jean-Yves L’Excellent, and
  Clément Weisbecker. Improving multifrontal methods by means of block low-rank represen-
  tations. SIAM Journal on Scientific Computing, 37(3):A1451–A1474, 2015.
Yoshua Bengio, Nicholas Léonard, and Aaron Courville. Estimating or propagating gradients
  through stochastic neurons for conditional computation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1308.3432, 2013.
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are
  few-shot learners. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:1877–1901, 2020.
Andrew M Bruckner, Judith B Bruckner, and Brian S Thomson. Real analysis. ClassicalRealAnal-
  ysis. com, 1997.
Beidi Chen, Tri Dao, Kaizhao Liang, Jiaming Yang, Zhao Song, Atri Rudra, and Christopher Re.
  Pixelated butterfly: Simple and efficient sparse training for neural network models. In Interna-
  tional Conference on Learning Representations, 2022. URL https://openreview.net/
  forum?id=Nfl-iXa-y7R.
James W Cooley and John W Tukey. An algorithm for the machine calculation of complex fourier
  series. Mathematics of computation, 19(90):297–301, 1965.
Tri Dao, Albert Gu, Matthew Eichhorn, Atri Rudra, and Christopher Ré. Learning fast algorithms for
  linear transforms using butterfly factorizations. In International conference on machine learning,
  pp. 1517–1527. PMLR, 2019.
Tri Dao, Beidi Chen, Nimit S Sohoni, Arjun Desai, Michael Poli, Jessica Grogan, Alexander Liu,
  Aniruddh Rao, Atri Rudra, and Christopher Ré. Monarch: Expressive structured matrices for
  efficient and accurate training. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 4690–
  4721. PMLR, 2022.
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. Bert: Pre-training of deep
  bidirectional transformers for language understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04805, 2018.
Alexey Dosovitskiy, Lucas Beyer, Alexander Kolesnikov, Dirk Weissenborn, Xiaohua Zhai, Thomas
  Unterthiner, Mostafa Dehghani, Matthias Minderer, Georg Heigold, Sylvain Gelly, et al. An im-
  age is worth 16x16 words: Transformers for image recognition at scale. In International Confer-
  ence on Learning Representations, 2020.
Suriya Gunasekar, Blake E Woodworth, Srinadh Bhojanapalli, Behnam Neyshabur, and Nati Sre-
  bro. Implicit regularization in matrix factorization. Advances in neural information processing
  systems, 30, 2017.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image recog-
  nition. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp.
  770–778, 2016.


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Geoffrey Hinton. Neural networks for machine learning coursera video lectures. 2012.

Yen-Chang Hsu, Ting Hua, Sungen Chang, Qian Lou, Yilin Shen, and Hongxia Jin. Language model
  compression with weighted low-rank factorization. In International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2022. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=uPv9Y3gmAI5.

Minyoung Huh, Hossein Mobahi, Richard Zhang, Brian Cheung, Pulkit Agrawal, and Phillip Isola.
 The low-rank simplicity bias in deep networks. Transactions on Machine Learning Research,
 2022.

Yerlan Idelbayev and Miguel A Carreira-Perpinán. Low-rank compression of neural nets: Learning
  the rank of each layer. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
  Pattern Recognition, pp. 8049–8059, 2020.

Eric Jang, Shixiang Gu, and Ben Poole. Categorical reparameterization with gumbel-softmax. In
  International Conference on Learning Representations, 2016.

Claude-Pierre Jeannerod, Theo Mary, Clément Pernet, and Daniel S Roche. Improving the complex-
  ity of block low-rank factorizations with fast matrix arithmetic. SIAM Journal on Matrix Analysis
  and Applications, 40(4):1478–1496, 2019.

Alex Krizhevsky, Geoffrey Hinton, et al. Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images.
  2009.

Chong Li and CJ Shi. Constrained optimization based low-rank approximation of deep neural net-
  works. In Proceedings of the European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV), pp. 732–747,
  2018.

Yingzhou Li, Haizhao Yang, Eileen R Martin, Kenneth L Ho, and Lexing Ying. Butterfly factoriza-
  tion. Multiscale Modeling & Simulation, 13(2):714–732, 2015.

Lucas Liebenwein, Alaa Maalouf, Dan Feldman, and Daniela Rus. Compressing neural networks:
  Towards determining the optimal layer-wise decomposition. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 34:5328–5344, 2021.

Ji Lin, Yongming Rao, Jiwen Lu, and Jie Zhou. Runtime neural pruning. Advances in neural
   information processing systems, 30, 2017.

Hanxiao Liu, Karen Simonyan, and Yiming Yang. Darts: Differentiable architecture search. In
  International Conference on Learning Representations, 2018.

Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter.      Decoupled weight decay regularization.       arXiv preprint
   arXiv:1711.05101, 2017.

Chris J. Maddison, Andriy Mnih, and Yee Whye Teh. The concrete distribution: A continuous re-
  laxation of discrete random variables. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2017. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=S1jE5L5gl.

Stephen Merity, Caiming Xiong, James Bradbury, and Richard Socher. Pointer sentinel mixture
  models. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2016.

Hieu Pham, Melody Guan, Barret Zoph, Quoc Le, and Jeff Dean. Efficient neural architecture search
  via parameters sharing. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 4095–4104. PMLR,
  2018.

Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, Ilya Sutskever, et al. Language
  models are unsupervised multitask learners. OpenAI blog, 1(8):9, 2019.

Rachid Riad, Olivier Teboul, David Grangier, and Neil Zeghidour. Learning strides in convolutional
  neural networks. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022. URL https:
  //openreview.net/forum?id=M752z9FKJP.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Olga Russakovsky, Jia Deng, Hao Su, Jonathan Krause, Sanjeev Satheesh, Sean Ma, Zhiheng
  Huang, Andrej Karpathy, Aditya Khosla, Michael Bernstein, Alexander C. Berg, and Li Fei-Fei.
  ImageNet Large Scale Visual Recognition Challenge. International Journal of Computer Vision
  (IJCV), 115(3):211–252, 2015. doi: 10.1007/s11263-015-0816-y.
Victor Sanh, Thomas Wolf, and Alexander Rush. Movement pruning: Adaptive sparsity by fine-
  tuning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:20378–20389, 2020.
Ilya O Tolstikhin, Neil Houlsby, Alexander Kolesnikov, Lucas Beyer, Xiaohua Zhai, Thomas Un-
   terthiner, Jessica Yung, Andreas Steiner, Daniel Keysers, Jakob Uszkoreit, et al. Mlp-mixer: An
   all-mlp architecture for vision. Advances in neural information processing systems, 34:24261–
   24272, 2021.
Hugo Touvron, Matthieu Cord, Matthijs Douze, Francisco Massa, Alexandre Sablayrolles, and
  Hervé Jégou. Training data-efficient image transformers & distillation through attention. In
  International conference on machine learning, pp. 10347–10357. PMLR, 2021.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez,
  Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. Advances in neural informa-
  tion processing systems, 30, 2017.
Can Yaras, Peng Wang, Wei Hu, Zhihui Zhu, Laura Balzano, and Qing Qu. The law of parsimony
  in gradient descent for learning deep linear networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.01154, 2023.
Wayne Xin Zhao, Kun Zhou, Junyi Li, Tianyi Tang, Xiaolei Wang, Yupeng Hou, Yingqian Min,
 Beichen Zhang, Junjie Zhang, Zican Dong, et al. A survey of large language models. arXiv
 preprint arXiv:2303.18223, 2023.
Shuchang Zhou, Yuxin Wu, Zekun Ni, Xinyu Zhou, He Wen, and Yuheng Zou. Dorefa-net: Train-
  ing low bitwidth convolutional neural networks with low bitwidth gradients. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1606.06160, 2016.
Barret Zoph and Quoc Le. Neural architecture search with reinforcement learning. In International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2016.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A     A PPENDIX

A.1     P ROOFS

In this section, we provide the missing definitions, propositions, and proofs. The original theorems
are restated for completeness.

A.1.1    D EFINITIONS
We introduce formal definitions of the block-related matrices discussed in our paper.
Definition 2 (Block-sparse matrix). An n-by-n matrix is (n, m, s)-block-sparse (BSP) if it contains
m non-overlapping non-zero blocks whose dimension is at most s × s.

A (n, m, s)-block-sparse matrix may contain blocks of different sizes, but each of them has maxi-
mum s × s elements.
Definition 3 (Block-low-rank matrix (Amestoy et al., 2015; Jeannerod et al., 2019)). An n-by-n
matrix is (n, m, s, r)-block-low-rank (BLR) if, when it is equally partitioned into m = p × p non-
overlapping blocks of dimension s × s, every block has a rank at most r ≪ np .

The (n, m, s, r)-BLR matrix has blocks of the same size that tile the entire matrix.

A.1.2    P ROOF OF T HEOREM 1
Theorem 1. Let n, K, s be positive integers satisfying Ks ≥ n. Then any n-by-n rank- Ks   n matri-
ces and (n, K
            s , s)-block-sparse matrices are (n, K, s)-GBLR. Also, any (n, K, s, 1)-block-low-rank
matrices are (n, K, s)-GBLR if K = (n/s)2 .

Proof. It is sufficient to find the structural parameters of an (n, K, s)-GBLR matrix for each struc-
tured matrix format. Let wR , wC ∈ InK be the width parameters of rows and columns of the
(n, K, s)-GBLR matrix, respectively, and lR , lC ∈ In−1  K
                                                              be the locations parameters of rows and
columns, respectively, where In = {0, 1, . . . , n}.
Low Rank Matrix. The rank- Ks
                            n matrix is equivalent to the GBLR matrix with Ks/n full-sized
                      R   C
rank-1 blocks, i.e., w = w = [n, n, . . . , n, 0, 0, . . . , 0] and lR = lC = 0.
                              | {z }
                                     Ks/n

Block Sparse Matrix. A block of the (n, K   s , s)-block-sparse matrix can have full rank. Consider
a rank-1 block B of a (n, K, s)-GBLR matrix with some location parameters where the sum of the
row width and the column width is 2s. The maximum dimension of the block B is s × s. Then
clone and overlap the identical block with the same location and width parameters s times to form
a full-rank block of the dimension at most s × s. Since the full-rank block can be generated K/s
times, any (n, K/s, s)-block-sparse matrix can be modeled by the corresponding width parameters
and the location parameters.
                                         2
Block Low rank Matrix. Since K = ns2 , let us divide the n-by-n matrix into (n/s)2 blocks of the
dimension of s-by-s. Assign the width and the location parameters correspondingly. The resulting
matrix forms the (n, K, s, 1)-block-low-rank matrix.

A.1.3    P ROOF OF T HEOREM 2
Theorem 2 (Closed under structural interpolation). Given two n × n matrices W , Z ∈
GBLR(n, K, s), and α ∈ [0, 1], consider the following combination between the structural pa-
rameters:
                  w′ = ⌊αw(W ) + (1 − α)w(Z)⌋,        l′ = ⌊αl(W ) + (1 − α)l(Z)⌋.
A matrix Y generated by Eq. 3 with the structural parameter (w′ , l′ ) is a (n, K, s)-GBLR matrix,
Y ∈ GBLR(n, K, s).


                                                 13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                R         C
Proof. Let w′ k and w′ k be the width of the row and the column of the kth block of Y , respectively.
We use the same style of notation for w(W )R            C            R      C
                                              k , w(W )k and w(Z)k , w(Z)k to denote the row and
column width of the kth block of W and Z. The interpolated matrix Y is (n, K, s)-GBLR if and
only if the mean of the elements of w′ is less than or equal to s, or equivalently the sum of the
elements is less than or equal to 2Ks. Also, both W and Z have 2Ks sum of the width parameters.
From this, the sum of the interpolated width is less than or equal to 2Ks:
                        K
                                R        C
           X            X
                wi′ =         w′ k + w′ k
            i           k=1
                        K
                        X
                    =       ⌊αw(W )R              R            C              C
                                   k + (1 − α)w(Z)k ⌋ + ⌊αw(W )k + (1 − α)w(Z)k ⌋
                        k=1
                        K
                        X
                    ≤         αw(W )R              R         C              C
                                    k + (1 − α)w(Z)k + αw(W )k + (1 − α)w(Z)k
                        k=1
                          K
                          X                                              K
                                                                         X
                    =α         (w(W )R        C
                                     k + w(W )k ) + (1 − α)                    (w(W )R        C
                                                                                     k + w(W )k )
                          k=1                                            k=1
                    ≤ α2Ks + (1 − α)2Ks
                    = 2Ks.
Hence the interpolated matrix Y ∈ GBLR(n, K, s).

A.1.4    P ROOF OF L EMMA 5
Lemma 5. Let n ∈ N be a positive integer. Let l ∈ In−1 and w ∈ In . Consider the discrete boxcar
mask m(w,l) with the structural parameter (w, l) as in Eq. 2 and the Gaudi mask m̃σ(w,l) with the
same parameters and σ > 0 as in Eq. 6. Then m̃σ(w,l) converges to m(w,l) as σ → ∞, where the
bound between two at σ is given as follows:
                                    ∥m(w,l) − m̃σ(w,l) ∥2                    (1−n−1 )2
                                                              ≤ 1 − e−          2σ 2       .
                                         ∥m(w,l) ∥2

Proof. By Parseval’s theorem,
                                                  1             ˆ σ ∥22
                        ∥m(w,l) − m̃σ(w,l) ∥22 =    ∥m̂(w,l) − m̃ (w,l)                                          (10)
                                                  n
                                                    n−1                        2
                                                  1X                        k2
                                                =        dw [k] − dw [k]e− 2σ2
                                                  n
                                                        k=0
                                                        n−1                                         2
                                                    1   X            2
                                                                                         k2
                                                =             |dw [k]|       1 − e− 2σ2
                                                    n
                                                        k=0
                                                        n−1                                             2
                                                                                                            !2
                                                  1     X            2               −
                                                                                         ( n−1
                                                                                            n )
                                                ≤             |dw [k]|       1−e               2σ 2
                                                  n
                                                        k=0
                                                                                               2
                                                                                                   !2
                                                                              −
                                                                                  (1− n1 )
                                                = ∥m(w,l) ∥22        1−e            2σ 2                ,        (11)

where Eq. 11 is also due to Parseval’s theorem.



A.1.5    P ROOF OF T HEOREM 3
Let us first consider the derivative of the sinc function in eq. 5.


                                                         14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                              dsinc wk       cos πwk  sinc wk
Lemma 6. For any n ̸= 0,         dw
                                    n
                                         =      w
                                                  n
                                                     − wn .


Proof.

               dsinc wk
                     n     d sin πwk
                                  n
                        =
                  dw      dw πwkn
                                   −2                     −1
                              πwk     πk     πwk     πwk         πwk πk
                        =−               sin     +           cos    ·
                               n      n       n       n           n   n
                              cos πwk
                                   n    sin πwk
                                             n
                          =           −
                                 w        πwk 2

                                                  n
                            cos πwk
                                 n    sinc wk
                                           n
                          =         −         .
                               w         w



Note that the derivative in Lemma 6 at w → 0 is zero since limt→0 sinc′ (t) = 0.
The following lemma is useful for proving Theorem 3.
Lemma 7. For any σ ∈ (0, ∞] and w, l ∈ [0, n], the derivative of the Gaudi function dσ(w,l) with
respect to w is as follows:
                              ∂dσw [k]         k         k       k2      1
                                       = e−2πı n w · eπı n · e− 2σ2 ·         .
                               ∂w                                     sinc nk


Proof. Let us merge the terms of the Gaudi function dσw [k] that does not contain w into Ck :

                                                  k2          sinc wk       ıπk(1−w)
                                dσw [k] = e− 2σ2 · w ·             n
                                                                        e       n
                                                              sinc nk
                                                       wk −ıπkw
                                         = w · sinc      · e n · Ck
                                                       n
                     k2
where Ck = eπı n e− 2σ2 sinc
                k          1
                              k . From Lemma 6, the derivative of the Gaudi function with respect to
                             n
w is as follows:

 ∂ σ               ∂              wk −ıπkw
    dw [k] = Ck ·      w · sinc       ·e n
∂w                ∂w               n
                                                            !                                               !
                                         cos πwk  − sinc wk

                        wk −πı k w            n          n        −πı k
                                                                        w         wk          k     −πı k
                                                                                                          w
           = Ck · sinc       e     n  +                        we     n   + wsinc     · −πı       e     n
                         n                       w                                 n          n
                      πwk           πwk
          = Ck · (cos       − ı sin     )
                        n            n
                      k
          = Ck · e−ıπ n w .


Now we prove Theorem 3.
Theorem 3. Let n < ∞ be a finite positive integer. For any σ ∈ (0, ∞] and w, l ∈ [0, n], the
derivatives of the Gaudi mask m̃σ(w,l) with respect to w and l are bounded almost everywhere:

                                ∂ m̃σ(w,l)                     ∂ m̃σ(w,l)
                                                  < ∞,                            < ∞.
                                   ∂w         2                   ∂l          2


                                                         15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Proof. Here we use Parseval’s theorem again:

                                    2
                   ∂ m̃σ(w,l)           1X ∂ σ
                                                n−1
                                                          k                                 ∂ σ         k
                                                                                                                 ∗
                                      =       dw [k]e−2πı n l                                d [k]e−2πı n l
                        ∂w          2   n  ∂w                                              ∂w w
                                                k=0
                                                n−1                                                                   2
                                          1     X            k
                                                        −2πı n                k            k
                                                                                        − 2σ
                                                                                            2         1         k
                                        =             e        w
                                                                      ·e   πı n
                                                                                   ·e        2
                                                                                                 ·      k
                                                                                                          e−2πı n l
                                          n                                                        sinc n
                                                k=0
                                                n−1                                2
                                          1 X − k22     1
                                        =     e 2σ ·
                                          n
                                                k=0
                                                     sinc nk
                                                n−1                    2
                                            1   X       1
                                        ≤                n−1
                                            n       sinc  n
                                                k=0
                                        < ∞,

                                                                k2
where the first inequality used the fact that e− 2σ2 ≤ 1 and sinc
                                                                1
                                                                  k ≤
                                                                          1
                                                                      sinc n−1
                                                                               for k = 0, 1, . . . , n − 1.
                                                                  n         n
Similarly, the bound on the norm of the derivative with respect to the location parameter can be also
derived as below:

                                2
                  ∂ m̃σ(w,l)        1X σ
                                            n−1
                                            ∂      k          ∂      k
                                                                                                             ∗
                                  =   dw [k] e−2πı n l dσw [k] e−2πı n l
                        ∂l      2   n       ∂l                ∂l
                                            k=0
                                            n−1                                                                           2
                                      1     X         sinc wk           k
                                                                     − 2σ
                                                                           2
                                                                          2 −
                                                                              2πı(1−w)                k       k
                                    =                      n
                                                                e              e  n              (−2πı )e−2πı n l
                                      n
                                            k=0
                                                      sinc nk                                         n
                                            n−1                                        2
                                         1X     1       n−1
                                    ≤                2π
                                         n  sinc n−1
                                            k=0   n
                                                         n
                                    < ∞.


A.1.6    P ROOF OF C OROLLARY 4

Before proving Corollary 4, we introduce another Corollary of Lemma 7.

Corollary 8. For any σ ∈ (0, ∞] and w, l ∈ [0, n], the derivatives of the Gaudi mask m̃σ(w,l) with
respect to w and l are given as follows:


                   ∂ m̃σ(w,l) [k]   1X ∗
                                                n−1
                                                      k             k       k2        1
                                  =       Fjk · e−2πı n (w+l) · eπı n · e− 2σ2 ·        k
                                                                                          ,
                        ∂w          n                                              sinc n
                                      k=0

                   ∂ m̃σ(w,l) [k]     n−1
                                    1X ∗                k             k
                                  =       Fjk · −2πı        · e−2πı n l · dσw [k],
                         ∂l         n                   n
                                                k=0


                    k
       ∗
where Fjk = e2πıj n is the (j, k)th element of the inverse discrete Fourier transform (IDFT) matrix.


                                                                     16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Proof. By linearity of differentiation and Lemma 7
                                                 n−1
                  ∂ σ              ∂ 1X ∗          k
                    m̃(w,l) [k] =      Fjk · e−2πı n l · dσw [k]
                 ∂w               ∂w n
                                                 k=0
                                           n−1
                                       1   X
                                                  ∗           k       ∂ σ
                                  =              Fjk · e−2πı n l ·     d [k]
                                       n                             ∂w w
                                           k=0
                                           n−1
                                       1   X                  k          k        k        k2        1
                                  =               ∗
                                                 Fjk · e−2πı n l · e−2πı n w · eπı n · e− 2σ2 ·
                                       n
                                           k=0
                                                                                                  sinc nk
                                           n−1
                                       1   X                  k              k     k2        1
                                  =               ∗
                                                 Fjk · e−2πı n (w+l) · eπı n · e− 2σ2 ·           .
                                       n
                                           k=0
                                                                                          sinc nk

The derivative with respect to the location parameter is a direct consequence of the derivative of the
exponential function.
Corollary 4. For any l ∈ [0, n] and σ ∈ (0, ∞], the norm of the derivative of the Gaudi mask
                                                                                                      ∂ m̃σ
m̃σ(w,l) with respect to w at w = 0 is well-defined and greater than zero, i.e., 0 <                      (w,l)
                                                                                                         ∂w           < ∞.
                                                                                                                  2

Proof. From Corollary 8
                    ∂ m̃σ(w,l) [k]                 n−1
                                                 1X ∗          k         k       k2      1
                                             =     Fjk · e−2πı n l · eπı n · e− 2σ2 ·         .
                          ∂w                     n
                                                   k=0
                                                                                      sinc nk
                                       w=0

             k        k          k2
                              − 2σ
Since e−2πı n l · eπı n · e        2        1
                                       · sinc k is not zero for any l ∈ [0, n] and σ ∈ (0, ∞] and the IDFT
                                             n
matrix F ∗ is unitary (up to scaling factor), the derivative ∂w
                                                              ∂
                                                                m̃σ(w,l) ̸= 0.

A.2    I NITIALIZATION A LGORITHM

Suppose an n-by-n matrix Winit is given before the initialization step. We first initialize the structural
parameters based on the correlation within the columns of Winit .
                                       T                   T
Consider the Gram matrix C = Winit       Winit . Cij = W:,i  W:,j is the inner product between the ith
column and the jth column of Winit . That is, the higher |Cij | is, the more correlated the columns
are. Thus, for the width and the location parameter of the column of the first block, we pick a row of
the Gram matrix Ci1 ,: where i1 is the index of the row which has the largest norm. Then we apply
a smoothing filter (e.g., Gaussian filter with the standard deviation γ > 0) to the absolute values of
the row, which is followed by binarizing the filtered output based on some threshold τ > 0. Hence,
for the kth block, it can be summarized as follows:

                1 cik [j] ≥ τ
    bik [j] =                  , cik = Filter(|Cik ,: |, γ), ik = argsort({∥Ci,: ∥2 }ni=1 )[k]. (12)
                0 cik [j] < τ
As a result, the binary vector bi consists of the chunks of ones and zeros. We choose the longest
chunk of ones and initialize the width and the location parameters (wkC , lkC ) correspondingly. For the
row parameters of the kth block, the same procedure is repeated with the columns of Winit selected
in the column parameter initialization step.
Next, the content parameters are set by the left and the right singular vectors of Winit scaled by the
                                  1/2             1/2
singular values, i.e., U ← Uinit Sinit and V ← Sinit V T where Winit = Uinit Sinit Vinit
                                                                                     T
                                                                                         .
Finally, we update the structural parameters and content parameters by minimizing the following
objective function:
                                                         2
                           min         Winit − W θ F + λ∥w∥1 + 1w∈Inn + 1l∈In−1
                                                                            n                                          (13)
                          U ,V ,ϕ

We summarize the initialization steps in Algorithm 2.


                                                             17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 2 GBLR Parameter Initialization
 1: C ← W T W                                                          ▷ Target matrix W ∈ Rn×n
 2: i1 , i2 , . . . , in ← argsort({∥Ci,: ∥2 }n
                                              i=1 )
 3: b ← 0
 4: for k = 1, . . . , n do
 5:       ϕC k ← get mask params(|Cik ,: |, γ, τ )
 6:       R = (W · mC                 C T
                            k )(W · mk )
 7:       i′k ← argmax({∥Ri,: ∥2 }ni=1 )
 8:       ϕR                               T
             k ← get mask params(|Ri′ ,: |, γ, τ )
                                         k
 9:     b ← b + nnz(mck ) + nnz(mR   k)
10:     if b > s then
11:          wkc ← 0, wkR ← 0; break
12:     end if
13: end for
14: U , V ← SVD(W )
15: Solve Eq. 13 by Alg. (1).


A.3   R ECTENGULAR G AUDI -GBLR M ATRICES


When the number of rows m is not equal to the number of columns n, the width and location
parameters for rows are defined on Im and Im−1 , respectively, whereas the structural parameters on
columns are defined on In and In−1 . Except for the index sets, the GBLR matrix on the rectangular
case is defined exactly the same. Theorem 1 and 2 hold as well. The Gaudi mask is also defined in
the same manner.


A.4   G AUDI M ASK WITH R EAL - VALUED W IDTHS AND L OCATIONS


Let us consider the Gaudi mask in Eq. 6 with the continuous-valued widths and locations w, l ∈
[0, n]. Also, let us assume for now that σ = ∞, namely, no Gaussian smoothing is applied. On
one hand, Eq. 6 still compiles the time-domain signal after IDFT. On the other hand, the output
of the IDFT is not a boxcar mask anymore if at least one of w and l is not an integer. In Figure
7, we present the time-domain signal of three cases of the Gaudi mask on n = 512: 1) integer-
valued width and locations with the smoothing parameter σ = ∞, namely, no Gaussian filter is
applied in the Gaudi function; 2) non-integer-valued width and location with σ = ∞; and 3) non-
integer-valued width and location with σ = 100. As illustrated in the figure, the non-integer-valued
parameters generate many spiking errors (middle). Notably, however, the errors are alleviated when
the smoothing parameter σ = 100 (right), which almost recovers the shape of the signal with the
integer-valued parameters (left).


                                                      18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


         n=512, width=128.0, location=192.0, σ = ∞   n=512, width=128.5, location=191.8, σ = ∞   n=512, width=128.5, location=191.8, σ = 100


   1.0


   0.8


   0.6


   0.4


   0.2


   0.0


          0      100    200     300    400    500    0      100    200     300    400    500     0     100    200     300     400    500



Figure 7: Gaudi Masks in time-domain with different width, location and σ on n = 512. Left:
integer width w = 128 and integer location l = 192 with σ = ∞, i.e., no Gaussian smoothing.
Middle: non-integer width w = 128.5 and location l = 191.8 with σ = ∞. Due to the non-integer
parameters, the time-domain signal contains spiking errors. Right: non-integer width w = 128.5
and location l = 191.8 with σ = 100. The Gaussian smoothing in the Gaudi function alleviates the
spiking errors.



A.5        M ORE D ETAILS ON P ROXIMAL G RADIENT D ESCENT ON G AUDI -GBLR PARAMETERS
           IN D EEP N EURAL N ETWORKS


A.5.1         D ISCRETE S TRUCTURAL PARAMETERS

Here we discuss solving Problem (8) using the discrete width and location parameters w ∈ In and
l ∈ In−1 . To be specific, given real-valued widths w ∈ [0, n]K and locations l ∈ [0, n]K of a
Gaudi-GBLR matrix, we apply a Straight Through Estimator (Hinton, 2012; Bengio et al., 2013;
Zhou et al., 2016) to w and l before generating the masks. Then, we project each value of w and l to
[0, n] after the PGD step. We find that this setting is useful when the Gaussian smoothing parameter
σ of the Gaudi function is very high or infinite, since the non-integer parameters generate spiking
errors as discussed in Appendix A.4.


A.5.2         M ULTIPLE G AUDI -GBLR M ATRICES

For a DNN with T weight matrices, we suggest adjusting the shrinkage parameter λ in eq. 9 based
on the predefined computational cost budget B for the DNN. For example, one can set λ = 0 if the
sum of average widths of the weight matrices w̄sum = w̄(W1 ) + w̄(W2 ) + · · · + w̄(WT ) is below
B, and use λ = λ0 > 0 if w̄sum is above B where λ0 is given as a hyperparameter by user. In our
experiments, this strategy effectively (not necessarily equally) distributes the computational cost to
each matrix to meet the overall cost budget constraint during the learning process.



A.6        I MPACT OF SVD

SVD. Since our method involves Singular Vector Decomposition (SVD) during initialization, the
time complexity of the SVD is discussed in this section. The impact caused by SVD is negligible
in the training process. The SVD operation performed during initialization decomposes at most
4096 × 1024-sized matrix, which takes less than a second on commercial CPUs or GPUs, whereas
the overall training or fine-tuning time ranges from a few hours to tens of hours. Also, the SVD
does not occur during the inference stage, so it does not become a bottleneck in any sense once the
network is trained.


                                                                     19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.7     E XTENDED E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS AND D ETAILS

A.7.1     F INE - TUNING

In fine-tuning experiments, we use the pre-trained ViT-Base (Dosovitskiy et al., 2020). For each
pre-trained weight on Query, Key, Value and MLPs, we assign the Gaudi-GBLR matrix where the
structural and content parameters are initialized by Algorithm 2. We use the smoothing parameter
of the filter γ = 1 and the threshold to obtain the binary mask τ = 0.98 · max(cik ) in Eq. 12.
During the fine-tuning, we use σ = ∞ in Eq. 6 Then, all parameters are updated by SGD with
AdamW(Loshchilov & Hutter, 2017) optimizers.
For the Block Low-Rank matrices, we use Monarch (Dao et al., 2022) implementation. We project
the pre-trained matrix by minimizing the Frobenius norm between the pretrained one and the
Monarch matrix by gradient descent for 1000 steps with the learning rate of 0.001.
The initialization learning rate for the structural parameters was set to 0.0025 and decayed to
0.000025. We trained the networks for 35 epochs with the learning rate of 0.0001 for all param-
eters, including the structural parameters of the Gaudi-GBLR matrices.
For the WikiText103 experiments, we used the publicly available GPT-2 model1 for the pre-trained
weights.


A.7.2     T RAINING FROM S CRATCH

For the Gaudi-GBLR matrices, we initialize location parameters to zero and width parameters to the
low rank + block sparse structure. The content parameters as well as other weights are initialized
randomly.
During the training with Proximal Gradient Descent in Eq. 9, as in Appendix A.5, the shrinkage
parameter λ is set to zero if the average width of the Gaudi-GBLR matrices of the DNN is below
the predefined budget, and recovers the predefined value λ0 otherwise.
Also, we anneal σ = 1 to 100 during the training process. σ is fixed to 1 for 5 warm-up epochs, then
linearly increases to 100 for 295 epochs. The hyperparameters used in the ImageNet experiment is
presented in Table 4.
Table 4: Hyperparameters used in ImageNet experiments using ViT-Base for training from scratch.
                      Learning Rate                        Shrinkage
Model                                                                            σ (init/final)   Epochs   Weight Decay   Drop Path Rate
                      Structural Params   Content Params   λ0     Target Width
ViT-Base              N/A                 0.001            N/A N/A               N/A              310      0.05           0.1
ViT-Base Gaudi-GBLR   0.001               0.001            0.04 0.12 · 768       1.0/100.0        310      0.05           0.0


A.8     E XTENDED E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS

A.8.1     GBLR M ATRIX FOR C ONVOLUTION W EIGHTS .

We compare the ImageNet accuracy of ResNet18 (He et al., 2016) with GBLR weight matrices
to the Automatic Layer-wise Decomposition Selector (ALDS) (Liebenwein et al., 2021), a simi-
lar rank-based layer-wise compression method. Following Liebenwein et al. (2021), we consider
the (d, c, k1 , k2 )-sized weight tensor of a convolution layer as d × (ck1 k2 )-sized matrix, where
d, c, k1 , k2 are the number of output channels, input channels, and the widths and heights of the
kernels, respectively. In this manner, we converted the weights of the convolution layers of the
ResNet18 model to GBLR matrices, and retrained the model. Table 5 shows the accuracy and the
relative FLOPs of the ResNet18 model with dense weights, low-rank weights found by one-shot
ALDS, and GBLR weights found by our method. Even without any supervision on the structural
properties of the convolution kernels, GBLR outperforms ALDS low-rank weights in terms of both
accuracy and complexity.


   1
       https://huggingface.co/Graphcore/gpt2-wikitext-103


                                                                20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                           Table 5: ImageNet Accuracy on ResNet18.

                    Weight Type                          Accuracy     GFLOPs
                    Dense                                   69.62        1.82
                    ALDS (Liebenwein et al., 2021)          69.22        1.03
                    GBLR (ours)                             69.31        1.01

A.8.2   G ENERALIZATION G AP OF DNN S WITH GBLR WEIGHTS
In this section, we estimate the generalization gap of the DNNs with GBLR weights. We used the
ViT-Base model discussed in Section 4.3 which is trained on ImageNet from scratch. The accuracy
of the dense and GBLR models on the training and validation sets are evaluated and presented in
Table 6. Notably, the training-validation accuracy difference of the GBLR model is smaller than
that of the dense model. The comparable validation accuracy despite the lower training accuracy
provides reasonable empirical evidence that the DNNs with GBLR matrices may exhibit smaller
generalization errors than dense models.
                 Table 6: Generalization Gap of Dense and GBLR ViT-Base Models.

 Weight Type    Training Acc. (%)   Validation Acc. (|∆|) (%)   Training Loss   Validation Loss (|∆|)
 Dense                      99.03               78.57 (20.46)          0.1640        1.0639 (0.8999)
 Gaudi-GBLR                 94.93               78.51 (16.42)          0.3260        0.9917 (0.6657)


                                                21
