Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


O CEAN GPT: A L ARGE L ANGUAGE M ODEL                                                                FOR
O CEAN S CIENCE TASKS
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                                  A BSTRACT
             Ocean science, which delves into the oceans that are reservoirs of life and biodi-
             versity, is of geart significance given that oceans cover over 70% of our planet’s
             surface. Recently, advances in Large Language Models (LLMs) have transformed
             the paradigm in science. Despite the notable success in other domains, current
             LLMs often fall short in catering to the needs of domain experts like oceanogra-
             phers, and the potential of LLMs for ocean science is under-explored. The intrin-
             sic reason is the immense and intricate nature of ocean data as well as the necessity
             for higher granularity and richness in knowledge. To alleviate these issues, we in-
             troduce O CEAN GPT, the first-ever LLM in the ocean domain, which is expert
             in various ocean science tasks. We propose D O I NSTRUCT, a novel framework to
             automatically obtain a large volume of ocean science instruction data, which gen-
             erates instructions based on multi-agent collaboration. Additionally, we construct
             the first oceanography benchmark, O CEAN B ENCH, to evaluate the capabilities of
             LLMs in the ocean domain. Though comprehensive experiments, O CEAN GPT
             not only shows a higher level of knowledge expertise for oceans science tasks but
             also gains preliminary embodied intelligence capabilities in ocean technology1 .


1       I NTRODUCTION
Ocean science, which delves into the intricacies of oceans that cover over 70% of our planet’s sur-
face, is essential not only for understanding the rich reservoirs of life and biodiversity but also for
recognizing their pivotal role in regulating the global climate and supporting economies. Recently,
advances in Large Language Models (LLMs) (OpenAI, 2023; Chowdhery et al., 2022) have trans-
formed the paradigm in science domains such as medical science (Moor et al., 2023), molecular
science (Fang et al., 2023), protein science (Lin et al., 2023) and geoscience (Deng et al., 2023).
However, the potential for the LLM in ocean science is under-explored.
Despite remarkable success in general domain, current LLMs still do not fully meet the specific
demand of oceanographers. This inadequacy is primarily due to: (1) The immense volume and in-
tricate nature of ocean data. As ocean science research progresses, acquiring ocean data becomes
increasingly challenging, which makes enhancing the oceanic understanding both a golden oppor-
tunity and a significant hurdle. (2) The necessity for higher granularity and richness in knowledge.
The data requirements faced by researchers are becoming increasingly intricate and diverse. Ocean
science encompasses various domains and subjects, each with its distinct data attributes and patterns.
To alleviate these issues, we introduce O CEAN GPT, the first-ever LLM in the ocean domain, which
is expert in various ocean science tasks. Specifically, we propose D O I NSTRUCT, an efficient ocean
science instruction generation framework that capitalizes on multi-agent collaboration. Each agent
in our designed framework is considered an expert in a specific domain (Topic) and is responsible for
generating the corresponding data. For the advancement of ocean science research using LLMs, we
also create a benchmark called O CEAN B ENCH to evaluate the capabilities in ocean science tasks.
Our benchmark data is based on criteria manually evaluated by ocean experts, and can accurately
reflect the capabilities that LLMs possess in the field of ocean science.
Through extensive experiments, O CEAN GPT shows superiority for diverse ocean science tasks. As
depicted in Figure 1, our model can comprehensively answer questions according to the instructions
    1
        Codes are in the supplementary materials and will be released.


                                                         1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


       How to conduct research on interfacial chemistry                            What happens if an undersea pipeline leaks?
       and toxicological effects of key radioactive nuclides?                      Please list the solutions.
      Determine the specific radioactive nuclides of interest ...                 If and when it comes to fixing any problems with pipelines,
      Conduct laboratory experiments ... Develop computational
      models...    Analyze experimental data ...        Develop        OceanGPT   safety measures are of utmost importance in order for
                                                                                  people not get harmed or injured while they're being
      toxicological risk assessment methods Conduct field                         repairs; these include wearing protective clothing such as
      experiments: ... Develop guidelines for safe disposal                       gloves & hardhats before starting work near potential
                                                                                  hazards like broken equipment etc., having emergency
                                                                                  supplies readily available just case something goes wrong
       What are the fishery resources in South China Sea?                         during maintenance procedures (like first aid kits),
                                                                                  communicating clearly between team members so
       The following species of commercial and recreational
                                                                                  everyone knows what needs doing next steps wise …
       importance can be found among ... south China sea: tuna,
       mackerel sardines squid crabs shrimps lobsters oyster
       shellfish pearls etc. In addition to these commercially ...
                                                                                  How to conduct research on interfacial chemistry
                                                                                  and toxicological effects of key radioactive nuclides?
       Why    does    the    establishment  of   marine                           1. Determine the specific radioactive nuclides of
       standardization contribute to the development of                           interest …2. Conduct laboratory experiments … 3.
       the marine industry?                                                       Develop computational models: Computational models
       The creation and implementation of maritime standards                      can be used to simulate the chemical and toxicological
       can have numerous benefits for businesses in this field,                   effects of radioactive nuclides. ... 4.Analyze experimental
       including increased safety at sea, better communication                    data…5.Develop toxicological risk assessment methods:
       between vessels, improved cargo handling procedures,                       Toxicological risk assessment methods are used to
       more efficient ship design, enhanced environmental                         evaluate the potential hazards of radioactive nuclides.
       protection, reduced costs through streamlined operations,                  This involves developing models that can predict the
       enhanced global coordination among regulatory bodies,                      toxicological effects of radioactive nuclides and assessing
       promotion of best practices across the industry, facilitation              their risks to human health. 6. Conduct field
       of international trade, assurance of compliance with                       experiments: ...7. Develop guidelines for safe disposal:
       international laws and treaties, fostering innovation                      Safe disposal of radioactive nuclides is critical for
       through research and development incentives ....                           preventing environmental contamination and protecting...


                                                   Figure 1: Capabilities of O CEAN GPT.


of oceanographers, which demonstrates its expertise in oceanography. We also explore the potential
of O CEAN GPT from the perspectives of ocean science and ocean engineering. Specifically, we
integrate ocean robotics instructions into the training data and evaluate the ability of O CEAN GPT
via code or console commands. O CEAN GPT not only demonstrates a higher level of knowledge
expertise but also gains preliminary embodied intelligence capabilities in ocean technology.
Our contributions can be summarized as follows:

       • We introduce O CEAN GPT, the first ocean LLM, which shows superiority for various
         ocean science tasks. It can answer oceanographic questions according to the instructions
         of oceanographers, demonstrating expertise in oceanography.
       • We propose D O I NSTRUCT, an automated domain instruction evolving framework that con-
         structs the ocean instruction dataset by multi-agent collaboration. Our framework effec-
         tively alleviates the difficulty of obtaining ocean domain data.
       • Extensive experiments demonstrate the superiority of O CEAN GPT in our build O CEAN -
         B ENCH. O CEAN GPT not only demonstrates a higher level of knowledge expertise for
         oceans science tasks but also gains preliminary embodied intelligence capabilities.

2   R ELATED W ORK
Large Language Models. The landscape of LLM (Brown et al., 2020; Chowdhery et al., 2022;
Touvron et al., 2023a;b) has rapidly evolved and achieved a series breakthroughs. Rae et al. (2021);
Zhang et al. (2022); Thoppilan et al. (2022); Scao et al. (2022); Zeng et al. (2023) have explored the
performance across a wide range of model scales and broadened the application scope. LLMs also
exhibit capabilities in various aspects, including reasoning and knowledge interaction (Qiao et al.,
2023a; Zhang et al., 2023a; Qiao et al., 2023b; Wang et al., 2023a; Xi et al., 2023). To build LLMs,
instruction tuning (Wei et al., 2022; Zhang et al., 2023b; Ouyang et al., 2022) is a crucial technique
to alignment with user preferences and desired outputs. Taori et al. (2023) uses self-instruct (Wang
et al., 2023d) to generate data from manually instructions. Chiang et al. (2023); Xu et al. (2023)
uses user-shared conversations and AI-generated data for tuning. Different from those, we introduce
an automatic and effective domain instruction generation framework via multi-agent collaboration.

Science Large Language Models. LLMs have emerged as cornerstone models in addressing chal-
lenges within scientific research. Singhal et al. (2022) explores the potential of clinical LLMs and
introduces a human evaluation framework and instruction prompt tuning. Moor et al. (2023) pro-
poses generalist medical AI that is capable of handling diverse medical tasks using self-supervised


                                                                         2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


learning on large datasets. Kraljevic et al. (2021) introduces MedGPT, a model using EHR data and
Named Entity Recognition tools for predicting future medical events. BioGPT (Luo et al., 2022) is
a transformer language model pre-trained on biomedical literature for improved text generation and
mining. Theodoris et al. (2023) describes Geneformer, a model pre-trained on single-cell transcrip-
tomes for making predictions with limited data in network biology. Lin et al. (2023) demonstrates
the prediction of atomic-level protein structure from primary sequences using scaled-up language
models. Deng et al. (2023) introduces the first LLM specifically designed for geoscience, including
its training and benchmarking protocols. Different from previous works, we are the first LLM for
ocean science tasks and explore its potential for ocean research.

3     O CEAN GPT

To obtain O CEAN GPT, we first construct the training corpus for ocean science and pre-train a large
model in ocean science based on LLaMA-2 (Touvron et al. (2023b) in Section 3.1. Then we propose
D O I NSTRUCT, an automated framework for domain instruction generation to build a ocean domain-
specific instruction dataset. Our framework leverages multi-agent collaboration and utilizes ocean
literature to automatically generate a large volume of domain-specific instructions for ocean science
tasks (Section 3.2). The overview of our O CEAN GPT is shown in Figure 2.


                                            Domain Instruction                   Instruction
                                             Data Generation                        Data
             Ocean Corpus
                                                                   Fine-tuning


              Pre-training   Pre-training                     Evaluation
                 Data                         OceanGPT                           OceanBench



                      Figure 2: Overall framework of training O CEAN GPT.


3.1   P RE - TRAINING S TAGE

To pre-train the foundation model for ocean science tasks, it is essential to construct the pre-training
dataset specific to ocean science. Therefore, we first collect a raw corpus of 67,633 documents
from open-access literature. Specifically, we utilize the Python package pdfminer to convert the
content of literature files into plain text. To ensure the quality and consistency of the data, further
processing of the collected dataset is necessary. We apply regular expressions to filter out figures,
tables, headers, footers, page numbers, URLs and references. Additionally, any extra spaces, line
breaks, and other non-text characters are removed. The processed documents cover various aspects
of ocean science such as ocean physics, ocean chemistry, ocean biology, geology, hydrology, etc. It
is important to note that special characters, emoticons, and garbled characters are also replaced or
eliminated during this process. We also employ hash-based methods to de-duplicate the data, which
helps reduce the risk of over-fitting in the model and enhances its generalization capability. The
detailed statistics is shown in Table 1 (Appendix A.3).

3.2   D OMAIN I NSTRUCTION DATA G ENERATION

As ocean science research deepens, researchers are facing increasingly complex and diversified data
demands. Ocean science corpus contains multiple fields and topics, and each topic has its unique
data characteristics and patterns. To effectively simulate and generate this data, we propose a do-
main instruction generation framework D O I NSTRUCT to obtain ocean instructions H by multi-agent
collaboration. Each agent is considered an expert in a specific domain (topic) and is responsible
for generating the corresponding data. It not only ensures the professionalism and accuracy of the
data but also allows for the parallel and efficient generation of a large amount of data. Note that
framework also has greater flexibility, allowing us to independently optimize and adjust for different
domains (e.g., astronomy).


                                                   3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                            Instruction
                                                           Seed Dataset

      Expert - Engineer
                                                                                                                          Expert-annotated corpus
                                                                          (instruction, output)
                          Expert - Biologist
                                               Enrich and Refine                      build pairs for training


                                                                                                                 𝑩𝑴𝟐𝟓
                                                                                                                         Retrieve
      Ocean                                                                                                                              Ocean
                                                                         (output, instruction)                                           Corpus
      Agents
                                                                                                    Extracting
                                               Iterative                                                                High-quality
                 Expert - Meteorologist                                                                                 Candidates
                                               evolution
                                                                            Fine-tuning gpt-3.5                                           Instructions

                  Evolving Agent as Generator                                      Fine-tuned Agent as Literature Extractor

                                                            Agentx as Inspector
                                                            rules as constraints
                                    Quality Filtering                                Robotics Code
                                    Agent Debating                                    Synthesizing
                                                              Ocean
                                                           Instructions



Figure 3: Procedure of our proposed D O I NSTRUCT. We use agents as experts for each ocean
topic and make them rapidly expand the instructions by collaboration. We design three agent roles:
evolving generator, fine-tuned literature extractor and inspector with rule constraints.


Ocean Topic Definition. To provide researchers with a clear and organized resources, we man-
ually categorize the data in ocean science into five major ocean topics, which are based on the
expertise of experts in oceanography. The definitions of these five topics comprehensively cover all
the main areas of ocean science and are relatively independent. The detailed explanation for the five
major topics is described as follows:

      • Science and research focuses on the fundamental scientific theories and research related to
        the ocean, such as ocean currents, sea temperatures and ocean biodiversity. This portion of
        data separately helps drive the advancement of pure scientific research and theories.
      • Technology and engineering encompasses aspects ranging from ocean measurements, ob-
        servational equipment, and ship engineering to ocean energy development. Such catego-
        rization aids in a more focused exploration of ocean engineering and technological needs,
        while also facilitating interdisciplinary research with other engineering disciplines.
      • Resources and development includes fisheries, minerals, oil and gas, as well as other sus-
        tainable development resources. It is set for a better examination and planning of the ratio-
        nal development of ocean resources.
      • Ecology and environment. Environmental protection and ecological sustainability are cur-
        rently global hot topics. It helps to address issues such as ocean pollution, ecological
        degradation, and the impact of climate change on the oceans in a more focused manner.
      • Life, culture and others. The ocean is not only a natural resource or a subject of scientific
        research; it is also an integral part of culture and lifestyle. This category consists of aspects
        ranging from history and culture to the mutual influences between the ocean and human
        societal activities, such as tourism, leisure, art, faith, and more.

While these five topics are distinct, there might be some overlap as well. For instance, some issues
related to ocean environmental protection might also be associated with the technology of ocean
engineering. For the sake of convenience in data analysis, in the actual construction of the dataset,
we map each sample to the most relevant category it belongs to.


                                                                    4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Agents as Domain (Ocean) Experts In Figure 3, we leverage agents as domain experts for each
ocean topic and make them rapidly expand the instructions by collaboration. We first collect the
seed instruction data and then propose three strategies by using multiple agents acting as experts.
The seed instruction dataset comes from annotations by ocean science researchers, which includes
5 major categories, over 500 sub-categories, and a total of more than 10,000 data entries.

• Evolving Agent as the Generator. We design an evolving approach that selects samples from
  the seed instruction dataset and simultaneously calls upon two agents (gpt-3.5-turbo) to evolve the
  selected samples. The evolution procedure includes two aspects: (1) we enrich the content of the
  sample by having the agent automatically add relevant background knowledge to it; (2) we guide
  the agent to refine the sample by conducting a more in-depth analysis of specific concepts or en-
  tities. Through multiple rounds of iterative execution, our method can rapidly expand the existing
  seed dataset, which allows for the rapid expansion of both the breadth and depth of information.
• Fine-Tuned Agent as the Literature Extractor. As shown in Figure 3, we collect a smaller
  expert-annotated corpus and use the BM25 to retrieve high quality sentences in a larger ocean
  dataset. We use the retrieved texts are used as high-quality candidate samples. Meanwhile, we
  fine-tune gpt-3.5-turbo in the seed instruction dataset. Thus, we can regard the fine-tuned agent as
  the literature extractor. In other words, it can automatically ask questions (instruction) from the
  unsupervised ocean science corpus (output). Therefore, we use the agent to automatically build
  pairs of (instruction, output) on external ocean science literature.
• Agent as the Inspector with Rule Constraints. For the massively generated instructions, we use
  the pre-defined rules as constraints and perform filtering on the data. These rules include syntactic
  and semantic constraints as well as some basic definitions in the ocean domain. We describe these
  rules using natural language because many constraints and norms related to ocean science cannot


                                                  5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    be directly represented with expressions. Therefore, we provide prompts to the gpt-3.5-turbo API
    as demonstrations, letting it play the role of an Inspector. Our approach ensures that the generated
    ocean instruction data is of higher quality. The detailed prompt agent is shown in Appendix A.5.


                                                   Data-Seed       Data-Evolving    Data-Extracting

                 Technology and Engineering

                      Science and Research

                   Ecology and Environment

                 Resources and Development

                    Life, Culture and Others


                                               0                   Sample numbers             40,000


Figure 4: Statistics of our final instruction dataset. We use D O I NSTRUCT to expand more than
15,000 instructions (data-evolving, data-extracting) from the seed data (data-seed).

Finally, we assign two extra gpt-3.5-turbo agents as roles to debate the quality of data and obtain
high-quality instruction dataset. The designed framework is capable of rapidly constructing a ocean
science dataset using multi-agents, and by incorporating external knowledge, it overcomes the lim-
itations inherent to the agents themselves. Our framework can also be effectively applied to the
construction of directive data in other scientific domains. It should be noted that we separately syn-
thesize robot instructions to equip O CEAN GPT with the capability to interact with the environment.
The statistics of our dataset are shown in Figure 4 and the procedure is described in Algorithm 1.

Quality Control for the Dateset. We ask domain experts to carefully review and check data to
ensure quality. Specifically, the human volunteers with no experience are first trained to make sure
they have a comprehensive understanding of the task. Then we develop a platform that can help
experts to sample instances from the instruction dataset. Next, the trained domain experts are asked
to validate if there are potential errors in the sampled instances. The final IAA (inter-annotator
agreement) score for our dataset is 0.82, which satisfies the research purpose. We will continue to
maintain the benchmark by adding new data and tasks.

4        B ENCHMARKING O CEAN S CIENCE TASKS
We provide detailed explanations of the experimental setup and the baseline models in Section 4.1.
In Section 4.2, we construct an ocean-specific benchmark O CEAN B ENCH to evaluate the capabili-
ties of our O CEAN GPT. We describe the GPT4-based evaluation metrics in Section 4.2.

4.1      I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS AND BASELINES

For the pre-training stage, we pre-train our O CEAN GPT based on the LLaMA-2 (Touvron et al.,
2023b) model for seven days with six A800 Nvidia GPUs. For the instruction-tuning stage, we
employ the LoRA method (Hu et al., 2021) to fine-tune the pre-trained model and choose three
baseline models for comparison. We use the chat version of LLaMA-2 (Llama-2-7b-chat-hf 2 ) ,
which is a generative text model optimized for dialogue use cases. Vicuna-1.53 (Chiang et al., 2023)
is a chat assistant which fine-tune LLaMA-2 on dataset collected from ShareGPT. ChatGLM2-6B4
is the optimized version of ChatGLM2 (Zeng et al., 2023). The detailed experimental settings are
shown in Table 3 (Appendix A.4).


     2
       https://huggingface.co/meta-llama/Llama-2-7b-chat-hf
     3
       https://huggingface.co/lmsys/vicuna-7b-v1.5
     4
       https://huggingface.co/THUDM/chatglm2-6b


                                                               6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


4.2    DATASETS AND M ETRICS

O CEAN B ENCH. To evaluate the capabilities of LLMs for oceanography tasks, we design a bench-
mark called O CEAN B ENCH. Our benchmark includes a total of 15 ocean-related task types, such
as question-answering, extraction, and description tasks. Our evaluation samples are automatically
generated from the seed dataset and have undergone deduplication and manual verification. For the
quality control, the sampling strategy is adopted. Those disagreed cases are made final decisions by
the annotators and bad cases are returned to be fixed. The distribution of our O CEAN B ENCH and
the statistics can be found in Appendix A.3.

Automatic Evaluation. To evaluate the performance and reduce reliance on manual evaluation,
we leverage GPT-4 as the evaluator for our experimental results. Inspired by Wang et al. (2023c) and
Wang et al. (2023b), we utilize an effective calibration method to evaluate the performance of two
LLMs. For each testing question, given two responses and from two LLMs, we query the GPT4 to
obtain the comparison result. We note that LLMs are sensitive to the position of responses, therefore,
alleviating the positional bias is very important. To balance the position bias, we exchange the order
of the responses to form the new prompt. The final evaluating result is the sum of the test results for
the two prompts with their order swapped.

Human Evaluation. To validate our proposed framework, we also collect the output data in dif-
ferent settings and evaluate it by human evaluation. We employ 5 students with an ocean science
background as human annotators. For each evaluation setting, we sample a set of 200 examples and
human annotators will rank the outputs they prefer. The total expense is about 500 US dollars.

5     E VALUATION
5.1    I NSIGHTS FROM P ERFORMANCE R ESULTS


                              Win      Tie         Loss                             Win    Tie        Loss
             OceanGPT
                                     Win:12                   Tie:3                        Win:12               Tie:2    Loss:1
       vs vicuna-1.5-7b

             OceanGPT
                                               Win:14                 Tie:1                      Win:13                 Tie:2
      vs llama2-chat-7b

            OceanGPT
        vs chatglm2-6b                           Win:15                                             Win:14                Tie:1



                          0     20            Win rate (%)   80           100   0     20         Win rate (%)   80         100



Figure 5: Ocean task-level results. Left: Automatic evaluation. Right: Human evaluation. Com-
pared to baselines, O CEAN GPT performs better than llama2-chat-7b, vicuna-1.5-7b and chatglm2-
6b in both two settings. The instance-level result is in Table 11 (Appendix A.2).


O CEAN GPT can obtain better performance than previous open-sourced LLMs. In Figure
5, we compare the performance of O CEAN GPT with the three baseline models across 15 sub-
tasks at the task-level in the ocean domain. We utilize both automatic and human evaluators, then
compute the win rate (%) with baseline models. Compared to the baselines (llama2-chat-7b, vicuna-
1.5-7b, chatglm2-6b)5 , O CEAN GPT outperforms in the majority of tasks, which demonstrates the
effectiveness of the proposed approach.

O CEAN GPT excels in a range of ocean science tasks. As shown in Figure 6, we present detailed
automatic evaluation experimental results in the O CEAN B ENCH. It can be clearly seen that our
model is superior to baseline language models in the vast majority of tasks. Note that previous
open-sourced LLMs even fail to handle several expertise ocean tasks (e.g., Editing). While our
designed multi-agent data generation framework can effectively act as experts in various subfields
of the ocean domain, which indicates that O CEAN GPT is a better expert in various ocean domains.
   5
     Before the ICLR 2024 deadline, we have only trained OceanGPT-7b, thus we compare open-sourced LLMs
around 7B. We are running resources to train OceanGPT-30b, and will compare with more LLMs in the future.


                                                                      7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



        Win       Tie      Loss

  Win rate (%)                                                    Win rate (%)                                                    Win rate (%)                                                     Win rate (%)

                            Analysis                                               Commonsense Reasoning                                                 Recommendation                                                     Editing
  90                                                              90                                                              90                                                               90


  60                                                              60                                                              60                                                               60


  30                                                              30                                                              30                                                               30


   0                                                               0                                                               0                                                                0
             OceanGPT            OceanGPT           OceanGPT               OceanGPT            OceanGPT             OceanGPT               OceanGPT             OceanGPT             OceanGPT               OceanGPT            OceanGPT             OceanGPT
       vs vicuna-1.5-7b    vs llama2-chat-7b    vs chatglm2-6b         vs chatglm2-6b    vs llama2-chat-7b    vs vicuna-1.5-7b         vs chatglm2-6b     vs llama2-chat-7b    vs vicuna-1.5-7b         vs chatglm2-6b    vs llama2-chat-7b    vs vicuna-1.5-7b

         Win      Tie       Loss

                   Question Anwsering                                                    Classification                                                 Open-ended Generation                                             Description
  90                                                              90                                                              90                                                               90


  60                                                              60                                                              60                                                               60


  30                                                              30                                                              30                                                               30


   0                                                               0                                                               0                                                                0
              OceanGPT            OceanGPT           OceanGPT               OceanGPT            OceanGPT             OceanGPT               OceanGPT             OceanGPT             OceanGPT               OceanGPT            OceanGPT             OceanGPT
        vs vicuna-1.5-7b    vs llama2-chat-7b    vs chatglm2-6b         vs chatglm2-6b    vs llama2-chat-7b    vs vicuna-1.5-7b         vs chatglm2-6b     vs llama2-chat-7b    vs vicuna-1.5-7b         vs chatglm2-6b    vs llama2-chat-7b    vs vicuna-1.5-7b


Figure 6: Evaluation results of O CEAN GPT in the ocean science tasks in O CEAN B ENCH. The
complete experimental results are shown in the Table 10 (Appendix A.2).


               Score                                  D O I NSTRUCT are the effective ocean data
                                                                                    Agent as Generator

                     5                                generators by multi-agent collaboration.
                                                                                    Agent as Extractor
                                                                                    Agent as Inspector
         4                                            As shown in Figure 7, we design three indi-
         3
                                                      cators to measure the data generation effect of
                                                      our proposed method from the perspectives of
         2
                                                      knowledge quality, expertise and diversity. We
         1
                Quality Expertise Diversity           use manual evaluation to calculate the scores of
                                                      the three indicators from 1 to 5. The higher the
   Figure 7: Performance analysis for agents.         score, the better the effect of the testing model.
                                                      It can be seen that the evolving generator agent
                                                      can effectively enhance the richness of ocean
data. When the extraction agent is at work, the expertise of the content is greatly improved. At the
same time, the inspector agent plays a significant role in enhancing the quality of the generated data.
The results show that multi-agent collaboration is effective for ocean instruction generation.

5.2         E XPLORING THE P OTENTIAL OF O CEAN GPT

In this section, we explore the potential of O CEAN GPT from the perspectives of ocean science and
ocean engineering. For ocean science (Section 5.2.1), we focus on the key scientific issues of nuclear
pollution in the ocean environment. For ocean engineering (Section 5.2.2), we use the Gazebo 6 as
the simulator to test O CEAN GPT’s ability to control underwater robots.

5.2.1             O CEAN GPT FOR O CEAN S CIENCE
In Figure 8, given the question ”How to conduct research on interfacial chemistry and toxicological
effects of key radioactive nuclides”, we compare the outputs of our model and vicuna-1.5-7b. The
result shows that O CEAN GPT demonstrates a higher level of knowledge expertise when describ-
ing the content of radioactive nuclide research. Its textual content is not only clear in structure and
well-organized, but also covers various aspects of radioactive nuclide research, from experimental
design to data analysis, and then to risk assessment and disposal guidelines. In contrast, although
vicuna-1.5-7b has clear expression and logicality, it lacks depth and specific content related to ra-
dioactive nuclides. Overall, O CEAN GPT has advantages in terms of knowledge expertise, quality,
and richness. The complete outputs of both models are shown in the Table 4 (Appendix A.6).

5.2.2             O CEAN GPT FOR O CEAN E NGINEERING
Ocean engineering focuses on the design, development, and management of structures and systems
within the ocean environment. It plays an indispensable role in harnessing the vast potential of the
oceans while ensuring sustainable and secure maritime operations. To facilitate interaction between
O CEAN GPT and the external world, we integrate machine code instructions into its training data.
   6
       https://github.com/uuvsimulator/uuv_simulator


                                                                                                                                  8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                   OceanGPT                                                                                     Vicuna-7b-1.5
    The study of interfacial chemistry and toxicological effects of key radioactive            Conducting research on interfacial chemistry and toxicological effects of key
    nuclides is a complex research field that requires a multidisciplinary approach. It        radioactive nuclides requires a multidisciplinary approach, combining expertise in
    involves multiple techniques such as experimental research, theoretical research,          chemistry, physics, biology, and environmental science. Here are some general
    and numerical simulations. The following is a detailed outline of the steps to             steps you can follow to conduct research in this area:
    conduct research on the interface chemistry and toxicological effects of key               1. Identify the key radioactive nuclides of interest… 2. Develop a research
    radioactive nuclides:                                                                      question… 3. Design experiments: Develop a set of experiments that will help you
    1. Determine the specific radioactive nuclides of interest …2. Conduct laboratory          answer your research question. This may involve conducting laboratory
    experiments … 3. Develop computational models: Computational models can be                 experiments, field studies, or both. Be sure to choose experiments that are
    used to simulate the chemical and toxicological effects of radioactive nuclides. ...       appropriate for your research question and that use methods that are reliable and
    4.Analyze experimental data…5.Develop toxicological risk assessment methods:               valid. 4. Collect and analyze data… 5. Interpret results and draw conclusions: Use
    Toxicological risk assessment methods are used to evaluate the potential                   your data to draw conclusions about the interfacial chemistry and toxicological
    hazards of radioactive nuclides. This involves developing models that can predict          effects of the key radioactive nuclides. Be sure to consider any limitations of your
    the toxicological effects of radioactive nuclides and assessing their risks to             study and to consider how your findings may be generalized to other contexts.
    human health. 6. Conduct field experiments: ...7. Develop guidelines for safe              6. Communicate your results: Finally, share your findings with others through
    disposal: Safe disposal of radioactive nuclides is critical for preventing                 publication in academic journals, presentations at conferences, and other means.
    environmental contamination and protecting human health. This involves...                  Be sure to clearly communicate the importance of your work and its implications...


Figure 8: Performance analysis on ocean science issues. We use blue font to represent the differ-
ent texts by O CEAN GPT. The instruction is: How to conduct research on interfacial
chemistry and toxicological effects of key radioactive nuclides?


                                  Command for Robot
                              `roslaunch uuv_control_utils
     Start Point
                              start_helical_trajectory.launch
                              uuv_name:=rexrov n_turns:=2`

                                                                                                                                  OceanGPT
                    𝒗


                                                  Target Object



Figure 9: Our model can be instructed for underwater robot control in the simulation platform of
Gazebo, which shows O CEAN GPT gains preliminary embodied intelligence capabilities.


As depicted in Figure 9, O CEAN GPT can instruct underwater robots via code or console com-
mands, allowing them to execute basic path-finding operations. In this example, by using natural
language as a prompt, the O CEAN GPT can automatically generate code (the robot generate a double
helix path) for underwater robot to operate based on human instructions. In fact, the experimental
result suggests that O CEAN GPT has the potential to acquire embodied intelligence. Though we
make preliminary attempts for ocean robot interaction, it paves the way for future advanced oceanic
models to undertake intricate robotic control and planning tasks.

6   C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we introduce O CEAN GPT, the first-ever oceanographic pre-trained language model,
which is expert in various ocean science tasks. To alleviate the difficulties for obtaining ocean
data, we propose an domain construction framework called D O I NSTRUCT, which constructs the
ocean instruction dataset by multi-agent collaboration. Each agent in our designed framework is
considered an expert in a specific topic and is responsible for generating the corresponding data.
Our generated dataset consists of diverse instructions to align the desired behaviors in ocean science
issues. Additionally, we establish the first oceanography benchmark, O CEAN B ENCH, to evaluate
the capabilities of LLMs in ocean science. Though comprehensive analysis in ocean science and
ocean engineering, O CEAN GPT not only demonstrates a higher level of knowledge expertise for
oceans science tasks but also gains preliminary embodied intelligence capabilities. We will continue
to improve O CEAN GPT by training larger models (e.g., 30b, 70b) and maintain O CEAN B ENCH
by adding new data and tasks.



                                                                                           9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E THICAL C ONSIDERATIONS

The datasets and model in this paper are designed for exploratory analysis. Within the domain of
LLMs, the distribution of both pre-training data and instructional data might exhibit biases, poten-
tially influencing the model’s outputs. Throughout experiments, we have carefully examined the
sampled data, eliminating any content that could be deemed toxic or offensive. Yet, it’s possible
that O CEAN GPT might occasionally yield incorrect or imprecise results. Hence, users leveraging
the insights provided by this model should exercise their discretion and bear the risk.

R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT

Codes, datasest are in the supplementary materials and will be released on GitHub,
O CEAN GPT will be released on Huggingface. We provide technical details of in Appendix A.4
and prompt design in Appendix A.5.

R EFERENCES
Tom B. Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared Kaplan, Prafulla Dhari-
  wal, Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Sandhini Agar-
  wal, Ariel Herbert-Voss, Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child, Aditya Ramesh,
  Daniel M. Ziegler, Jeffrey Wu, Clemens Winter, Christopher Hesse, Mark Chen, Eric Sigler,
  Mateusz Litwin, Scott Gray, Benjamin Chess, Jack Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam McCan-
  dlish, Alec Radford, Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. Language models are few-shot
  learners. In Hugo Larochelle, Marc’Aurelio Ranzato, Raia Hadsell, Maria-Florina Balcan,
  and Hsuan-Tien Lin (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 33: Annual
  Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2020, NeurIPS 2020, December 6-12,
  2020, virtual, 2020. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2020/hash/
  1457c0d6bfcb4967418bfb8ac142f64a-Abstract.html.
Wei-Lin Chiang, Zhuohan Li, Zi Lin, Ying Sheng, Zhanghao Wu, Hao Zhang, Lianmin Zheng,
 Siyuan Zhuang, Yonghao Zhuang, Joseph E. Gonzalez, Ion Stoica, and Eric P. Xing. Vicuna: An
 open-source chatbot impressing gpt-4 with 90%* chatgpt quality, March 2023. URL https:
 //lmsys.org/blog/2023-03-30-vicuna/.
Aakanksha Chowdhery, Sharan Narang, Jacob Devlin, Maarten Bosma, Gaurav Mishra, Adam
  Roberts, Paul Barham, Hyung Won Chung, Charles Sutton, Sebastian Gehrmann, Parker Schuh,
  Kensen Shi, Sasha Tsvyashchenko, Joshua Maynez, Abhishek Rao, Parker Barnes, Yi Tay, Noam
  Shazeer, Vinodkumar Prabhakaran, Emily Reif, Nan Du, Ben Hutchinson, Reiner Pope, James
  Bradbury, Jacob Austin, Michael Isard, Guy Gur-Ari, Pengcheng Yin, Toju Duke, Anselm Lev-
  skaya, Sanjay Ghemawat, Sunipa Dev, Henryk Michalewski, Xavier Garcia, Vedant Misra, Kevin
  Robinson, Liam Fedus, Denny Zhou, Daphne Ippolito, David Luan, Hyeontaek Lim, Barret
  Zoph, Alexander Spiridonov, Ryan Sepassi, David Dohan, Shivani Agrawal, Mark Omernick,
  Andrew M. Dai, Thanumalayan Sankaranarayana Pillai, Marie Pellat, Aitor Lewkowycz, Er-
  ica Moreira, Rewon Child, Oleksandr Polozov, Katherine Lee, Zongwei Zhou, Xuezhi Wang,
  Brennan Saeta, Mark Diaz, Orhan Firat, Michele Catasta, Jason Wei, Kathy Meier-Hellstern,
  Douglas Eck, Jeff Dean, Slav Petrov, and Noah Fiedel. Palm: Scaling language model-
  ing with pathways. CoRR, abs/2204.02311, 2022. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2204.02311. URL
  https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2204.02311.
Cheng Deng, Tianhang Zhang, Zhongmou He, Qiyuan Chen, Yuanyuan Shi, Le Zhou, Luoyi Fu,
  Weinan Zhang, Xinbing Wang, Chenghu Zhou, Zhouhan Lin, and Junxian He. Learning A
  foundation language model for geoscience knowledge understanding and utilization. CoRR,
  abs/2306.05064, 2023. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2306.05064. URL https://doi.org/10.
  48550/arXiv.2306.05064.
Yin Fang, Qiang Zhang, Ningyu Zhang, Zhuo Chen, Xiang Zhuang, Xin Shao, Xiaohui Fan, and
  Huajun Chen. Knowledge graph-enhanced molecular contrastive learning with functional prompt.
  Nature Machine Intelligence, 5:1–12, 05 2023. doi: 10.1038/s42256-023-00654-0.
Edward J. Hu, Yelong Shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang,
  and Weizhu Chen. Lora: Low-rank adaptation of large language models, 2021.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Zeljko Kraljevic, Anthony Shek, Daniel Bean, Rebecca Bendayan, James T. Teo, and Richard J. B.
  Dobson. Medgpt: Medical concept prediction from clinical narratives. CoRR, abs/2107.03134,
  2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2107.03134.
Zeming Lin, Halil Akin, Roshan Rao, Brian Hie, Zhongkai Zhu, Wenting Lu, Nikita Smetanin,
  Robert Verkuil, Ori Kabeli, Yaniv Shmueli, Allan dos Santos Costa, Maryam Fazel-Zarandi, Tom
  Sercu, Salvatore Candido, and Alexander Rives. Evolutionary-scale prediction of atomic-level
  protein structure with a language model. Science, 379(6637):1123–1130, 2023. doi: 10.1126/
  science.ade2574. URL https://www.science.org/doi/abs/10.1126/science.
  ade2574.
Renqian Luo, Liai Sun, Yingce Xia, Tao Qin, Sheng Zhang, Hoifung Poon, and Tie-Yan Liu. Biogpt:
  generative pre-trained transformer for biomedical text generation and mining. Briefings Bioin-
  form., 23(6), 2022. doi: 10.1093/bib/bbac409. URL https://doi.org/10.1093/bib/
  bbac409.
Michael Moor, Oishi Banerjee, Zahra Shakeri, Harlan Krumholz, Jure Leskovec, Eric Topol, and
 Pranav Rajpurkar. Foundation models for generalist medical artificial intelligence. Nature, 616:
 259–265, 04 2023. doi: 10.1038/s41586-023-05881-4.
OpenAI. Gpt-4 technical report, 2023.
Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll L. Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin,
  Chong Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, John Schulman, Jacob Hilton, Fraser
  Kelton, Luke Miller, Maddie Simens, Amanda Askell, Peter Welinder, Paul F. Christiano, Jan
  Leike, and Ryan Lowe. Training language models to follow instructions with human feedback. In
  NeurIPS, 2022. URL http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2022/hash/
  b1efde53be364a73914f58805a001731-Abstract-Conference.html.
Shuofei Qiao, Honghao Gui, Qianghuai Jia, Huajun Chen, and Ningyu Zhang. Making language
  models better tool learners with execution feedback. CoRR, 2023a.
Shuofei Qiao, Yixin Ou, Ningyu Zhang, Xiang Chen, Yunzhi Yao, Shumin Deng, Chuanqi Tan,
  Fei Huang, and Huajun Chen. Reasoning with language model prompting: A survey. In Anna
  Rogers, Jordan L. Boyd-Graber, and Naoaki Okazaki (eds.), Proceedings of the 61st Annual
  Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), ACL 2023,
  Toronto, Canada, July 9-14, 2023, pp. 5368–5393. Association for Computational Linguistics,
  2023b. doi: 10.18653/v1/2023.acl-long.294. URL https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/
  2023.acl-long.294.
Jack W. Rae, Sebastian Borgeaud, Trevor Cai, Katie Millican, Jordan Hoffmann, H. Francis
  Song, John Aslanides, Sarah Henderson, Roman Ring, Susannah Young, Eliza Rutherford,
  Tom Hennigan, Jacob Menick, Albin Cassirer, Richard Powell, George van den Driessche,
  Lisa Anne Hendricks, Maribeth Rauh, Po-Sen Huang, Amelia Glaese, Johannes Welbl, Sumanth
  Dathathri, Saffron Huang, Jonathan Uesato, John Mellor, Irina Higgins, Antonia Creswell, Nat
  McAleese, Amy Wu, Erich Elsen, Siddhant M. Jayakumar, Elena Buchatskaya, David Budden,
  Esme Sutherland, Karen Simonyan, Michela Paganini, Laurent Sifre, Lena Martens, Xiang Lor-
  raine Li, Adhiguna Kuncoro, Aida Nematzadeh, Elena Gribovskaya, Domenic Donato, Ange-
  liki Lazaridou, Arthur Mensch, Jean-Baptiste Lespiau, Maria Tsimpoukelli, Nikolai Grigorev,
  Doug Fritz, Thibault Sottiaux, Mantas Pajarskas, Toby Pohlen, Zhitao Gong, Daniel Toyama, Cy-
  prien de Masson d’Autume, Yujia Li, Tayfun Terzi, Vladimir Mikulik, Igor Babuschkin, Aidan
  Clark, Diego de Las Casas, Aurelia Guy, Chris Jones, James Bradbury, Matthew J. Johnson,
  Blake A. Hechtman, Laura Weidinger, Iason Gabriel, William Isaac, Edward Lockhart, Simon
  Osindero, Laura Rimell, Chris Dyer, Oriol Vinyals, Kareem Ayoub, Jeff Stanway, Lorrayne
  Bennett, Demis Hassabis, Koray Kavukcuoglu, and Geoffrey Irving. Scaling language mod-
  els: Methods, analysis & insights from training gopher. CoRR, abs/2112.11446, 2021. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2112.11446.
Teven Le Scao, Angela Fan, Christopher Akiki, Ellie Pavlick, Suzana Ilic, Daniel Hesslow, Roman
  Castagné, Alexandra Sasha Luccioni, François Yvon, Matthias Gallé, Jonathan Tow, Alexan-
  der M. Rush, Stella Biderman, Albert Webson, Pawan Sasanka Ammanamanchi, Thomas Wang,


                                               11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  Benoı̂t Sagot, Niklas Muennighoff, Albert Villanova del Moral, Olatunji Ruwase, Rachel Baw-
  den, Stas Bekman, Angelina McMillan-Major, Iz Beltagy, Huu Nguyen, Lucile Saulnier, Samson
  Tan, Pedro Ortiz Suarez, Victor Sanh, Hugo Laurençon, Yacine Jernite, Julien Launay, Margaret
  Mitchell, Colin Raffel, Aaron Gokaslan, Adi Simhi, Aitor Soroa, Alham Fikri Aji, Amit Alfassy,
  Anna Rogers, Ariel Kreisberg Nitzav, Canwen Xu, Chenghao Mou, Chris Emezue, Christo-
  pher Klamm, Colin Leong, Daniel van Strien, David Ifeoluwa Adelani, and et al. BLOOM:
  A 176b-parameter open-access multilingual language model. CoRR, abs/2211.05100, 2022. doi:
  10.48550/arXiv.2211.05100. URL https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2211.05100.

Karan Singhal, Shekoofeh Azizi, Tao Tu, S. Sara Mahdavi, Jason Wei, Hyung Won Chung, Nathan
  Scales, Ajay Kumar Tanwani, Heather Cole-Lewis, Stephen Pfohl, Perry Payne, Martin Senevi-
  ratne, Paul Gamble, Chris Kelly, Nathaneal Schärli, Aakanksha Chowdhery, Philip Andrew Mans-
  field, Blaise Agüera y Arcas, Dale R. Webster, Gregory S. Corrado, Yossi Matias, Katherine
  Chou, Juraj Gottweis, Nenad Tomasev, Yun Liu, Alvin Rajkomar, Joelle K. Barral, Christo-
  pher Semturs, Alan Karthikesalingam, and Vivek Natarajan. Large language models encode
  clinical knowledge. CoRR, abs/2212.13138, 2022. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2212.13138. URL
  https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2212.13138.

Rohan Taori, Ishaan Gulrajani, Tianyi Zhang, Yann Dubois, Xuechen Li, Carlos Guestrin, Percy
  Liang, and Tatsunori B. Hashimoto. Stanford alpaca: An instruction-following llama model.
  https://github.com/tatsu-lab/stanford_alpaca, 2023.

Christina Theodoris, Ling Xiao, Anant Chopra, Mark Chaffin, Zeina Sayed, Matthew Hill, He-
  lene Mantineo, Elizabeth Brydon, Zexian Zeng, Shirley Liu, and Patrick Ellinor. Transfer
  learning enables predictions in network biology. Nature, 618:1–9, 05 2023. doi: 10.1038/
  s41586-023-06139-9.

Romal Thoppilan, Daniel De Freitas, Jamie Hall, Noam Shazeer, Apoorv Kulshreshtha, Heng-Tze
  Cheng, Alicia Jin, Taylor Bos, Leslie Baker, Yu Du, YaGuang Li, Hongrae Lee, Huaixiu Steven
  Zheng, Amin Ghafouri, Marcelo Menegali, Yanping Huang, Maxim Krikun, Dmitry Lepikhin,
  James Qin, Dehao Chen, Yuanzhong Xu, Zhifeng Chen, Adam Roberts, Maarten Bosma, Yanqi
  Zhou, Chung-Ching Chang, Igor Krivokon, Will Rusch, Marc Pickett, Kathleen S. Meier-
  Hellstern, Meredith Ringel Morris, Tulsee Doshi, Renelito Delos Santos, Toju Duke, Johnny
  Soraker, Ben Zevenbergen, Vinodkumar Prabhakaran, Mark Diaz, Ben Hutchinson, Kristen Ol-
  son, Alejandra Molina, Erin Hoffman-John, Josh Lee, Lora Aroyo, Ravi Rajakumar, Alena
  Butryna, Matthew Lamm, Viktoriya Kuzmina, Joe Fenton, Aaron Cohen, Rachel Bernstein,
  Ray Kurzweil, Blaise Agüera y Arcas, Claire Cui, Marian Croak, Ed H. Chi, and Quoc Le.
  Lamda: Language models for dialog applications. CoRR, abs/2201.08239, 2022. URL https:
  //arxiv.org/abs/2201.08239.

Hugo Touvron, Thibaut Lavril, Gautier Izacard, Xavier Martinet, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Timothée
  Lacroix, Baptiste Rozière, Naman Goyal, Eric Hambro, Faisal Azhar, Aurélien Rodriguez, Ar-
  mand Joulin, Edouard Grave, and Guillaume Lample. Llama: Open and efficient foundation
  language models. CoRR, abs/2302.13971, 2023a. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2302.13971. URL
  https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2302.13971.

Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Albert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei, Niko-
  lay Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti Bhosale, Dan Bikel, Lukas Blecher,
  Cristian Canton-Ferrer, Moya Chen, Guillem Cucurull, David Esiobu, Jude Fernandes, Jeremy
  Fu, Wenyin Fu, Brian Fuller, Cynthia Gao, Vedanuj Goswami, Naman Goyal, Anthony Hartshorn,
  Saghar Hosseini, Rui Hou, Hakan Inan, Marcin Kardas, Viktor Kerkez, Madian Khabsa, Isabel
  Kloumann, Artem Korenev, Punit Singh Koura, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Thibaut Lavril, Jenya
  Lee, Diana Liskovich, Yinghai Lu, Yuning Mao, Xavier Martinet, Todor Mihaylov, Pushkar
  Mishra, Igor Molybog, Yixin Nie, Andrew Poulton, Jeremy Reizenstein, Rashi Rungta, Kalyan
  Saladi, Alan Schelten, Ruan Silva, Eric Michael Smith, Ranjan Subramanian, Xiaoqing Ellen
  Tan, Binh Tang, Ross Taylor, Adina Williams, Jian Xiang Kuan, Puxin Xu, Zheng Yan, Iliyan
  Zarov, Yuchen Zhang, Angela Fan, Melanie Kambadur, Sharan Narang, Aurélien Rodriguez,
  Robert Stojnic, Sergey Edunov, and Thomas Scialom. Llama 2: Open foundation and fine-
  tuned chat models. CoRR, abs/2307.09288, 2023b. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2307.09288. URL
  https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2307.09288.


                                              12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Lei Wang, Chen Ma, Xueyang Feng, Zeyu Zhang, Hao Yang, Jingsen Zhang, Zhiyuan Chen, Jiakai
  Tang, Xu Chen, Yankai Lin, Wayne Xin Zhao, Zhewei Wei, and Ji-Rong Wen. A survey on large
  language model based autonomous agents. CoRR, abs/2308.11432, 2023a. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.
  2308.11432. URL https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2308.11432.
Peiyi Wang, Lei Li, Liang Chen, Zefan Cai, Dawei Zhu, Binghuai Lin, Yunbo Cao, Qi Liu, Tianyu
  Liu, and Zhifang Sui. Large language models are not fair evaluators, 2023b.
Xingyao Wang, Zihan Wang, Jiateng Liu, Yangyi Chen, Lifan Yuan, Hao Peng, and Heng Ji. Mint:
  Evaluating llms in multi-turn interaction with tools and language feedback, 2023c.
Yizhong Wang, Yeganeh Kordi, Swaroop Mishra, Alisa Liu, Noah A. Smith, Daniel Khashabi, and
  Hannaneh Hajishirzi. Self-instruct: Aligning language models with self-generated instructions.
  In Anna Rogers, Jordan L. Boyd-Graber, and Naoaki Okazaki (eds.), Proceedings of the 61st An-
  nual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), ACL
  2023, Toronto, Canada, July 9-14, 2023, pp. 13484–13508. Association for Computational Lin-
  guistics, 2023d. doi: 10.18653/v1/2023.acl-long.754. URL https://doi.org/10.18653/
  v1/2023.acl-long.754.
Jason Wei, Maarten Bosma, Vincent Y. Zhao, Kelvin Guu, Adams Wei Yu, Brian Lester, Nan
  Du, Andrew M. Dai, and Quoc V. Le. Finetuned language models are zero-shot learners. In
  The Tenth International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2022, Virtual Event,
  April 25-29, 2022. OpenReview.net, 2022. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
  gEZrGCozdqR.
Zhiheng Xi, Wenxiang Chen, Xin Guo, Wei He, Yiwen Ding, Boyang Hong, Ming Zhang, Jun-
  zhe Wang, Senjie Jin, Enyu Zhou, Rui Zheng, Xiaoran Fan, Xiao Wang, Limao Xiong, Yuhao
  Zhou, Weiran Wang, Changhao Jiang, Yicheng Zou, Xiangyang Liu, Zhangyue Yin, Shihan
  Dou, Rongxiang Weng, Wensen Cheng, Qi Zhang, Wenjuan Qin, Yongyan Zheng, Xipeng
  Qiu, Xuanjing Huan, and Tao Gui. The rise and potential of large language model based
  agents: A survey. CoRR, abs/2309.07864, 2023. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2309.07864. URL
  https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2309.07864.
Can Xu, Qingfeng Sun, Kai Zheng, Xiubo Geng, Pu Zhao, Jiazhan Feng, Chongyang Tao, and
  Daxin Jiang. Wizardlm: Empowering large language models to follow complex instructions.
  CoRR, abs/2304.12244, 2023. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2304.12244. URL https://doi.org/
  10.48550/arXiv.2304.12244.
Aohan Zeng, Xiao Liu, Zhengxiao Du, Zihan Wang, Hanyu Lai, Ming Ding, Zhuoyi Yang, Yifan
  Xu, Wendi Zheng, Xiao Xia, Weng Lam Tam, Zixuan Ma, Yufei Xue, Jidong Zhai, Wenguang
  Chen, Zhiyuan Liu, Peng Zhang, Yuxiao Dong, and Jie Tang. GLM-130B: an open bilingual
  pre-trained model. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR
  2023, Kigali, Rwanda, May 1-5, 2023. OpenReview.net, 2023. URL https://openreview.
  net/pdf?id=-Aw0rrrPUF.
Ningyu Zhang, Jintian Zhang, Xiaohan Wang, Honghao Gui, Kangwei Liu, Yinuo Jiang, Xiang
  Chen, Shengyu Mao, Shuofei Qiao, Yuqi Zhu, Zhen Bi, Jing Chen, Xiaozhuan Liang, Yixin Ou,
  Runnan Fang, Zekun Xi, Xin Xu, Lei Li, Peng Wang, Mengru Wang, Yunzhi Yao, Bozhong Tian,
  Yin Fang, Guozhou Zheng, and Huajun Chen. Knowlm: An open-sourced knowledgeable large
  langugae model framework, 2023a. URL http://knowlm.zjukg.cn/.
Shengyu Zhang, Linfeng Dong, Xiaoya Li, Sen Zhang, Xiaofei Sun, Shuhe Wang, Jiwei Li, Runyi
  Hu, Tianwei Zhang, Fei Wu, and Guoyin Wang. Instruction tuning for large language models:
  A survey. CoRR, abs/2308.10792, 2023b. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2308.10792. URL https:
  //doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2308.10792.
Susan Zhang, Stephen Roller, Naman Goyal, Mikel Artetxe, Moya Chen, Shuohui Chen, Christo-
  pher Dewan, Mona T. Diab, Xian Li, Xi Victoria Lin, Todor Mihaylov, Myle Ott, Sam Shleifer,
  Kurt Shuster, Daniel Simig, Punit Singh Koura, Anjali Sridhar, Tianlu Wang, and Luke Zettle-
  moyer. OPT: open pre-trained transformer language models. CoRR, abs/2205.01068, 2022. doi:
  10.48550/arXiv.2205.01068. URL https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2205.01068.



                                              13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A                     A PPENDIX
A.1                         L IMITATIONS AND E THICAL C ONCERNS

A.1.1                               B IAS IN DATA D ISTRIBUTION
In the realm of large language models, the distribution of pre-training data and instruction data
can be subject to substantial biases, which can shape the outputs of these models. Pre-training
data for language models often comes from the internet, a vast and potentially biased source of
information. The Internet content is inherently skewed, reflecting the biases of its contributors,
and hence may not represent a balanced global perspective. Similarly, instruction data can also
carry the biases of the humans who create these instructions. For instance, instruction developed by
individuals with a particular cultural, socioeconomic, or educational background may inadvertently
favor specific perspectives, languages, or communication styles and marginalize others. This bias in
data distribution can result in models that reinforce existing prejudices, lack cultural sensitivity, or
fail to accurately understand and generate content in underrepresented languages or dialects.

A.1.2                               H ALLUCINATION IN L ARGE L ANGUAGE M ODELS
Although LLMs have shown tremendous success in general domains of NLP, there is a notable issue
regarding their tendency to produce hallucinations. Hallucinations refer to instances where LLMs
occasionally generate content that deviates from the user’s input, contradicts previously generated
context, or conflicts with established world knowledge. By developing strategies to address the
issue of hallucination, LLMs can better align their outputs with user intent, preserve coherence
within generated content, and enhance their overall utility in real-world applications.

A.2                         C OMPLETE R ESULTS IN O CEAN B ENCH

          Win       Tie      Loss

Win rate (%)                                                            Win rate (%)                                                       Win rate (%)                                                             Win rate (%)                                                         Win rate (%)

                              Task 1: Analysis                                           Task 2: Commonsense Reasoning                                      Task 3: Recommendation                                                               Task 4: Editing                                            Task 5: Question Anwsering
90                                                                      90                                                                 90                                                                       90                                                                      90


60                                                                      60                                                                 60                                                                       60                                                                      60


30                                                                      30                                                                 30                                                                       30                                                                      30


 0                                                                       0                                                                  0                                                                        0                                                                      0
               OceanGPT            OceanGPT            OceanGPT                  OceanGPT               OceanGPT             OceanGPT                OceanGPT               OceanGPT                OceanGPT                  OceanGPT               OceanGPT               OceanGPT                    OceanGPT            OceanGPT             OceanGPT
         vs vicuna-1.5-7b    vs llama2-chat-7b     vs chatglm2-6b            vs chatglm2-6b       vs llama2-chat-7b    vs vicuna-1.5-7b          vs chatglm2-6b       vs llama2-chat-7b       vs vicuna-1.5-7b            vs chatglm2-6b       vs llama2-chat-7b      vs vicuna-1.5-7b            vs vicuna-1.5-7b    vs llama2-chat-7b      vs chatglm2-6b



                            Task 6: Classification                                       Task 7: Open-ended Generation                                                   Task 8: Description                                               Task 9: Identification                                                 Task 10: Letter Writing
 90                                                                     90                                                                  90                                                                      90                                                                      90



 60                                                                     60                                                                  60                                                                      60                                                                      60


 30                                                                     30                                                                  30                                                                      30                                                                      30


     0                                                                   0                                                                      0                                                                    0                                                                       0
               OceanGPT              OceanGPT              OceanGPT                  OceanGPT            OceanGPT             OceanGPT                   OceanGPT              OceanGPT                OceanGPT                 OceanGPT             OceanGPT              OceanGPT                  OceanGPT              OceanGPT              OceanGPT
           vs chatglm2-6b      vs llama2-chat-7b     vs vicuna-1.5-7b            vs chatglm2-6b    vs llama2-chat-7b    vs vicuna-1.5-7b             vs chatglm2-6b      vs llama2-chat-7b       vs vicuna-1.5-7b         vs vicuna-1.5-7b     vs llama2-chat-7b       vs chatglm2-6b            vs chatglm2-6b      vs llama2-chat-7b     vs vicuna-1.5-7b


                             Task 11: Judgment                                                    Task 12: Extraction                                                    Task 13: Summary                                                  Task 14: Transformation                                                   Task 15: Others
 90                                                                      90                                                                  90                                                                          90                                                                 90


 60                                                                      60                                                                     60                                                                       60                                                                 60


 30                                                                      30                                                                  30                                                                          30                                                                 30


     0                                                                       0                                                                  0                                                                        0                                                                   0
              OceanGPT              OceanGPT             OceanGPT                    OceanGPT            OceanGPT             OceanGPT                      OceanGPT            OceanGPT              OceanGPT                    OceanGPT              OceanGPT               OceanGPT                OceanGPT              OceanGPT              OceanGPT
          vs chatglm2-6b      vs llama2-chat-7b    vs vicuna-1.5-7b              vs chatglm2-6b    vs llama2-chat-7b    vs vicuna-1.5-7b              vs vicuna-1.5-7b    vs llama2-chat-7b       vs chatglm2-6b              vs chatglm2-6b      vs llama2-chat-7b      vs vicuna-1.5-7b          vs chatglm2-6b      vs llama2-chat-7b     vs vicuna-1.5-7b


Figure 10: Automatic evaluation results of O CEAN GPT in all ocean science tasks in O CEAN -
B ENCH.


A.3                         DATA S TATISTICS AND A NALYSIS

A.4                         I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS

A.5                         P ROMPT DESIGN IN THIS WORK

A.6                         D ETAILED R ESULT FOR O CEAN S CIENCE I SSUES


                                                                                                                                                                            14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  Journal                                             Num           Journal                                     Num
  Oceanography                                        1,359         Ocean Science                               1,168
  Ocean Dynamics                                      2,825         Marine Biology                              10,485
  Aquatic Sciences                                    2,522         Fisheries Science                           2,371
  Maritime Studies                                    313           Marine Biotechnology                        1,794
  Ocean Science Journal                               717           Physical Oceanography                       455
  Marine Geophysical Research                         1,155         Journal of Oceanography                     2,580
  Journal of Physical Oceanography                    3,588         Marine Ecology Progress Series              1,494
  Fish Physiology and Biochemistry                    3,251         Atmospheric and Oceanic Optics              1,156
  Reviews in Fish Biology and Fisheries               1,158         Journal of Oceanology and Limnology         3,510
  Journal of Atmospheric and Oceanic                  3,298         Journal of Ocean Engineering and Ma-        266
  Technology                                                        rine Energy
  Journal of the Marine Biological Asso-              7,676         Journal of Offshore Mechanics and           2,015
  ciation of the United Kingdom                                     Arctic Engineering

    Table 1: The statistics of the pre-training corpus. Num denotes the number of documents.



     Task                               Num      Task                               Num       Task             Num
     Analysis                           674      Classification                     895       Judgment         655
     Commonsense Reasoning              1024     Open-ended Generation              930       Extraction       1078
     Recommendation                     1,089    Description                        1,246     Summary          149
     Editing                            1,075    Identification                     464       Transformation   401
     Question Answering                 1,230    Letter Writing                     359       Others           157

        Table 2: The statistics of O CEAN B ENCH. Num denotes the number of samples.



                                                Win           Tie         Loss
                       OceanGPT
                                                        0.60                          0.35             0.05
                 vs vicuna-1.5-7b

                       OceanGPT
                vs llama2-chat-7b                      0.65                               0.32          0.03



                      OceanGPT
                  vs chatglm2-6b                              0.84                                0.02 0.14


                                    0             20                 Win rate (%)            80         100


     Figure 11: Instance-level results (automatic evaluation) in 15 tasks of O CEAN B ENCH.



                                    Hyperparameter
                                    Fine-tuning method               LoRA
                                    Batch Size                       512
                                    Device†                          NVIDIA A800
                                    GPU number                       6
                                    Learning Rate (LR)               1e − 4
                                    LoRA r                           8
                                    LoRA α                           16
                                    LoRA Dropout                     0.05
                                    Epoch                            10

                                Table 3: Detailed experimental settings.



                                                               15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                           Figure 12: Distribution of our O CEAN B ENCH.


  Prompt for ”Fine-Tuned Agent as the Literature Extractor”:
  You are a helpful ocean assistant. You are to extract the question from each of the answer provided.
  Answer: This is a seahorse, belonging to the family Syngnathidae. Seahorses are vertebrates commonly
  found in tropical and subtropical waters. They have unique morphology and biological characteristics and
  are important organisms in marine ecosystems.
  Prompt for ”Evolving Agent as the Generator”:
  Assuming you are an expert in marine engineering and resources, please keep the meaning of the follow-
  ing sentences unchanged and provide as much professional knowledge as possible.
  Sentences:Please recommend some mineral resources found in the East China Sea.
  Prompt for “Agent as the Inspector with Rule Constraints”:
  Assuming you are an inspector in marine science, please filter and judge the sentences in ’Sentences’
  based on the constraints provided below:
  Constraints: Keyword Filter: Focus on literature that prominently mentions the terms ’coral reefs’, ’ocean
  acidification’, or ’deep-sea exploration’. Date Range: Only consider articles published between 2010 and
  2022. Author Filter: Prioritize works by the Oceanic Research Institute. Type of Literature: Specifically
  look for ’experimental studies’ and ’review articles’. Exclude ’conference papers’. Geographical Focus:
  Highlight research that pertains to the Pacific Ocean region. Language Constraint: Only select literature
  written in English. Abstract Inclusion: Ensure the abstract contains the phrase ’climate impact’. Abstract
  Exclusion: Exclude any literature whose abstract mentions ’laboratory simulation’.
  Prompt for automatic evaluation using GPT4:
  Please check if following sentences contain rich ocean related information. If so, output ”related”. Oth-
  erwise, output ”unrelated”.
  Sentences: Dissolved organic carbon (DOC) represents the largest pool of reduced carbon in oceans and
  plays important roles in the ocean carbon cycle and food webs . DOC comprises nearly half of the riverine
  organic carbon flux into oceans. Riverine DOC is involved in numerous ecosystem functions, including
  key roles in chemical and biological processes. Refractory and labile DOC are, respectively, important
  for carbon sequestra-tion in the ocean and a vital food source for marine bacteria.

                      Figure 13: The prompt example that we use in this work.



                                                     16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  Instruction: How to conduct research on interfacial chemistry and toxicological effects of key radioactive nuclides?

  O CEAN GPT                   The study of interfacial chemistry and toxicological effects of key radioactive
                               nuclides is a complex research field that requires a multidisciplinary
                               approach. It involves multiple techniques such as experimental research,
                               theoretical research, and numerical simulations. The following is a detailed
                               outline of the steps to conduct research on the interface chemistry and
                               toxicological effects of key radioactive nuclides: 1. Determine the specific
                               radioactive nuclides of interest: Different radioactive nuclides have
                               different chemical properties and toxicological effects. Therefore, it is
                               necessary to select specific radioactive nuclides of interest and establish
                               a research plan. 2. Conduct laboratory experiments: Laboratory experiments
                               are crucial for studying the chemical properties and toxicological effects
                               of radioactive nuclides. The experiments involve measuring the chemical
                               properties of radioactive nuclides, such as their reactivity, stability, and
                               chemical reactivity. 3. Develop computational models: Computational models
                               can be used to simulate the chemical and toxicological effects of radioactive
                               nuclides. This involves developing mathematical models and algorithms to
                               predict the behavior of radioactive nuclides under different conditions.
                               4. Analyze experimental data: Experimental data obtained from laboratory
                               experiments need to be analyzed and interpreted. This involves studying
                               the experimental results and comparing them with theoretical predictions.
                               5. Develop toxicological risk assessment methods: Toxicological risk
                               assessment methods are used to evaluate the potential hazards of radioactive
                               nuclides. This involves developing models that can predict the toxicological
                               effects of radioactive nuclides and assessing their risks to human health.
                               6. Conduct field experiments: Field experiments are necessary to study the
                               behavior of radioactive nuclides in real-world environments. This involves
                               measuring the chemical and toxicological effects of radioactive nuclides
                               in different ecosystems and studying their distribution and transport.
                               7. Develop guidelines for safe disposal: Safe disposal of radioactive
                               nuclides is critical for preventing environmental contamination and protecting
                               human health. This involves developing guidelines for the safe disposal of
                               radioactive nuclides and their storage and transport.


  vicuna-1.5-7b                Conducting research on interfacial chemistry and toxicological effects of key
                               radioactive nuclides requires a multidisciplinary approach, combining expertise
                               in chemistry, physics, biology, and environmental science. Here are some
                               general steps you can follow to conduct research in this area: 1. Identify
                               the key radioactive nuclides of interest: Start by identifying the specific
                               radioactive nuclides that you want to study. This may include elements such as
                               uranium, plutonium, and cesium, among others. 2. Develop a research question:
                               Once you have identified the key radioactive nuclides, develop a research
                               question that addresses an important aspect of their interfacial chemistry
                               and toxicological effects. This question should be specific and focused, and
                               should guide your research efforts. 3. Design experiments: Develop a set
                               of experiments that will help you answer your research question. This may
                               involve conducting laboratory experiments, field studies, or both. Be sure
                               to choose experiments that are appropriate for your research question and that
                               use methods that are reliable and valid. 4. Collect and analyze data: Once
                               you have conducted your experiments, collect and analyze the data you have
                               generated. Be sure to carefully document your methods and results, and to
                               interpret your data in a clear and concise manner. 5. Interpret results and
                               draw conclusions: Use your data to draw conclusions about the interfacial
                               chemistry and toxicological effects of the key radioactive nuclides. Be sure
                               to consider any limitations of your study and to consider how your findings
                               may be generalized to other contexts. 6.Communicate your results: Finally,
                               share your findings with others through publication in academic journals,
                               presentations at conferences, and other means. Be sure to clearly communicate
                               the importance of your work and its implications for interfacial chemistry and
                               toxicology.


Table 4:        Performance analysis on ocean science issues. The input prompt in-
struction is How to conduct research on interfacial chemistry and toxicological
effects of key radioactive nuclides?


                                                                   17
