Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


S TATELESS M EAN -F IELD G AMES : A F RAMEWORK FOR
I NDEPENDENT L EARNING WITH L ARGE P OPULATIONS
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                                  A BSTRACT

             Competitive games played by thousands or even millions of players are omnipresent
             in the real world, for instance in transportation, communications, or computer net-
             works. However, learning in such large-scale multi-agent settings is known to be
             challenging due to the so-called “curse of many agents”. In order to tackle large
             population independent learning in a general class of such problems, we formulate
             and analyze the Stateless Mean-Field Game (SMFG): we show that SMFG is a
             relevant and powerful special case of certain mean-field game formulations and
             a generalization of other interaction models. Furthermore, we show that SMFG
             can model many real-world interactions, and we prove explicit finite sample com-
             plexity guarantees with independent learning under different feedback models with
             repeated play. Theoretically, we contribute techniques from variational inequality
             (VI) literature to analyze independent learning by showing that SMFG is a VI prob-
             lem at the infinite agent limit. We formulate learning and exploration algorithms
             that converge efficiently to approximate Nash equilibria even with finitely many
             agents. Finally, we validate our theoretical results in numerical examples as well
             as in the real-world problems of city traffic and network access.


1       I NTRODUCTION

Multi-agent RL (MARL) has been an active area of research, with a very broad range of successful
applications in games such as Chess, Shogi (Silver et al., 2017), Go (Silver et al., 2018), Stratego
(Perolat et al., 2022), as well as real-world applications for instance in robotics (Matignon et al.,
2007). However, the applications of MARL to games of a much larger scale involving thousands or
millions of agents still remain a theoretical and experimental challenge (Wang et al., 2020).
Despite this limitation, competitive games with many players are ubiquitous and typically high-stakes.
In many real-world games, extremely large-scale competitive multiagency is the rule rather than the
exception: for instance when commuting every morning between cities using infrastructure shared
with millions of other commuters, when periodically accessing an internet resource by querying
servers used simultaneously by many users, or when sending information over common communica-
tion channels. A strong but common and powerful assumption in such games is that of statelessness.
For instance, one can assume that the capacity of an intercity highway or an internet server is only
a function of its (and other highways’/servers’) immediate load and not a function of time 1 .
With the aim of modeling learning in such games, we propose and analyze the Stateless Mean-Field
Game (SMFG). In our SMFG model, N players (drivers, internet users, . . . ) choose among K actions
(highway to take, server to access, . . . ) yielding an empirical distribution of players over actions (i.e.,
the load of each action) µ ∈ ∆K , where ∆K is the K dimensional probability simplex. The vector
of expected payoffs then of each action is a function F(µ) ∈ [0, 1]K of the load over actions. Note
that F allows complex dependencies of the payoff of an action on the occupancy of itself and all
other actions as well, hence is a powerful and generic model. Furthermore, we assume players are
selfish, i.e., without regard to global welfare each agent has the goal of maximizing their expected
reward. Hence the natural solution concept is a Nash equilibrium where agents do not have incentive
to unilaterally deviate. Finally, in our setting, we are interested in independent learning (IL) using
repeated play, that is, algorithms where each agent learns from their own (noisy) interactions without
    1
        Unless the timescale is years/decades, in which long-term degradation effects will become significant.


                                                         1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


observing others or a centralized coordinator. IL, despite being theoretically challenging, is natural
for such games as centralized control can be an unrealistic assumption for large populations.
From a theoretical perspective, our setting is novel but closely related to certain mean-field game
(MFG) formulations in RL literature, and yields non-trivial results for cases where N is large. As we
present later, the assumptions we introduce are related to Lasry-Lions conditions in MFG literature
(Perrin et al., 2020), although not a strict subclass. Furthermore, our formulation is sufficiently general
to be relevant in many real-world problems while admitting finite-time, finite-sample IL guarantees,
which is absent in MFG literature to the best of our knowledge. Before we formalize SMFG and
present the main theoretical contribution, we first motivate its relevance with three examples.
Network resource management. Assume there are K resources (e.g., servers/computational nodes)
available on a computer network shared by a large number of (say, N ≫ K) users. These resources
might have varying capabilities and load tolerances, as well as correlations in performance due effects
of virtualization. At each time step, each user tries to access a resource and experiences a delay that
increases with the number of users trying to access the same node. The expected delays of each server
might be a highly nonlinear function of the distribution of users over servers that can not be directly
modeled, as many complex interactions in infrastructure usage (power, connectivity, CPU/memory
resources) typically exist.
Repeated commuting with large populations. Every morning, N commuters from city A to city
B choose among K routes to drive to their target (typically N ≫ K), observing only how long
it takes them to commute. The distribution of choices in the population affects how much time
each person spends traveling. A simplistic model would be increased waiting times as more people
choose the same (or intersecting) routes. However, modern road infrastructure can be very complex
(Hoogendoorn & Knoop, 2013) due to non-trivial feedback loops and adaptive systems such as
load-dependent traffic lights.
Multi-player multi-armed bandits with soft collisions. Multiplayer MAB have already been studied
in the special case where collisions (i.e., multiple players choosing the same arm) result in zero returns.
In many real-world applications, arms used by multiple players yield diminished (but non-zero)
utilities when occupied by multiple players. For instance, in many radio communications applications
(Bluetooth, Wi-Fi), common frequencies are automatically used via time-sharing, yielding delayed
but successful communication when collisions occur. Similarly, when accessing online resources,
servers will be able to serve multiple clients albeit with slower response times.
Overall, in this paper we introduce the SMFG, its Nash equilibrium as the intuitive solution concept,
and discuss its real-world relevance (Section 2). We theoretically analyze the SMFG at the limit
N → ∞ and make connections to variational inequalities in optimization literature (Section 3.1),
leading to the formulation and finite-time analysis of independent learning in full and bandit feedback
cases (Sections 3.2, 3.3). Finally, we experimentally verify our theory in numerical examples and
two real-world use cases in city traffic and access to the Tor network (Section 4).


1.1   R ELATED W ORK

This work is situated at the intersection of multiple areas of research, we first present each.
Mean-field games. Mean-field games (MFG), originally proposed independently by Lasry & Lions
(2007) and Huang et al. (2006), have been an active research area in multi-agent RL literature. MFG
is a useful theoretical tool for analyzing a specific class of MARL problems consisting of a large
number of players with symmetric (but competitive) interests by formulating the infinite agent limit.
Such games have been analyzed under various assumptions, reward models and solution concepts,
such as Lasry-Lions games (Perrin et al., 2020; Pérolat et al., 2022), stationary MFG (Anahtarci
et al., 2022; Xie et al., 2021; Zaman et al., 2023; Yardim et al., 2022), linear quadratic MFG (Guo
et al., 2022; Fu et al., 2019), and MFGs on graphs (Yang et al., 2017; Gu et al., 2021). However,
finite-sample guarantees for mean-field games only exist under specific assumptions. For Lasry-Lions
games, convergence guarantees exist only in continuous time dynamics with an infinite agent oracle
(Perrin et al., 2020) and discrete time iteration complexity guarantees only have been shown in the
case rewards admit a concave potential (Geist et al., 2021), while IL guarantees with finite agents
in this setting do not exist to the best of our knowledge. For stationary MFGs, many recent works
require strong regularization, smoothness, and access to infinite-agent oracles (Anahtarci et al., 2022;


                                                    2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Xie et al., 2021; Zaman et al., 2023; Mao et al., 2022). IL in stationary MFGs has been studied either
under a subjective equilibrium solution concept (Yongacoglu et al., 2022) or with strong regularization
bias and arbitrarily poor sample complexity (Yardim et al., 2022).
Multi-player MAB (MMAB). Our model is related to the MMAB problem. The standard reward
model for MMAB is collisions (Anandkumar et al., 2011), where agents receive a reward of 0 if
more than one pulls the same arm. Results have focused on the so-called no-communications setting,
establishing regret guarantees for the cooperative setting without a centralized coordinator (Avner &
Mannor, 2014; Rosenski et al., 2016; Bubeck et al., 2021). In our competitive setting, our primary
metric is exploitability or proximity to NE rather than regret as typically employed in the collaborative
setting of MMAB (similar to the NE for MMAB result established in (Lugosi & Mehrabian, 2022)).
Variational inequalities. Variational inequalities (VI) and algorithms, which we use as theoretical
tools, have been an active research in classical (Nemirovski, 2004; Facchinei & Pang, 2003; Nesterov,
2007) and recent (Lin et al., 2022; Kotsalis et al., 2022) optimization literature. A recent survey for
methods for solving VIs can be found in (Beznosikov et al., 2023).
Other work. A setting that has a similar set of keywords is mean-field bandits Gummadi et al. (2013);
Wang & Jia (2021), as mentioned in the survey by (Laurière et al., 2022). However, these models
do not analyze a competitive (Nash) equilibrium, but rather a population steady-state reached by
an infinite population under a prescribed, unknown agent behavior. In these works, optimality or
exploitability is not a concern, hence a direct comparison with our work is not possible (differences
detailed in appendix, Section A). IL has also been investigated in zero-sum games (Daskalakis et al.,
2020; Sayin et al., 2021; Ozdaglar et al., 2021) and potential games (Ding et al., 2022; Heliou et al.,
2017). A related literature is population games & evolutionary dynamics (Sandholm, 2015; Quijano
et al., 2017), where competitive populations are analyzed with differential equations. While solution
concepts overlap, we are interested in IL with repeated play and not the continuous-time dynamic
system.

1.2   S UMMARY OF C ONTRIBUTIONS

From the perspective of MFG literature, we (1) formulate the SMFG, a new class of MFGs in
which learning occurs without central coordination and with restricted (bandit) feedback, and (2)
propose an algorithm that converges to a solution with finite-sample, finite-agent, IL guarantees under
limited feedback models. Compared to MMAB, the fundamental contribution of our model is the
incorporation of a large class of reward interactions beyond collision models and analysis for large
(N ≫ K) populations of players. SMFG can be also seen as an extension of VIs to the setting where
a stochastic operator oracle is absent, and can only be evaluated in aggregate by a population. From a
technical point of view, we further present the following summary of our novelty and roadmap:
1. We use techniques from optimization and VIs to analyze independent learning with N -agents,
    proving finite sample bounds with regularized learning. Our analyses are partially inspired by
    Rakhlin et al. (2011), although significantly diverging from their techniques due to (1) having
    an arbitrary monotone operator rather than a convex minimization problem, (2) the lack of
    access to a noisy gradient/operator oracle since we are analyzing IL with N -agents rather than
    stochastic optimization, and (3) restricted (bandit) feedback. As a technical contribution, our work
    demonstrates that VI and operator theory can be used to understand IL.
2. We analyze the learning algorithm under a bandit feedback model and prove finite sample
    guarantees. In this case, we propose a probabilistic exploration scheme that enables agents to
    obtain low-variance estimates of the payoff operator F in the absence of centralized coordination.
3. We verify our theoretical results with synthetic and real-world experiments, demonstrating the
    usefulness of the mean-field formulation in real-world problems.

2     P ROBLEM F ORMALIZATION AND M OTIVATION

Notation. ∆A denotes the probability simplex over a finite set A. For a set A and a map F : Ω → RA
defined on Ω, for ω ∈ Ω, a ∈ A, we denote the entry of F(ω) ∈ RA corresponding to a as
F(ω, a) ∈ R. For a vector u ∈ RA , u(a) ∈ R denotes its entry corresponding to a ∈ A. 1K ∈ RK
denotes a vector with all entries 1. For N -tuple v ∈ ΩN and v ∈ Ω, (v, v−i ) is the N -tuple with the
i-th entry replaced by v. ea ∈ RA is the standard unit vector with coordinate a set to 1.


                                                   3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


2.1    M ATHEMATICAL F ORMULATION

We formalize the stateless mean-field game (SMFG), the main mathematical object of interest of this
work. The SMFG problem with repeated plays consists of the following.
     1. Finite set of players N = {1, . . . , N } with |N | = N ∈ N>0 ,
     2. Set of finitely many actions A, with |A| = K ∈ N>0 ,
     3. A payoff function F : ∆A → [0, 1]K , which maps the empirical occupancy measure of the
         population over actions to a corresponding payoff in [0, 1] for each action.
SMFG is played across multiple rounds where players are allowed to alter their strategies in between
observations, where at each round t ∈ N≥0 ,
       1. Each player i ∈ N picks an action ait ∈ A,
                                                                        b t := N1 N
                                                                                    P
       2. The empirical occupancy measure over actions is set to be µ                  i=1 eait
       3. Depending on the feedback model, each agent i ∈ N observes:
          Full feedback: The (noisy) payoffs for each action rit := F(µ     b t ) + nit ∈ RK or,
          Bandit feedback: The (noisy) payoff for their chosen action rti := rit (ait ) ∈ R.
       4. Each agent receives the payoff rti .
Intuitively, SMFG models games where the payoff obtained from choosing an action depends on
how the population is statistically distributed over actions, without distinguishing between particular
players. We assume the K-dimensional noise vectors nit are i.i.d. for each i, t and entry-wise have
zero mean and variance σ 2 . Hence each agent observes a noisy version of the payoff of their action
(or the payoff of all actions with full feedback) under the current empirical occupancy over actions.
We assume the game is competitive, that is, each agent aims to maximize their personal expected
payoff without regard to social welfare. We allow agents to play randomized actions (mixed strategies),
where each agent i randomly chooses their actions at time t with respect to their mixed strategy
π it ∈ ∆A . The primary solution concept for such a game will be the Nash equilibrium (NE).

Definition 1 (Expected payoff, exploitability, Nash equilibrium) For an N -tuple of mixed strate-
      π 1 , . . . , π N ) ∈ ∆N
gies (π                                                                i
                                  A , we define the expected payoff V of an agent i ∈ {1, . . . , N } as
                                                                                                  
                                                         N
                                                      1 X
                  V i (π
                       π 1 , . . . , π N ) := E F         e j  (ai ) aj ∼ π j , ∀j = 1, . . . , N  .
                                                     N j=1 a

             π 1 , . . . , π N ) ∈ ∆N
An N -tuple (π                                                         i π1
                                       A is called a NE if for all i, V (π                                    π , π −i ).
                                                                              , . . . , π N ) = maxπ ∈∆A V i (π
For any δ > 0, we call (π       1           N
                              π , . . . , π ) ∈ ∆A a δ-NE if V (π   i  1            N
                                                                      π , . . . , π ) ≥ maxπ ∈∆A V (π  i π , π −i ) − δ
                                                                                                    i   π j }N
for any i. We also define the exploitability of agent i for the tuple as Eexp ({π                            j=1 ) :=
              i     ′     −i
                 π , π ) − V (π     i     1         N
                                       π , . . . , π ).
maxπ ′ ∈∆A V (π

                                             π 1 , . . . , π N ) that is a Nash equilibrium, no agent has the
Intuitively, under a mixed strategy profile (π
incentive to deviate from their mixed strategy as in expectation each agent is playing optimally with
respect to the rest. The task of finding a NE is equivalent to finding policies with low exploitability,
             i
therefore Eexp is a natural error metric. Note that our definition of exploitability can be seen as the
N -player version of the mean-field game exploitability defined in literature (Perrin et al., 2020).
Goal. With the SMFG problem definition and the solution concept introduced, we state our objective:
in both feedback models, we would like to find sample efficient algorithms which learn an approximate
NE (in the sense of low exploitability) independently from repeated plays by N agents when N is
large. To avoid clutter, we rigorously formalize the notion of an algorithm in the different feedback
models in the appendices (Section C).

2.2    A SSUMPTIONS ON PAYOFFS AND E XAMPLES

Finding an NE in general is challenging, and possibly computationally intractable. We analyze
SMFG under certain assumptions on F that also correspond closely to real-world problems. Our first
assumption is the Lipschitz continuity of the payoff. In many applications, action payoffs should not
change too much with small variations in population behavior, Definition 2 formalizes this intuition.


                                                           4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Definition 2 (Lipschitz continuous payoffs) The payoff map F : ∆A → [0, 1]K is called Lipschitz
continuous with parameter L > 0 if for any µ, µ′ ∈ ∆A , ∥F(µ) − F(µ′ )∥2 ≤ L∥µ − µ′ ∥2 .

The next fundamental assumption, monotonicity, is standard in variational inequality literature
(Facchinei & Pang, 2003) and is somewhat similar in form to Lasry-Lions conditions in mean-field
games literature (Perrin et al., 2020; Pérolat et al., 2022), apart from the dependence on distributions
over actions rather than states.

Definition 3 (Monotone/Strongly monotone payoff) The vector map F : ∆A → [0, 1]K is called
monotone if for some λ ≥ 0, for all ∀µ1 , µ2 ∈ ∆A , it holds that
                  ⊤
                                   X
(F(µ1 ) − F(µ2 )) (µ1 − µ2 ) =        (µ1 (a) − µ2 (a))(F(µ1 , a) − F(µ2 , a)) ≤ −λ∥µ1 − µ2 ∥22 .
                                    a∈A

Furthermore, if the above holds with some λ > 0, F is called λ-strongly monotone.

Monotone payoffs, as in the case of Lasry-Lions conditions, can be intuitively thought as modeling
problems where payoff of an action on average decreases as the occupancy increases. However, one
fundamental difference from existing MFG works is that our monotonicity assumption is on action
occupancy, and not on state occupancy as in (Perrin et al., 2020). While monotonicity is somewhat
technical, the following examples indicate that the assumptions coincide with practically relevant
cases (explicit proofs deferred to the appendix, Section B).

Example 1 (Non-increasing payoffs) Let Fa P      : [0, 1] → [0, 1] for a ∈ A be Lipschitz continuous
and non-increasing functions, define F(µ) := a Fa (µ(a))ea . Then F is monotone and Lipschitz.
If Fa is also strictly decreasing and there exists λ > 0 such that |Fa (x) − Fa (x′ )| ≥ λ|x − x′ | for
all x, x′ ∈ [0, 1], a ∈ A, then F is λ-strongly monotone.

While the above example is expected, the monotone assumption can also model a large class of
payoffs with complicated cross-dependencies on the occupations, as the next example shows.

Example 2 Let A = {1, . . . , K}, and αk > 0, λk,k′ ∈ R constants for P              all k, k ′ ∈ A, k >
  ′                                                                                                  ′
k   .   The  payoff   given  by  F(µ, k)  :=  −  exp{αk µ(k)}/ P ′ exp{α ′ µ(k′ )} +
                                                                k       k              k′ <k λk,k µ(k ) −
                                                                                                 ′
                    ′
P
     k′ >k λk ,k µ(k ) for all k ∈ A is Lipschitz and monotone.
             ′



As a richer class of examples, for any concave potential function Φ : ∆A → R, the payoff vector
F = ∇ Φ is monotone (see Example 5 in the appendix). The class of monotone payoffs is also strictly
richer than payoffs with potential, and the MMAB problem with collisions can be also formulated
as a monotone operator. Hence, one interpretation of our setting is that we allow soft collisions for
action payoffs, as actions yield non-zero payoffs when chosen by multiple players. We discuss these
further in the appendix (Section B). We also show that monotone payoffs are more general than
congestion games (Rosenthal, 1973) and potential games (Monderer & Shapley, 1996).

3     M AIN T HEORETICAL R ESULTS
We present the main theoretical results of this paper, with actual proofs deferred to the appendices.

3.1   T HEORETICAL T OOL : T HE M EAN -F IELD G AME L IMIT N → ∞

In this section, we present the main theoretical machinery of our approach that permits efficient
learning: we formulate and introduce the mean-field limit as the limit when the number of players
goes to infinity. For this purpose, we introduce the following MF-NE concept.

Definition 4 (MF-NE) A mean-field Nash equilibrium (MF-NE) π ∗ ∈ P             ∆A associated with
payoff operator  F is a probability distribution       over actions such that Pa π ∗ (a)F(π
                                                                                          π ∗ , a) =
                      π ∗ , a). If it holds that a π ∗ (a)F(π
                                                            π ∗ , a) ≥ maxπ ∈∆A a π (a)F(ππ ∗ , a) − δ
           P                                    P
maxπ ∈∆A a π (a)F(π
for some δ > 0, we call π ∗ a δ-MF-NE.

Intuitively, the mean-field limit simplifies the SMFG problem by assuming each agent follows the
same policy and replacing the notion of N independent agents with a single agent playing against a


                                                   5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


continuum of infinitely many identical agents. We show in the appendix (Proposition 2) that the price
                                                            √
paid for using the MF-NE solution concept scales with O(1/ N ) additional exploitability, which will
become insignificant in games with large N . Furthermore, finding MF-NE is equivalent to solving
the following variational inequality problem corresponding to the operator F and domain ∆A :
                        Find π ∗ ∈ ∆A s.t. F(π
                                             π ∗ )⊤ (π
                                                     π ∗ − π ) ≥ 0, ∀π
                                                                     π ∈ ∆A .                   (MF-VI)
This formulation enables the use of theoretical results from VI literature. For instance, the MF-NE
always exists for continuous F, and is unique for strongly monotone F (see Section E.1). Finally,
regularizing the MF-VI problem will play a crucial role in the IL setting, as it will prevent the policies
of agents from diverging when there is no centralized controller synchronizing the policies of agents.
We formulate the related τ -Tikhonov regularized VI problem:
               Find π ∗ ∈ ∆A s.t. (F − τ I)(π
                                            π ∗ )⊤ (π
                                                    π ∗ − π ) ≥ 0, ∀π
                                                                    π ∈ ∆A .                  (MF-RVI)
Note that F − τ I is strongly monotone if F is monotone, hence (MF-RVI) always admits a unique
solution. In the following sections, we will present IL algorithms in the more concrete finite N -player
setting and the associated guarantees, using as a theoretical tool.
Is it possible to simply solve MF-RVI in our setting? Past works in MFG have already proved
approximation results of N -agent games by MFG albeit in different settings (e.g. Saldi et al. (2019)),
but these results do not consider when learning itself is carried out with N agents. If N agents can
not communicate, it is theoretically challenging to approximate the MF-RVI and to tackle bandit
feedback. Hence, in the next sections, we prove the more challenging result of convergence with IL.

3.2   C ONVERGENCE IN THE F ULL F EEDBACK C ASE

We first present an IL algorithm for full feedback. In this setting, while there is no centralized
controller, independent noisy reports of all action payoffs are available to each agent after each round.
Our analysis builds up on Tikhonov regularized projected ascent (TRPA). The TRPA is defined as
            Γη,τ (π           π + η(F − τ I)(π
                  π ) := Π∆A (π              π )) = Π∆A ((1 − ητ )π
                                                                  π + ηF(π
                                                                         π )),                   (TRPA)
                                                                          η,τ
for a learning rate η > 0 and regularization τ > 0. Intuitively, Γ          uses F evaluated at π to
modify action probabilities in the direction of the greatest payoff, incorporating an ℓ2 regularizer of
τ . The analysis of TRPA is standard and known to converge for monotone F (Facchinei & Pang,
2003; Nemirovski, 2004), when (stochastic) oracle access to F is assumed. Naturally, the main
complication in applying the method above will be the fact that in the IL setting, agents can not
evaluate the operator F arbitrarily, but rather can only observe (a noisy) estimate of F as a function
of the empirical population distribution and not of their policy π . Hence in the full feedback setting,
we analyze the following update rule:
                               1
           π i0 := Unif(A) =     1K , π it+1 = Π∆A ((1 − τ ηt )π     π it + ηt rit ),       (TRPA-Full)
                               K
for a time varying learning rate ηt , for each agent i = 1, . . . , N . The extraneous ℓ2 regularization
incorporated each agent running TRPA-Full is critical for the analysis and convergence in IL, as it
allows explicit synchronization of policies of agents without communication.

Theorem 1 (Convergence, full feedback) Assume F is Lipschitz, monotone. Assume N agents run
                                                                                   −1
the TRPA-Full update rule for T time steps with learning rates ηt := τt+1 and regularization τ > 0.
                                                     h                   i
                                                                                  τ√−2     −1
Then it holds for any agent i = 1, . . . , N that E Eexpi    π jT }N
                                                           ({π                           τ
                                                                   j=1 ) ≤ O( T + N +τ ). Furthermore,
                                                                                         √
                                        h                  i
                                                                     τ −3/2  −1/2      −1/2 −1/2
if F is λ-strongly monotone, then E Eexp    i   π jT }N
                                              ({π     j=1 ) ≤ O(
                                                                         √λ
                                                                            T
                                                                                  + τ √N   λ
                                                                                                 + τ ).

Proof: (sketch) We show that under TRPA-Full, (i) the deviations of policies ∥π      π it − π jt ∥2 can be
bounded, (ii) consequently, the bias in evaluating F in aggregate as a population is bounded, and (iii)
the resulting recursion yields the stated result. See Theorem 3 in the appendix for details.            □
We note that in the choice of learning rate ηt above, no intrinsic problem parameter is assumed to
be known. Furthermore, due to (1) the regularization τ and (2) a finite population, a non-vanishing
                             √
exploitability of O(τ + τ −1/ N ) will be induced in terms of the NE (see Lemma 7) in the monotone


                                                    6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


case. Since for finite population SMFG, there will be always be a non-vanishing exploitability in
terms of NE due to the mean-field approximation, in practice τ could be chosen to incorporate an
acceptable loss. Alternatively, if the exact value of the number of players N is known by each agent,
one could choose τ optimally, to obtain the following corollary.

Corollary 1 (Optimal τ , full feedback) Assume the hconditions of Theorem
                                                                      i     1. For monotone F,
                                                                            √
                                        √                     j N
                                        4              i
choosing regularization parameter τ = / N yields E Eexp ({π
                                      1                    π T }j=1 ) ≤ O( N√
                                                                              T
                                                                                 + √4
                                                                                     1
                                                                                        ) for any i.
                                                                                      N
                                                       h                 i           √
                                          √                      j             λ−1/2
                                                                                       N      −1/2
                                                         i
For λ-strongly monotone F, choosing τ = 1/ 3 N yields E Eexp ({π    N
                                                               π T }j=1 ) ≤ O( √T        + λ√ 3
                                                                                                N
                                                                                                   ).

Even though TRPA-Full solves the regularized (hence strongly monotone) problem, compared to the
O(1/T ) rate in classical strongly monotone VI (Kotsalis et al., 2022) or strongly convex optimization
                                      √
(Rakhlin et al., 2011), our worse O(1/ T ) time dependence is due to independent learning. Intuitively,
additional time is required to ensure the policies of independent learners are sufficiently √
                                                                                            close when
“collectively” evaluating F. The additional dependence of the time-vanishing term on N is also
a result of this fact. Furthermore, when learning itself is performed by N agents, we note that the
                                             √             √
bias as a function of N decreases with O(1/ 4 N ) (or O(1/ 3 N ) for strongly monotone problems), and
               √
not with O(1/ N ) as Proposition 2 might suggest. We leave the question of whether this gap can be
improved and whether knowledge of N is required in Corollary 1, as future work.

3.3   C ONVERGENCE IN THE BANDIT F EEDBACK C ASE

We now move on to the more challenging and realistic bandit feedback case, where agents can only
observe the payoffs of the actions they have chosen. Once again, we analyze the IL setting (or in
bandits terminology, the “no communications” setting) where agents can not interact or coordinate
with each other. One of the main challenges of bandit feedback with IL in our setting is that it is
difficult for each agent to identify itself (i.e., assign itself a unique number between 1, . . . , N ) so that
exploration of action payoffs can be performed in turns. For instance, in MMAB algorithms, this
is typically achieved using variants of the so-called musical chairs algorithm (Lugosi & Mehrabian,
2022), which is not available in our formulation. Instead, we adopt a probabilistic exploration scheme
where each agent probabilistically decides it is its turn to explore payoffs while the rest of the agents
induce the required empirical population distribution on which F should be evaluated.
Our algorithm, which we call TRPA-Bandit, is straightforward and relies on exploration occurring
over epochs, where policies are updated once inbetween epochs using the estimate of action payoffs
constructed during the exploration phase. While we formally present TRPA-Bandit in the appendix
(Algorithm 1), the procedure informally is as follows for each agent, fixing an exploration parameter
ε ∈ (0, 1):
      1. At each epoch h, for Th = ⌈ε−1 log(h + 1)⌉ time steps, repeat the following:
          (a) With probability ε, sample uniformly an action ah,t , observe the payoff rh,t , and keep
              the importance sampling estimate b   rh ← Krh,t eah,t .
          (b) Otherwise (with probability 1 − ε), sample action according to current policy π h .
      2. Update the policy using TRPA, π h+1 = Π∆A ((1 − τ ηh )π      π h + ηh b
                                                                               rh ), with learning rate
                τ −1
         ηh := h+1                                              rh = 0.
                     . If agent did not explore this epoch, use b
Intuitively, the probabilistic sampling scheme allows some agents to build a low-variance estimate
of F, while others simply sample actions with their current policy in order to induce the empirical
population distribution at which F should be evaluated. The result in this setting is as follows.

Theorem 2 (Convergence, bandit feedback) Assume F is Lipschitz, monotone. Assume N agents
run TRPA-Bandit (Algorithm 1) for T time steps with regularization τ > 0 and exploration parameter
                                   π i }i after executing Algorithm 1. Then, for any agent i = 1, . . . , N
ε > 0, and agents return policies {π
                                −2 −1/2                      −1      −3/2
                            e τ √ε         + τ −1 ε + τ + τ√N + τ N ). If F is λ-strongly monotone,
         i
              π j }N
that E Eexp ({π    j=1 ) ≤ O(       T
                            e τ −3/2 λ√−1/2 −1/2
                                           ε                              −1/2 −1/2
                                                  + τ − /2 λ− /2 ε + τ + τ √λ
                                                       1     1                         −1 −1/2
                                                                                    +τ λ
         i
then E Eexp   π j }N ) ≤ O(
            ({π     j=1                  T                                       N            N).

Proof: (sketch) In addition to the full feedback case, we show that (i) for each agent the b   rh are
low-variance, low-bias (scaling O(ε)) estimators of F evaluated at the mean policy, and (ii) the bias
due to no exploration occuring can be controlled. See Theorem 4 in the appendix for a full proof. □


                                                      7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Once again, the values of τ and exploration probability ε can be chosen to incorporate a tolerable
exploitability. In the case where the number of participants N in the game is known, the following
corollary indicates the asymptotically optimal choices for the hyperparameters.

Corollary 2 (Optimal ε, τ , bandit feedback) Assume the conditions of Theorem 2 for N agents run-
                                                     √             √             i

ning TRPA-Bandit. For monotone F, choosing τ = 1/ 4 N and ε = 1/ N yields E Eexp     π j }N
                                                                                   ({π    j=1 ) ≤
e N√3/4 + √    1                                                       √               √
O(    T       4
                N
                  ) for any i. For strongly monotone F, choosing τ = 1/ 3 N and ε = 1/ N yields
                         e N 3/4√λ−1/2 + λ√
                                          −1/2
    i
E Eexp    π j }N
        ({π     j=1 ) ≤ O(       T        3    ).
                                            N


The dependence of N of the sample complexity in the bandit case is worse compared to the full
feedback setting as expected: intuitively the agents must take turns to estimate the payoffs of each
action in bandit feedback. Furthermore, while our problem framework is different and a direct
comparison is difficult in terms of bounds, we point out that classical MMAB results such as (Lugosi
& Mehrabian, 2022) have a linear dependence on N , while in our case the dependence on N scales
        3
with N /4 . We emphasize that the time-dependence is sublinear in terms of N , up to the non-vanishing
finite population bias. As in the full feedback case, the non-vanishing finite population bias in the
                                         √           √                      √
bandit feedback case scales with O(1/ 4 N ) or O(1/ 3 N ), rather than O(1/ N ) which would match
Proposition 2. Note that the dependence of the bias on N varies in various mean-field game results
(Saldi et al., 2019), but asymptotically is known to converge to zero as N → ∞, as our explicit
finite-agent bound also demonstrates.


4    E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS

We validate the theoretical results of our work on numerical and two real-world experiments. The
details of the setup are presented in greater detail in the appendix (Section G) and the code is provided
in supplementary materials. Our experiments assume bandit feedback, although in the appendix we
also include results under the full feedback model. We provide an overview of our setup first.
Numerical problems. Firstly, we formulate three numerical problems, which are based on examples
suggested in Sections 2.2, B. We randomly generate monotone payoff operators that are linear
(L INEAR) and a payoff function that admits a KL divergence potential (KL). We also analyze a
particular “beach bar process” (BB), a stateless version of the example presented in (Perrin et al.,
2020). For numerical examples, we use K = 5, and vary between various population sizes in
N = {20, 50, 100, 200, 500, 1000} to quantify the effect of finite N and compare with theoretical
bias bounds. We set the parameters ε, τ using the theoretical values from Corollary 2.
Traffic flow simulation. Using the UTD19 dataset (Loder et al., 2019), we evaluate our algorithms
on traffic congestion data on three different routes for accessing the city center of Zurich (UTD). The
UTD19 dataset features many closed loop sensors across various urban roads in Zurich, providing
granular measurements of road occupancy and traffic flow. We use these real-world stationary detector
measurements to approximate traveling times as a function of route occupancy with a kernelized
regression model on three routes. We then evaluate our algorithms on estimated traveling times.
Access to the Tor network. We also run experiments on accessing the Tor network, which is a large
decentralized network for secure communications and an active area of research in computer security
(Jansen et al., 2014; McCoy et al., 2008). The Tor network consists of many decentralized servers
and access to the network is achieved by communicating with one of many entry guard servers (a
list advertised publicly (The Tor Network), some hosted by universities). As the entry guards serve
a wide public of users and each user is free to choose an entry point, the network is an ideal setting
to test our algorithms. We simulate 100 independent agents accessing Tor by choosing among K = 5
entry servers every minute and use the real-world ping delays for bandit feedback.
Overall, our experiments in both models and real-world use cases support our theory. Firstly, our ex-
                                                                                        i   π j }N
periments verify learning in the sense of decreasing maximum exploitability maxi∈N Eexp   ({π    j=1 )
                                        1        ∗    i
                                           P
and mean distance to MF-NE given by N i ∥π      π − π t ∥2 during IL (Figure1-b,c). As expected from
Corollary 2, the maximum exploitability oscillates but remains bounded (due to the effect of finite
N ). Furthermore, the agents converge to policies closer to the MF-NE as N increases (Figure1-c),
empirically demonstrating that the MF-NE is an accurate description of the limiting behaviour of


                                                   8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


SMFG as N → ∞. The scale of the excess exploitability in our experiments decreases rapidly in N ,
allowing our results to be significant even for hundreds or thousands of agents.


               (a)                               (b)                                (c)

Figure 1: Results for numerical problems KL, BB, LINEAR, UTD. (a) Maximum exploitability of N
agents at convergence as a function of N for different problems, (b) The max. exploitability among
N agents during training with linear payoff (LINEAR), for different N , (c) The mean ℓ2 distance of
agent policies during training to the MF-NE in the Zurich traffic flow simulation problem (UTD).


               (a)                               (b)                                (c)

Figure 2: Results for the Tor network experiment. (a) Average policies (probability distribution) over
5 servers of the 100 agents in the Tor network access experiment, (b) Empirical distribution of agents
over Tor entry servers during training on 5 servers (different colors indicate different entry servers),
(c) Average waiting times for Tor network access during training.

Our experimental results in traffic congestion and server access also support our theoretical claims.
Despite having no a priori assumption of monotonicity, our methods efficiently converge. We note
that in the case of the network access experiments, we refrain from simulating thousands of agents to
minimize network impact. This implies that the delays have a high dependence on external factors
as the behavior of other users will be dominant. Nevertheless, our experiment indicates that our
algorithm can produce competitive results in the wild (Figure 2).
Finally, we note that while there are no algorithms that have theoretical guarantees in the N agent
IL setting, we compare our results with a heuristic extension of online mirror descent (Pérolat et al.,
2022) in the numerical problems, see Appendix G.4. Our results suggest a naive extension of OMD
to our setting will lead to divergence or cycling.


5    D ISCUSSION AND C ONCLUSION

Overall, we proposed and analyzed a finite-agent, independent learning algorithm under bandit
feedback with finite sample guarantees, demonstrating efficient IL is possible in a new class of games.
Our theoretical results prove explicit guarantees for a class of games under IL, corresponding to open
questions in MFG literature. We leave the establishment of lower bounds as well as considerations of
weaker notions of monotonicity (Kotsalis et al., 2022) as future work.


                                                   9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Berkay Anahtarci, Can Deha Kariksiz, and Naci Saldi. Q-learning in regularized mean-field games.
  Dynamic Games and Applications, pp. 1–29, 2022.

Animashree Anandkumar, Nithin Michael, Ao Kevin Tang, and Ananthram Swami. Distributed
  algorithms for learning and cognitive medium access with logarithmic regret. IEEE Journal on
 Selected Areas in Communications, 29(4):731–745, 2011.

Orly Avner and Shie Mannor. Concurrent bandits and cognitive radio networks. In Machine Learning
  and Knowledge Discovery in Databases: European Conference, ECML PKDD 2014, Nancy,
  France, September 15-19, 2014. Proceedings, Part I 14, pp. 66–81. Springer, 2014.

Aleksandr Beznosikov, Boris Polyak, Eduard Gorbunov, Dmitry Kovalev, and Alexander Gasnikov.
  Smooth monotone stochastic variational inequalities and saddle point problems: A survey. Euro-
  pean Mathematical Society Magazine, (127):15–28, 2023.

Sébastien Bubeck, Thomas Budzinski, and Mark Sellke. Cooperative and stochastic multi-player
  multi-armed bandit: Optimal regret with neither communication nor collisions. In Conference on
  Learning Theory, pp. 821–822. PMLR, 2021.

Constantinos Daskalakis, Dylan J Foster, and Noah Golowich. Independent policy gradient methods
  for competitive reinforcement learning. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:
  5527–5540, 2020.

Dongsheng Ding, Chen-Yu Wei, Kaiqing Zhang, and Mihailo Jovanovic. Independent policy gradient
  for large-scale markov potential games: Sharper rates, function approximation, and game-agnostic
  convergence. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 5166–5220. PMLR, 2022.

John Duchi, Shai Shalev-Shwartz, Yoram Singer, and Tushar Chandra. Efficient projections onto the
  l 1-ball for learning in high dimensions. In Proceedings of the 25th international conference on
  Machine learning, pp. 272–279, 2008.

Francisco Facchinei and Jong-Shi Pang. Finite-dimensional variational inequalities and complemen-
  tarity problems. Springer, 2003.

Zuyue Fu, Zhuoran Yang, Yongxin Chen, and Zhaoran Wang. Actor-critic provably finds nash equilib-
  ria of linear-quadratic mean-field games. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2019.

Matthieu Geist, Julien Pérolat, Mathieu Laurière, Romuald Elie, Sarah Perrin, Olivier Bachem,
 Rémi Munos, and Olivier Pietquin. Concave utility reinforcement learning: the mean-field game
 viewpoint. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.03787, 2021.

Haotian Gu, Xin Guo, Xiaoli Wei, and Renyuan Xu. Mean-field multi-agent reinforcement learning:
  A decentralized network approach. arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.02731, 2021.

Ramki Gummadi, Ramesh Johari, Sven Schmit, and Jia Yuan Yu. Mean field analysis of multi-armed
  bandit games. Available at SSRN 2045842, 2013.

Xin Guo, Renyuan Xu, and Thaleia Zariphopoulou. Entropy regularization for mean field games with
  learning. Mathematics of Operations Research, 2022.

Amélie Heliou, Johanne Cohen, and Panayotis Mertikopoulos. Learning with bandit feedback in
 potential games. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 30, 2017.

Serge Hoogendoorn and Victor Knoop. Traffic flow theory and modelling. The transport system and
  transport policy: an introduction, pp. 125–159, 2013.

Minyi Huang, Roland P Malhamé, and Peter E Caines. Large population stochastic dynamic games:
 closed-loop mckean-vlasov systems and the nash certainty equivalence principle. Communications
 in Information & Systems, 6(3):221–252, 2006.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Rob Jansen, Florian Tschorsch, Aaron Johnson, and Björn Scheuermann. The sniper attack: Anony-
  mously deanonymizing and disabling the tor network. Technical report, Office of Naval Research
  Arlington VA, 2014.
Georgios Kotsalis, Guanghui Lan, and Tianjiao Li. Simple and optimal methods for stochastic
  variational inequalities, i: Operator extrapolation. SIAM Journal on Optimization, 32(3):2041–
  2073, 2022.
Jean-Michel Lasry and Pierre-Louis Lions. Mean field games. Japanese journal of mathematics, 2
  (1):229–260, 2007.
Mathieu Laurière, Sarah Perrin, Matthieu Geist, and Olivier Pietquin. Learning mean field games: A
 survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.12944, 2022.
Tianyi Lin, Michael Jordan, et al. Perseus: A simple high-order regularization method for variational
  inequalities. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.03202, 2022.
Allister Loder, Lukas Ambühl, Monica Menendez, and Kay W Axhausen. Understanding traffic
  capacity of urban networks. Scientific reports, 9(1):16283, 2019.
Gábor Lugosi and Abbas Mehrabian. Multiplayer bandits without observing collision information.
  Mathematics of Operations Research, 47(2):1247–1265, 2022.
Weichao Mao, Haoran Qiu, Chen Wang, Hubertus Franke, Zbigniew Kalbarczyk, Ravi Iyer, and Tamer
 Basar. A mean-field game approach to cloud resource management with function approximation.
 In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022.
Laëtitia Matignon, Guillaume J Laurent, and Nadine Le Fort-Piat. Hysteretic q-learning: an algorithm
  for decentralized reinforcement learning in cooperative multi-agent teams. In 2007 IEEE/RSJ
  International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems, pp. 64–69. IEEE, 2007.
Damon McCoy, Kevin Bauer, Dirk Grunwald, Tadayoshi Kohno, and Douglas Sicker. Shining light in
  dark places: Understanding the tor network. In Privacy Enhancing Technologies: 8th International
  Symposium, PETS 2008 Leuven, Belgium, July 23-25, 2008 Proceedings 8, pp. 63–76. Springer,
  2008.
Dov Monderer and Lloyd S Shapley. Potential games. Games and economic behavior, 14(1):124–143,
 1996.
Arkadi Nemirovski. Prox-method with rate of convergence o (1/t) for variational inequalities with
  lipschitz continuous monotone operators and smooth convex-concave saddle point problems. SIAM
  Journal on Optimization, 15(1):229–251, 2004.
Yurii Nesterov. Dual extrapolation and its applications to solving variational inequalities and related
  problems. Mathematical Programming, 109(2-3):319–344, 2007.
OpenStreetMap contributors. Planet dump retrieved from https://planet.osm.org . https://www.
  openstreetmap.org, 2017.
Asuman Ozdaglar, Muhammed O Sayin, and Kaiqing Zhang. Independent learning in stochastic
  games. arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.11743, 2021.
Julien Perolat, Bart De Vylder, Daniel Hennes, Eugene Tarassov, Florian Strub, Vincent de Boer,
  Paul Muller, Jerome T Connor, Neil Burch, Thomas Anthony, et al. Mastering the game of stratego
  with model-free multiagent reinforcement learning. Science, 378(6623):990–996, 2022.
Julien Pérolat, Sarah Perrin, Romuald Elie, Mathieu Laurière, Georgios Piliouras, Matthieu Geist, Karl
  Tuyls, and Olivier Pietquin. Scaling mean field games by online mirror descent. In Proceedings of
  the 21st International Conference on Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems, pp. 1028–1037,
  2022.
Sarah Perrin, Julien Pérolat, Mathieu Laurière, Matthieu Geist, Romuald Elie, and Olivier Pietquin.
  Fictitious play for mean field games: Continuous time analysis and applications. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:13199–13213, 2020.


                                                  11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Nicanor Quijano, Carlos Ocampo-Martinez, Julian Barreiro-Gomez, German Obando, Andres Pantoja,
  and Eduardo Mojica-Nava. The role of population games and evolutionary dynamics in distributed
  control systems: The advantages of evolutionary game theory. IEEE Control Systems Magazine,
  37(1):70–97, 2017.

Alexander Rakhlin, Ohad Shamir, and Karthik Sridharan. Making gradient descent optimal for
  strongly convex stochastic optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1109.5647, 2011.

Jonathan Rosenski, Ohad Shamir, and Liran Szlak. Multi-player bandits–a musical chairs approach.
  In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 155–163. PMLR, 2016.

Robert W Rosenthal. A class of games possessing pure-strategy nash equilibria. International Journal
  of Game Theory, 2(1):65–67, 1973.

Naci Saldi, Tamer Başar, and Maxim Raginsky. Approximate nash equilibria in partially observed
  stochastic games with mean-field interactions. Mathematics of Operations Research, 44(3):1006–
 1033, 2019.

William H Sandholm. Population games and deterministic evolutionary dynamics. In Handbook of
 game theory with economic applications, volume 4, pp. 703–778. Elsevier, 2015.

Muhammed Sayin, Kaiqing Zhang, David Leslie, Tamer Basar, and Asuman Ozdaglar. Decentralized
 q-learning in zero-sum markov games. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:
 18320–18334, 2021.

David Silver, Thomas Hubert, Julian Schrittwieser, Ioannis Antonoglou, Matthew Lai, Arthur Guez,
  Marc Lanctot, Laurent Sifre, Dharshan Kumaran, Thore Graepel, et al. Mastering chess and shogi
  by self-play with a general reinforcement learning algorithm. arXiv preprint arXiv:1712.01815,
  2017.

David Silver, Thomas Hubert, Julian Schrittwieser, Ioannis Antonoglou, Matthew Lai, Arthur Guez,
  Marc Lanctot, Laurent Sifre, Dharshan Kumaran, Thore Graepel, et al. A general reinforcement
  learning algorithm that masters chess, shogi, and go through self-play. Science, 362(6419):
 1140–1144, 2018.

The Tor Network. Tor metrics: Relay search. https://metrics.torproject.org/rs.
  html#search/flag:Guard. Accessed: 2023-05-01.

Lingxiao Wang, Zhuoran Yang, and Zhaoran Wang. Breaking the curse of many agents: Provable
  mean embedding q-iteration for mean-field reinforcement learning. In International conference on
  machine learning, pp. 10092–10103. PMLR, 2020.

Xiong Wang and Riheng Jia. Mean field equilibrium in multi-armed bandit game with continuous
  reward. arXiv preprint arXiv:2105.00767, 2021.

Qiaomin Xie, Zhuoran Yang, Zhaoran Wang, and Andreea Minca. Learning while playing in mean-
  field games: Convergence and optimality. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
  11436–11447. PMLR, 2021.

Jiachen Yang, Xiaojing Ye, Rakshit Trivedi, Huan Xu, and Hongyuan Zha. Learning deep mean field
   games for modeling large population behavior. arXiv preprint arXiv:1711.03156, 2017.

Batuhan Yardim, Semih Cayci, Matthieu Geist, and Niao He. Policy mirror ascent for efficient and
  independent learning in mean field games. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.14449, 2022.

Bora Yongacoglu, Gürdal Arslan, and Serdar Yüksel. Independent learning in mean-field games:
  Satisficing paths and convergence to subjective equilibria. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.05703, 2022.

Muhammad Aneeq Uz Zaman, Alec Koppel, Sujay Bhatt, and Tamer Basar. Oracle-free reinforcement
 learning in mean-field games along a single sample path. In International Conference on Artificial
 Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 10178–10206. PMLR, 2023.


                                                12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A    A D ETAILED C OMPARISON TO THE S ETTING IN G UMMADI ET AL . (2013)

Since specific keywords seem to correspond to the works on mean-field approximations with bandits,
we provide a greater discussion of our setting and the results by Gummadi et al. (2013). In general,
our settings and models are very different, hence almost none of the results between our work and
Gummadi et al. are transferable to the other. Our problem formulation, analysis, and results are
fundamentally different from their setting due to the following points.
Stationary equilibrium vs Nash equilibrium. The most critical difference between the two works
is the solution concepts. Our setting is competitive, as a natural extension, the solution concept is
that of a Nash equilibrium where each agent has no incentive to change their policy. On the other
hand, the setting of Gummadi et al. need not be competitive or collaborative and this distinction is
not significant for their framework, their goal is to characterize convergence of the population to a
stationary distribution. Their main results show that if a particular policy map σ : Z2n≥0 → ∆A is
prescribed on agents, the population distribution will converge to a steady state. The equilibrium
concept Gummadi et al. (2013) is not Nash, rather stationarity.
Optimality considerations. As a consequence of analyzing stationarity, the results in Gummadi et al.
(2013) do not analyze or aim to characterize optimality. In their analysis, a fixed map σ : Z2n
                                                                                             ≥0 → ∆A
is assumed to be the policy/strategy of a continuum of (i.e., infinitely many) agents, which maps
observed loss/win counts (from Bernoulli distributed arm rewards) to arm probabilities. The stationary
distribution in general obtained from σ in Gummadi et al. (2013) does not have optimality properties,
for instance, a fixed agent will can have arbitrary large exploitability. The main goal of Gummadi
et al. (2013) is to prove the convergence of the population distribution to a steady state behaviour.
Algorithms. As a consequence of the previous points, Gummadi et al. abstract away any algorithmic
considerations to the fixed map σ and the particular algorithms employed by agents do not directly
have significance in terms of their theoretical conclusions. Since we analyze optimality in our setting,
we require a specific algorithm to be employed (TRPA and Algorithm 1).
Independent learning. In our setting, the notion of learning and independent learning become
significant since we are aiming to obtain an approximate NE. Hence, our theoretical results bound the
expected exploitability (Theorems 1, 2) in terms of number of samples. In Gummadi et al. (2013),
the main aim is convergence to steady state rather than learning.
Population regeneration. Finally, to be able to obtain a contractive mapping yielding a population
stationary distribution/steady state, Gummadi et al. (2013) assumes that the population regenerates at
a constant rate β, implying agents are constantly being replaced by oblivious agents that have not
observed the game dynamics. This smooths the dynamics by introducing a forgetting mechanism
to game participants. Our results on the other hand are closer to the traditional bandits/independent
learning setting. For instance, this would correspond to non-vanishing exploitability scaling with
O(β) in our system as agents constantly “forget” what they learned.
Other (minor) model differences. In our setting, we assume general noisy rewards while in
Gummadi et al. (2013), the rewards are Bernoulli random variables with success probability dependent
on the population.


B    E XAMPLES OF M ONOTONE PAYOFFS

We first prove the monotonicity of the example provided in the main body.

Example 3 (Monotone decreasing congestion payoffs) Assume there exists Lipschitz P continuous
functions Fa : [0, 1] → [0, 1] such that Fa is non-increasing, and let F(µ) := a Fa (µ(a))ea .
Since we have for µ, µ′ ∈ ∆A ,
                                       X
         (F(µ) − F(µ′ ))⊤ (µ − µ′ ) =      (Fa (µ(a)) − Fa (µ′ (a)))(µ(a) − µ′ (a)) ≤ 0,
                                           a

the payoff map F is monotone. This payoff map corresponds to a congestion model as more agents
using a particular action leads to diminished payoffs.


                                                  13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Assume further there exists functions Fa : [0, 1] → [0, 1] and a constant λ′ > 0 such that |Fa (x) −
Fa (x′ )| ≥ λ′ |x − x′ | for all a, x, x′ . Since we have for µ, µ′ ∈ ∆A ,
                                                 X
             (F(µ) − F(µ′ ))⊤ (µ − µ′ ) =            (Fa (µ(a)) − Fa (µ′ (a)))(µ(a) − µ′ (a))
                                              a
                                             X
                                         ≤        λ′ (µ′ (a) − µ(a))(µ(a) − µ′ (a))
                                              a
                                             = −λ′ ∥µ − µ′ ∥22 ,
F is λ-strongly monotone. This map also corresponds to payoffs decreasing with occupancy, but
ruling out flat regions.

As a special case of the example above, the classical multi-player multi-armed bandits setting with
collisions also yields a monotone Lipschitz continuous payoff. We state this in the following example.

Example 4 (Multi-player MAB with Collisions) For the N -player game, for each action a ∈ A,
                    a
take the functions Fcol : [0, 1] → [0, 1] such that
                                                        1
                                         a
                                        α , if x ≤ N ,
                               a
                            Fcol (x) = α N ( N − x), if N1 ≤ x ≤ N2 ,
                                             a     2

                                           0, if x ≥ N2 .
                                        

where αa ∈ [0,P 1] is the expected payoff of the action a when no collision occurs. Take the payoff
                          a
map F(µ) := a∈A Fcol        (µa )ea . The payoff map F is Lipschitz continuous and monotone, and
corresponds to the classical multi-player MAB with collisions.

While the classical MMAB is a special case of SMFG, the analysis methods and solution concepts
are different (for instance, our results in SMFG consider the regime when N → ∞), hence classical
algorithms are still preferable in the MMAB case. Instead, we emphasize that the above connection
to MMAB indicates our monotonicity assumption on F can be seen as a model with “soft-collisions”
observed in many real-world applications.
We also re-iterate the payoffs with potential as outlined in the main text as a large class of examples
satisfying monotonicity.

Example 5 (Payoffs with potential) If there exists a potential function Φ : ∆A → R that is concave
such that F = ∇Φ, the payoff operator F is monotone. Furthermore, if the potential Φ is λ-strongly
concave, then F is λ-strongly monotone.

B.1   M ONOTONE PAYOFFS WITHOUT P OTENTIAL F UNCTION

The examples in the previous section are special cases of payoffs with a potential function. We
emphasize that the problem class of monotone operators is much large than that of potential payoffs
with the following example that does not admit any potential function.

Example 6 (A monotone payoff operator without a potential) Let S ∈ SD×D  ++     be a symmetric
                               D                                 D×D
positive definite matrix, b ∈ R be an arbitrary vector, and X ∈ M    be a anti-symmetric matrix
such that X = −X⊤ . Take the payoff operator
                                     F(µ) = (−S + X)µ + b.
Then, −S + X is not symmetric in general, therefore there exists no potential Φ such that F = ∇Φ
since the Jacobian satisfies J(F) = −S + X = ∇2 Φ and ∇2 Φ must be symmetric. Furthermore,
(−S + X) + (−S + X)⊤ = −2S ⪯ 0, so r is monotone.

Note that in the above Example 6, (−S + X) must exclusively have negative entries on its diagonal,
but can have positive/negative non-diagonal entries. Hence, this would model a problem where
action payoffs have non-trivial interactions/correlations with the occupancies. Such problems can be
wide-spread in complicated real-world problems which can not be modeled just by simple collisions.
For instance, due to memory caching effects or power-of-two effects on virtual servers sharing


                                                   14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


hardware such as RAM/CPU it might be the case that in certain regimes increased load on one server
introduces a small benefit to the other. Likewise, systems that adapt to population behavior (e.g., red
light durations that depend on number of cars waiting, queueing systems that incorporate non-trivial
priority rules) might exhibit such behavior: where on average increased load of options leads to worse
payoffs for everyone, but certain positive reinforcement regimes exist.
Finally, we prove that Example 2 in the main body of the paper is indeed monotone.

Example 7 Let A = {1, . . . , K}, and αk > 0, λk,k′ ∈ R constants for allPk, k ′ ∈ A, k > k ′ .
                                                                                           ′
P the payoff ′ given by F(µ, k) := −                                         k′ <k λk,k µ(k ) −
Take                                     exp{αk µ(k)}/ P ′ exp{α ′ µ(k′ )} +           ′
                                                        k       k

  k′ >k λk ,k µ(k ).
          ′


The fact that F is Lipschitz follows from straightforward properties of the softmax function. For
monotonicity, define the two operators F1 , F2 : ∆A → [0, 1]A given by
                                          exp{αk µ(k)}
                          F1 (µ, a) = − P                ′
                                           ′ exp{αk ′ µ(k )}
                                      Xk                 X
                          F2 (µ, a) =    λk,k′ µ(k ′ ) −     λk′ ,k µ(k ′ ).
                                        k′ <k                 k′ >k

Firstly, note that F2 (µ) = Xµ for the antisymmetric matrix X, hence is monotone by Example 6.
For F1 , take the negative log-sum-exp potential function
                                                               !
                                                  X
                                 Φ(µ) = − log         exp{µ(a)} ,
                                                        a∈A

which is concave, and note that F1 = ∇Φ, implying that F1 is monotone by Example 5. Finally,
since both F1 , F2 are monotone, the operator F = F1 + F2 is also monotone.

B.2   M ONOTONE PAYOFFS , P OTENTIAL G AMES AND C ONGESTION G AMES

A natural comparison of our framework is with congestion games first proposed by Rosenthal (1973).
In such a setting, a monotonically decreasing payoff function (in terms of occupancy) is assigned
to each action. We present the following example to emphasize that monotone operators are more
general than such payoff models.

Example 8 (Monotonicity without congestion) In Example 6, take the three action game A =
{a1 , a2 , a3 } and the operator F(µ) = Aµ + b, where
                                        −1 −1 0          0
                                                    !      !
                                  A= 1      0     0 ,b = 0 .
                                        0   0 −1         0
Hence by simple computation,
                                        µ1               −µ1 − µ2
                                                !                   !
                                      F µ2          =       µ1          .
                                        µ3                 −µ3
As before, F is monotone, but it is not a congestion game as the payoff of the action a2 increases as
the occupancy of a1 increases.

A related class of games in game theory that admits provable guarantees with independent learning is
potential games Monderer & Shapley (1996). We show that the N -player SMFG is in general not a
potential game, hence independent learning with best response dynamics is not trivial to analyze. We
provide a particular SMFG that is a counter-example (i.e. does not admit a game potential).

Example 9 The SMFG is a potential game if there exists a map P : AN → R such that for all
i ∈ N , a = (a1 , . . . , aN ) ∈ AN , a ∈ A, it holds that
                       V i (ai , a−i ) − V i (a, a−i ) = P (ai , a−i ) − P (a, a−i ),              (1)


                                                        15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


where V i (a) denotes the expected reward of player i when each player j ∈ N (deterministically)
plays action aj . Note that V i (a) = F(µa )(ai ) where µa ∈ ∆A is the empirical distribution of
actions over actions induced by action profile a.
We provide an example of a SMFG where no such P exists. Take N = 3, K = 3, A = {a1 , a2 , a3 },
and the monotone reward F is defined as
                                      µ1     −µ1 − µ2
                                         !              !
                                  F µ2 =        µ1        ,
                                      µ3       −µ3
which is monotone. Assume a potential P exists satisfying Equation 1. Then, it follows by simple
computation that:
                    V 1 (a2 , a1 , a1 ) − V 1 (a3 , a1 , a1 ) = P (a2 , a1 , a1 ) − P (a3 , a1 , a1 ),
                    V 2 (a3 , a1 , a1 ) − V 2 (a3 , a2 , a1 ) = P (a3 , a1 , a1 ) − P (a3 , a2 , a1 ),
                    V 1 (a3 , a2 , a1 ) − V 1 (a2 , a2 , a1 ) = P (a3 , a2 , a1 ) − P (a2 , a2 , a1 ),
                    V 2 (a2 , a2 , a1 ) − V 2 (a2 , a1 , a1 ) = P (a1 , a2 , a1 ) − P (a1 , a1 , a1 ).
Hence, adding the inequalities above, it must hold that
     0 =V 1 (a2 , a1 , a1 ) − V 1 (a3 , a1 , a1 ) + V 2 (a3 , a1 , a1 ) − V 2 (a3 , a2 , a1 )
         V 1 (a3 , a2 , a1 ) − V 1 (a2 , a2 , a1 ) + V 2 (a2 , a2 , a1 ) − V 2 (a2 , a1 , a1 )
       =F((2/3, 1/3, 0), a2 ) − F((2/3, 0, 1/3), a3 ) + F((2/3, 0, 1/3), a1 ) − F((1/3, 1/3, 1/3), a2 )
          + F((1/3, 1/3, 1/3), a3 ) − F((1/3, 2/3, 0), a2 ) + F((1/3, 2/3, 0), a2 ) − F((2/3, 1/3, 0), a1 )
       = /3 − (−1/3) + (−2/3) − 1/3
         2

          + (−1/3) − 1/3 + 1/3 − (−1)
       ̸=0,
leading to a contradiction. Hence no such potential P exists, and this (monotone) SMFG is not a
potential game.

C     F ORMALIZING L EARNING A LGORITHMS
In this section, we formalize the concept of an independent learning algorithm in the full feedback and
bandit feedback setting. In general, we formalize the notion of an algorithm as a map Ait : Hti → ∆A
that maps the set of past observations of agent i at time t to action selection probabilities. The
definition of the set Hti varies in the full feedback and bandit feedback, we define these rigorously.

Definition 5 (Learning algorithm with full feedback) An independent learning algorithm with full
information A = {Ait }i,t is a sequence of mappings for each player with
                                  Ait : ∆t−1
                                         A ×A
                                              t−1
                                                  × [0, 1](t−1)×K → ∆A ,
                                  Ai0 ∈ ∆A ,
that maps past t − 1 observations from previous rounds to a mixed strategy on actions A at time t for
each agent i.

Naturally, we are interested in algorithms that yield the NE at the limit with high probability or in
expectation.

Definition 6 (Rational learning algorithm with full feedback) Let A be an algorithm with full
feedback as defined in Definition 5. We call A δ-rational if it holds that for all i, the induced mixed
strategies π it under π i0 = Ai0 , π it = Ait (π
                                               π i0 , . . . , π it−1 , ai0 , . . . , ait−1 , ri0 , . . . , rit−1 ) satisfy
                                          i
                                   lim E[Eexp   π jt }N
                                              ({π     j=1 )] ≤ δ, for all i ∈ N .
                                  t→∞

Note that while not specified in the definition above, we will also be interested in the rate of
convergence of the exploitability term for a consistent algorithm. Finally, we also formalize the
bandit setting.


                                                           16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Definition 7 (Algorithm with bandit beedback) An algorithm with bandit feedback A = {Ait }i,t
is a sequence of mappings for each player with

                                     Ait : ∆t−1
                                            A ×A
                                                 t−1
                                                     × [0, 1](t−1) → ∆A ,
                                     Ai0 ∈ ∆A ,
that maps past t − 1 observations from previous rounds (only including the payoffs of the played
actions) to a probability distribution on actions A.

Definition 8 (Rational algorithm with bandit feedback) Let A be an algorithm with bandit feed-
back as defined in Definition 7. We call A δ-rational if it holds that for all i, the induced (random)
mixed strategies π it under π i0 = Ai0 , π it = Ait (π
                                                     π i0 , . . . , π it−1 , ai0 , . . . , ait−1 , r0i , . . . , rt−1
                                                                                                                  i
                                                                                                                      ) satisfy
                                           i
                                    lim E[Eexp   π jt }N
                                               ({π     j=1 )] ≤ δ, for all i ∈ N .
                                    t→∞


D     BASIC I NEQUALITIES

In our proofs, we will need to repeatedly bound certain recurrences and sums. In this section, we
present useful inequalities to this end.

Lemma 1 (Harmonic partial sum bound) For any integers s, s̄ such that 1 ≤ s̄ < s and p ̸= −1,
it holds that
                                                   s
                                               1 X1       1
                           log s − log s̄ +      ≤       ≤ + log s − log s̄,
                                               s̄ n=s̄ n  s
                                           s
                     sp+1   s̄p+1      p
                                          X         sp+1   s̄p+1
                          −        + s̄ ≤      np ≤      −       + sp , if p ≥ 0
                     p + 1 (p + 1)        n=s̄
                                                    p+1 p+1
                                            s
                       sp+1   s̄p+1        X         sp+1    s̄p+1
                            −       + sp ≤      np ≤       −       + s̄p , if p ≤ 0
                       p+1 p+1             n=s̄
                                                     p + 1   p + 1

Proof: Let f1 : R≥0 → R≥0 be a non-decreasing positive function and f2 : R≥0 → R≥0 be a
non-increasing positive function. Then it holds that
                          Zs                            s
                                                        X                  Zs
                               f1 (x)dx + f1 (s̄) ≤            f1 (n) ≤          f1 (x)dx + f1 (s),
                        x=s̄                            n=s̄              x=s̄
                         Zs                             s
                                                        X                  Zs
                               f2 (x)dx + f2 (s) ≤             f2 (n) ≤          f2 (x)dx + f2 (s̄).
                        x=s̄                            n=s̄              x=s̄
                                                                    R 1                                     p+1
                                                                                                 xp dx = xp+1 .
                                                                                             R
The result follows from a simple integral bound with                  x dx = log x and                                     □
We state a certain recurrence inequality that appears several times in our analysis as a lemma, in order
to shorten some proofs.

Lemma 2 (General error recurrence) Let c0 ≥ 0, c1 ≥ 0, γ > 1 be arbitrary constants. Fur-
thermore, let {ut }∞
                   t=0 be a sequence of non-negative numbers such that for all t ≥ 0, it holds
that

                                   c0       c1             γ
                          ut+1 ≤       +          + 1−           ut .
                                 t + 1 (t + 1)2          t+1
Then, for all values of t ≥ 0, it holds that:
                         c0     c1          u0        −1            c1          c1
             ut+1 ≤         +        2
                                       +         γ +γ    c0 +               +         .
                       t + 1 (t + 1)     (t + 1)              (t + 1)(γ − 1) (t + 1)γ

                                                               17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Proof:   We note that inductively, we have
                                t              Xt−1                   Yt
         c0        c1          Y           γ            c0     c1                 γ
ut+1 ≤       +           + u 0      1 −       +            +               1 −          .
       t + 1 (t + 1)2          s=0
                                         s+1    s=0
                                                      s + 1 (s + 1)2 ′         s′ + 1
                                                                                    s =s+1
Using the inequality 1 + x ≤ ex and Lemma 1, we obtain
                                t                    X   t−1                           Y  t
         c0         c1         Y              γ                   c0         c1                             γ
ut+1 ≤       +           + u 0     exp    −           +                 +                      exp     −
       t + 1 (t + 1)2          s=0
                                            s+1          s=0
                                                                s + 1 (s + 1)2 ′                         s′ + 1
                                                                                       s =s+1
                                   (      t
                                                    ) t−1                                     (      t
                                                                                                                 )
         c0         c1                  X       γ         X        c0         c1                   X          γ
     ≤       +           + u0 exp −                    +                +               exp −
       t + 1 (t + 1)2                        s+1                 s + 1 (s + 1)2                           s′ + 1
                                        s=0               s=0                                    s′ =s+1
                                                           t−1
         c0         c1                                     X        c0          c1                         t+1
     ≤       +           + u 0 exp {−γ   log (t +  1)} +                 +               exp    −γ  log
       t + 1 (t + 1)2                                      s=0
                                                                  s + 1 (s + 1)2                           s+1
                                         t−1                                       γ
         c0         c1         u0       X         c0          c1          s+1
     ≤       +           +          γ +                +
       t + 1 (t + 1)2       (t + 1)      s=0
                                                s + 1 (s + 1)2            t+1
                                                     t−1
         c0         c1         u0                 −γ
                                                     X        c0          c1                γ
     ≤       +           +          γ + (t + 1)                     +               (s + 1)
       t + 1 (t + 1)2       (t + 1)                  s=0
                                                            s +  1     (s + 1) 2

                                                  t−1
            c0     c1         u0               −γ
                                                  X                γ−1              γ−2

      ≤        +         +         γ + (t + 1)          c0 (s + 1)     + c1 (s + 1)
          t + 1 (t + 1)2   (t + 1)                s=0
The last term can be bound with the corresponding integral (see Lemma 1), yielding (since γ − 1 > 0):
                                     t−1
                                    X                  (t + 1)γ
                                         (s + 1)γ−1 ≤           .
                                     s=0
                                                           γ
             Pt−1
For the term s=0 (s + 1)γ−2 , we analyze to cases. If 1 < γ ≤ 2, we have
                                   t−1
                                   X                    (t + 1)γ−1
                                         (s + 1)γ−2 ≤              +1
                                   s=0
                                                           γ−1
otherwise, if γ ≥ 2, then
                                    t−1
                                    X                (t + 1)γ−1
                                        (s + 1)γ−2 ≤            .
                                    s=0
                                                        γ−1
Hence the two inequalities combined yield the stated bound,
                                                        t−1
               c0         c1        u0            1     X
                                                             c0 (s + 1)γ−1 + c1 (s + 1)γ−2

     ut+1 ≤        +         2
                               +         γ +          γ
             t + 1 (t + 1)       (t + 1)      (t + 1) s=0
               c0         c1        u0          −1            c1             c1
           ≤       +         2
                               +         γ +γ      c0 +                 +          .
             t + 1 (t + 1)       (t + 1)                (t + 1)(γ − 1) (t + 1)γ
                                                                                                       □

E     G ENERAL R ESULTS FOR MF-NE AND VI S
E.1   E XISTENCE AND U NIQUENESS OF MF-NE

The problem of finding a MF-NE is equivalent to finding a distribution over actions π ∗ ∈ ∆A
                                   ∀π          π ∗ )⊤ (π
                                    π ∈ ∆A , F(π       π ∗ − π ) ≥ 0.
that is, it is the solution of the VI corresponding to F. The existence of solutions to VIs is a
well-studied problem, and we state the main existence and uniqueness theorem.
Proposition 1 (Existence and Uniqueness of MF-NE) Let F : ∆A → [0, 1]K be a continuous
function. Then F has at least one MF-NE π ∗ , and the set of MF-NE is compact. Furthermore, if F is
also λ-strongly monotone for some λ > 0, then the MF-NE is unique.


                                                   18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Proof:   The MF-NE corresponds to solutions of the VI:

                                    ∀π          π ∗ )⊤ (π
                                     π ∈ ∆A , F(π       π ∗ − π ) ≥ 0.

The domain set ∆A is compact and convex, and the assumption that F is continuous yields the
existence of a solution using Corollary 2.2.5 of Facchinei & Pang (2003).
For uniqueness in the case of strong monotonicity, see Theorem 2.3.3 of Facchinei & Pang (2003). □


E.2   MF-NE, NE AND E XPLOITABILITY B OUNDS

The critical theoretical building block of the paper is the relationship between MF-NE, NE and
explicit bounds in terms of the former on exploitability. We restate several results from the main body
and provide the full proofs, as well as proving certain useful intermediary lemmas.

Lemma 3 For any π 1 , . . . , π N ∈ ∆A , it holds that

                                                                                            √
                       i                        i,⊤
                                                          h
                                                                     aj ∼π
                                                                         π j ,∀j
                                                                                     i     L 2
                        π1, . . . , π N ) − π
                     V (π                             E       F(µ)
                                                                b µ:= 1
                                                                         PN              ≤     .
                                                                   b N     j=1 eaj          N


Proof: We introduce a random variable āi which is independent from other players’ actions {aj }N
                                                                                                j=1
and has distribution π i . Then, it holds by simple computation that

                                                                                        
                                                                               N
                                                                            1 X
      V i (π                          b ai ) = E F(µ,   b ai ) = E F           e j , ai 

           π 1 , . . . , π N ) = E F(µ,
                                                                            N j=1 a
                                                                
                                                N
                                        1       X
                               = E F                eaj + eāi  , ai 
                                        N
                                              j=1,j̸=i
                                                                                        
                                               N                             N
                                            1 X                       1     X
                                 + E F          e j , ai  − F               eaj + eāi  , ai  .
                                           N j=1 a                    N
                                                                               j=1,j̸=i



For the first term above, we observe that
                                                                         
              N                                                N
         1    X                                          1     X
   E F            eaj + eāi  , ai  = E E F                 eaj + eāi  , ai  ai 
         N                                              N
            j=1,j̸=i                                         j=1,j̸=i
                                                                                 
                                                                    N
                                                           1       X
                                          = E E e⊤ai F
                                                                       eaj + eāi  |aj 
                                                           N
                                                                j=1,j̸=i
                                                                                  
                                                                    N
                                                           1       X
                                          = E e⊤
                                                ai E F
                                                                       eaj + eāi  ai 
                                                           N
                                                                j=1,j̸=i
                                                                                  
                                                                     N
                                                ⊤           1       X
                                          = E eai E F                  eaj + eāi 
                                                           N
                                                                                     j=1,j̸=i
                                                              i,⊤
                                                       π
                                                      =π            E[F(µ)],
                                                                        b


                                                              19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                        −i
since {aj }N        i
           i and (ā , a ) are identically distributed. The second term above can be bounded using
                                                                          
                              N                            N
                           1 X                       1     X
                    F           e j , ai  − F                 eaj + eāi  , ai 
                          N j=1 a                   N
                                                         j=1,j̸=i
                                                                            
                                 N                              N
                           1                         1 
                                 X                             X
                = e⊤  ai F           e j  − e⊤ ai F                 eaj + eāi 
                              N j=1 a                   N
                                                            j=1,j̸=i
                                                                              
                                        N                         N
                                  1   X                  1      X
                ≤ ∥eai ∥2 F                e j − F                 eaj + eāi 
                                  N j=1 a                N
                                                              j=1,j̸=i
                                                                                      2
                                                √
                        1                      L 2
                ≤L         (e i − eāi ) ≤          .
                        N a               2     N
The last inequality follows from the fact that F is L-Lipschitz. Hence the result follows.                       □
                                                     ∗
Proposition 2 Let F be L-Lipschitz,
                                         δ ≥ 0, and π be a δ-MF-NE. Then, the strategy profile
 π ∗ , . . . , π ∗ ) ∈ ∆N
(π                                  √L
                        A is a O δ + N -NE.


Proof: Firstly, define the independent random variables aj ∼ π j for all j ∈ N for some π j ∈ ∆A ,
         π = 1/N N                                                        b := 1/N N
                   P                                                               P
and let π̄            j=1 π j . As before, define the random variable µ              j=1 eaj . It is
                        h P                    i
                                N
straightforward that E N1 j=1 eaj aj ∼ π j = π̄     π , furthermore, by independence of the random
vectors eaj , we have
                                             v                                  
                                             u                          2
                                             u             N
                                             u     1     X
                       b − π j ∥2 aj ∼ π j ≤u

                  E ∥µ                                        eaj − π j aj ∼ π j 
                                                                                 
                                             tE  N
                                                          j=1
                                                                                   2
                                                   v
                                                   u    N
                                                   u 1 X    h
                                                                         2
                                                                                    i
                                                  ≤t 2     E ∥eaj − π j ∥2 aj ∼ π j
                                                     N j=1
                                                    2
                                                  ≤√ .
                                                    N
Hence, we have that
                                                                        2L
                     ∥ E[F(µ)|a
                           b j ∼ π j ] − F(π̄
                                           π )∥2 ≤ E[∥F(µ)    π )∥2 ] ≤ √ .
                                                        b − F(π̄
                                                                         N

Now let i ∈ N be arbitrary, and let π ′ ∈ ∆A be any distribution over actions that satisfies
     π ′ , π ∗,−i ) = maxπ V i (π
V i (π                          π , π ∗,−i ). We also define the quantities
                                                b aj ∼ π ∗ , ∀j ∈ N ,

                                 F1 = E F(µ)
                                                b aj ∼ π j , ∀i ̸= j, ai ∼ π ′ .

                                 F2 = E F(µ)
                   π ′ , π ∗,−i ) − V i (π
We will bound V i (π                     π ∗ , π ∗,−i ). Firstly, using Lemma 3 and the result above, we
observe that
                                                                                                N −1 ∗ 1
        π ′ , π ∗,−i ) − π ′⊤ F(π
  |V i (π                       π ∗ )| ≤|V i (π
                                              π ′ , π ∗,−i ) − π ′⊤ F2 | + |π
                                                                            π ′⊤ F2 − π ′⊤ F(       π + π ′ )|
                                                                                                 N     N
                                                 N −1 ∗ 1
                                         π ′⊤ F(
                                      + |π           π + π ′ ) − π ′⊤ F(π
                                                                        π ∗ )|
                                       √          N     N
                                      L 2      2L    2L
                                    ≤       +√ +
                                       N         N   N


                                                         20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


since F is L-Lipschitz. Likewise, we have
                                                                        √
                                  i   ∗    ∗,−i         ∗,⊤       ∗    L 2  2L
                               |V (π
                                   π ,π           )−π           π )| ≤
                                                              F(π          +√ .
                                                                        N    N
Finally, using the definition of a δ-MF-NE, it holds that
      π ′ , π ∗,−i ) − V i (π
 V i (π                     π ∗ , π ∗,−i ) ≤F(π
                                              π ∗ )⊤ (π
                                                      π′ − π ∗)
                                               π ∗ , π ∗,−i ) − π ∗,⊤ F(π
                                       + |V i (π                        π ∗ )| + |V i (π
                                                                                       π ′ , π ∗,−i ) − π ′⊤ F(π
                                                                                                               π ∗ )|
                                                √
                                           L(2 2 + 4)           4L
                                      ≤δ +                   +√ .
                                                  N               N
                                                                                                                    □
Our goal in the context of the N -player SMFG is to find policies {ππ j }N
                                                                         j=1 with low exploitability
 i                                                                                   i
Eexp for all i. We will next establish a sequence of results that explicitly bound Eexp in terms of
various quantities related to the MF-NE. The next lemma shows that for strongly monotone problems,
bounding the distance ∥π  π − π ∗ ∥2 to the unique MF-NE π ∗ can be used to obtain an approximate
MF-NE.

Lemma 4 (Exploitability and ∥π   π − π ∗ ∥2 ) Let F : ∆A → [0, 1]A be L-Lipschitz, λ-strongly mono-
                 ∗                                                                        π − π ∗ ∥2 .
tone. Assume π is the (unique) MF-NE corresponding to F, and π ∈ ∆A with δ := ∥π
                             ′
Then, it holds that for all π ∈ ∆A ,
                                             π )⊤π ≥ F(π
                                           F(π         π )⊤π ′ − cδ.
                  p
for c := (2L +        |A|), that is, π is a cδ-MF-NE.

Proof:     Let π ′ ∈ ∆A be arbitrary. Using the definition of the MF-NE π ∗ ,
                                    π ∗ )⊤π ∗ ≥F(π
                                  F(π            π ∗ )⊤ π ′ .
      π )⊤π + (F(π
    F(π          π ∗ )⊤π ∗ − F(π
                               π )⊤π ) ≥F(π
                                          π )⊤π ′ + (F(π
                                                       π ∗ )⊤π ′ − F(π
                                                                     π )⊤π ′ )
                              π )⊤ (π
                            F(π     π − π ′ ) ≥ (F(π
                                                   π ∗ )⊤π ′ − F(π
                                                                 π )⊤π ′ ) − (F(π
                                                                                π ∗ )⊤π ∗ − F(π
                                                                                              π )⊤π ) .
                                                |                         {z                       }
                                                                                ϵ

The quantity ϵ can be bounded by
                    π ∗ ) − F(π
           |ϵ| ≤|(F(π         π ))⊤π ′ | + |F(π
                                              π ∗ )⊤π ∗ − F(π
                                                            π ∗ )⊤π | + |F(π
                                                                           π ∗ )⊤π − F(π
                                                                                       π )⊤ π |
                 π ′ ∥2 ∥F(π
               ≤∥π         π ∗ ) − F(π          π ∗ )∥2 ∥π
                                     π )∥2 + ∥F(π        π ∗ − π ∥2 + ∥π       π ∗ ) − F(π
                                                                       π ∥2 ∥F(π         π )∥2
                          p
               ≤δ(2L + |A|).
                                                                                                                  □
Finally, we will need the following result regarding Tikhonov regularized solutions to MF-NE.
Namely, our approach will involve solving a Tikhonov regularized version of the VI problem for
stability, that is, our algorithms will converge to the solutions of the regularized problem MF-RVI.
The following result shows that as expected, the solutions of the MF-RVI are approximate MF-NE.

Lemma 5 (MF-NE and Tikhonov regularization) Let F : ∆A → [0, 1]A be λ ≥ 0 monotone,
L-Lipschitz. Assume further that π τ,δ ∈ Π is a δ-MF-NE for the (λ + τ )-strongly monotone operator
F − τ I. Then, it holds that π τ,δ is a δ + 2τ -MF-NE for the operator F.

Proof:     The proof simply follow by writing down the MF-NE inequality that ∀π
                                                                              π ∈ ∆A ,
                                 π τ,δ )⊤π τ,δ ≥ (F − τ I)(π
                       (F − τ I)(π                         π τ,δ )⊤π − δ,
                                  π τ,δ )⊤π τ,δ ≥ F(π
                                F(π                 π τ,δ )⊤π + τπ
                                                                 π⊤     π τ,δ − π ) − δ,
                                                                   τ,δ (π

                                π⊤
and a simple bound on the term |π      π τ,δ − π )| ≤ ∥π
                                  τ,δ (π               π τ,δ ∥2 ∥π
                                                                 π τ,δ − π ∥2 ≤ 2.                                □
Before moving on to the proof of Lemma 7, we will require an additional technical result regarding
                             i
the Lipschitz continuity of Eexp .


                                                          21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


             i                                                         i
Lemma 6 (Eexp   is Lipschitz) For any N , the exploitability function Eexp : ∆N
                                                                              A → R is Lipschitz
                                1          N     N
                              π , . . . , π ) ∈ ∆A , π , π̄
                                                         π ∈ ∆A ,
continuous, that is, for any (π

                                         i
                                       |Eexp  π , π −j ) − Eexp
                                             (π             i
                                                                 π , π −j )| ≤ Lj,i ∥π
                                                                (π̄                  π − π̄
                                                                                         π ∥2 ,

with the Lipschitz modulus given by

                                                             (√
                                                                √
                                                                  K, if i = j,
                                                    Li,j =    4L 2K
                                                                N   , if i ̸= j.


Proof: We first prove the fact that V i is Lipschitz. In the proof, we denote the empirical action
distribution induced by actions {aj }N      N     b j }N
                                     j=1 ∈ A by µ({a      j=1 ) ∈ ∆A .



      π , π −i ) − V i (π
|V i (π                 π ′ , π −i )|
                b k }N             i
                                                                                      a ∼ π j , ∀j ̸= i, ai ∼ π ′
                                       j
                                      a ∼ π j , ∀j ̸= i, ai ∼ π − E F µ({a
                                                                      b k }N       i
                                                                                       j
  ≤ E F µ({a            k=1 ), a                                           k=1 ), a


      X Y                      X                                          X Y                      X
 ≤                 π j (aj )           π (ai )F(µ({a
                                                b k }N       i
                                                     k=1 ), a ) −                     π j (aj )           π ′ (ai )F(µ({a
                                                                                                                     b k }N       i
                                                                                                                          k=1 ), a )
          j                    ai ∈A                                       j                      ai ∈A
     a ∈A j̸=i                                                            a ∈A j̸=i
      j̸=i                                                                 j̸=i

     X Y                       X
                  π j (aj )       π (ai ) − π ′ (ai ) F(µ({a
                                                        b k }N       i

 ≤                                                           k=1 ), a )
     aj ∈A j̸=i                ai ∈A
      j̸=i
     X Y                                    sX
                    j   j               ′
 ≤                π (a ) ∥π
                          π − π ∥2                        b k }N
                                                        F(µ({a         i 2
                                                               k=1 ), a )
      j                                         ai ∈A
     a ∈A j̸=i
      j̸=i
     X Y                                    √
 ≤                           π − π ′ ∥2
                  π j (aj ) ∥π                  K
     aj ∈A j̸=i
      j̸=i
                    √
    π − π ′ ∥2
 ≤ ∥π                   K.

where we use the Cauchy-Schwartz inequality.
Likewise, for any k ̸= i, it holds that

      π , π −k ) − V i (π
|V i (π                 π ′ , π −k )|
             b l }N             i
                                                                                   a ∼ π j , ∀j ̸= k, ak ∼ π ′
                                    j
                                   a ∼ π j , ∀j ̸= k, ak ∼ π − E F µ({a
                                                                   b l }N       i
                                                                                    j
  ≤ E F µ({a         l=1 ), a                                           l=1 ), a


      X Y                       X                                          X Y                     X
 ≤                 π j (aj )           π (ak )F(µ({a
                                                b l }N       i
                                                     l=1 ), a ) −                      π j (aj )           π ′ (ak )F(µ({a
                                                                                                                      b l }N       i
                                                                                                                           l=1 ), a )
     aj ∈A j̸=k                ak ∈A                                      aj ∈A j̸=k               ak ∈A
      j̸=k                                                                 j̸=k

     X Y                        X
                  π j (aj )        π (ak ) − π ′ (ak ) F(µ({a
                                                         b l }N       i

 ≤                                                            l=1 ), a )
     aj ∈A j̸=k                ak ∈A
      j̸=k



In this case, note that for any a, a′ ∈ A, a ∈
                                             √
                                                               b a−k ), ai ) − F(µ(a
                                               AK , we have |F(µ(a,              b ′ , a−k ), ai )| ≤
            −k               ′  −k
∥F(µ(a,
     b a )) − F(µ(a      b , a ))∥2 ≤ L 2/N , hence there exists a constant v−k ∈ R such that


                                                                   22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                                            √
   b a−k ), ai ) − v−k | ≤ 2L 2/N for all a. Then,
|F(µ(a,
                     π , π −k ) − V i (π
               |V i (π                 π ′ , π −k )|
                     X Y                          X
                                     π j (aj )       π (ak ) − π ′ (ak ) F(µ({a
                                                                           b l }N       i

                 ≤                                                              l=1 ), a ) − v−k
                     aj ∈A j̸=k                   ak ∈A
                      j̸=k
                                                               sX
                     X Y                                                                              2
                                               π − π ′ ∥2
                                     π j (aj )∥π

                 ≤                                                             b l }N
                                                                             F(µ({a         i
                                                                                    l=1 ), a ) − v−k
                     aj ∈A j̸=k                                    ak ∈A
                      j̸=k
                     X Y                                           √ √
                 ≤                             π − π ′ ∥2 2L 2 K/N
                                     π j (aj )∥π
                     aj ∈A j̸=k
                      j̸=k
                              √ √
                            2L 2 K
                                 ′
                 ≤∥π
                   π − π ∥2        .
                               N
                                                   i
Finally, we establish the Lipschitz continuity of Eexp .
                 i
               |Eexp  π , π −i ) − Eexp
                     (π             i
                                         π ′ , π −i )|
                                        (π

                             π , π −i ) − V i (π
                  ≤ max V i (π                 π , π −i ) − max V i (π
                                                                     π , π −i ) + V i (π
                                                                                       π ′ , π −i )
                      π ∈∆A                                                  π ∈∆A
                         i       ′    −i           i          −i
                  ≤ V (π
                       π , π ) − V (π
                                    π, π )
                   √         ′
                  ≤ K∥ππ − π ∥2 .
Similarly, for k ̸= i,
           i
         |Eexp  π , π −k ) − Eexp
               (π             i
                                   π ′ , π −k )|
                                  (π

                       π , π , π −k,i ) − V i (π
            ≤ max V i (π                       π , π −k ) − max V i (π
                                                                     π , π ′ , π −k,i ) + V i (π
                                                                                               π ′ , π −k )
                π ∈∆A                                                        π ∈∆A
                                           −k,i                    ′   −k,i
            ≤ max V (π       i
                      π, π , π    ) − V (π
                                         π, π , π         i
                                                                                       π , π −k ) − V i (π
                                                                              ) + V i (π                 π ′ , π −k )
              π ∈∆A
                 √
              4L 2K
            ≤        π − π ′ ∥2 .
                    ∥π
                 N
                                                                                                                        □
Finally, we prove the following statement that shows the infinite agent solution to MF-RVI is an
approximate N -player Nash equilibrium.

Lemma 7 Let F be monotone, L-Lipschitz. Let π ∗τ ∈ ∆A be the (unique) MF-NE of the regularized
                                                      π i − π ∗τ ∥2 ≤ δ for all i, then it holds that
map F − τ I. Let π 1 , . . . , π N ∈ ∆A be such that ∥π
 i       j N                       √
Eexp ({π
       π }j=1 ) = O(τ + δ + / N ) for all i ∈ N .
                                 1


Proof:     By the Lipschitz continuity of exploitability (Lemma 6), we have
                                                                         √
                                       ∗ N
                                                  √           ∗
                                                                    X 4L 2K
            i
           Eexp   π j }N
                ({π    j=1 ) ≤E i
                               exp   π
                                   ({π   }
                                       τ j=1  ) +     π
                                                    K∥π i
                                                          − π   ∥
                                                              τ 2 +          π j − π ∗τ ∥2
                                                                            ∥π
                                                                         N
                                                                    j̸=i
                                i      ∗ N
                                                   √        √
                             ≤Eexp ({π
                                     π τ }j=1 ) + δ K + 4L 2Kδ
The statement follows by using the results of Lemma 4 and Lemma 5.                                                      □

E.3   T HE P ROJECTED A SCENT O PERATOR

Lemma 8 Assume r is λ-monotone and L-Lipschitz.                                      Then Γηpg is Lipschitz with constant
p
  1 − 2λη + η 2 L2 .


                                                                       23
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Proof: The proof is similar to Theorem 12.1.2 of Facchinei & Pang (2003), page 1109.
    ∥Γpg (µ) − Γpg (µ′ )∥2 ≤∥Π∆K (µ + ηr(µ)) − Π∆K (µ′ + ηr(µ′ ))∥2
                            ≤∥µ + ηr(µ) − µ′ − ηr(µ′ )∥2
                            ≤∥µ − µ′ ∥2 + η 2 ∥r(µ) − r(µ′ )|2 + 2η(r(µ) − r(µ′ ))⊤ (µ − µ′ )
                            ≤(1 + η 2 L2 )∥µ − µ′ ∥2 − 2λη∥µ − µ′ ∥2
                            ≤(1 − 2λη + η 2 L2 )∥µ − µ′ ∥2
                                                                                                     □
                           2λ          η
Corollary 3 If 0 < η < L     2 , then Γpg is a contraction. The smallest contraction modulus is achieved
                                   √
for η = Lλ2 , for which Γηpg is a 1 − κ2 -contraction, where κ := L    λ
                                                                         .

Proof:   Placing the values in Lemma 8 yields the statement.                                         □

F     P ROOFS OF M AIN T HEORETICAL R ESULTS
In this section, we present the full statements and the proofs of the main convergence theorems, in
the case of expert feedback and bandit feedback.

F.1   C ONVERGENCE R ESULT FOR E XPERT F EEDBACK

Theorem 3 (Convergence - Expert feedback) Assume F is Lipschitz and monotone. Take the algo-
rithm with expert feedback for each player i so that
                                    Ai0 := Unif(A)
                              Ait+1 (. . .) := Π∆K ((1 − τ ηt )π
                                                               π it + ηt rit ).
                             −1
with learning rates ηt := τt+1 . Furthermore, let π ∗τ be the solution of the τ -Tikhonov regularized
problem. Then, for any i ∈ N , it holds that
                                                   √                             √
         i      j N
                                       √ 4τ −1 K 1 + σ 2 + 4τ −1 (L + τ ) K + 12Kτ −2 Lσ 2
    E[Eexp ({ππ t }j=1 )] ≤ max{1, 4L 2}                              √
                                                                          t
                                     √        √    24τ −1 L + ∥ππ i0 − π ∗τ ∥22
                            + max{ K, 4L 2K}                  √
                                                                t
                                 −1
                                             √      √                       √
                              2τ L max{ K, 4L 2K}                     L(2 2 + 4)      4L
                            +               √              + 2τ +                    +√ .
                                              N                              N         N
Furthermore, if F is λ > 0 strongly monotone, it holds that
                                                 √                          √
      i      j N
                                     √ 3τ −1 K 1 + σ 2 + τ −1 (L + τ ) 6K + 5τ −3/2 LKσλ−1/2
           π t }j=1 )] ≤ max{1, 4L 2}
  E[Eexp ({π                                                          √
                                                                          t
                                  √         √    9τ − /2 Lλ− /2 + ∥π
                                                     1      1
                                                                     π i0 − π ∗τ ∥2
                          + max{ K, 4L 2K}                    √
                                                                 t
                               −1/2    −1/2
                                                 √       √                        √
                            2τ      Lλ      max{ K, 4L 2K}                  L(2 2 + 4)   4L
                          +                  √                   + 2τ +                +√ .
                                               N                                   N       N

Proof: Define the sigma algebra FT := F({ππ it }i=1,...,N
                                                t=0,...,T ). Also define the quantities and random
variables
                                              N
                                         1 X i
                                  µ̄t :=         π ,
                                         N i=1 t
                                                τ −1
                                         ηt :=        ,
                                               t+1
                                        eit := ∥π
                                                π it − µ̄t ∥22 ,
                                        uit := E ∥π  π t − π ∗ ∥22 .
                                                   i



                                                     24
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Our goal naturally is to bound the sequence or error terms uit . The strategy is as follows: (1) bound
the expected differences of each agent’s action probabilities eit , showing the deviations of the policies
of the agents go to zero, (2) obtain a non-linear recursion for the expectation of the terms uit , (3) solve
the recursion to obtain the convergence rate.
Step 1: Bounding Policy Variations. Firstly, we control the term eit . Note that for any i, j, using the
non-expansiveness of the projection operator, it holds that

   π it+1 − π jt+1 ∥22 =∥Π((1 − τ ηt )π
  ∥π                                                                 π jt + ηt rjt )∥22
                                      π it + ηt rit ) − Π((1 − τ ηt )π
                                                              π jt − ηt rjt ∥22
                                   π it + ηt rit − (1 − τ ηt )π
                      ≤∥(1 − τ ηt )π
                                    π it − π jt ) + ηt (rit − rjt )∥22
                      ≤∥(1 − τ ηt )(π
                                     π it − π jt ∥22 + ηt2 ∥rit − rjt ∥22 + 2(1 − τ ηt )ηt (π
                      =(1 − τ ηt )2 ∥π                                                      π it − π jt )⊤ (rit − rjt )

Taking the conditional expectation on both sides, we obtain
              h                         i                                     h                     i
            E ∥π π it+1 − π jt+1 ∥22 |Ft ≤(1 − τ ηt )2 ∥ππ it − π jt ∥22 + E ηt2 ∥rit − rjt ∥22 |Ft
                                                                                h               i
                                            + 2(1 − τ ηt )ηt (ππ it − π jt )⊤ E rit − rjt |Ft
                                                                              h                     i
                                                         π it − π jt ∥22 + E ηt2 ∥rit − rjt ∥22 |Ft
                                          =(1 − τ ηt )2 ∥π
                                                                                h                   i
                                                         π it − π jt ∥22 + ηt2 E ∥εit − εjt ∥22 |Ft
                                          =(1 − τ ηt )2 ∥π
                                                           π it − π jt ∥22 + ηt2 Kσ 2
                                            =(1 − τ ηt )2 ∥π

since we have rit := F(µ  b t ) + εit and K = |A|. Then, it holds that
  h                    i                  h                 i
E ∥ππ it+1 − π jt+1 ∥22 ≤(1 − τ ηt )2 E ∥π   π it − π jt ∥22 + ηt2 Kσ 2

                                      1
                                          2 h                     i   τ −1  2
                         ≤ 1−                E ∥π  π it − π jt ∥22 +             Kσ 2
                                  t+1                                  t+1

                                      2
                                           h                     i      1       h               i τ −2 Kσ 2
                         ≤ 1−               E ∥π  π it − π jt ∥22 +           E  ∥π
                                                                                  π i
                                                                                    t −   π j 2
                                                                                             ∥
                                                                                            t 2 +
                                  t+1                               (t + 1)2                           (t + 1)2

                                      2
                                           h                     i      1       h                        i τ −2 Kσ 2
                         ≤ 1−               E ∥π  π it − π jt ∥22 +         2
                                                                              E 2∥ππ it ∥22 + 2∥ππ jt ∥22 +
                                  t+1                               (t + 1)                                  (t + 1)2

                                      2
                                           h                     i τ −2 Kσ 2 + 4
                         ≤ 1−               E ∥π  π it − π jt ∥22 +
                                  t+1                                  (t + 1)2

To bound the recurrence, we can use Lemma 2 (noting γ = 2, u0 = 0, c0 = 0, c1 = τ −2 Kσ 2 + 4).
     h                    i τ −2 Kσ 2 + 4 τ −2 Kσ 2 + 4 τ −2 Kσ 2 + 4   3τ −2 Kσ 2 + 12
       π it+1 − π jt+1 ∥22 ≤
    E ∥π                                 +             +              ≤                 .
                               (t + 1)2        t+1         (t + 1)2         (t + 1)

Then, the expected values of eit can be bounded using:
                                                                    2
                                                           N                   N
                                                    1 X j                   1 X i
                      eit =∥π
                            π it − µ̄t ∥22 = π it −      π              ≤         π − π jt ∥22
                                                                                 ∥π
                                                    N j=1 t                 N j=1 t
                                                                    2
                                                                 −2
                                                                    Kσ 2 +12
by an application of Jensen’s inequality. Then we have E eit ≤ 3τ t+1

                                                                             .
Step 2: Formulating the main recurrence. Next, we analyze for any i, the error term ∥π   π it − π ∗ ∥22 .
We denote αt := (1 − τ ηt ). We note that for the regularized solution π ∗ , we have the fixed point
result
                                  π ∗ + ηt F(π
                     Π((1 − τ ηt )π          π ∗ )) = Π(π
                                                        π ∗ + ηt (F − τ I)(π
                                                                           π ∗ )) = π ∗ .


                                                          25
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Hence, we can bound the quantity ∥µit+1 − π ∗ ∥22 by:

 π it+1 − π ∗ ∥22 =∥Π(αtπ it + ηt rit ) − Π(αtπ ∗ + ηt F(π
∥π                                                       π ∗ ))∥22
                 ≤∥αtπ it + ηt rit − αtπ ∗ − ηt F(π
                                                  π ∗ )∥22
                                 π it ) − αtπ ∗ − ηt F(π
                 ≤∥αtπ it + ηt F(π                     π ∗ ) + ηt (rit − F(π
                                                                           π it ))∥22
                 =ηt2 ∥rit − F(π                    π it − π ∗ ) + ηt (F(π
                               π it )∥22 + 2ηt (αt (π                               π ∗ )))⊤ (rit − F(π
                                                                         π it ) − F(π                 π it ))
                           π it − π ∗ ) + ηt (F(π
                    + ∥αt (π                               π ∗ ))∥22
                                                π it ) − F(π
                 =ηt2 ∥rit − F(π
                               π it )∥22 + 2ηt2 (F(π          π ∗ )))⊤ (rit − F(π
                                                   π it ) − F(π                                   π it − π ∗ )⊤ (rit − F(π
                                                                                π it )) + 2ηt αt (π                      π it ))
                           π it − π ∗ ) + ηt (F(π
                    + ∥αt (π                               π ∗ ))∥22
                                                π it ) − F(π
                 ≤ ηt2 ∥rit − F(π
                                π it )∥22 + 2ηt2 (F(π         π ∗ ))⊤ (rit − F(π
                                                    π i ) − F(π                π it ))
                   |                               {zt                               }
                                                     (a)

                              π it − π ∗ )⊤ (rit − F(π
                    + 2ηt αt (π                                     π it − π ∗ ) + ηt (F(π
                                                     π it )) + ∥αt (π                               π ∗ ))∥22 .
                                                                                         π it ) − F(π
                       |                 {z                 }   |                      {z                    }
                                         (b)                                           (c)



We analyze the three marked terms separately. For term (a), using the independence assumption of
the noise vectors and Young’s inequality, in expectation we obtain

          E[(a)] ≤ηt2 E[∥rit − F(π
                                 π it )∥22 ] + ηt2 E[∥F(π          π ∗ )∥22 ] + ηt2 E[∥rit − F(π
                                                        π it ) − F(π                           π it )∥22 ]
                  ≤2ηt2 E[∥rit − F(π
                                   π it )∥22 ] + ηt2 E[∥F(π          π ∗ )∥22 ]
                                                          π it ) − F(π
                  ≤2ηt2 E[∥rit − F(µ
                                   b t )∥22 + ∥F(µ         π it )∥22 ] + ηt2 K
                                                 b t ) − F(π
                  ≤2ηt2 σ 2 K + 2ηt2 K = 2ηt2 K(σ 2 + 1)

For the term (c), we obtain

                                     π it − π ∗ ) + ηt (F(π
                           (c) =∥αt (π                               π ∗ ))∥22
                                                          π it ) − F(π
                                  π it − π ∗ ) + ηt (F(π
                               =∥(π                    π it ) − τπ
                                                                 π it − F(π π ∗ ) + τππ ∗ )∥22
                               ≤ 1 − 2(λ + τ )ηt + (L + τ )2 ηt2 ∥π      π it − π ∗ ∥22


                                                     π it − π ∗ ∥22 + 2(L + τ )2 ηt2
                               ≤ (1 − 2(λ + τ )ηt ) ∥π

where the last inequality holds from the contractivity result in Lemma 8.
For the term (b), first taking the strongly monotone problem λ > 0 , we have that

             π it − π ∗ )⊤ (rit − F(π
(b) =2ηt αt (π                      π it ))
             π it − π ∗ )⊤ (rit − F(µ
    =2ηt αt (π                                       π it − π ∗ )⊤ (F(µ
                                    b t )) + 2ηt αt (π                b t ) − F(µ̄t ))
               π it − π ∗ )⊤ (F(µ̄t ) − F(π
     + 2ηt αt (π                            π it ))

              λ i         ∗ 2    1                      2            λ i    ∗ 2  1               i 2
    ≤2ηt αt    ∥ππ − π ∥2 + ∥F(µ        b t ) − F(µ̄t )∥2 + 2ηt αt    ∥π
                                                                       π − π ∥2 + ∥F(µ̄t ) − F(π
                                                                                               π t )∥2 +
              4 t                λ                                   4 t         λ
             π it − π ∗ )⊤ (rit − F(µ
     2ηt αt (π                         b t ))
         λ i                   2η                             2ηt
    ≤2ηt ∥π  π − π ∗ ∥22 + t ∥F(µ        b t ) − F(µ̄t )∥22 +                  π it )∥22
                                                                  ∥F(µ̄t ) − F(π
         2 t                     λ                             λ
     + 2ηt αt (π  π it − π ∗ )⊤ (rit − F(µ  b t )),

which follows from an application of Young’s inequality. For the last three terms, we have the bounds
in the conditional expectation:

                                            π it − π ∗ )⊤ (rit − F(µ

                                  E 2ηt αt (π                      b t ))|Ft = 0


                                                           26
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                          b t ) − F(µ̄t )∥22 |Ft ] ≤L2 E ∥µb t − µ̄t ∥22 |Ft

                     E[∥F(µ
                                                         "                                    #
                                                           1     X           X
                                                   ≤L2 E       ∥     πi −        eait ∥22 |Ft
                                                           N2 i t              i
                                                       L2 X
                                                   =           π it − eait ∥22 |Ft ]
                                                            E[∥π
                                                       N2 i
                                                       2L2
                                                   ≤
                                                        N

                                             π it )∥22 ≤ L2 ∥µ̄t − π it ∥22 = L2 eit
                                ∥F(µ̄t ) − F(π
Noting that µ
            b t is the sum of N independent random variables and has expectation µ̄t .
Hence, putting in the bounds for (a), (b), (c) and taking expectations, we obtain the inequality
                                                   4η L2   2ηt L2   i
                π t+1 − π ∗ ∥22 ≤2ηt2 K(1 + σ 2 ) + t
                i
             E ∥π                                        +         E et
                                                    λN
                                                               λ
                                            λ
                                                           π t − π ∗ ∥22 + 2(L + τ )2 ηt2
                                                           i
                                 + 1 − 2( + τ )ηt E ∥π
                                            2
or equivalently, the recursion
          2τ −2 K(1 + σ 2 ) + 2τ −2 (L + τ )2   4τ −1 L2 λ−1   2τ −1 L2 λ−1   i           2τ −1 (λ/2 + τ )

uit+1 ≤                                       +              +             E e t  +   1 −                    uit .
                      (t + 1)2                   N (t + 1)        (t + 1)                      t+1

However, if λ = 0, we bound the term (a) as follows. Take any arbitrary 1 > δ > 0. Then, once
again applying Young’s inequality, we obtain
             π it − π ∗ )⊤ (rit − F(π
(a) =2ηt αt (π                      π it ))
             π it − π ∗ )⊤ (rit − F(µ
    =2ηt αt (π                                       π it − π ∗ )⊤ (F(µ
                                    b t )) + 2ηt αt (π                b t ) − F(µ̄t ))
               π it − π ∗ )⊤ (F(µ̄t ) − F(π
     + 2ηt αt (π                          π it ))

              τδ i         ∗ 2       1                    2            τδ i    ∗ 2    1                  i 2
    ≤2ηt αt      ∥ππ − π ∥2 +          ∥r(µ
                                          b t ) − r(µ̄t )∥2 + 2ηt αt     ∥π
                                                                          π − π ∥2 +      ∥r(µ̄t ) − r(π
                                                                                                       π t )∥2 +
              2 t                 2τ δ                                 2 t           2τ δ
             π it − π ∗ )⊤ (rit − F(µ
     2ηt αt (π                         b t ))
                                 η                           ηt
             π it − π ∗ ∥22 + t ∥F(µ
    ≤2ηt τ δ∥π                           b t ) − F(µ̄t )∥22 + ∥F(µ̄t ) − F(π
                                                                           π it )∥22
                                τδ                           τδ
     + 2ηt αt (π  π it − π ∗ )⊤ (rit − F(µ  b t )).
Then, once again repeating the analysis before, we obtain the bound
             −2
                  K(1 + σ 2 ) + 2τ −2 (L + τ )2   4τ −2 L2 δ −1   τ −2 L2 δ −1   i

        2τ                                                                               2(1 − δ)
uit+1 ≤                                         +               +             E et + 1 −            uit .
                        (t + 1)2                   N (t + 1)        (t + 1)                t+1

Step 3: Solving the recurrence. Note that the exploitability in the main statement of the theorem
can be related to uit as follows using Lemma 6:
                                                                             √
                                                √                        4L 2K X
         i
     E[Eexp   π jt }N
            ({π     j=1 )] ≤E i
                             exp   π
                                 ({π ∗ N
                                       }j=1 ) +   K    π
                                                    E[∥π i
                                                         t − π ∗
                                                                 ∥ 2 ] +                   π jt − π ∗ ∥2 ]
                                                                                        E[∥π
                                                                             N
                                                                                   j̸=i
                                                               √
                                                √   q
                                                            4L 2K X
                                                                             q
                              i
                           ≤Eexp   π ∗ }N
                                 ({π    j=1 ) +   K uit +                      ujt
                                                               N
                                                                        j̸=i
                                                     √        √
                                                max{ K, 4L 2K} X
                                                                             q
                              i
                           ≤Eexp ({π ∗ N
                                   π }j=1 ) +                                  ujt
                                                         N                j

Hence the bounds on ujt will yield the result of the theorem by linearity of expectation, along with an
invocation of Proposition 2 and Lemma 5.


                                                         27
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Finally, we solve the recurrences for λ = 0 and λ > 0. For the case λ > 0, placing the shown before
            −2
               Kσ 2 +12
E eit ≤ 3τ t+1

                        , we obtain

                    2τ −2 K(1 + σ 2 ) + 2τ −2 (L + τ )2 + 6τ −3 Kσ 2 λ−1 L2 + 24τ −1 L2 λ−1
          uit+1 ≤
                                                    (t + 1)2
                          −1 2 −1               −1 λ

                       4τ L λ                 2τ ( /2 + τ )
                    +                + 1−                       uit .
                        N (t + 1)                 t+1

An invocation of Lemma 2 proves the main statement of the theorem.
For the monotone case λ = 0, we have the recursion:

                    2τ −2 K(1 + σ 2 ) + 2τ −2 (L + τ )2 + 6Kτ −4 L2 δ −1 σ 2 + 24τ −2 L2 δ −1
          uit+1 ≤
                                                   (t + 1)2
                          −2 2 −1

                       2τ L δ                 2(1 − δ)
                    +               + 1−                 uit .
                        N (t + 1)               t+1

Another invocation of Lemma 2 concludes the proof, choosing δ = 1/4.                               □


F.2   C ONVERGENCE R ESULT FOR BANDIT F EEDBACK


Algorithm 1 TRPA-Bandit: Independent learning with bandit feedback algorithm for an agent.
Require: Number of actions K, regularization τ > 0, exploration probability ε > 0, number of
  epochs H.
          1
  π0 ← K    1
  for h = 0, . . . , H − 1 do
      rh ← 0
      b
      Th ← ⌈ε−1 log(h + 1)⌉
      for t = 1, . . . , Th do                      ▷ Exploration for Th rounds before policy update,
          Sample Bernoulli r.v. u ∼ Ber(ε).
          if u = 1 then
               Play action ah,t ∼ Unif(A) uniformly at random. ▷ playing uniformly with prob. ε,
               Observe payoff rh,t .
               rh ← Krh,t eah,t .
               b
          else if u = 0 then
               Play action with current policy ah,t ∼ π h .    ▷ playing the current policy otherwise.
          end if
      end for−1
             τ
      ηh = h+1    .
      π h+1 = Π∆K ((1 − τ ηh )π  π h + ηh rbh )                     ▷ After each epoch, update policy.
  end for
  Return π H



Theorem 4 (Convergence - Bandit feedback) Assume F is L-Lipschitz and monotone, and let π ∗τ
be the solution of the τ -Tikhonov regularized problem. Assume that for H rounds, each player runs
Algorithm 1 with learning rates and epoch durations

                                          τ −1
                                ηh :=           , Th := ε−1 log(h + 1),
                                        (h + 1)


                                                   28
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


producing policies {π   π jh }N
                              j=1 at each epoch h ∈ 0, . . . , H − 1. Then for each player i, it holds that
                            √
                        12 1 + σ 2 K /2 τ −1 (1 + τ −1 L) + 6τ −1 (L + τ )
                                          3
                                                                                          √         √
   i
E[Eexp   π jh }N
       ({π     j=1 )] ≤                             √                            max{ K, 4L 2K}
                                                      h
                             8K /4 τ − /2 (1 + σ /2 ) + 15τ −1 L(τ − /2 + 1) + ∥π
                                 3      1         1                    1
                                                                                     π i0 − π ∗τ ∥2     √     √
                        +                                     √                                     max{ K, 4L 2K}
                                                                h

                                    −1      −1/2
                                                                                         √         √
                                                 + 8τ Lε + 8τ − /2 LN −1 max{ K, 4L 2K}
                                                      −1           3
                        + 23τ LN
                                         √
                                     L(2 2 + 4)        4L
                        + 2τ +                     +√ .
                                          N               N
Furthermore, if it holds that F is λ-strongly monotone,
                        7τ −1 K /2 (σ + 1)(1 + τ − /2 λ− /2 L) + 17τ −1 λ− /2 (τ − /2 + 1)
                                   3                    1     1                 1          1
                                                                                                         √    √
   i
E[Eexp   π jh }N
       ({π     j=1 )] ≤                                      √                                      max{ K, 4L 2K}
                                                               h
                                                             √
                             5τ −1 (L + τ ) + 5K /4 τ − /2 1 + σ + ∥π
                                                    3      1
                                                                         π i0 − π ∗τ ∥2          √      √
                        +                                √                               max{ K, 4L 2K}
                                                           h

                                    −1/2 −1/2      −1/2
                                                                                                          √     √
                                                        + 8τ − /2 λ− /2 Lε + 6τ −1 λ− /2 LN −1 max{ K, 4L 2K}
                                                                1    1                    1
                        + 23τ           λ      LN
                                         √
                                     L(2 2 + 4)        4L
                        + 2τ +                     +√ .
                                          N               N
Proof: Our analysis follows that in the case of expert feedback, the difference being the errors are
analyzed per epoch and randomization in the exploration probabilities. We introduce the following
indicator random variables:
             1ih,t :=1{player i explores at round t of epoch h}
               i
             Eh,t  :={1ih,t = 1}
              1ih :=1{player i explores at least once during epoch h} = max 1ih,t
                                                                             t=1,...,Th
                                   Th
              Ehi :={1ih = 1} =
                                   [
                                          i
                                         Eh,t
                                   t=1
               aih :=Last explored action in epoch h by agent i,
                     and a0 if no exploration occurred.
               sih :=Timestep when exploration last occurred in epoch h by agent i,
                     and 0 if no exploration occurred. ∈ {1, . . . , Th }
Note that 1ih,t are independent random variables for different (i, h, t) triplets, likewise for i ̸= j,
1ih,t and 1jh are pairwise independent. Once again, we define the following sigma algebra Fh :=
            i=1,...,N
F({π π ih′ }h=0,...,h ), and the random variables:
                                                     N
                                                  1 X i
                                         µ̄h :=        π ,
                                                  N i=1 h
                                                 τ −1
                                         ηh :=
                                                h+1
                                           i
                                         et := ∥ππ ih − µ̄h ∥22 ,
                                         uih := E ∥π  π h − π ∗ ∥22 .
                                                    i

We again proceed in several steps.
Step 1: The importance sampling estimate. By the definition of the above events and the proba-
bilistic exploration scheme, note that we have

                              rih = K F(µ
                              b            b sih ,h , aih ) + nit,h (aih ) 1ih .


                                                     29
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Firstly, we note that by law of total expectations and the fact that Ehi are independent from Fh ,
               i             i i                     h            i
                            rh Eh , Fh P(Ehi ) + E b  rih Ehi , Fh P(Ehi )

           E brh Fh = E b
                             i i                i i                      h            i
                                                                          rih Ehi , Fh P(Ehi )

                       =E b rh Eh , Fh − E b   rh Eh , Fh P(Ehi ) + E b
                                            |                       {z                       }
                                                                            :=bih
                                 i i
                                rh Eh , Fh + bih

                           =E b
for bih quantifying a bias induced due to the probability of no exploration. We have that
                                                  √ p
                                   ∥bih ∥2 ≤ K K 1 + σ 2 exp {−εTh }
         h              i
since E b  rih Ehi , Fh = 0 and exploration probabilities are determined by independent random
Bernoulli variables hence
                                                          T
                                    P(Ehi ) = (1 − ε) h ≤ exp {−εTh } .
To further characterize the bias, we introduce a coupling argument. Define independent random
variables ājh ∼ επ π unif + (1 − ε)ππ jh for all j ∈ N and āih,exp ∼ π unif . By the definition, it holds that
         b h }j ) ∈ ∆A denotes the empirical distribution induced by actions {ājh }j ):
(where µ({ā   j
                                                      h              i
                                                           b jh }j )) ∥2
                                  i i
                            ∥E b rh Eh , Fh − E F(µ({ā
                                                                  h                 i
                                          b ih,exp , ā−i             b jh }j )) ∥2

                              ≤∥ E F(µ(ā              h )) − E F(µ({ā
                                  h                                               i
                                                                       j
                              ≤ E ∥F(µ(ā b ih,exp , ā−i
                                                       h  )) − F( µ({ā
                                                                  b    h }j ))∥ 2

                                  2L
                              ≤      .
                                  N
Step 2: Bounding policy variations. Once again, we first bound the variations in policies between
agents.
 π ih+1 − π jh+1 ∥22 =∥Π((1 − τ ηh )π
∥π                                  π ih + ηhb                    π jh + ηhb
                                             rih ) − Π((1 − τ ηh )π        rjh )∥22
                                  π ih + ηhb
                     ≤∥(1 − τ ηh )π                         π jh + ηhb
                                           rih − (1 − τ ηh )π        rjh ∥22
                                   π ih − π jh ) + ηh (b
                     ≤∥(1 − τ ηh )(π                         rjh )∥22
                                                       rih − b
                                  π ih − π jh ∥22 + ηh2 ∥b
                   =(1 − τ ηh )2 ∥π                       rih − brjh ∥22 + 2(1 − τ ηh )ηh (π    π ih − π jh )⊤ (b     rjh ).
                                                                                                                rih − b
Unlike the expert feedback proof, the last term does not vanish in expectation.
 h                         i                                      h                          i
E ∥ππ ih+1 − π jh+1 ∥22 |Fh ≤(1 − τ ηh )2 ∥π π ih − π jh ∥22 + E ηh2 ∥b         rjh ∥22 |Fh
                                                                          rih − b
                                                                       h                 i
                               + 2(1 − τ ηh )ηh (π  π ih − π jh )⊤ E b         rjh |Fh
                                                                         rih − b
                                                                  h                          i
                             ≤(1 − τ ηh )2 ∥ππ ih − π jh ∥22 + E ηh2 ∥b         rjh ∥22 |Fh
                                                                          rih − b
                                                       h                                   h              i         i
                                       π ih − π jh )⊤ E b    rih Ehi , Fh + bih − E b        rjh Ehj , Fh − bjh

                               + 2ηh (π
                                                                  h                          i
                             ≤(1 − τ ηh )2 ∥ππ ih − π jh ∥22 + E ηh2 ∥b         rjh ∥22 |Fh
                                                                          rih − b
                                                       h                          h                ii
                                       π ih − π jh )⊤ E b    rih Ehi , Fh − E b     rjh Ehj , Fh + 8ηh exp {−εTh } ,

                               + 2ηh (π
where the last line follows from the bound on bih in step 1. Furthermore, using Young’s inequality,
we hobtain                   i                                  h                      i
 E ∥π π ih+1 − π jh+1 ∥22 |Fh ≤(1 − τ ηh )2 ∥π
                                             π ih − π jh ∥22 + E ηh2 ∥b     rjh ∥22 |Fh + 8ηh exp {−εTh }
                                                                      rih − b
                                   τ ηh i                                              h              i 2
                                         π h − π jh ∥22 + τ −1 E b                       rjh Ehj , Fh
                                                                    i i
                                 +      |π                         rh Eh , Fh − E b
                                     2                          h                      i                2
                                           2    i       j 2        2    i     j 2
                               ≤(1 − τ ηh ) ∥π
                                             π h − π h ∥2 + E ηh ∥b   rh − brh ∥2 |Fh + 8ηh exp {−εTh }
                                         τ ηh i                4τ −1 L2
                                    +         π h − π jh ∥22 +
                                             ∥π                         .
                                           2                     N2


                                                          30
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Hence with the choice of Th = ε−1 log(h + 1) and noting that ∥π    π ih − π jh ∥2 ≤ 2, we obtain the
recurrence
       h                    i        3/2
                                             h                i 2τ −2 K 3 (σ 2 + 1) + 8τ −1 + 4
    E ∥π π ih+1 − π jh+1 ∥22 ≤ 1 −             π ih − π jh ∥22 +
                                            E ∥π
                                    h+1                                     (h + 1)2
                                4τ −1 L2
                              +          .
                                  N2
                                                                              −1   2
Hence, by invoking the recurrence lemma (Lemma 2, with c0 = 4τ N 2L , c1 = 2τ −2 K 3 (σ 2 + 1) +
8τ −1 + 4, γ = 3/2, u0 = 0), we have
                 h                    i 8τ −2 K 3 (σ 2 + 1) + 32τ −1 + 16 8τ −1 L2
                   π ih+1 − π jh+1 ∥22 ≤
                E ∥π                                                     +         .
                                                       h+1                  N2

Step 3: Formulating the main recurrence. Next, we formulate a recurrence for the main error term
              π it+1 − π ∗ ∥22 , As before, we have (noting αh := 1 − τ ηh ):
of interest, ∥π

 π ih+1 − π ∗ ∥22 =∥Π(αhπ ih + ηhb
∥π                               rih ) − Π(αhπ ∗ + ηh F(π
                                                        π ∗ ))∥22
                              rih − αhπ ∗ − ηh F(π
                 ≤∥αhπ ih + ηhb                  π ∗ )∥22
                                 π ih ) − αhπ ∗ − ηh F(π
                 ≤∥αhπ ih + ηh F(π                     π ∗ ) + ηh (b
                                                                   rih − F(π
                                                                           π ih ))∥22
                 =ηh2 ∥b
                       rih − F(π                    π ih − π ∗ ) + ηh (F(π
                               π ih )∥22 + 2ηh (αh (π                               π ∗ )))⊤ (b
                                                                         π ih ) − F(π         rih − F(π
                                                                                                      π ih ))
                          π ih − π ∗ ) + ηh (F(π
                   + ∥αh (π                               π ∗ ))∥22
                                               π ih ) − F(π
                 =ηh2 ∥b
                       rih − F(π
                               π ih )∥22 + 2ηh2 (F(π          π ∗ )))⊤ (b
                                                   π ih ) − F(π         rih − F(π                 π ih − π ∗ )⊤ (b
                                                                                π ih )) + 2ηh αh (π              rih − F(π
                                                                                                                         π ih ))
                          π ih − π ∗ ) + ηh (F(π
                   + ∥αh (π                               π ∗ ))∥22
                                               π ih ) − F(π
                 ≤ ηh2 ∥b
                        rih − F(π
                                π ih )∥22 + 2ηh2 (F(π         π ∗ )))⊤ (b
                                                    π i ) − F(π         rih − F(π
                                                                                π ih ))
                   |                                {zh                               }
                                                    (a)

                             π ih − π ∗ )⊤ (b
                   + 2ηh αh (π              rih − F(π              π ih − π ∗ ) + ηh (F(π
                                                    π ih )) + ∥αh (π                               π ∗ ))∥22
                                                                                        π ih ) − F(π
                      |                 {z                  }   |                      {z                   }
                                        (b)                                            (c)

Once again, we will need to bound the three terms above. For the term (a), we bound in expectation
as before:
                                        E [(a)] ≤ 2ηt2 K 3 (σ 2 + 1).
Likewise, it still holds for the term (c) that
                                 π ih − π ∗ ) + ηh (F(π
                       (c) =∥αh (π                               π ∗ ))∥22
                                                      π ih ) − F(π
                              π ih − π ∗ ) + ηh (F(π
                           =∥(π                    π ih ) − τπ
                                                             π ih − F(π π ∗ ) + τπ π ∗ )∥22
                           ≤ 1 − 2(λ + τ )ηh + (L + τ )2 ηh2 ∥π     π ih − π ∗ ∥22 .


However, this time, the exploration parameter ε will cause additional bias in the term (b). Define
rih = E[e
e       rih |Ehi , Fh ].

             π ih − π ∗ )⊤ (b
(b) =2ηh αh (π              rih − F(π
                                    π ih ))
             π ih − π ∗ )⊤ (b
    =2ηh αh (π              rih − e               π ih − π ∗ )⊤ (e
                                  rih ) + 2ηh αh (π              rih − F(µ̄h ))
     + 2ηh αh (ππ ih − π ∗ )⊤ (F(µ̄h ) − F(π
                                           π ih ))

              λ i                 1 i                            λ i               1
    ≤2ηh αh     ∥ππ h − π ∗ ∥22 + ∥e  rh − F(µ̄h )∥22 + 2ηh αh      π h − π ∗ ∥22 + ∥F(µ̄h ) − F(π
                                                                   ∥π                            π ih )∥22 +
              4                   λ                              4                 λ
             π ih − π ∗ )⊤ (b
     2ηh αh (π               rih − erih )
         λ i                   2η                        2ηh
    ≤2ηh ∥π π h − π ∗ ∥22 + h ∥e      rih − F(µ̄h )∥22 +                  π ih )∥22
                                                             ∥F(µ̄h ) − F(π
         2                       λ                        λ
     + 2ηh αh (π π ih − π ∗ )⊤ (brih − e rih ),


                                                       31
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


and similarly, if λ = 0, we have
             π ih − π ∗ )⊤ (b
(b) =2ηh αh (π              rih − F(π
                                    π ih ))
             π ih − π ∗ )⊤ (b
    =2ηh αh (π              rih − e               π ih − π ∗ )⊤ (e
                                  rih ) + 2ηh αh (π              rih − F(µ̄h ))
               π ih − π ∗ )⊤ (F(µ̄h ) − F(π
     + 2ηh αh (π                           π ih ))

              τδ i         ∗ 2      1    i          2            τδ i    ∗ 2    1                  i   2
    ≤2ηh αh      ∥ππ − π ∥2 +          ∥e
                                        r − F(µ̄h )∥2 + 2ηh αh     ∥π
                                                                    π − π ∥2 +      ∥F(µ̄h ) − F(π
                                                                                                 π h )∥2 +
              2 h                 2τ δ h                         2 h           2τ δ
             π ih − π ∗ )⊤ (b
     2ηh αh (π                rih − erih )
                                 η                      ηh
             π ih − π ∗ ∥22 + h ∥e
    ≤2ηh τ δ∥π                        rih − F(µ̄h )∥22 + ∥F(µ̄h ) − F(π
                                                                      π ih )∥22
                                 τδ                     τδ
     + 2ηh αh (π  π ih − π ∗ )⊤ (brih − e rih ).

                      1
Denote π unif := K      1K . The remaining error terms we can bound by (using the auxiliary coupling
                    j
random actions āh from Step 1):
            π ih − π ∗ )⊤ (brih − e rih )|Fh |

| E 2ηh αh (π
                                                                  h                                           i
                π ih − π ∗ )⊤ (brih − e                                    π ih − π ∗ )⊤ (b
                                        rih )|Ehi , Fh P(Ehi ) + E 2ηh αh (π              rih − e
                                                                                                rih )|Ehi , Fh P(Ehi )|

 ≤| E 2ηh αh (π
   2τ −1 h i                                           i
 ≤        E ∥π  π h − π ∗ ∥2 ∥brih − e rih ∥2 |Ehi , Fh P(Ehi )
   h+1
             √
   8K /2 τ −1 1 + σ 2
       3

 ≤                        .
         (h + 1)2

   rih − F(µ̄t )∥22 |Fh ] ≤2 E ∥e       b ih,exp , ā−i                       b ih,exp , ā−i
                                 i                        2
                                                                                                          2

E[∥e                             rh − F(µ(ā         h ))∥2 Fh + 2 E ∥F(µ(ā               h )) − F(µ̄h )∥2 |Fh
                            8L2
                                          b ih,exp , ā−i             2

                          ≤     + 2 E ∥F(µ(ā          h )) − F(µ̄h )∥2 |Fh
                             N                                              
                                                               N
                            8L2                             1 X j 2 
                          ≤               b iexp , ā−i ) −
                                + 2L2 E ∥µ(ā                     π ∥ |Ft
                             N                              N j=1 h 2
                                                                                                            
                            8L2                             1 X                           j    π unif
                          ≤               b iexp , ā−i ) −
                                + 4L2 E ∥µ(ā                       π unif + (1 − ε)π
                                                                   (επ                   πh) −        ∥2 |Ft 
                             N                              N                                    N 2
                                                              j̸=i
                                                                                      
                                                                   i
                                        1 X j                    π   −  π unif
                            + 4L2 E ∥ε        π h − π unif ) + h
                                             (επ                               ∥22 |Ft 
                                        N                             N
                                                j̸=i
                                2        2
                            8L    8L              4
                          ≤     +     + 4L2 (2ε2 + )
                             N     N              N
                            64L2
                          =      + 8L2 ε2 ,
                             N

                                           π ih )∥22 ≤ L2 ∥µ̄h − π ih ∥22 = L2 eih
                              ∥F(µ̄h ) − F(π

Step 4: Main result. Once again, for the strongly monotone case λ > 0 we have that
                                                                       √
                    2τ −2 K 3 (1 + σ 2 ) + 8τ −2 (L + τ )2 + 8K /2 τ −1 1 + σ 2
                                                               3
             i
           uh+1 ≤
                                               (h + 1)2
                       128τ λ L N + 16τ −1 λ−1 L2 ε2
                             −1 −1 2 −1
                                                                    2τ −1 λ−1 L2   i
                    +                                           +               E eh
                                          h+1                          h+1
                              2τ −1 (λ/2 + τ )

                    + 1−                         uih ,
                                  h+1


                                                       32
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


leading to the recurrence
             −2
                                                                                                    √
            K 3 (σ 2 + 1)(1 + 8τ −1 λ−1 L2 ) + 32τ −2 λ−1 (2τ −1 + 1) + 8τ −2 (L + τ )2 + 8K /2 τ −1 1 + σ 2
                                                                                            3
        2τ
uih+1 ≤
                                                      (h + 1)2
          16τ −1 λ−1 L2 (8N −1 + ε2 ) + 16τ −2 λ−1 L2 N −2
        +
                                 h+1
                2τ −1 (λ/2 + τ )

        + 1−                       uih .
                     h+1

In the case of a monotone operator, we have
                               −2
                                                                            √
                              K 3 (σ 2 + 1) + 4τ −2 (L + τ )2 + 8K /2 τ −1 1 + σ 2
                                                                   3
                          2τ
                  uih+1 ≤
                                                    (h + 1)2
                            64τ δ L N + 8τ −2 δ −1 L2 ε2
                               −2 −1 2 −1
                                                                    τ −2 δ −1 L2   i
                          +                                      +              E eh
                                            h+1                       (h + 1)

                                  2(1 − δ)
                          + 1−                uih ,
                                    h+1
which we can bound by (choosing δ = 1/4):
                                                                             √
        (1 + σ 2 )K 3 τ −2 (2 + 32τ −2 L2 ) + 4τ −2 (L + τ )2 + 8K /2 τ −1       1 + σ 2 + 64τ −2 L2 (2τ −1 + 1)
                                                                  3

uit+1 ≤                                                        2
                                                  (h + 1)
          256τ −2 L2 N −1 + 32τ −2 L2 ε2 + 32τ −3 L2 N −2
        +
                              h+1

                 3/2
        + 1−            uih .
                h+1
We use Lemma 2 to obtain the statement of the theorem, once again choosing γ = 3/2.
The bound in the statement of the theorem in the main body of the paper follows from the fact that
the lengths of the exploration epochs scale with Th = O(ε−1 log(h + 1)) = O(ε
                                                                            e −1 ).             □
Finally, we note that while the dependence on K, the number of actions, is not discussed in the main
body paper, as expected the algorithm for bandit feedback has a worse dependency on the number
of actions. This is as expected due to the fact that (i) the importance sampling estimator increases
variance on payoff estimators by a factor of K, and (2) in other words, a factor of O(K) is introduced
in order to explore all actions.

G     D ETAILS OF E XPERIMENTS

Hardware and compute. All experiments were run on single core of an AMD EPYC 7742 CPU,
a single experiment with 1000 independent agents and 100000 iterations takes roughly 1 hour. No
GPU compute was used. All relevant code (withholding location details to preserve anonymity) has
been shared in the supplementary material.
Setup details. For all experiments, we use parameters τ, ϵ as implied by Corollaries 1,2. Projections
to the probability simplex were implemented using the algorithm in Duchi et al. (2008). The
particular Python implementation of the TRPA-Full and TRPA-Bandit operators are provided in the
supplementary material.

G.1   P ROBLEM G ENERATION D ETAILS

We provide further details on how we generate/simulate the SMFG problems.
Linear payoffs. We generate a payoff map
                                      Flin (µ) := (S + X)µ + b


                                                  33
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


for some S ∈ SK×K
                ++   and X anti-symmetric matrix, which makes monotone Flin by Example 6. We
randomly sample S from a Wishart distribution (which has support contained in positive definite
                                          ⊤
matrices), generate X by computing U−U  2    for a random matrix U with entries sampled uniformly
from [0, 1] and b having entries uniformly sampled from [0, 1].
Payoffs with KL potential. Next, based on Example 5, we construct the following payoff operator
FKL for some reference distribution µref ∈ ∆A :
                         ΦKL (µ) := DKL (γµ + (1 − γ)µref ||µref )
                         FKL (µ) := ∇ΦKL (µ)

                                             γµ(a) + (1 − γ)µref (a)
                        FKL (µ, a) = γ log                             +γ
                                                    µref (a)
Note that as ΦKL is convex, FKL is monotone. In our experiments, we use γ = 0.1, and we generate
µref by sampling K uniform random variables in [0, 1] and normalizing.
Beach bar process. Following the example given in Perrin et al. (2020), we use the action set
A = {1, . . . , K} for potential locations at the beach and assume a bar is located at xbar := ⌊ K2 ⌋.
Taking into the proximity to the bar and the occupancy measure over actions (i.e., the crowdedness of
locations at the beach), the payoff map is given by:
                                         |a − xbar |
                          Fbb (µ, a) = 1 −           − α log(1 + µ(a)).
                                             K
Note that by Example 1, the above payoff map is monotone. We use α = 1 for our experiments.

G.2    L EARNING CURVES - F ULL F EEDBACK

We provide the learning curves under full feedback for various choices of the number of agents
N ∈ {20, 100, 1000}. The errors in terms of maximum exploitability and distance to MF-NE are
presented in Figure 3 and Figure 4 respectively.
As expected, the games with larger number of players N converge to better approximate NE in the
sense that the final maximum exploitability is smaller at convergence. Furthermore, in most cases the
exploitability converges slightly slower with more agents, also supporting the theoretical finding that
there is a dependence on N . As before, the exploitability curves have oscillations at later stages of
the training, even though they remain upper bounded as foreseen the theoretical results. This does
not contradict our results as long as for larger N , the upper bound on the oscillations us smaller.
The confidence intervals plotted in figures support a high-probability upper bound on the maximum
exploitability as one would expect.

G.3    L EARNING CURVES - BANDIT F EEDBACK

We provide the learning curves under bandit feedback for various choices of the number of agents
N ∈ {50, 100, 1000}. The errors in terms of maximum exploitability and distance to MF-NE are
presented in Figure 5 and Figure 6 respectively.
As in the case of full feedback, the curves converge to smaller values as N increases. Furthermore,
one straightforward observation is that the variance at early stages of learning is much higher than in
the full feedback case. This can be due to the added variance of the importance sampling estimator
constructed through exploration epochs. As exploration occurs in shorter duration at early epochs, the
variance between agent policies will be high as well, explaining the initial increase in exploitability
in certain toy experiments in Figure 5.
Furthermore, comparing the observations for bandit feedback (Figure 5) and full feedback cases
(Figure 3), we empirically confirm that learning take more iterations in the bandit case. This is likely
due to the fact that exploration occurs probabilistically, inducing additional variance in the policy
updates that increases with N and incorporates an additional logarithmic term in the theoretical
bounds. However, the number of exploration epochs in the bandit case is comparable to the number
of time steps in the full feedback case.
Finally, we also emphasize the fact that in earlier stages of training with bandit feedback, the cases
with N = 1000 had much higher exploitability and ℓ2 distance to MF-NE at earlier time steps. This


                                                  34
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                               (a)                                    (b)


                               (c)                                    (d)

Figure 3: The (smoothed) maximum exploitability maxi∈N ϕi ({π     π j }N
                                                                       j=1 ) among N agents throughout
learning with full feedback for three different N , on the problems (a) linear payoffs, (b) exponentially
decreasing payoffs, (c) payoffs with KL potential and (d) the beach bar payoffs.


is due to the fact that policy updates occur with larger intervals in between when N is large, as can
be seen in Algorithm 1. This can be explicitly observed in Figure 6, as the policies of agents are
constant in between policy updates. However, at later stages as the time-dependent term in the bound
on epxloitability in Corollary 2 disappears, we observe that the experiments for larger N converge
to a better policy (i.e., one with lower exploitability) than the cases with smaller N as the theory
suggests.
Finally, comparing Figures 5,6, we see that in certain experiments for some N despite having a
lower exploitability we observe a greater ℓ2 distance to MF-NE. This likely due to fact that the
non-vanishing bias term in exploitability and ℓ2 distance have differing dependence on problem
parameters such as L, λ, K. Therefore, for instance for the KL potential payoffs, we observe a greater
mean ℓ2 distance to MF-NE but a smaller exploitability for N = 1000.

G.4   C OMPARISON WITH M ULTIPLICATIVE W EIGHT U PDATES

The SMFG problem of interactive learning without communications and bandit feedback has not been
studied in the literature previously, and there is no alternative algorithm with theoretical guarantees
to the best of our knowledge in this setting. However, in Figure 7 we provide comparison with a
heuristic extension of the OMD algorithm proposed by Pérolat et al. (2022) which was analyzed in
the case of an infinite agent game. In general, independent learning with N agents introduces unique
challenges that cause the algorithm to cycle or diverge.

G.5   E XPERIMENTS ON T RAFFIC C ONGESTION

UTD19 and closed-loop sensors. The UTD19 dataset contains measurements by closed-loop sensors
which report the fraction of the time a particular section of the route remains occupied (i.e., a car is
located in between sensors placed on the sides). The data consists of measurements every 5 minutes,


                                                   35
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                               (a)                                    (b)


                               (c)                                    (d)
                                                         1
                                                                  π i − π ∗ ∥2 with N agents throughout
                                                           P
Figure 4: The mean ℓ2 distance to MF-NE given by N i∈N ∥π
learning with full feedback for three different N , on the problems (a) linear payoffs, (b) exponentially
decreasing payoffs, (c) payoffs with KL potential and (d) the beach bar payoffs.


from various sensors across 41 European cities. The dataset contains 2 weeks of data collected by
sensors placed around Zurich, the locations of sensors imposed on the map in Figure 8.
Payoff models. We fit kernelized ridge regression models to model the flow as a function of occupancy
using the UTD19 dataset. We use an RBF kernel and a regularization of α = 1.0 for all models. We
compute a proxy for the travel velocity using the flow and occupancy measurements on each route,
and a scaling factor cdist due to varying lengths of each route, leading to the estimated travel time

                                                           flow
                                      Ttravel = cdist             .
                                                        occupancy

We use −Ttravel as the reward for each agent. The flows collected from the dataset and the corre-
sponding fitted models are presented in Figure 9 and Figure 10.
In Figure 9, we emphasize that as expected, total flow peaks at a value of occupancy in (0, 1),
as congestion effects likely become dominant for high occupancy resulting in lower flow values.
However, as expected, the travel speed (Figure 10) seems to be monotonically decreasing as a
function of occupancy, also as expected. This suggests that up to minor deviations due to the kernelize
regression model, the rewards −Ttravel decrease monotonically as occupancy increases. Hence
Figure 10 provides empirical evidence of a monotone payoff operator.
We emphasize that our model of congestion is greatly simplified and does not take into account
network effects in congestion due to interactions of various connected routes in the city. For instance,
it is likely that correlations exist between the travel speed as a function of congestion of the three
routes in reality. While more realistic simulations could be performed using the UTD19 dataset
resulting in a more realistic evaluation of our methods, more intricate simulations of traffic remain
outside the scope of this paper and we leave the evaluation of TRPA-Bandit in such realistic scenarios
as future work.


                                                   36
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                               (a)                                    (b)


                               (c)                                    (d)

Figure 5: The (smoothed) maximum exploitability maxi∈N ϕi ({π    π j }N
                                                                      j=1 ) among N agents through-
out learning with bandit feedback for three different N , on the problems (a) linear payoffs, (b)
exponentially decreasing payoffs, (c) payoffs with KL potential and (d) the beach bar payoffs.


G.6   E XPERIMENTS ON N ETWORK ACCESS

For the Tor network access experiment, we randomly chose 5 entry guard servers (the complete list
available publicly The Tor Network) in various geographic locations, among the servers that have
the longest recorded uptime. To simulate access to each server, we ping each 5 consecutive times
and average the delays to compute the cost. As expected, due to varying bandwidths/computational
power, each server has different sensitivities to load in terms of delay, as Figure 11 demonstrates for
two. For the two servers plotted here for instance, we note that while on has waiting times somewhat
sensitive to occupancy, the other is much less sensitive to additional agents accessing it, at least when
simulating 100 agents. Hence, strong monotonicity is likely to not hold.
We use parameters τ = 0.01, ε = 0.3 for the experiments in this section. The arbitrary choice is
due to the fact that in the presence of external agents in the game that do not use TRPA-Bandit (in
this case, thousands of other users accessing the Tor network), the theoretically optimal parameters
implied by Corollary 2 can not be used. While more realistic simulations that are also closer to the
theory could be run by keeping N larger and simulating a Tor access rather than simple pings, we
refrain from this in order to minimize the footprint of our experiments on the Tor network.


                                                   37
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                              (a)                                   (b)


                              (c)                                   (d)
                                                      1
                                                                π i − π ∗ ∥2 with N agents throughout
                                                        P
Figure 6: The mean ℓ2 distance to MF-NE given by N i∈N ∥π
learning with bandit feedback for three different N , on the problems (a) linear payoffs, (b) exponen-
tially decreasing payoffs, (c) payoffs with KL potential and (d) the beach bar payoffs.


                                                 38
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 Figure 7: Comparison of maximum exploitability between our TRPA-Bandit and multiplicative
 weight updates (equivalently OMD of Pérolat et al. (2022)) in benchmarks LINEAR, BB, KL, EXP
                 (left to right). N = 1000 agents, averaged over 10 experiments.


Figure 8: A portion of the sensors placed in the UTD19 dataset Loder et al. (2019) within the Zurich
center. Map generated using OpenStreetMap contributors (2017).



                                                39
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 9: Data and fitted models of occupancy vs. flow on three different urban roads. The red line
indicates the fitted model predictions.


Figure 10: Data and fitted models of occupancy vs. speed (scaled) on three different urban roads.
The red line indicates the fitted model predictions.


                          (a)                                        (b)

Figure 11: Access times (in terms of ping delays) of two Tor entry guard servers in terms of number
of agents accessing simultaneously.


                                                40
