Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


F ED BPT: E FFICIENT F EDERATED B LACK - BOX P ROMPT
T UNING FOR L ARGE L ANGUAGE M ODELS
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                             A BSTRACT
         Pre-trained language models (PLM) have revolutionized the NLP landscape, achiev-
         ing stellar performances across diverse tasks. These models, while benefiting from
         vast training data, often require fine-tuning on specific data to cater to distinct
         downstream tasks. However, this data adaptation process has inherent security
         and privacy concerns, primarily when leveraging user-generated, device-residing
         data. Federated learning (FL) provides a solution, allowing collaborative model
         fine-tuning without centralized data collection. However, applying FL to finetune
         PLMs is hampered by challenges, including restricted model parameter access,
         high computational requirements, and communication overheads. This paper intro-
         duces Federated Black-box Prompt Tuning (FedBPT), a framework designed to
         address these challenges. FedBPT does not require the clients to access the model
         parameters. By focusing on training optimal prompts and utilizing gradient-free
         optimization methods, FedBPT reduces the number of exchanged variables, boosts
         communication efficiency, and minimizes computational and storage costs. Ex-
         periments highlight the framework’s ability to drastically cut communication and
         memory costs while maintaining competitive performance. Ultimately, FedBPT
         presents a promising solution for efficient, privacy-preserving fine-tuning of PLM
         in the age of large language models.


1    I NTRODUCTION
Large language models (LLM) have shown increasing power on various NLP tasks (Devlin et al.,
2018; Raffel et al., 2020; Brown et al., 2020; Fedus et al., 2022; Zhang et al., 2021; Zeng et al., 2021;
Sun et al., 2021; Qiu et al., 2020). Typically, these models are trained on a diverse range of text from
books, articles, and websites to gain a broad understanding of human language and are known as the
pre-trained language models (PLMs). However, task-specific data is often required to adapt PLMs to
perform specific tasks or be more accurate in real-world scenarios. This fine-tuning process relies
heavily on user-generated data on devices, providing a wealth of contextual insights and nuanced use
cases that reflect actual human interaction and needs. In practice, it is challenging to use these devices
and data securely. Data needs to be collected and stored for training, but exchanging and storing
sensitive data carries security risks and privacy concerns. To overcome the issue of data isolation,
federated learning (FL) can be applied to enable numerous devices to collaboratively finetune PLMs
over decentralized data while preserving data privacy (McMahan et al., 2017; Sun et al., 2020).
Although fine-tuning PLMs through FL presents promising opportunities, three challenges constrain
their real-world application. Especially for LLMs, these challenges include (1) devices’ limited access
to the PLM parameters, (2) computational and storage costs for local clients, and (3) communication
overhead in the FL system. In the real world, devices utilize LLMs primarily by invoking APIs
provided by LLM services (e.g., ChatGPT (OpenAI, 2022; 2023) or NeMo (Kuchaiev et al., 2019)).
The clients cannot access the model parameters, thereby being unable to conduct local training.
Additionally, even if the clients could access the model parameters, it is impractical for devices
with limited resources to conduct local PLM fine-tuning, which is extremely memory-intensive and
brings high computational overhead. Moreover, fine-tuning PLMs through FL requires the clients and
server to frequently exchange model parameters or gradients, usually in the scale of millions or even
billions. Such intensive communication cost is unfeasible for commercial edge devices with limited
communication bandwidth. To this end, existing works (Sun et al., 2022a; Chen et al., 2022b; Zhao
et al., 2023; Xu et al., 2023) apply parameter-efficient fine-tuning (PEFT) methods of PLMs to FL to


                                                    1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                                                                                     Federated Server

                                                                    …
                                                                                                                                                         CMA-ES update
                                                      𝓝𝓝 𝒛𝒛𝒌𝒌𝒕𝒕+𝟏𝟏 , 𝝈𝝈𝒌𝒌𝒕𝒕+𝟏𝟏 𝑪𝑪𝒌𝒌𝒕𝒕+𝟏𝟏                              𝓝𝓝 𝒛𝒛𝒕𝒕+𝟏𝟏 , 𝝈𝝈𝒕𝒕+𝟏𝟏 𝑪𝑪𝒕𝒕+𝟏𝟏       Server aggregation
                                                                                                                                                         Local distribution
                                                                                                                                                         Global distribution
                                   𝒛𝒛𝒕𝒕+𝟏𝟏 , 𝝈𝝈𝒕𝒕+𝟏𝟏 𝑪𝑪𝒕𝒕+𝟏𝟏

                                                                𝒛𝒛𝟏𝟏𝒕𝒕+𝟏𝟏 , 𝝈𝝈𝟏𝟏𝒕𝒕+𝟏𝟏 , 𝑪𝑪𝟏𝟏𝒕𝒕+𝟏𝟏 , 𝑭𝑭𝟏𝟏 (𝒛𝒛𝒕𝒕+𝟏𝟏
                                                                                                            𝟏𝟏
                                                                                                                  )
            Client 1                                                                                                                                 Client K

           CMA-ES                                                                                                                                     CMA-ES
                                                                      𝒛𝒛𝒕𝒕                         𝑨𝑨𝒛𝒛𝒕𝒕 , 𝑿𝑿𝟏𝟏


                                                                                                                         Inference API


                                                                                                                                                                               Inference API
                              𝓝𝓝 𝒛𝒛𝒕𝒕 , 𝝈𝝈𝒕𝒕 𝑪𝑪𝒕𝒕
                                                                                     𝑿𝑿𝟏𝟏                                                   …
                                                                                     𝒀𝒀𝟏𝟏
                                                                    𝟏𝟏
                       𝓝𝓝 𝒛𝒛𝟏𝟏𝒕𝒕+𝟏𝟏 , 𝝈𝝈𝟏𝟏𝒕𝒕+𝟏𝟏 𝑪𝑪𝟏𝟏𝒕𝒕+𝟏𝟏        𝑭𝑭 (𝒛𝒛𝒕𝒕 )                      𝒇𝒇(𝑨𝑨𝒛𝒛𝒕𝒕 , 𝑿𝑿𝟏𝟏 )


Figure 1: Overview of FedBPT. The clients in FedBPT adopt a gradient-free optimization (CMA-ES)
to search for optimal distributions of the prompt based on local data. The clients are not required
to access the PLM parameters, and only inference of the PLM is conducted during the search. The
server aggregates the uploaded local distributions to derive the globally optimal distribution of the
prompt. The global distribution will be sent back to the clients for the next round of search.


reduce resource costs. Effective PEFT methods include adapter tuning (Houlsby et al., 2019), prefix
                                                                                                                                                                                               5
tuning (Li & Liang, 2021), LoRA (Hu et al., 2021) and BitFit (Zaken et al., 2021). These techniques
primarily freeze most parameters of PLMs and update only a few additional parameters, which can
reduce communication costs significantly. However, these PEFT methods still require the clients to
access model parameters and gradients for local training. Even if the computational cost could be
reduced, these gradient-based PEFT methods requiring back-propagation are still unfeasible for most
edge devices with limited resources, such as mobile phones and AR headsets.
To solve these challenges simultaneously, we propose a new framework called Federated Black-box
Prompt Tuning (FedBPT) as shown in Fig. 1. The goal of FedBPT is to train an optimal prompt to
improve the performance of the frozen PLMs. The clients and the server exchange prompts rather
than model parameters, which reduces the communicated variables from the scale of millions or
billions to only hundreds, improving the communication efficiency significantly. The clients in
FedBPT adopt a gradient-free optimization method rather than gradient-based methods to conduct
local training, which frees the clients from being required to access the model parameters. In addition,
only forward-propagation without back-propagation is needed for local training, which can reduce
the computational and storage costs for both the devices holding a model and the LLM server that
provides inference service APIs.
We conducted experiments on multiple datasets using SOTA PLMs. The results show that FedBPT
reduces the communication cost by more than 500k× while achieving comparable results with the
baselines that require model parameter access and back-propagation for optimization. FedBPT can
also reduce the memory footprint by more than 3× without applying any additional efficient inference
technique. By proposing FedBPT, we offer a solution to break down data silos in the era of LLMs
without the limiting factors of requiring full model access, large communication bandwidth, and
device compute capacity.
We summarize our contributions as follows:

       • We present three challenges in applying FL to adapt PLMs in the real world, including the
         requirement of model access, communication cost, and on-device compute capacity.
       • We propose a federated black-box prompt tuning framework (FedBPT) that enables the
         devices to adapt PLMs in the real world collaboratively by solving the above-mentioned
         challenges simultaneously.
       • We evaluate FedBPT on multiple datasets with SOTA PLMs. FedBPT achieves comparable
         accuracy with the gradient-based methods that require clients to access model parameters
         while reducing communication and memory costs significantly.


                                                                                                                2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


2     R ELATED W ORKS

2.1   F EDERATED L EARNING

Federated learning (FL) (Konečnỳ et al., 2016; McMahan et al., 2017; Sun et al., 2022b) is a prominent
distributed learning strategy, particularly beneficial for tasks that prioritize privacy. However, its
application faces challenges due to the non-IID nature of distributed datasets. The heterogeneous
data distribution across devices compromises accuracy relative to traditional centralized training.
Numerous research efforts (Kairouz et al., 2021; Zhao et al., 2018; Chai et al., 2020; Li et al., 2018)
have sought to mitigate this performance degradation. Recent works (Chen et al., 2022a; Nguyen et al.,
2022) demonstrate that fine-tuning the pre-trained models through FL suffers less from the non-IID
issue. Empirical research by Weller et al. (2022) suggests that Pretrained Language Models (PLMs)
can diminish the effects of non-IID data and bridge the accuracy discrepancy with centralized training.
Their results show that when applying PLMs, even the vanilla FedAvg can achieve comparable model
performance with centralized training. These works indicate that FL presents a promising avenue
for fine-tuning PLMs by leveraging user data while upholding privacy standards. However, PLMs,
especially large-scale ones, introduce considerable communication overheads in FL scenarios, making
federated training cumbersome and often unsuitable for practical applications. Additionally, the
training of PLMs typically demands ample labeled data to ensure satisfactory accuracy – a condition
that may be unattainable for individual device users. It is also noteworthy that many local devices
are constrained by limited computational capacity and storage, making the local training of PLMs a
challenging endeavor. Diverging from these studies, our work delves into adapting PLMs within FL,
especially under tight resource constraints.

2.2   P ROMPT- BASED L EARNING

Prompt-based learning has gained significant attention in the realm of LLMs. Its essence is rooted
in leveraging minimal examples or specific cues to guide a PLM toward the desired output. This
contrasts with traditional supervised learning, where a model is trained explicitly using extensive
labeled data. OpenAI’s GPT-3 (Brown et al., 2020) marked a pivotal turn in the exploration of
prompt-based learning. The sheer scale of GPT-3 made it possible to produce relevant outputs with
carefully crafted prompts (Brown et al., 2020; Lester et al., 2021) without the need for task-specific
model fine-tuning. However, manually designed prompts still suffer a performance gap compared
with a fine-tuned model (Brown et al., 2020; Schick & Schütze, 2020; Gao et al., 2020; Sun et al.,
2022c). Recent works demonstrate that the prompt does not have to represent natural language.
It can also be optimized efficiently in continuous space with gradient descent (Li & Liang, 2021;
Hambardzumyan et al., 2021; Qin & Eisner, 2021; Liu et al., 2023; Zhong et al., 2021; Liu et al.,
2021). In the case of only tuning the continuous prompt while keeping the parameters of large
PLMs untouched, one can retain the efficient training benefits while matching the performance of
full model tuning. Prompt tuning (Lester et al., 2021; Li & Liang, 2021) was proposed to fine-tune a
continuous vector concatenated to the input embeddings. Unlike manual prompt design conducted at
the vocabulary level, prompt tuning optimizes the prompt in the embedding space. Based on this idea,
p-tuning (Liu et al., 2021; 2022; 2023) was proposed to improve the performance further. Similar to
prompt tuning, p-tuning also learns concrete prompts in the embedding space. However, in p-tuning,
an additional LSTM model is required to predict token embeddings.

3     P RELIMINARY: B LACK - BOX P ROMPT T UNING

Common language understanding tasks can be formulated as a classification task to predict for a
batch of input texts X the labels Y . Prompt tuning is to train a continuous prompt vector p ∈ RD
such that the prediction performance can be improved when the model is fed the optimal prompt
vector p∗ together with the input X. The objective of prompt tuning can be formulated as
                                   p∗ = arg min L (f (p; X), Y ) ,                                  (1)
                                             p∈P

where f (·) is the PLM inference API, L(·) is the loss function and P is some search space of interest.
To optimize p, gradient-based methods (e.g., SGD) can be applied by conducting back-propagation
of the model f . Recently, a gradient-free optimization, Black-Box Tuning (BBT) (Sun et al., 2022d),


                                                   3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


was also proposed to optimize the prompt p without back-propagation. Based on the observation that
large-scale PLMs have a low intrinsic dimensionality Aghajanyan et al. (2020); Qin et al. (2021),
BBT optimizes z ∈ Rd in a much smaller subspace (d ≪ D) and uses a random projection matrix
A ∈ RD×d to project z on the original prompt space P. The objective can be formulated as
                                    z ∗ = arg min L (f (Az; X), Y ) .                                    (2)
                                                 z∈Z


To optimize z, BBT adopts a gradient-free optimizer CMA-ES (Covariance Matrix Adaptation
Evolution Strategy) (Hansen, 2016), a widely used evolutionary algorithm for non-convex black-box
optimization in the continuous domain. CMA-ES maintains a parameterized search distribution, i.e.,
a multivariate normal distribution. In each iteration, CMA-ES samples a population of new query
solutions from the multivariate normal distribution as
                                      zt+1,i ∼ mt + σt N (0, Ct ) ,                                      (3)

where i = 1, ..., λ and λ is the population size. mt ∈ Rd and Ct ∈ Rd×d are the mean vector
and covariance matrix of the search distribution at iteration step t, respectively. σt is the standard
deviation that controls the step length. mt , Ct and σt are updated by maximizing the likelihood of
successful steps, which are the steps with lower loss values (cf. Hansen (2016) for more details).

4     M ETHOD
To solve the challenges of model access, communication cost, and computational cost simultaneously,
we propose Federated Black-box Prompt Tuning method (FedBPT) to train an optimal prompt in a
federated fashion by adapting BBT to federated learning. Unlike FL methods communicating model
parameters, the clients in FedBPT train and communicate with the server prompts rather than the
model parameters, which is communication efficient. To optimize prompts, the clients only need to
conduct inference rather than back-propagation, significantly reducing the computational cost and
memory usage. The FL server aggregates the local prompts uploaded by the client and is completely
agnostic to the employed LLM architecture. During training, the clients can treat the model as a black
box: neither the clients nor the server requires access to the PLM parameters.

4.1   P ROBLEM F ORMULATION

Suppose there are K clients in FL, and each client hosts a private dataset Dk = (X k , Y k ) consisting
of nk samples {xki , yik }i∈[nk ] . Given a global projected matrix A in Eq. (2), the clients collaboratively
train an optimal z with the objective to solve:
                                                  X             nk
                                z ∗ = arg min              P             k
                                                                             F k (z),                    (4)
                                                           k∈[K] n
                                             z
                                                  k∈[K]


where F k (z) is the loss of client k:
                                                     X
                     F k (z) = L f (Az; X k ), Y k =   L f (Az; xki ), yik .

                                                                                                         (5)
                                                               i∈[nk ]


4.2   OVERVIEW OF F ED BPT

In FedBPT, the clients optimize local objectives based on BBT. Thus, unlike previous FL works,
FedBPT aggregates the CMA-ES parameters applied by the clients to conduct BBT rather than the
deep learning models. At the start of the training, the server initializes and distributes the projection
matrix A to the clients. Then, the server and clients will freeze and apply A to calculate the prompt
with the received z. In each communication round (e.g., the t-th round), the server first sends the
up-to-date global CMA-ES parameters, including the mean vector zt , covariance matrix Ct and the
search step σt to clients. Then, the clients (e.g., the k-th client) conduct BBT to optimize the received
CMA-ES parameters by minimizing their local loss, i.e. Eq. (5). After local optimization, the clients
upload their locally optimal parameters and the local loss value F k (zt+1   k
                                                                               ) to the server. After the


                                                       4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


server receives all CMA-ES parameters, it aggregates the local parameters and updates the global
CMA-ES parameters for the next communication round. After the training is completed (e.g., T
communication rounds), the mean vector of the global CMA-ES zT will be adopted to compute the
optimal prompt pT = AzT .
The primary distinction between FedBPT and earlier FL algorithms lies in the use of BBT for
optimization. Yet, integrating BBT into FL algorithms, such as FedAvg, is not straightforward.
Simply combining BBT and FedAvg cannot achieve decent performance. The first challenge is
the prompt overfitting problem caused by data distribution shifts across clients, which is common
under non-IID settings. The second challenge is how to aggregate CMA-ES parameters on the server
effectively. Unlike aggregating deep learning models, directly averaging CMA-ES parameters, mostly
consisting of distribution statistics, is not feasible. We will introduce these challenges in detail and
our solutions in the following sections.

4.3     S ERVER - LEVEL CMA-ES A LGORITHM

                                                               Local distribution                      Global distribution

      FedAvg                                          FedBPT                         CMA-ES

                                                                                    𝒛𝒛𝟏𝟏𝒕𝒕+𝟏𝟏 ; 𝑭𝑭𝟏𝟏 (𝒛𝒛𝟏𝟏𝒕𝒕+𝟏𝟏 )                  𝓝𝓝 𝒛𝒛𝒕𝒕 , 𝝈𝝈𝒕𝒕 𝑪𝑪𝒕𝒕


                                                                                               …
               Average statistics of
               local distributions                                                    𝑲𝑲
                                                                                    𝒛𝒛𝒕𝒕+𝟏𝟏           𝑲𝑲
                                                                                            ; 𝑭𝑭𝑲𝑲 (𝒛𝒛𝒕𝒕+𝟏𝟏 )                𝓝𝓝 𝒛𝒛𝒕𝒕+𝟏𝟏 , 𝝈𝝈𝒕𝒕+𝟏𝟏 𝑪𝑪𝒕𝒕+𝟏𝟏


Figure 2: Comparison of aggregation between directly using FedAvg and FedBPT. FedAvg derives
the global distribution by directly averaging the local distribution statistics. In FedBPT, the server
applies CMA-ES to derive the global prompt distributions with the awareness of the evaluation results
of the uploaded local distributions.
                                                                                                                                                                  7



After receiving local CMA-ES parameters, the server conducts aggregation on the server to derive a
global search distribution that can guide the clients’ search in the next communication round. Directly
averaging the models uploaded by the clients following FedAvg is not effective for FedBPT. In
FedBPT, the clients locally optimize the CMA-ES parameters parameterized by multivariate normal
distribution statistics. Directly averaging the standard deviation and covariance matrices via FedAvg
cannot derive an optimal global search distribution, as is shown in Sec. 5.2. In addition, CMA-ES is a
random search algorithm that cannot guarantee to achieve a local optimum as with gradient-based
optimization algorithms. Directly averaging optimal and inferior local search results makes it difficult
to achieve a global optimum. To derive an optimal global search distribution on the server, we adopt
a server-level CMA-ES algorithm to update the search distribution statistics based on the local search
results. The comparison of aggregations by directly applying FedAvg and FedBPT is shown in Fig. 2.
The intuition of the server-level CMA-ES is to consider the local search results as a set of solutions
sampled by the server. The server then evaluates these sampled solutions and updates the search
distributions for the next communication round. Suppose a set of clients St participate in training in
                                                                                             k
the t-th communication round. The server-level CMA-ES takes the received mean vectors {zt+1     }k∈St
as the sampled solutions and the local loss values {F k (zt+1
                                                          k
                                                              )}k∈St as the corresponding search step
loss. To update the CMA-ES parameters, the search step length is required. However, the server-level
“sampling” is conducted by multiple local search steps, and the server-level search step length σt is
intractable. Directly applying a local search step length causes the model to diverge. We provide a
theoretical explanation for this divergence in Appendix A. We also theoretically derive a corrected
search step length σt′ for the server formulated as
                                             v
                                             u  I
                                             uX X       2
                                        ′          k
                                       σt = 2t    σt,j    / (|St | · λk ),                                                                                  (6)
                                             u
                                               k∈S′t j=1


where S′t is the set of |S2t | clients that upload zt+1
                                                    k
                                                        with the lowest local loss values F k (zt+1
                                                                                                k       k
                                                                                                    ). σt,j is
the step length of client k’s j-th local search iteration in communication round t. I is the number of
local search iterations, and λk is the local search population of client k. The derivation can be found
in Appendix A.


                                                           5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


4.4   L OCAL B LACK - BOX P ROMPT T UNING AGAINST OVERFITTING

In real life, client data are non-IID distributed, which causes label-
skew across clients (Li et al., 2018). The server-level CMA-ES                1   2      0         1   0
evaluates the clients’ search results based on the uploaded local loss
values. Such label-skew makes local searches overfitted to local data         2   0      3         0   0


                                                                                               True label
distributions by achieving low local loss values and makes it diffi-
                                                                              3   0      0         4   1
cult for the server to evaluate their performance on the global data
distribution. This overfitting issue is more serious when adopting
                                                                              4   2      1         0   2
BBT for local training. Gradient-based optimizations (e.g., SGD)
incorporate both data and label information into the gradient for                 1      2         3   4
                                                                                       Predicted label
updating. In contrast, when using Eq. (2) as the local training ob-
jective, BBT modifies the CMA-ES parameters based primarily on              (a) Results without prompt.
                                                                                                         5
how close predictions are to the labels while using the data only             1   3      0         0   0
indirectly. It is a practical label-skew case in which most of a client’s                                4
data is distributed in one class (Tang et al., 2022). In this case, a         2   3      0         0   0 3


                                                                                               True label
local CMA-ES might learn a prompt that triggers the frozen PLM to
generate predictions corresponding to the dominant class, regardless          3   5      0         0   0 2
of the input. To demonstrate this issue, we conduct experiments on                                       1
AG’s NEWS (OpenAI), a topic classification dataset with four data             4   5      0         0   0
classes. We simulate an FL client to train prompts for a pre-trained                                     0
                                                                                  1      2         3   4
                                                                                       Predicted label
RoBERTa (Liu et al., 2019) model using BBT. The simulated client
holds data following the Dirichlet distribution, commonly applied in        (b) Results of locally
previous FL papers (Hsu et al., 2019; Tang et al., 2022) for non-iid        trained prompts.
setting, and more than 90% of its data are in class one. The confusion
matrix evaluated with the prompt trained by this client is shown in Figure 3: Confusion matrix of
Fig. 3. It is shown that all of the data will be classified as class one a client holding data that more
after applying the prompt trained by this client, which demonstrates than 90% is in class one.
the problem of overfitting caused by local BBT.

             𝒑𝒑                    𝒙𝒙𝒌𝒌𝒊𝒊
      p[0]        …        I                 have           zero          complaints   about                the   restaurant

             𝒑𝒑                𝒙𝒙𝒌𝒌𝒊𝒊 ⊙ 𝒎𝒎𝒌𝒌𝒊𝒊 + 𝒙𝒙
                                                 �𝒌𝒌𝒊𝒊 ⊙ (𝟏𝟏 − 𝒎𝒎𝒌𝒌𝒊𝒊 )           Randomly mask & Replace the tokens
      p[0]        …        I                 have           dog           execution    about                the   service


Figure 4: We randomly mask and replace the tokens to perturb a sentence. The PLM should be
confused about the perturbed sentence even given an optimal prompt.

To mitigate this overfitting issue, we propose a perturbation method to regularize the local training
objective and avoid CMA-ES selecting overfitting prompts. For a sample {xki , yik } of client k, we
randomly generate a binary mask mki with an artificial rate rp of elements that are zeros. We then
randomly sample a sentence x̂ki from the vocabulary with the same length of xki as shown in Fig. 4,
and the local training objective for the k-th client is formulated as
                                                             L f (Az; xki ), yik

                       ∗
                                             X
                      z = arg min                                                           .                                  (7)7
                                  z∈Z
                                                k
                                                  L f Az; xki ⊙ mki + x̂ki ⊙ 1 − mki , yik
                                            i∈[n ]

The intuition is that given a perturbed input, the PLM should not be confident of generating a correct
prediction even when fed an optimal prompt.
Applying server-level CMA-ES and local perturbance method, the detailed algorithm of FedBPT can
be found in Appendix B.

5     E XPERIMENTS
5.1   E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP

Datasets and Models We conduct experiments on three language understanding datasets: (1) The
SST-2 (Socher et al., 2013) is a popular sentiment analysis dataset. The SST-2 dataset consists of


                                                                     6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


sentences taken from movie reviews along with their corresponding sentiment labels. Each sentence
is annotated as either "positive" or "negative" based on the sentiment conveyed. (2) The Yelp
polarity (yelp) is another sentiment analysis dataset, which consists of reviews on Yelp along with
their corresponding sentiment labels of "positive" or "negative". (3) The AG’s News dataset (OpenAI)
is a large-scale topic classification dataset for the task of categorizing news articles into one of four
predefined topic classes. The dataset is based on the AG’s corpus, a collection of news articles
from various sources. We evaluate our FedBPT on two PLMs: (1) RoBERTa (Liu et al., 2019) is
a variation of the BERT model. It is pre-trained using a variant of the masked language modeling
(MLM) objective, whose objective is to predict masked tokens in a given text sequence. In this paper,
we apply the version of 356 million parameters. (2) Llama 2 (Touvron et al., 2023) is a SOTA PLM
released by Meta, which is a collection of foundation language models ranging from 7 billion to 70
billion parameters. Llama 2 models are trained on 2 trillion tokens and have double the context length
than Llama 1. In this paper, we evaluate FedBPT on the model with 7 billion parameters.
Baselines We compare our black-box tuning FL framework with several gradient-based and
gradient-free methods. For gradient-based methods, we compare with three baselines: (1) Fe-
dAvg (McMahan et al., 2017) is the most widely-used algorithm for FL. In FedAvg, the clients
fine-tune the whole model and transmit the updated model parameters. (2) FedPrompt (Zhao et al.,
2023) is the SOTA work of applying FL to adapt the PLM with high communication efficiency. The
clients in FedPrompt learn and transmit prompts, which reduces the communication cost signifi-
cantly. (3) FedP-tuning is built on FedPrompt by replacing the local training from prompt tuning to
p-tuning (Liu et al., 2022), which is more advanced and proven to achieve higher performance on
downstream tasks. For gradient-free methods, we consider three baselines: (1) Manual Prompt is
adapted following the templates and label words in Appendix C to conduct zero-shot evaluation. (2)
In-context Learning Following Brown et al. (2020), we randomly select up to 5 training samples
and concatenate them with the input texts. (3) FedAvg-BBT is a baseline by simply combining
BBT (Sun et al., 2022d) and FedAvg. We build this baseline for comparison as part of an ablation
study to show the effectiveness of our designed server-level prompt tuning.
FL setup & Hyperparameters We follow FedPrompt (Zhao et al., 2023) to design our FL setup.
The system has ten clients, and all of the clients participate in training in each round. Considering the
real world, where many users possess only a limited amount of labeled data, we conduct experiments
under few-shot settings. We randomly select 40 samples for each class to construct a training set
Dtrain . We conduct experiments in both IID and non-IID settings. For IID settings, we split the
training dataset Dtrain evenly. For non-IID settings, we follow previous works to split the data
following the Dirichlet distribution parameterized by α. We maintain a default setting of α = 1.0
throughout our experiments. The initial search step length σ1 is 1. We set local iteration I to 8 and
the local population λk to be 5 for all clients.

5.2   E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS

                                             SST-2              AG’s NEWS                Yelp
                         Trainable    Acc.(%) Acc.(%) Acc.(%) Acc.(%)              Acc.(%) Acc.(%)
  Method
                          Params.       IID       non-IID      IID     non-IID       IID     non-IID
                                        Gradient-based methods
  FedPrompt                 51K        90.25       85.55     87.72       85.62      91.44           91.47
  FedP-tuning               15M         90.6       87.16     88.17       86.11      93.61           91.63
  FedAvg                   355M         84.7        82.4     77.43       76.54      88.25           88.03
                                         Gradient-free methods
  Manual prompt              0                83.6                 75.75                    88.37
  In-Context Learning        0                79.7                 76.96                    89.65
  FedAvg-BBT                500        84.45       84.17     76.54       76.46      89.64           89.72
  FedBPT                    500        87.16       86.47     82.36       81.03      91.12            90.8

   Table 1: Results under both IID and non-IID settings with RoBERTa as the backbone model.


Results of RoBERTa. The results when adopting RoBERTa as the PLM are shown in Tab. 1.
Compared with the gradient-based methods, FedBPT achieves comparable or even higher accuracy
with drastically reduced trainable parameters. Specifically, FedBPT achieves an accuracy of 0.92%


                                                   7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


higher than FedPrompt and only 0.69% lower than the best gradient-based baseline FedP-tuning for
SST-2 under the non-IID setting. Meanwhile, FedBPT reduces the trainable parameters by more
than 100× and 30,000× compared with FedPrompt and FedP-tuning, respectively. The trainable
parameters are required to be transmitted in each communication round, which means that FedBPT
reduces the communication cost of one device in one round from 120MB to only 4KB compared with
FedP-tuning. For AG’s News and Yelp, FedBPT can also achieve comparable accuracy under IID
and non-IID settings. Notably, FedAvg cannot improve the accuracy under both IID and non-IID
settings. This demonstrates that directly fine-tuning LLMs is not feasible in realistic FL settings when
the clients hold limited labeled samples. We document the memory usage by one client of different
methods on SST-2 in Tab. 2. It is shown that FedBPT can reduce memory costs by more than 3×
compared with gradient-based methods.
Compared with gradient-free baselines, FedBPT achieves higher
accuracies under IID and non-IID settings for all the datasets.
                                                                             Method          Mem.
FedBPT achieves accuracies of 2.3%, 4.57%, and 1.08% higher                FedPrompt        5.8 GB
than FedAvg-BBT under non-IID settings for SST-2, AG’s News,               FedP-tuning      6.1 GB
and Yelp, respectively. It is shown that FedAvg-BBT achieves                 FedAvg         7.2 GB
limited accuracy improvement compared with manual prompts              In-context Learning 2.1 GB
for all the datasets, which demonstrates that simply combining               FedBPT         1.8 GB
FedAvg and BBT cannot achieve decent performance. The results
show that gradient-based methods outperform gradient-free base- Table 2: Memory footprint on
lines significantly in accuracy, which is expected. However, we SST-2 by applying RoBERTa.
should realize that gradient-based methods require model parame-
ter access and conducting back-propagation, which are not always
realistic for most cases of FL, and only the gradient-free methods are feasible in many cases.

                                                        G r a d ie n t- b a s e d :     F e d P ro m p t                            F e d P - tu n in g                F e d A v g
                                                         G r a d ie n t- f r e e :    M a n u a l p ro m p t                          I n - c o n te x t le a r n in g         F e d A v g -B B T                            F e d B P T
                        1 0 0                                                                                         1 0 0                                                                                                 1 0 0

                          9 0                                                                                           9 0                                                                                                   9 0
A c c u ra c y (% ) ↑


                                                                                              A c c u ra c y (% ) ↑


                                                                                                                                                                                                    A c c u ra c y (% ) ↑


                          8 0                                                                                           8 0                                                                                                   8 0

                          7 0                                                                                           7 0                                                                                                   7 0

                          6 0                                                                                           6 0                                                                                                   6 0
                                0        4 k    8 k             2 M           2 G 5 3 G                                       0        4 k    8 k             2 M           2 G 5 3 G                                                0        4 k    8 k             2 M           2 G 5 3 G
                                    C o m m u n ic a tio n c o s t ( B ) / r o u n d ↓                                            C o m m u n ic a tio n c o s t ( B ) / r o u n d ↓                                                     C o m m u n ic a tio n c o s t ( B ) / r o u n d ↓
                                               (a ) S S T -2 IID                                                                      ( b ) A G 's N e w s I I D                                                                                       (c ) Y e lp IID
                        1 0 0                                                                                         1 0 0                                                                                                 1 0 0

                          9 0                                                                                           9 0                                                                                                   9 0
A c c u ra c y (% ) ↑


                                                                                              A c c u ra c y (% ) ↑


                                                                                                                                                                                                    A c c u ra c y (% ) ↑


                          8 0                                                                                           8 0                                                                                                   8 0

                          7 0                                                                                           7 0                                                                                                   7 0

                          6 0                                                                                           6 0                                                                                                   6 0
                                0        4 k    8 k             2 M           2 G 5 3 G                                       0        4 k    8 k             2 M           2 G 5 3 G                                                0        4 k    8 k             2 M           2 G 5 3 G
                                    C o m m u n ic a tio n c o s t ( B ) / r o u n d ↓                                            C o m m u n ic a tio n c o s t ( B ) / r o u n d ↓                                                     C o m m u n ic a tio n c o s t ( B ) / r o u n d ↓
                                         (d ) S S T -2 n o n -IID                                                                 ( e ) A G 's N e w s n o n - I I D                                                                               (f) Y e lp n o n -IID


                        Figure 5: The results under IID and non-IID settings with Llama 2 as the backbone model.


                         Method                                              FedPrompt                                  FedP-tuning                         FedAvg                    Manual                                        FedAvg-BBT                        FedBPT
                         Trainable Params.                                     205K                                        235M                               7B                        0                                               500                             500

                          Table 3: Number of trainable parameters when adopting Llama 2 as the backbone model.


Results of Llama 2. The number of trainable parameters when applying Llama 2 as the PLM is
shown in Tab. 3. The trade-off between the communication cost of one device in one round and model
accuracy is shown in Fig. 5. We have three important observations: (1) For Llama 2, FedBPT can
improve the accuracy significantly compared with the gradient-free baselines and achieve comparable
accuracies with the gradient-based methods in most settings. Specifically, FedBPT improves accuracy


                                                                                                                                                     8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


by more than 12%, 11%, and 13% for SST-2, AG’s News, and Yelp compared with the manual
prompts under non-IID settings, respectively. FedBPT can achieve slightly higher accuracy than
FedPrompt under the AG’s News IID setting, while the gradient-free baselines experience declines
in accuracy of over 15%. (2) FedBPT reduces the number of trainable parameters compared with
gradient-based methods even more significantly than adopting RoBERTa. Specifically, compared
with FedP-tuning, FedBPT reduces the trainable parameters from 235M to only 500, which means
that FedBPT reduces the communication cost of one device in one round from nearly 2GB to 4KB.
In summary, FedBPT can achieve much higher accuracy than gradient-free baselines and comparable
accuracy as gradient-based methods for both RoBERTa and Llama 2 models. In addition, the number
of trainable parameters does not increase when the model scale is larger. The reason is that FedBPT
adopts a projection matrix to project the embedding space to a low-dimension space, which enables
the clients to conduct CMA-ES learning to train a low-dimensional vector. This scalability is essential
considering the rapid growth of the PLM parameter scale, which allows the clients in FedBPT not to
pay more computational or storage costs when the FL system adopts larger PLMs.

5.3    A BLATION STUDIES

Local binary mask rate (rp ). We study the effect of the rate of zeros in the binary masks mki that
local devices apply to perturb input and avoid overfitting. We conduct experiments on SST-2 and
AG’s News under the non-IID setting for RoBERTa. As introduced in Sec. 4.4, a larger rp means that
more tokens in a sentence will be randomly replaced. We set rp from 0% to 80%, and the results are
shown in Tab. 4. It is shown that applying the random placement can improve the global accuracy
compared with simply adopting vanilla BBT for local training (i.e., rp = 0). This illustrates the
effectiveness of our designed random placement in mitigating the local overfitting challenge.

      Dataset                                               SST-2                                                                     AG’s News
      rp                                0      0.2           0.4     0.6           0.8                              0          0.2       0.4    0.6      0.8
      Acc. (%)                        84.86   85.21         86.03   86.47         86.12                           78.28       80.92     81.03 80.75     80.83

      Table 4: Results of FedBPT adopting RoBERTa with different rp under non-IID settings.

Local population size (λk ). In each iteration of local search, the clients (e.g., the k-th client) sample
λk candidates for evaluation. We study the effect of local population λk on the model accuracy. We
set λk from 5 to 20, and conduct experiments on SST-2 and AG’s News for RoBERTa. The results
are shown in Fig. 6. It is shown that the model accuracy of FedBPT is not sensitive to λk . Thus, in
real applications, λk can be set relatively small to reduce computational cost.

                                                 S S T -2                   IID                        n o n -IID                A G 's N e w s
                                8 8
                                                                                                            8 4

                                8 7
          A c c u ra c y (% )


                                                                                      A c c u ra c y (% )


                                                                                                            8 0
                                8 6

                                                                                                            7 6
                                8 5
                                          5           1 0           2 0                                                   5             1 0       2 0
                                                       λk                                                                                λk

                                      Figure 6: Results of FedBPT adopting RoBERTa with different λk .


6     C ONCLUSION
We introduced an FL framework, FedBPT, allowing clients to adapt black-box PLMs efficiently
using gradient-free optimization. This approach eliminates the need for clients to access model
parameters and only requires forward propagation for local training, thus lowering computational and
storage demands for devices and LLM service providers. Evaluations of several datasets with SOTA
PLMs revealed that FedBPT matches the accuracy of gradient-based methods but with markedly less
communication and memory overhead.


                                                                                  9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Armen Aghajanyan, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Sonal Gupta. Intrinsic dimensionality explains the
  effectiveness of language model fine-tuning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2012.13255, 2020.
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are
  few-shot learners. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:1877–1901, 2020.
Zheng Chai, Yujing Chen, Liang Zhao, Yue Cheng, and Huzefa Rangwala. Fedat: A communication-
  efficient federated learning method with asynchronous tiers under non-iid data. ArXivorg, 2020.
Hong-You Chen, Cheng-Hao Tu, Ziwei Li, Han-Wei Shen, and Wei-Lun Chao. On pre-training for
  federated learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.11488, 2022a.
Jinyu Chen, Wenchao Xu, Song Guo, Junxiao Wang, Jie Zhang, and Haozhao Wang. Fedtune:
   A deep dive into efficient federated fine-tuning with pre-trained transformers. arXiv preprint
   arXiv:2211.08025, 2022b.
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. Bert: Pre-training of deep
  bidirectional transformers for language understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04805, 2018.
William Fedus, Barret Zoph, and Noam Shazeer. Switch transformers: Scaling to trillion parameter
 models with simple and efficient sparsity. The Journal of Machine Learning Research, 23(1):
 5232–5270, 2022.
Tianyu Gao, Adam Fisch, and Danqi Chen. Making pre-trained language models better few-shot
  learners. arXiv preprint arXiv:2012.15723, 2020.
Karen Hambardzumyan, Hrant Khachatrian, and Jonathan May. Warp: Word-level adversarial
  reprogramming. arXiv preprint arXiv:2101.00121, 2021.
Nikolaus Hansen. The cma evolution strategy: A tutorial. arXiv preprint arXiv:1604.00772, 2016.
Neil Houlsby, Andrei Giurgiu, Stanislaw Jastrzebski, Bruna Morrone, Quentin De Laroussilhe,
  Andrea Gesmundo, Mona Attariyan, and Sylvain Gelly. Parameter-efficient transfer learning for
  nlp. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 2790–2799. PMLR, 2019.
Tzu-Ming Harry Hsu, Hang Qi, and Matthew Brown. Measuring the effects of non-identical data
  distribution for federated visual classification. arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.06335, 2019.
Edward J Hu, Yelong Shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang,
  and Weizhu Chen. Lora: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2106.09685, 2021.
Peter Kairouz, H Brendan McMahan, Brendan Avent, Aurélien Bellet, Mehdi Bennis, Arjun Nitin
  Bhagoji, Kallista Bonawitz, Zachary Charles, Graham Cormode, Rachel Cummings, et al. Ad-
  vances and open problems in federated learning. Foundations and Trends® in Machine Learning,
  14(1–2):1–210, 2021.
Jakub Konečnỳ, H Brendan McMahan, Felix X Yu, Peter Richtárik, Ananda Theertha Suresh, and
  Dave Bacon. Federated learning: Strategies for improving communication efficiency. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1610.05492, 2016.
Oleksii Kuchaiev, Jason Li, Huyen Nguyen, Oleksii Hrinchuk, Ryan Leary, Boris Ginsburg, Samuel
  Kriman, Stanislav Beliaev, Vitaly Lavrukhin, Jack Cook, Patrice Castonguay, Mariya Popova,
  Jocelyn Huang, Christopher Parisien, and Erich Elsen. Nemo: a toolkit for building ai applications
  using neural modules. In ASRU, 2019. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1909.09577.
Brian Lester, Rami Al-Rfou, and Noah Constant. The power of scale for parameter-efficient prompt
  tuning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.08691, 2021.
Tian Li, Anit Kumar Sahu, Maziar Sanjabi, Manzil Zaheer, Ameet Talwalkar, and Virginia Smith.
  On the convergence of federated optimization in heterogeneous networks. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1812.06127, 2018.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Xiang Lisa Li and Percy Liang. Prefix-tuning: Optimizing continuous prompts for generation. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2101.00190, 2021.
Xiao Liu, Kaixuan Ji, Yicheng Fu, Weng Lam Tam, Zhengxiao Du, Zhilin Yang, and Jie Tang.
  P-tuning v2: Prompt tuning can be comparable to fine-tuning universally across scales and tasks.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.07602, 2021.
Xiao Liu, Kaixuan Ji, Yicheng Fu, Weng Tam, Zhengxiao Du, Zhilin Yang, and Jie Tang. P-tuning:
  Prompt tuning can be comparable to fine-tuning across scales and tasks. In Proceedings of the 60th
  Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 2: Short Papers), pp.
  61–68, 2022.
Xiao Liu, Yanan Zheng, Zhengxiao Du, Ming Ding, Yujie Qian, Zhilin Yang, and Jie Tang. Gpt
  understands, too. AI Open, 2023.
Yinhan Liu, Myle Ott, Naman Goyal, Jingfei Du, Mandar Joshi, Danqi Chen, Omer Levy, Mike
  Lewis, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Veselin Stoyanov. Roberta: A robustly optimized bert pretraining
  approach. arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.11692, 2019.
Brendan McMahan, Eider Moore, Daniel Ramage, Seth Hampson, and Blaise Aguera y Arcas.
  Communication-efficient learning of deep networks from decentralized data. In Artificial intelli-
  gence and statistics, pp. 1273–1282. PMLR, 2017.
John Nguyen, Jianyu Wang, Kshitiz Malik, Maziar Sanjabi, and Michael Rabbat. Where to begin? on
  the impact of pre-training and initialization in federated learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.08090,
  2022.
OpenAI. Ag’s news dataset.
OpenAI. Chatgpt based on gpt-4 architecture. https://www.openai.com/, 2022.
OpenAI. Gpt-4 technical report, 2023.
Guanghui Qin and Jason Eisner. Learning how to ask: Querying lms with mixtures of soft prompts.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.06599, 2021.
Yujia Qin, Xiaozhi Wang, Yusheng Su, Yankai Lin, Ning Ding, Zhiyuan Liu, Juanzi Li, Lei Hou,
  Peng Li, Maosong Sun, et al. Exploring lowdimensional intrinsic task subspace via prompt tuning.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.07867, 2021.
Xipeng Qiu, Tianxiang Sun, Yige Xu, Yunfan Shao, Ning Dai, and Xuanjing Huang. Pre-trained
  models for natural language processing: A survey. Science China Technological Sciences, 63(10):
  1872–1897, 2020.
Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Katherine Lee, Sharan Narang, Michael Matena, Yanqi
  Zhou, Wei Li, and Peter J Liu. Exploring the limits of transfer learning with a unified text-to-text
  transformer. The Journal of Machine Learning Research, 21(1):5485–5551, 2020.
Timo Schick and Hinrich Schütze. Exploiting cloze questions for few shot text classification and
  natural language inference. arXiv preprint arXiv:2001.07676, 2020.
Richard Socher, Alex Perelygin, Jean Wu, Jason Chuang, Christopher D. Manning, Andrew Ng, and
  Christopher Potts. Recursive deep models for semantic compositionality over a sentiment treebank.
  In Proceedings of the 2013 conference on empirical methods in natural language processing, pp.
  1631–1642, 2013.
Guangyu Sun, Matias Mendieta, Taojiannan Yang, and Chen Chen. Exploring parameter-efficient
  fine-tuning for improving communication efficiency in federated learning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2210.01708, 2022a.
Jingwei Sun, Ang Li, Binghui Wang, Huanrui Yang, Hai Li, and Yiran Chen. Provable defense
   against privacy leakage in federated learning from representation perspective. arXiv preprint
   arXiv:2012.06043, 2020.


                                                 11
  Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  Jingwei Sun, Ang Li, Lin Duan, Samiul Alam, Xuliang Deng, Xin Guo, Haiming Wang, Maria
     Gorlatova, Mi Zhang, Hai Li, et al. Fedsea: A semi-asynchronous federated learning framework
     for extremely heterogeneous devices. In Proceedings of the 20th ACM Conference on Embedded
     Networked Sensor Systems, pp. 106–119, 2022b.
  Tian-Xiang Sun, Xiang-Yang Liu, Xi-Peng Qiu, and Xuan-Jing Huang. Paradigm shift in natural
    language processing. Machine Intelligence Research, 19(3):169–183, 2022c.
  Tianxiang Sun, Yunfan Shao, Hong Qian, Xuanjing Huang, and Xipeng Qiu. Black-box tuning for
    language-model-as-a-service. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 20841–20855.
    PMLR, 2022d.
  Yu Sun, Shuohuan Wang, Shikun Feng, Siyu Ding, Chao Pang, Junyuan Shang, Jiaxiang Liu, Xuyi
    Chen, Yanbin Zhao, Yuxiang Lu, et al. Ernie 3.0: Large-scale knowledge enhanced pre-training
    for language understanding and generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.02137, 2021.
  Minxue Tang, Xuefei Ning, Yitu Wang, Jingwei Sun, Yu Wang, Hai Li, and Yiran Chen. Fedcor:
   Correlation-based active client selection strategy for heterogeneous federated learning. In Proceed-
   ings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 10102–10111,
   2022.
  Hugo Touvron, Thibaut Lavril, Gautier Izacard, Xavier Martinet, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Timothée
    Lacroix, Baptiste Rozière, Naman Goyal, Eric Hambro, Faisal Azhar, et al. Llama: Open and
    efficient foundation language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.13971, 2023.
  Orion Weller, Marc Marone, Vladimir Braverman, Dawn Lawrie, and Benjamin Van Durme. Pre-
    trained models for multilingual federated learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.02291, 2022.
  Mingbin Xu, Congzheng Song, Ye Tian, Neha Agrawal, Filip Granqvist, Rogier van Dalen, Xiao
   Zhang, Arturo Argueta, Shiyi Han, Yaqiao Deng, et al. Training large-vocabulary neural language
   models by private federated learning for resource-constrained devices. In ICASSP 2023-2023 IEEE
   International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), pp. 1–5. IEEE,
   2023.
  yelp. Yelp dataset challenge. URL https://www.yelp.com/dataset/challenge.
  Elad Ben Zaken, Shauli Ravfogel, and Yoav Goldberg. Bitfit: Simple parameter-efficient fine-tuning
    for transformer-based masked language-models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.10199, 2021.
  Wei Zeng, Xiaozhe Ren, Teng Su, Hui Wang, Yi Liao, Zhiwei Wang, Xin Jiang, ZhenZhang Yang,
   Kaisheng Wang, Xiaoda Zhang, et al. Pangu-
                                                    \
    alpha : Large − scaleautoregressivepretrainedchineselanguagemodelswithauto −
    parallelcomputation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.12369, 2021.
Zhengyan Zhang, Xu Han, Hao Zhou, Pei Ke, Yuxian Gu, Deming Ye, Yujia Qin, Yusheng Su, Haozhe
  Ji, Jian Guan, et al. Cpm: A large-scale generative chinese pre-trained language model. AI Open, 2:
  93–99, 2021.
Haodong Zhao, Wei Du, Fangqi Li, Peixuan Li, and Gongshen Liu. Fedprompt: Communication-
  efficient and privacy-preserving prompt tuning in federated learning. In ICASSP 2023-2023 IEEE
  International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), pp. 1–5. IEEE,
  2023.
Yue Zhao, Meng Li, Liangzhen Lai, Naveen Suda, Damon Civin, and Vikas Chandra. Federated learning
  with non-iid data. arXiv preprint arXiv:1806.00582, 2018.
Zexuan Zhong, Dan Friedman, and Danqi Chen. Factual probing is [mask]: Learning vs. learning to
  recall. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.05240, 2021.


                                                  12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A    D ERIVATION OF CORRECTED SEARCH STEP ON THE SERVER

The server of FedBPT adopts CMA-ES to conduct a server-level search of the optimal search
distribution and search step length. We follow the notation in Hansen (2016) to derive a corrected
search step σt′ on the server. After the server receives the locally updated prompt vectors {zt+1
                                                                                              k
                                                                                                  }k∈St
                                          k   k
and the corresponding loss values {F (zt+1h)}k∈St , the server   i    updates the CMA-ES    parameters.
                                                1                   |S |
Without the loss of generality, we assume that zt+1           t
                                                    , ..., zt+1 is ordered satisfying that F 1 (zt+1
                                                                                                 1
                                                                                                     )<
              |S |
... < F |St | (zt+1
                  t
                    ). The server updates zt+1 following

                                                µ
                                                X
                                                          k
                                      zt+1 =          wk zt+1
                                                k=1
                                                       µ
                                                                                                       (8)
                                                       X
                                                                  k
                                              = zt +         wk (zt+1 − zt ),
                                                       k=1

                                                                 k                  k
where we apply Rank-µ-Update Hansen (2016) and the µ best zt+1       with lowest zt+1   are summed
with the weights {wk }k∈[µ] to update zt+1 . There is no issue to update zt+1 on the server, but to
update σt+1 and Ct+1 , an intermediate coefficient evolution path value for this round pc,t+1 should
be derived first. CMA-ES derives the evolution path following

                                                                    √    −1/2 zt+1 − zt
                                                 p
                     pc,t+1 ← (1 − cc )pc,t +         1 − (1 − cc )2 µw Ct              ,              (9)
                                                                                 σt

where cc is an artificial hyper-parameter satisfying cc ≤ 1, and µw = Pµ 1 w2 . As explained in
                                                                              k=1  k
Sec. 4.3, σt is intractable in FedBPT. Thus, we need to derive an estimated σt′ to conduct CMA-ES
on the server correctly. The key to estimating the global search step on the server is to guarantee that
         √        −1/2 zt+1 −zt
the term µw Ct            σt    follow a standard normal distribution

                                    √          −1/2 zt+1 − zt
                                        µw Ct                     ∼ N (0, I)                          (10)
                                                           σt

                                                                        k
under neutral selection, which means that the server randomly selects zt+1  to update the CMA-ES
parameters. Based on this rule of estimation, we first derive the distribution of zt+1 − zt . From
Eq. (8), we have

                                                       µ
                                                       X
                                                                  k
                                      zt+1 − zt =            wk (zt+1 − zt ).                         (11)
                                                       k=1

 k
zt+1 is formulated as

                                      I
                                      X              µl
                                                     X
                         ztk = mt +          k              k      k             k

                                            σt,j ×         αt,j,i zt,j,i ∼ N 0, Ct,j   ,              (12)
                                      j=1            i=1


where I is the number of local iterations in one round of training, and µl is the rank of local Rank-µ-
           k                                                                      k
Update. σt,j  is the search step length of client k’s j-th iteration in round t. zt,j,i is the i-th sampled
                                                                 k
point in client k’s j-th iteration of search in round t, and αt,j,i is the corresponding weight when
                                k
conducting weighted sum of zt,j,i   i∈[µ ]
                                           . When the clients conduct limited iterations of local training
                                          l
                                                                      k
in one round, we make an assumption that the local covariance matrix Ct,j in one round will not
                                        k      k
change significantly, which means that Ct,j ≈ Ct,1 , then we have


                                                           13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                         I
                                         X              µl
                                                        X
                          k                     k                k      k             k

                         zt+1 = zt +           σt,j ×           αt,j,i zt,j,i ∼ N 0, Ct,j
                                         j=1            i=1
                                         I
                                         X              µl
                                                        X
                                                k                k      k             k

                               ≈ zt +          σt,j ×           αt,j,i zt,j,i ∼ N 0, Ct,1                (13)
                                         j=1            i=1
                                         I
                                         X              µl
                                                        X
                                                k                k      k
                                                                              ∼ N 0, Ctk .

                               = zt +          σt,j ×           αt,j,i zt,j,i
                                         j=1            i=1

Therefore, we have

                                         −1/2
                                     Ct   (zt+1 − zt )
                      qP
                            µ        2 PI      k 2
                                                     Pµl     k
                                                                   2 ∼ N (0, I) .                        (14)
                            k=1 (wk )   j=1  σ t,j     i=1 αt,j,i


In this paper, we focus on the CMA-ES algorithm setting that w1 = ... = wµ = µ1 and αt,j,1
                                                                                     k
                                                                                           = ... =
  k        1
αt,j,µl = µl . Hence, we have

                                               −1/2
                                           Ct         (zt+1 − zt )
                           qP
                                                          k 2
                             µ             2 PI                 Pµl     k
                                                                               2
                                 k=1 (wk )    j=1        σt,j      i=1 αt,j,i
                                            −1/2
                                                                                                         (15)
                           √      C   (zt+1 − zt )
                         = µw qP tP                       ∼ N (0, I) .
                                µ   I      k 2 / (µ · µ )

                                k=1 j=1  σ t,j         l


Compared with Eq. (10), we derive an estimated global search step length as
                                      v
                                      u µ I
                                    ′
                                      uX X      2
                                   σ =t
                                     t      σk    / (µ · µl ).  t,j                                      (16)
                                                k=1 j=1


In this paper, we set λ1 = ... = λK and µl = λ2k , where λk is the localhpopulation size
                                                                                       i of the k-th
                                                                                                |S |
client, and we set µ = |S2t | . Then without the restriction on the order of zt+1
                                                                              1             t
                                                                                  , ..., zt+1 , we have
                                        v
                                           I
                                        uX X
                                                 2
                                 σt′ = 2t
                                        u
                                             σk    / (|St | · λk ),
                                                                t,j                                      (17)
                                               k∈S′t j=1


where S′t is the set of |S2t | clients that upload zt+1
                                                    k
                                                        with the lowest local loss values F k (zt+1
                                                                                                k
                                                                                                    ).
                                                                                     k
From Eq. (15), we can see that if we directly apply the local search step length σt,j   as the global
search step size, zt+1 − zt will be normalized to follow a normal distribution with a larger variance.
In this case, the evolution path cannot be correctly adapted, and the CMA-ES algorithm cannot search
an optimal distribution for the global prompt and derive an optimal search step length for the next
communication round, which leads to the divergence of the local models.


                                                           14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B      A LGORITHM

Algorithm 1 Training Algorithm of FedBPT.
Server executes:
  initialize the projection matrix A and distribute it to the clients
  initialize the global CMA-ES parameters {z0 , σ0 , C0 }
  for each round t = 0, 1, . . . do
       for each client k ∈ St in parallel do
                k         k
            {zt+1   , {σt,j }j∈[I] , F k (zt+1
                                            k
                                                )} ← ClientUpdate (zt , σt , Ct )
       end forq
                                         k 2 / (|S | · λ )
                             PI
       σt′ = 2
                   P
                       k∈S′t    j=1 σt,j              t    k

                                                                                      ′

       {zt+1 , σt+1 , Ct+1 } ← CMA-ES zt+1 , F k zt+1   k        k
                                                                        k∈St
                                                                             ; zt , σt  , C t
  end for
ClientUpdate(zt , σt , Ct ):
    k      k      k
  zt,1 , σt,1 , Ct,1  ← zt , σt , Ct
  for each local iteration j from 1 to I − 1 do
       Randomly sample a set of binary masks Mjk with the same shape of X k with a rate rp of
  elements that are zeros
       Randomly sample a set of tokens X̂ k with the same shape of X k
       for i ∈ λk do
              k
            zt,j,i ∼ N (zt,j , σt,j Ct,j )

            F̂ k (zt,j,i
                   k
                         ) = L f (Azt,j,i k
                                              ; X k ), Y k /L f (Azt,j,i
                                                                      k
                                                                          ; X k ⊙ Mjk + X̂ k ⊙ 1 − Mjk ), Y k
       end for                                            n
         k           k        k                              k     k    k
                                                                             o             k      k      k
         zt,j+1 , σt,j+1 , Ct,j+1 ← CMA-ES zt,j,i , F̂ zt,j,i                           ; zt,j , σt,j , Ct,j
                                                                           i∈[λk ]
    end for
      k       k
    zt+1  ← zt,I
      k   k                  k

    F (zt+1 ) = L f (Azt+1        ; X k ), Y k
             k       k
    return {zt+1 , {σt,j }j∈[I] , F k (zt+1
                                         k
                                             )} to server


                                                        15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C    M ANUAL P ROMPT T EMPLATES

       Model       Dataset       Template
                   SST-2         ⟨S⟩. It was [M ASK] .
       RoBERTa     AG’s News     [M ASK] News: ⟨S⟩
                   Yelp          ⟨S⟩. It was [M ASK] .
                   SST-2         What is the sentiment of this sentence: ⟨S⟩? [OU T P U T ]
       Llama 2     AG’s News     ⟨S⟩. The news is about [OU T P U T ]
                   Yelp          ⟨S⟩. It is [OU T P U T ]

Table 5: Manual prompt templates. ⟨S⟩: sentence in the dataset. ⟨M ASK⟩: mask token adopted by
RoBERTa. [OU T P U T ]: output placeholder of Llama 2.

We set manual prompts for different datasets as shown in Tab. 5. We set different prompts for
RoBERTa and Llama 2 according to their pre-training strategy. For RoBERTa pre-trained on masked
language modeling (MLM) tasks, we apply manual prompts to organize the datasets as MLM datasets.
For Llama 2, which is pre-trained on causal language modeling (CLM) tasks, we organize the samples
to prompt the model to generate labels.


                                               16
