Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


M AXIMIZING B ENEFITS UNDER H ARM C ONSTRAINTS :
A G ENERALIZED L INEAR C ONTEXTUAL BANDIT A P -
PROACH

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT

         In many contextual sequential decision-making scenarios, such as dose-finding
         clinical trials for new drugs or personalized news article recommendation systems in
         social media, each action can simultaneously carry both benefits and potential harm.
         This could manifest as efficacy versus side effects in clinical trials, or increased
         user engagement versus the risk of radicalization and psychological distress in
         news recommendation. These multifaceted situations can be modeled using the
         multi-armed bandit (MAB) framework. Given the intricate balance of positive and
         negative outcomes in these contexts, there is a compelling need to develop methods
         which can maximize benefits while limiting harm within the MAB framework. This
         paper aims to address this gap. The primary contributions of this paper are two-fold:
         (i) We propose a novel contextual MAB model with the objective of optimizing
         reward potential while maintaining certain harm constraints. In this model both
         rewards and harm are governed by a generalized linear model with coefficients
         that vary based on the contextual variables. This flexibility allows the model to be
         broadly applicable for a wide range of scenarios. (ii) Building on our proposed
         generalized linear contextual MAB model, we develop an ϵt -greedy-based policy.
         This policy is designed to strike an effective balance between the dual objectives
         of exploration-exploitation to achieve the desired trade-off between
                                                                            √     benefit and
         harm. We demonstrate that this policy achieves a sublinear O( T log T ) regret.
         Extensive experimental results are presented to support our theoretical analyses
         and validate the effectiveness of our proposed model and policy.


1   I NTRODUCTION

The multi-armed bandit (MAB) problem is a classic framework in reinforcement learning, in which
an agent makes sequential decisions to choose from multiple “arms” in each round, with each arm
providing a stochastic reward. The objective is to find a strategy that maximizes the cumulative reward
over a sequence of decisions. The fundamental issue is how to balance exploration (trying different
arms to gain information) and exploitation (using the best option to maximize the reward). Various
algorithms have been proposed to solve the MAB problem, such as ϵt -greedy, upper confidence
bound (UCB), and Thompson sampling, each offering different balances between exploration and
exploitation. See for example Lattimore & Szepesvári (2020) and Slivkins (2019) for a thorough
review.
The contextual multi-armed bandit (CMAB) problem extends the MAB framework by allowing each
arm’s expected reward to depend on some contextual variables. The CMAB problem has applications
in numerous domains such as recommendation systems, personalized web services, and clinical trials.
For example, within a news recommendation system, the articles to recommend (the arms) aim for
the reward of a high click-through rate, which hinges on user-specific factors (the context) such as
past clicking behavior. Similarly, in a clinical trial setting, the drug dosage (the arms) yields the
reward of prolonged survival time, which depends on the patient-specific contextual information such
as age, gender, and overall health status. See Lee et al. (2020) and Li et al. (2010).
In many practical scenarios, opting for a specific arm can result in both rewards and potential harm,
and a focus on maximizing rewards alone might lead to unfavorable outcomes. For instance, within a


                                                  1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


news recommendation system, promoting content similar to those that have previously elicited clicks
from a particular user might yield a high click-through rate. However, this could also cultivate an
echo chamber, causing emotional and psychological distress, polarize society, and even radicalize
the user base. (see Comstock & Platania (2017); Houston et al. (2018)). Similarly, in a clinical
trial context, a higher dosage may produce a positive outcome for the disease being treated (such as
reducing tumor size), but it could also introduce more side effects, potentially harming the patient’s
overall health. Many efforts have been made to adopt MAB design in dose-finding clinical trials. See
Aziz et al. (2021) and Villar et al. (2015) for example.
To tackle these challenging and intricate practical issues, we need to explore the CMAB problem
jointly considering both rewards and harm at the same time. In the MAB literature, there have
been discussions around the related topic of the multi-objective multi-armed Bandit (MOMAB),
where the agent is assumed to have multiple objectives and a reward vector is revealed after each
arm pull (see, for example, Drugan & Nowe (2013)). However, in recent MOMAB literature,
the most popular approach, namely Pareto optimal front, cannot provide a safety guarantee. The
safety-constrained MAB problems, on the other hand, poses some unrealistic assumptions. This
motivates us to develop a framework to handle contextual multi-armed bandit problems with two
opposing objectives, thus filling a gap in the literature. Surprisingly, by merely introducing a second
objective, the possibility to reduce the problem to linear and apply LinUCB as in Li et al. (2017)
for single objective has been ruled out. We specifically model the mean reward and harm of each
arm using two separate varying coefficient generalized linear models, with the coefficients being
dependent on the contextual variables. This framework is flexible enough to manage both discrete and
continuous arms. We employ the Maximum Likelihood method for parameter estimation and develop
an ϵt -greedy algorithm with a harm function to address the exploration-exploitation trade-off. We
prove the consistency of our parameter estimates and demonstrate that our ϵt -greedy algorithm can
achieve optimal regret. An extensive simulation study has been conducted which shows the superior
performance of our proposed approach.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we provide a quick overview on related
work, thus putting our work into comparative perspectives. In Section 3, we introduce the system
model and problem formulation. Section 4 presents the our MAB policy design, which is followed
by its main theoretical results. Section 5 demonstrates our numerical experiments and Section 6
concludes this paper.


2   R ELATED WORK

In this section, we provide a quick overview on several related areas in the literature: 1) generalized
linear bandit problems, 2) multi-objective bandits, 3) varying coefficient models, and 4) safety-
constrained bandit problems, thus highlighting the differences and contributions of our work.
1) Generalized linear bandit problems: Generalized linear bandit problems with a single objective
have been studied by Filippi et al. (2010), Li et al. (2017) and Kveton et al. (2020), who showed
the advantage of generalized linear bandits over linear contextual bandits. Specifically, Filippi
et al. (2010) studied stochastic √
                                 generalized linear bandit and proposed algorithm called GLM-UCB,
which achieves a regret of Õ( T ) after T rounds.  √ Li et al. (2017) further considered contextual
generalized linear bandit and demonstrated an Õ( T ) regret for their UCB-GLM algorithm as well
        √
as Õ( T log K) regret for SupCB-GLM algorithm, following the idea of Auer (2002) to create
independent samples.
2) Multi-objective bandits: Drugan & Nowe (2013) introduced a stochastic multi objective multi-
armed bandit (MOMAB) framework. UCB algorithms for MOMAB under both scalarized regret
and Pareto regret have been proposed. Furthermore, Lu et al. (2019) considered multi-objective
generalized linear bandit problems, where each arm possesses a feature that serves as the independent
variable in the generalized linear model. This concept aligns with the approach inAziz et al. (2021),
who modeled toxicity and efficacy as a function of dose level in dosage finding clinical trials.
To highlight the difference in constructing context x and feature of the arm u, a brief summary of the
literature in CMAB and MOMAB is given in Table 1. As shown in Table 1, Filippi et al. (2010); Li
et al. (2017) used another notion of context xt,k that is varying not only in rounds but also across
arms. This notion is general but may impose difficulty on the practical meaning of the context. For


                                                  2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 1: Different formulations: t represents rounds, k represents arms, x represents context, u
represents feature of the arms and η represents parameter. µ(·) is a generic notation for mean
function.

    Algorithm      Mean Fuction      Context Changes w/ t        Per-arm Context      Feature for Arms
    9; 18          µ(xt,k , η)       ✓                           ✓                    ✗
    10             µ(xt , ηk )       ✓                           ✗                    ✗
    3; 20          µ(uk , η)         -                           -                    ✓
    Our work       µ(xt , uk , η)    ✓                           ✗                    ✓


example, at a certain round t, patient information xt should not change when they are assigned
different treatments (arms).
Another observation is the direct use of Pareto optimality, which is the current focus of MOMAB,
does not provide a safety guarantee. An arm with both high harm and high reward may fall in the
Pareto optimal front. However, a high harm may be unacceptable.
3) Varying coefficient models: Hastie & Tibshirani (1993) introduced varying coefficient models,
which empower flexible estimation of regression models by allowing the coefficients to vary as
smooth functions of other auxiliary variables. Varying coefficient models encompass a broad range
of models, including generalized linear models, dynamic generalized linear models, and generalized
additive models. Varying coefficient models are adopted in this paper to include a wide range of
models rather than to propose a specific formulation.
4) Safety-constrained bandit problems: Another line of research that addresses the safety concerns
in bandit problems can be found, for example, in (Amani et al., 2020). However, rather than observing
both reward and harm as in this paper, only the reward is observed in (Amani et al., 2020). With
only one set of responses available, parameters in safety constraints are assumed to be a known
linear transformation of the parameters in the reward model. On a related note, Kazerouni et al.
(2017) considered a conservative bandit setup with a known safe policy to serve as the baseline
without modeling harm explicitly. Rather, the estimated optimal arm is pulled when it outperforms
the baseline policy by a certain degree.
To the best of our knowledge, this  √ paper is the first to apply varying coefficient models to GLM
bandit problems. We show an O( T log T ) regret upper bound for a scalarized regret. This is the
first regret bound for ϵt -greedy algorithm in multi-objective generalized
                                                                 √          linear bandit. This result
matches the state-of-the-art single-objective regret bound O( T log T ) for UCB-GLM algorithm
presented in the work of Li et al. (2017).

3    S YSTEM MODEL AND PROBLEM FORMULATION

Consider a stochastic bandit setting with K arms, which could represent dosage level in clinical trials
or the level of controversial news recommendation amount. Suppose the K arms form a discrete
sampling from a continuous domain. Therefore, each arm is associated with a feature uk that is
constant through the experiment. Without loss of generality, we can let u = (u1 , · · · , uK ) with
u1 ≤ u2 ≤ · · · ≤ uK to represent the K arms. For example, in news recommendation systems, u
could be the proportion of controversial content recommended to users. In clinical trials for new
drugs, u may be the effective toxicity or efficacy assigned by physicians.
In each time step t ∈ {1, · · · , T }, the learner receives a context Xt , pulls an arm At from {1, · · · , K}
and observes two outcomes: a harm effect Yt and a reward Zt . Depending on the context Xt , each
arm has a harm distribution Pk,t and a reward distribution Qk,t . Suppose that Yt ∼ PAt ,t and
Zt ∼ QAt ,t independently. Let pk,t and qk,t be the expectations of Pk,t and Qk,t , respectively.
We assume the context, harm outcome and reward are all bounded random variables with ∥Xt ∥ ≤ r
for some positive real number r, Yt ∈ [0, 1] and √       Zt ∈ [0, 1]. Here ∥ · ∥ denotes the ℓ2 norm.
For a positive definite matirx A, we let ∥x∥A := xT Ax denote the norm defined by A. The
minimum and maximum eigen values of A are written as λmin (A) and λmax (A), respectively.
Finally, 1 : n := {1, 2, · · · , n}. Next, we define the unique features of our MAB model.


                                                      3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


1) Definition of the best arm: Due to the existence of two metrics, in this paper, we define the best
arm k ∗ (t) at round t as:
                           k ∗ (t) = min{arg max{qk,t − λ(pk,t − θ)+ }},                          (1)
                                               k
where min is taken to break ties, x+ is the positive part of x, θ is a pre-determined threshold for harm
expectation, and λ > 0 is the penalty for choosing an arm with harm expectation larger than θ. Both
θ and λ can be specified by practitioners based on their goals.
Therefore, a linear scalarization based on the penalty can be used to define the regret
                             T
                             X
                      RT =     {(qt∗ − qAt,t ) + λ(pAt,t − θ)+ − λ(p∗t − θ)+ },                         (2)
                             t=1

where qt∗ = qk∗ (t),t is the expected rewards of the best arm k ∗ (t), p∗t = pk∗ (t),t is the expected harm
of arm k ∗ (t).
It is also insightful to consider other alternatives of the best arm definition. For example, one may
desire to define the best arm as
                                  k ′ (t) = min{k : qk,t = max ql,t }                              (3)
                                                            l:pl,t ≤θ


and choose k̂ ′ (t) = min{k : q̂k,t = maxl:p̂l,t ≤θ q̂l,t } during the trial. This approach is adopted by
Lee et al. (2020) and Aziz et al. (2021) in the pure exploration problem. Note that the best arm
definition in equation 1 is an attempt to solve equation 3 approximately. When λ = ∞, the best arm
defined in equation 1 will be the same as equation 3. Therefore, If we are strictly conservative about
the harm, the definition in equation 3 would be more desirable. The effect of λ-values on the chosen
arm’s harm probability is provided in the Appendix, showing equation 1 is a good approximation to
equation 3 when λ is large. At the same time, the penalty term in equation 1 allows a soft constraint
on harm when we are not absolutely strict about it. In addition, if we take threshold θ = 0, then
equation 1 imposes penalty whenever there is harm effect, but equation 3 will give an empty set.
Overall, we believe the best arm definition equation 1 provides more generality.
Remark 3.1. Under equation 3, k ′ (t) does not necessarily yield the largest qk′ (t),t − (λ(pk′ (t),t − θ)+
among all {qk,t − (λ(pk,t − θ)+ }K  k=1 , so the regret equation 2 may admit negative terms and does
not suit the best arm definition in equation 3.
2) Varying coefficient generalized linear models for harm and benefits: A generalized linear
model for the harm takes uk as the covariate, and it is common to assume that the expectation of
harm increases with uk . We consider the parameters in the GLM to vary with the context x. When
the learner receiving context x ∈ Rd , if arm k is pulled, the expectation of harm p is given by
                                  p(x, k; β) = g(ζ(x, k; β))),                                       (4)
                                  ζ(x, k; β) = b0 (x; β0 ) + b1 (x; β1 )uk ,                         (5)
where g is the inverse of link function for harm model, ζ denotes the systematic component, uk
is the feature associated with arm k, and b0 (x; β0 ) and b1 (x; β1 ) are functional coefficients. If
b0 (x; β0 ) ≡ b0 and b1 (x; β1 ) ≡ b1 for some constants b0 and b1 , it is the common generalized linear
model.
For now, we assume parametric models b0 (x) = Φ(x)T β0 and b1 (x) = Φ(x)T β1 for some known
transformation Φ(·) from Rd to Rd1 . It is interesting future work to extend Φ(·) to a spline basis to
allow more flexible models.
The link function g −1 for generalized linear models is a monotone increasing function. Based on the
distribution of the response, different link functions can be used. For example, the canonical link
function for Gaussian distributed response is the identity link g −1 (x) = x, and the canonical link
                                                                  x
function for Bernoulli response is the logit link g −1 (x) = log      .
                                                                 1−x
The conditional distribution of harm Yt given context Xt and arm At is from the exponential family
in classic generalized linear models. The conditional density of Yt |(Xt = x, At = k) can be written
as
                    f (y|x, k) = exp{ϕ[yζ(x, k; β) − my (ζ(x, k; β))] + c(y, ϕ)},


                                                    4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


where ϕ is the known dispersion parameter, my (ζ) satisfies m′y (ζ(x, k; β)) = p(x, k; β) =
E(Yt |Xt = x, At = k), and c(y, ϕ) is the normalization function that does not involve ζ.
Conditioning on {X1 , A1 , X2 , A2 , · · · , Xt , At }, Y1 , Y2 , · · · , Yt are independent. The log-likelihood
function of β can be written as:
                              t
                              X
                  ℓt (β) =        {ϕ[Ys ζ(Xs , As ; β) − my (ζ(Xs , As ; β))] + c(Ys , ϕ)}
                              s=1
                                Xt
                          =ϕ          [Ys ζ(Xs , As ; β) − my (ζ(Xs , As ; β))] + constant.
                                s=1

As a result, the MLE of β can be defined as
                                           t
                                           X
                        β̂t = arg max            [Ys ζ(Xs , As ; β) − my (ζ(Xs , As ; β))].                 (6)
                                   β       s=1


In this paper, we let
                                                                      (y)
                                            Yt = p(Xt , At ; β) + et ,
          (y)
where {et }Tt=1 are independent zero-mean sub-Gaussian noise that is independent of Xt and At .
                                                                                      (y)
Note that if Yt |(Xt , At ) follows Gaussian, Bernoulli or any bounded distribution, et can be shown
to be sub-Gaussian.
Similar to the harm model, we assume for expected reward q,
                          q(x, k; γ) = h(ξ(x, k; γ)),                                                       (7)
                          ξ(x, k; γ) = c0 (x; γ0 ) + c1 (x; γ1 )uk + c2 (x; γ2 )u2k ,                       (8)

where h is the inverse of the link function for reward model, ξ denotes the systematic component,
c0 (x), c1 (x) and c2 (x) are functional coefficients. We use a quadratic model to allow non-monotonic
changes as k increases. An increasing-plateau model may also be considered, see more possible
models in Pinheiro et al. (2014) for example. Here we also use parametric models c0 (x) = Ψ(x)T γ0 ,
c1 (x) = Ψ(x)T γ1 and c2 (x) = Ψ(x)T γ2 with a known transformation Ψ(·) : Rd → Rd2 .
Similarly, the MLE for γ can be expressed as
                                           t
                                           X
                        γ̂t = arg max            [Zs ξ(Xs , As ; γ) − mz (ξ(Xs , As ; γ))],                 (9)
                                   γ
                                           s=1


                                                                                                            (z)
for m′z (ξ(x, k; γ)) = q(x, k; γ). The reward model can be written as Zt = q(Xt , At ; γ) + et ,
          (z)
where {et }Tt=1 are independent zero-mean sub-Gaussian noise.
Let β = (β0T , β1T )T , γ = (γ0T , γ1T , γ2T )T , and η = (β T , γ T )T denote all the parameters of interest.
The varying coefficient models are a natural extension to Aziz et al. (2021) and Lu et al. (2019),
who only define uk to characterize the arms rather than utilize information Xt about the task of each
round.
Except the boundedness of context, harm and reward, the following assumptions on the smoothness
of link functions are needed in order to establish the bound on regret.

    A1: κy :=       inf       g ′ (ζ(x, k; β ′ )) > 0 and κz :=      inf       h′ (ξ(x, k; γ ′ )) > 0.
                  ∥x∥≤r,                                           ∥x∥≤r,
                 ∥β ′ −β∥≤1                                       ∥γ ′ −γ∥≤1

    A2: g and h are twice differentiable. The first and second derivatives of g are bounded from
        above by Lg and Mg , and the first and second derivatives of h are bounded from above by
        Lh and Mh , respectively.


                                                           5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Assumptions A1 and A2 have been used by Li et al. (2017). A1 controls the local behavior of g ′ and
h′ when using parameter value β ′ and γ ′ near the true parameter value β and γ. A1 is necessary for
the convergence of parameter estimates. It is easy to verify A1 and A2 hold for identity link and logit
link. Specifically, for identity link, L = 1 and M = 0. For logit link L = M = 1/4.
Since we assume parametric models Φ(·) and Ψ(·), the linear predictors for harm and reward can be
written as
                             ζ(x, k; β) = (Φ(x)T , uk Φ(x)T )β,
                             ξ(x, k; γ) = (Ψ(x)T , uk Ψ(x)T , u2k Ψ(x)T )γ.
Define Wt = (Φ(Xt )T , uAt Φ(Xt )T )T ∈ R2d1 and Vt = (Ψ(Xt )T , uAt Ψ(Xt )T , u2At Ψ(Xt )T )T ∈
R3d2 , the design matrices for harm and reward model up to round t can be represented as
(W1 , W2 , · · · , Wt )T and (V1 , V2 , · · · , Vt )T .
The boundedness of ∥Wt ∥ and ∥Vt ∥ can be verified as long as the transformations Φ(·) and Ψ(·) are
continuous, and max uk < ∞. Without loss of generality, we assume Wt and Vt are normalized:
                 1≤k≤K

    A3: ∥Wt ∥ ≤ 1 and ∥Vt ∥ ≤ 1 for all 1 ≤ t ≤ T.
    A4: E[Wt WtT ] and E[Vt VtT ] are positive definite.

4    P OLICY DESIGN AND MAIN RESULTS
In this paper, we propose an ϵt -greedy-based algorithm for solving the problem. To obtain an initial
estimate of η, each arm is pulled m rounds at the beginning of the experiment. In clinical trials,
however, the initialization and exploration should be more carefully designed to avoid exposing
patients to high toxicity, see Aziz et al. (2021) for using an “admissible set” or “admissible doses” for
example.

Algorithm 1: ϵt -greedy Algorithm with harm penalty
input: Time horizon T , exploration rate ϵt ∈ (0, 1), penalty λ ∈ (0, ∞), harm threshold
 θ ∈ (0, 1), initialization rounds m
for t = 1, · · · , m × K do
    Sample from each arm m times, record context Xt and response Yt , Zt
end
for t = m × K + 1, · · · , T do
    Obtain maximum likelihood estimate η̂t−1 based on X1:t−1 , A1:t−1 , Y1:t−1 and Z1:t−1 as in
     equation 6 and equation 9
    Identify best arm k̂t = arg max q(Xt , k; γ̂t−1 ) − λ(p(Xt , k; β̂t−1 ) − θ)+
                                k
                                   ϵt
    Sample from k̂t w.p. 1 − ϵt + ,
                                   K
                                                        ϵt
    and sample from arms in {1, · · · , K}\{k̂t } w.p.
                                                       K
    Record context Xt , choice At and responses Yt , Zt
end
output: Parameter estimates η̂T

                                          n     log t o
Shrinking exploration probability ϵt = min 1, C         is taken as suggested by Cesa-Bianchi &
                                                  t
Fischer (1998) with constant C > 0.
The single-objective setting in (Li et al., 2017) allows a straightforward application of LinUCB based
on the linear systematic component. However, the two-objective setup in our paper already precludes
the possibility to directly reduce the problem to a linear case. Specifically, in the single-objective case,
since the link function h(ξ) is monotonically increasing in ξ, as long as ξ(x, k; γ) ≥ ξ(x, j; γ) for
arms k, j, we know h(ξ(x, k; γ)) ≥ h(ξ(x, j; γ)). Thus, it suffices to find the arm k that maximizes
ξ(x, k; γ) as well as design an upper confidence bound for ξ(xt , k; γ). However, our scalarized


                                                     6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


reward in equation 2 is no longer monotone in ξ or ζ, so the problem cannot be decomposed into two
linear pieces and dealt with separately.
To establish an upper bound for regret of Algorithm 1, it is essential to show convergence of parameter
estimates. Recall Theorem 1 from Li et al. (2017) for convergence of parameter estimates. For
simplicity, we state the theorem for Wt and Yt . Note that the result also holds for Vt and Zt .
                                                                  t
                                                                      Ws WsT , and let δ > 0 be given.
                                                                  P
Lemma 1 (Theorem 1 in (Li et al., 2017)). Define Gt =
                                                                    s=1
Furthermore, assume that
                                             512Mg2 σy2

                                                                           1
                              λmin (Gt ) ≥                    4d21 + log           .               (10)
                                                κ4y                        δ
Then, with probability at least 1−3δ, the maximum likelihood estimator β̂t satisfies, for any w ∈ R2d1 ,
                                                 σy p
                                |wT (β̂t − β)| ≤      log(1/δ)∥w∥G−1 .                             (11)
                                                 κy                t



Condition equation 10 is satisfied when there is a sufficient number of independent samples collected
in a trial of the multi-armed bandit problem. The sample size needed for equation 10 to hold is also
stated in Li et al. (2017) and is proficed in the Appendix in order for our work to be self-contained.
                                                                                            √
Based on the statistical property of parameter estimates, the theorem below shows an O( T log T )
regret bound.
Theorem 1. Let τ = m × K denote the number of initialization rounds. If we run the Algorithm 1
with
                C √2d + C plog(2/δ) 2
                                              !
                     1    1      2                     2B1
   τ = max                                        +            ,
                          λmin (Σ1 )               λmin (Σ1 )
                                                        √           p          !2                
                                                     C1 3d2 + C2 log(2/δ)                2B2 
                                                                                   +               ,
                                                              λmin (Σ2 )              λmin (Σ2 ) 
then with probability at least 1 − 3δ, the regret of the algorithm is upper bounded by
      RT ≤ (1 + λ)τ                                                                             (I)
                                                      r               !
                          (log T )2      (log τ )2      T −τ        1
          + (1 + λ) C               −C             +            log                            (II)
                              2             2              2        δ
                      r                                         r
                  σy                      6       T          σz                    6     T
          + 2λLg        4d1 (T − τ ) log log          + 2Lh        6d2 (T − τ ) log log     . (III)
                  κy                      δ      2d1         κz                    δ    3d2
Here, we may choose
                                        (                                )
                                             512Mg2 σy2

                                                             2        6
                            B1 = max 1,                    4d1 + log       ,
                                                  κ4y                 δ
                                             512Mh2 σz2

                                                             2        6
                            B2 = max 1,                    9d2 + log       ,
                                                  κ4z                 δ
and the second moments Σ1 := E[Wt WtT ] and Σ2 := E[Vt VtT ] exist following Assumption A3.
Sketch of proof. The regret RT can be decomposed into three parts: regret from exploration round 1
to τ (I), regret from exploration rounds (II) and regret from greedy rounds (III).
For the regret at time step t, qt∗ − qAt ,t + λ(pAt ,t − θ)+ − λ(p∗t − θ)+ ≤ 1 + λ always holds since
pk,t , qk,t ∈ [0, 1]. Therefore, the sum of regret from round 1 to τ is bounded by (1 + λ)τ .
                                        log t
The probability of exploration ϵt = C         is shrinking with round t. Thus, by the Hoeffding’s
                                          t
                                                                             (log T )2    (log τ )2
inequality, the number of exploration rounds is bounded from above by C                −C           +
r                                                                                2           2
   T −τ       1
          log w.p. at least 1 − δ, resulting in term (II) in the regret bound.
     2        δ

                                                   7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


If the algorithm does not explore at round t, due to the greedy characteristic, we have

            h(VtT γ̂t−1 ) − λ(g(WtT β̂t−1 ) − θ)+ ≥ h(VtT∗ γ̂t−1 ) − λ(g(WtT∗ β̂t−1 ) − θ)+ ,

which implies

     h(VtT∗ γ) − h(VtT γ) + λ(g(WtT β) − θ)+ − λ(g(WtT∗ β) − θ)+
    ≤h(VtT∗ γ) − h(VtT γ) + λ(g(WtT β) − θ)+ − λ(g(WtT∗ β) − θ)+
    +h(VtT γ̂t−1 ) − λ(g(WtT β̂t−1 ) − θ)+ − h(VtT∗ γ̂t−1 ) + λ(g(WtT∗ β̂t−1 ) − θ)+
    ≤Lh |VtT∗ (γ̂t−1 − γ)| + Lh |VtT (γ̂t−1 − γ)| + λLg |WtT (β̂t−1 − β)| + λLg |WtT∗ (β̂t−1 − β)|,

and the last line can be bounded using Lemmas 1 and 4 to obtain the third part of the regret bound.
Due to space limitation, the detailed proof is deferred to the Appendix.


5    N UMERICAL EXPERIMENTS

We test the varying coefficient model against four baseline models in 100 trials. In each trial,
we run the algorithms for T = 5, 000 rounds. K = 7 arms are used in the simulation with
u = (0.1, 0.2, · · · , 0.7). The penalty is chosen to be λ = 1, and harm threshold θ = 0.33.
1) Methods for comparison: We consider four baseline methods, all of which under the ϵt -greedy
framework. The first baseline method ignores the harm effect, and only targets at maximizing the
reward. The second baseline method ignores the context, which means the functional coefficients are
all treated as constants.
The third one is to learn K separate models independently for each of the K arms. This method is
used in Goldenshluger & Zeevi (2013). In this method, we assume arm k has parameters β (k) and γ (k)
with harm model p(x, β (k) ) = g(xT β (k) ) and reward model q(x, γ (k) ) = h(xT γ (k) ). When running
                                                                           (k)      (k)
the algorithm, only data from the history of arm k is used to estimate β̂t and γ̂t . Therefore, for
                              (j)  (j)        (k)  (k)
arms j ̸= k, the parameters β , γ and β , γ are learned separately.
The fourth baseline method under consideration is to bin the continuous context into N categories
C1 , · · · , CN , then learn a context-free model within each category. The binned context is considered
by Perchet & Rigollet (2013) and Li et al. (2019). For x belonging to category Ci , we assume there
are parameters β (i) ∈ R2 and γ (i) ∈ R3 , and model expected harm as p(x, uk ; β (i) ) = (1, uk )β (i) as
well as expected reward q(x, uk ; γ (i) ) = (1, uk , u2k )γ (i) . When context Xt arrives, we first decide
which category Xt belongs to, say Ci , then use history data {1 ≤ s ≤ t − 1 : Xs ∈ Ci } to estimate
  (i)         (i)
β̂t and γ̂t . N = 3 categories are used in the simulation.
2) Data generation: We consider a simple example where x ∈ R1 , and Φ(x) = Ψ(x) = (1, x)T
for the varying coefficient model. The context Xt is simulated i.i.d. from a Uniform distribution on
[0, 1]. The harm Yt and reward Zt are Bernoulli random variables with mean functions specified by
equation 4 and equation 7, respectively. The inverse link functions g and h are both expit functions.
The surfaces for the expectation of harm and reward are given in Figure 1.
We also run the oracle method, where the true β and γ values are known, to identify the best arm in
each round. For the five methods P under comparison, we report the regret of each method in Figure 2
                                     t
(a). Figure 2 (b) gives the count s=1 I{ps > θ} for the chisen arm, reflecting the safety feature
of each method. Due to space limit, more details on computation as well as additional results on
different λ-value are deferred to the Appendix.
The advantage of varying coefficient models becomes evident when examining the results depicted
in both plots. In Figure 2(a), the regret for varying coefficient models is constantly lower than the
other four methods. In Figure 2(b), the varying coefficient model is also comparable with the oracle
method on the safety side. These results emphasize the effectiveness of varying coefficient models in
making more informed and advantageous decisions.


                                                    8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


            (a) Surface of expectation of harm on       (b) Surface of expectation of reward on
                   feature u and context x.                     feature u and context x.

Figure 1: Note reward is not monotonely increasing with level (u), but harm is assumed to be
monotone in level (u).


                           (a)                                             (b)

Figure 2: (a) The cumulative regret averaged across 100 trials. (b)To reflect the safety feature of each
method, we calculate how many times the method chooses an arm with harm probability p > θ up to
round t. Then the count is averaged over 100 trials.



6   C ONCLUSION

In this paper, we considered a new contextual multi-armed bandit framework, where both benefits
and harm are the consequence of pulling an arm. By including the penalty of harm in the regret
formulation, we balanced between maximizing benefits and controlling harmful outcomes. Our
proposed model used contextual variables to construct the varying coefficient generalized linear
model, allowing flexible model specification.
                                      √       We proposed an ϵt -greedy algorithm to make decisions
sequentially. We established an O( T log T ) regret bound for the proposed ϵt -greedy algorithm
under varying coefficient generalized linear models. Compared to the baseline models, varying
coefficient models have shown an advantage in both minimizing regret and controlling harm. The
varying coefficient models successfully captured the connection between arms and utilized the
information provided by contextual variables. To allow greater model flexibility, the functional
coefficients may be estimated by nonparametric methods instead of parametric models. The statistical
properties of such nonparametric estimations are worth investigating. Also, the MLE of η becomes
computationally expensive as the time horizton T increases. Online update of parameters is worth
considering for large T to further promote the applicability of the proposed method. See Chen
et al. (2021) for example. Another approach to tackle the balance of benefit and harm is the Pareto
optimality, which may be adapted more carefully if safety guarantee is needed. Finally, in the current
analysis of regret, the convergence of parameter estimates was solely based on the initialization
rounds. However, ϵt -greedy algorithm collects more independent samples during the exploration. A
careful analysis to utilize the independent samples in exploration may lead to a better regret bound.


                                                    9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Sanae Amani, Mahnoosh Alizadeh, and Christos Thrampoulidis. Generalized linear bandits with
  safety constraints. International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP),
  pp. 3562–3566, 2020.
Peter Auer. Using confidence bounds for exploitation-exploration trade-offs. Journal of Machine
  Learning Research, 3:397–422, 2002.
Maryam Aziz, Emilie Kaufmann, and Marie-Karelle Riviere. On multi-armed bandit designs for
 dose-finding clinical trials. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 22(1):686–723, 2021.
Nicolo Cesa-Bianchi and Paul Fischer. Finite-time regret bounds for the multiarmed bandit problem.
  ICML, 98, 1998.
Haoyu Chen, Wenbin Lu, and Rui Song. Statistical inference for online decision making via stochastic
  gradient descent. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 116(534):708–719, 2021.
Casey Comstock and Judith Platania. The role of media-induced secondary traumatic stress on
  perceptions of distress. American International Journal of Social Science, 16(1), 2017.
Madalina M. Drugan and Ann Nowe. Designing multi-objective multi-armed bandits algorithms: A
 study. In The 2013 international joint conference on neural networks (IJCNN), 2013.
Valerii Fedorov. Optimal experimental design. Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Computational
  Statistics, 2(5):581–589, 2010.
Sarah Filippi, Olivier Cappe, Aurélien Garivier, and Csaba Szepesvári. Parametric bandits: The
  generalized linear case. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 23, 2010.
Alexander Goldenshluger and Assaf Zeevi. A linear response bandit problem. Stochastic Systems, 3
  (1):230–261, 2013.
Trevor Hastie and Robert Tibshirani. Varying-coefficient models. Journal of the Royal Statistical
  Society: Series B (Methodological), 55(4):757–779, 1993.
J. Brian Houston, Matthew L. Spialek, and Jennifer First. Disaster media effects: A systematic
   review and synthesis based on the differential susceptibility to media effects model. Journal of
   Communication, 68(4):734–757, 2018.
Abbas Kazerouni, Mohammad Ghavamzadeh, Yasin Abbasi Yadkori, and Benjamin Van Roy. Con-
  servative contextual linear bandits. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 30,
  2017.
Branislav Kveton, Manzil Zaheer, Csaba Szepesvari, Lihong Li, Mohammad Ghavamzadeh, and
  Craig Boutilier. Randomized exploration in generalized linear bandits. In International Conference
  on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 2066–2076, 2020.
Tor Lattimore and Csaba Szepesvári. Bandit algorithms. Cambridge University Press, 2020.
Hyun-Suk Lee, Cong Shen, James Jordon, and Mihaela Schaar. Contextual constrained learning for
  dose-finding clinical trials. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp.
  2645–2654, 2020.
Lihong Li, Wei Chu, John Langford, and Robert E. Schapire. A contextual-bandit approach to
  personalized news article recommendation. In Proceedings of the 19th international conference on
  World wide web, pp. 661–670, 2010.
Lihong Li, Yu Lu, and Dengyong Zhou. Provably optimal algorithms for generalized linear contextual
  bandits. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 2071–2080, 2017.
Wenhao Li, Ningyuan Chen, and L. Jeff Hong. A dimension-free algorithm for contextual continuum-
 armed bandits. arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.06550, 2019.


                                                   10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Shiyin Lu, Guanghui Wang, Yao Hu, and Lijun Zhang. Multi-objective generalized linear bandits.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:1905.12879, 2019.
Vianney Perchet and Philippe Rigollet. The multi-armed bandit problem with covariates. Annals of
  Statistics, 41(2):693–721, 2013.
José Pinheiro, Björn Bornkamp, Ekkehard Glimm, and Frank Bretz. Model-based dose finding under
  model uncertainty using general parametric models. Statistics in medicine, 33(10):1646–1661,
  2014.
Aleksandrs Slivkins. Introduction to multi-armed bandits. Foundations and Trends®in Machine
  Learning, 12(1-2):1–286, 2019.
Sofı́a S. Villar, Jack Bowden, and James Wason. Multi-armed bandit models for the optimal design
  of clinical trials: benefits and challenges. Statistical science: a review journal of the Institute of
  Mathematical Statistics, 30(2), 2015.


                                                  11
