Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


M AKING RL WITH P REFERENCE - BASED F EEDBACK
E FFICIENT VIA R ANDOMIZATION
 Runzhe Wu                                            Wen Sun
 Department of Computer Science                       Department of Computer Science
 Cornell University                                   Cornell University
 rw646@cornell.edu                                    ws455@cornell.edu



                                            A BSTRACT

         Reinforcement Learning algorithms that learn from human feedback (RLHF) need
         to be efficient in terms of statistical complexity, computational complexity, and
         query complexity. In this work, we consider the RLHF setting where the feedback
         is given in the format of preferences over pairs of trajectories. In the linear MDP
         model, using randomization in algorithm design, we present an algorithm that is
         sample efficient (i.e., has near-optimal worst-case regret bounds) and has poly-
         nomial running time (i.e., computational complexity is polynomial with respect
         to relevant parameters). Our algorithm further minimizes the query complexity
         through a novel randomized active learning procedure. In particular, our algo-
         rithm demonstrates a near-optimal tradeoff between the regret bound and the query
         complexity. To extend the results to more general nonlinear function approxi-
         mation, we design a model-based randomized algorithm inspired by the idea of
         Thompson sampling. Our algorithm minimizes Bayesian regret bound and query
         complexity, again achieving a near-optimal tradeoff between these two quantities.
         Computation-wise, similar to the prior Thompson sampling algorithms under the
         regular RL setting, the main computation primitives of our algorithm are Bayesian
         supervised learning oracles which have been heavily investigated on the empirical
         side when applying Thompson sampling algorithms to RL benchmark problems.


1   I NTRODUCTION

Reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF) has been widely used across various do-
mains, including robotics (Jain et al., 2013; 2015) and natural language processing (Stiennon et al.,
2020; Ouyang et al., 2022). Unlike standard RL, RLHF requires the agent to learn from feedback in
the format of preferences between pairs of trajectories instead of per-step reward since assigning a
dense reward function for each state is challenging in many tasks. For instance, in natural language
generation, rating each generated token individually is challenging. Hence, it is more realistic to ask
humans to compare two pieces of text and indicate their preference. Recent works have shown that,
by integrating preference-based feedback into the training process, we can align models with human
intention and enable high-quality human-machine interaction.
Despite the existing empirical applications of RLHF, its theoretical foundation remains far from
satisfactory. Empirically, researchers first learn reward models from preference-based feedback and
then optimize the reward models via policy gradient-based algorithms such as PPO (Schulman et al.,
2017). Questions such as whether or not the learned reward model is accurate, whether PPO is suf-
ficient for deep exploration, and how to strategically collect more feedback on the fly are often
ignored. Theoretically, prior works study the regret bound for RL with preference-based feedback
(Saha et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2022). Despite achieving sublinear worst-case regret, these algo-
rithms are computationally intractable even for simplified models such as tabular Markov Decision
Processes (MDPs). This means that we cannot easily leverage the algorithmic ideas in prior work to
guide or improve how we perform RLHF in practice.
In addition to maximizing reward, another important metric in RLHF is the query complexity since
human feedback is expensive to collect. To illustrate, we note that InstructGPTвҖҷs training data com-
prises a mere 30K instances of human feedback (Ouyang et al., 2022), which is significantly fewer


                                                  1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


than the internet-scale dataset for training the GPT-3 base model. This underscores the challenge
of scaling up the size of human feedback datasets. Ross et al. (2013); Laskey et al. (2016) also
pointed out that extensively querying for feedback puts too much burden on human experts. Empir-
ically, Lightman et al. (2023) observes that active learning reduces query complexity and improves
the learned reward model. In theory, query complexity is mostly studied in the settings of active
learning, online learning, and bandits (Cesa-Bianchi et al., 2005; Dekel et al., 2012; Agarwal, 2013;
Hanneke & Yang, 2021; Zhu & Nowak, 2022; Sekhari et al., 2023a;b), but overlooked in RL.
In this work, we aim to design new RL algorithms that can learn from preference-based feedback
and can be efficient in statistical complexity (i.e., regret), computational complexity, and query
complexity. In particular, we strike a near-optimal balance between regret minimization and query
complexity minimization. To achieve this goal, our key idea is to use randomization in algorithm
design. We summarize our new algorithmic ideas and key contributions as follows.

1. For MDPs with linear structure (i.e., linear MDP (Jin et al., 2020)), we propose the first RL
   algorithm that achieves sublinear worst-case regret and computational efficiency simultaneously
   with preference-based feedback. Even when reduced to tabular MDPs, it is still the first to
   achieve a no-regret guarantee and computational efficiency. Moreover, it has an active learning
   procedure and attains a near-optimal tradeoff between the regret and the query complexity. Our
   algorithm adds random Gaussian noises to the learned state-action-wise reward model and the
   least-squares value iteration (LSVI) procedure. Using random noise instead of the UCB-style
   technique (Azar et al., 2017) preserves the Markovian property in the reward model and allows
   one to use dynamic programming to achieve computation efficiency.
2. For function approximation beyond linear, we present a model-based Thompson-sampling (TS)
   algorithm that forms posterior distributions over the transitions and reward models. Assuming
   the transition and the reward model class both have small в„“1 -norm eluder dimension вҖ“ a structural
   condition introduced in Liu et al. (2022a) that is more general than the common в„“2 -norm eluder
   dimension (Russo & Van Roy, 2013), we show that our algorithm again achieves a near-optimal
   tradeoff between the Bayesian regret and the Bayesian query complexity. Computation-wise,
   similar to previous TS algorithms for regular RL (e.g., Osband et al. (2013)), the primary com-
   putation primitives are Bayesian supervised learning oracles for transition and reward learning.
3. Our query conditions for both algorithms are based on variance-style uncertainty quantification
   of the preference induced by the randomness of the reward model. We query for preference feed-
   back only when the uncertainty of the preference on a pair of trajectories is large. Approximately
   computing the uncertainty can be easily done using i.i.d. random reward models drawn from the
   reward model distribution, which makes the active query procedure computationally tractable.

Overall, while our main contribution is on the theoretical side, our theoretical investigation provides
several new practical insights. For instance, for regret minimization, our algorithms propose to draw
a pair of trajectories with one from the latest policy and the other from an older policy instead of
drawing two trajectories from the same policy (e.g., Christiano et al. (2017)), avoiding the situation
of drawing two similar trajectories when the policy becomes more and more deterministic. Our
theory shows that drawing two trajectories from a combination of new and older policies balances
exploration and exploitation better. Another practical insight is the variance-style uncertainty
measure for designing the query condition. Compared to more standard active learning procedure
that relies on constructing version space and confidence intervals (Dekel et al., 2012; Puchkin &
Zhivotovskiy, 2021; Zhu & Nowak, 2022; Sekhari et al., 2023a;b), our new approach comes with
strong theoretical guarantees and is more computationally tractable. It is also amenable to existing
implementations of Thompson sampling RL algorithms (e.g., using bootstrapping to approximate
the posterior sampling (Osband et al., 2016a; 2023)).

2   C OMPARISON TO PRIOR WORK
RL with preference-based feedback. Many recent works have obtained statistically efficient algo-
rithms but are computationally inefficient even for tabular MDPs due to intractable policy search and
version space construction (Chen et al., 2022; Zhan et al., 2023a;b; Saha et al., 2023). For example,
Zhan et al. (2023b); Saha et al. (2023) use the idea from optimal design and rely on the computation
oracle: arg maxПҖ,ПҖвҖІ вҲҲО  вҲҘEs,aвҲјПҖ П•(s, a) вҲ’ Es,aвҲјПҖвҖІ П•(s, a)вҲҘA with some positive definite matrix A.


                                                  2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Here вҲҘxвҲҘ2A := xвҠӨ Ax, and П• is some state-action feature.1 It is unclear how to implement this ora-
cle since standard planning approaches based on dynamic programming cannot be applied here. In
addition, these methods also actively maintain a policy space by eliminating potentially sub-optimal
policies. The policy class can be exponentially large even in tabular settings, so how to maintain it
computationally efficiently is unclear. We provide a more detailed discussion on the challenges in
achieving computational efficiency in RLHF in Appendix A.
While the work mentioned above is intractable even for tabular MDPs, there are some other works
that could be computationally efficient but have weaker statistical results. For instance, very recently,
Wang et al. (2023) proposed a reduction framework that can be computationally efficient (depending
on the base algorithm used in the reduction). However, their algorithms have PAC bounds while we
focus on regret minimization. Moreover, we achieve a near-optimal balance between regret and
query complexity. Novoseller et al. (2020) proposed a posterior sampling algorithm for tabular
MDP but their analysis is asymptotic (i.e., they do not address exploration, exploitation, and query
complexity tradeoff). Xu et al. (2020) proposed efficient algorithms that do reward-free exploration.
However, it is limited to tabular MDPs and PAC bounds.
In contrast to the above works, our algorithms aim to achieve efficiency in statistical, computa-
tional, and query complexities simultaneously. Our algorithms leverage randomization to balance
exploration, exploitation, and feedback query. Randomization allows us to avoid non-standard
computational oracles and only use standard Dynamic Programming (DP) based oracles (e.g.,
value iteration), which makes our algorithm computationally more tractable. Prior works that
simultaneously achieve efficiency in all three aspects are often restricted in the bandit and imitation
learning settings where the exploration problem is much easier (Sekhari et al., 2023a).
RL via randomization. There are two lines of work that study RL via randomization. The first
injects random noise into the learning object to encourage exploration. A typical example is the
randomized least-squares value iteration (RLSVI) (Osband et al., 2016b), which adds Gaussian noise
into the least-squares estimation and achieves near-optimal worst-case regret (Zanette et al., 2020;
Agrawal et al., 2021) for linear MDPs. The other line of work is Bayesian RL and uses Thompson
sampling (TS) (Osband et al., 2013; Osband & Van Roy, 2014b;a; Gopalan & Mannor, 2015;
Agrawal & Jia, 2017; Efroni et al., 2021; Zhong et al., 2022; Agarwal & Zhang, 2022). They
achieve provable Bayesian regret upper bound by maintaining posterior distributions over models.
Active learning. Numerous studies have studied active learning across various settings (Cesa-
Bianchi et al., 2005; Dekel et al., 2012; Agarwal, 2013; Hanneke & Yang, 2015; 2021; Zhu &
Nowak, 2022; Sekhari et al., 2023b;a). However, most of them focus on the bandits and online
learning settings, and their active learning procedures are usually computationally intractable due to
computing version spaces or upper and lower confidence bounds. In contrast, we design a variance-
style uncertainty quantification for our query condition, which can be easily estimated by random
samples of reward model. This makes our active learning procedure more computationally tractable.

3    P RELIMINARY
Notations. For two real numbers a and b, we denote [a, b] := {x : a вүӨ x вүӨ b}. For an integer N ,
we denote [N ] := {1, 2, . . . , N }. For a set S, we denote вҲҶ(S) as the set of distributions over S. Let
dTV (В·, В·) denote the total variation distance.
We consider a finite-horizon Markov decision process (MDP), which is a tuple M (S, A, rвӢҶ , P вӢҶ , H)
where S is the state space, A is the action space, P вӢҶ : S Г— A вҶ’ вҲҶ(S) is the transition kernel,
rвӢҶ : S Г— A вҶ’ [0, 1] is the reward function, and H is the length of the episode. The interaction
proceeds for T rounds. At each round t вҲҲ [T ], we need to select two policies ПҖt0 and ПҖt1 and execute
them separately, which generates two trajectories П„t0 and П„t1 where П„ti = (sit,1 , ait,1 , . . . , sit,H , ait,H )
for i вҲҲ {0, 1}. For the ease of notation, we assume a fixed initial state s1 . Then, we need to decide
whether to make a query for the preference between П„t0 and П„t1 . If making a query, we obtain a
preference feedback ot вҲҲ {0, 1} that is sampled from the Bernoulli distribution:
          Pr(ot = 1 | П„t1 , П„t0 , rвӢҶ ) = Pr(П„t1 is preferred to П„t0 | rвӢҶ ) = ОҰ rвӢҶ (П„t1 ) вҲ’ rвӢҶ (П„t0 )


    1
      These works typically assume trajectory-wise feature П•(П„ ) for a trajectory П„ . However, even when speci-
fied to state-action-wise features, these algorithms are still computationally intractable, even in tabular MDPs.


                                                        3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                   PH
where rвӢҶ (П„ti ) = h=1 rвӢҶ (sit,h , ait,h ) for i вҲҲ {0, 1} is the trajectory reward, and ОҰ : R вҶ’ [0, 1] is a
monotonically increasing link function. We note that, by symmetry, we have ОҰ(rвӢҶ (П„t0 ) вҲ’ rвӢҶ (П„t1 )) +
ОҰ(rвӢҶ (П„t1 ) вҲ’ rвӢҶ (П„t0 )) = 1. If not making a query, we receive no feedback.
This feedback model is weaker than the standard RL where the per-step reward signal is revealed.
We impose the following assumption on the link function ОҰ, which has appeared in many existing
works of RLHF (Saha et al., 2023; Zhu et al., 2023; Zhan et al., 2023a).
Assumption 3.1. We assume ОҰ is differentiable and there exists constants Оә, Оә > 0 such that ОәвҲ’1 вүӨ
ОҰвҖІ (x) вүӨ ОәвҲ’1 for any x вҲҲ [вҲ’H, H].
The constants Оә and Оә characterize the non-linearity of ОҰ and determine the difficulty of estimating
the reward from preference feedback. It is noteworthy that, in the theoretical results of our algo-
rithms, the bounds depend polynomially on Оә but logarithmically on Оә. Some typical examples of
the link functions are provided below.
Example 3.2 (Link functions). It is common to have ОҰ(x) = 1/(1 + exp(вҲ’x)), which recovers the
Bradley-Terry-Luce (BTL) model (Bradley & Terry, 1952), and we have Оә = 2+exp(вҲ’H)+exp(H)
and Оә = 4. Additionally, if the trajectory-wise reward is scaled within the interval of [0, 1], then the
difference in reward will be within the range of [вҲ’1, 1]. In this case, another common choice of the
link function is ОҰ(x) = (x + 1)/2, which results in Оә = Оә = 2.
The goal is to minimize the worst-case regret and the query complexity simultaneously:
                         T                                                      T
                        X                    0            1                     X
            RegretT :=       2V вӢҶ (s1 ) вҲ’ V ПҖt (s1 ) вҲ’ V ПҖt (s1 ) , QueriesT :=   Zt .
                          t=1                                                          t=1
        ПҖ
                      PH        вӢҶ
Here V (s1 ) := EПҖ [ h=1 r (sh , ah )] denotes the state-value function of policy ПҖ, and we define
                вӢҶ
V вӢҶ (s1 ) := V ПҖ (s1 ) where ПҖ вӢҶ is the optimal policy that maximizes the state-value function. The
variable Zt вҲҲ {0, 1} indicates whether a query is made at round t. Note that the regret looks at the
sum of the performance gaps between two pairs of policies: (ПҖ вӢҶ , ПҖt0 ) and (ПҖ вӢҶ , ПҖt1 ). This is standard
in dueling bandits (Yue & Joachims, 2011; Yue et al., 2012; DudДұМҒk et al., 2015; Bengs et al., 2022;
Wu et al., 2023b) and RL with preference-based feedback (Saha et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2022).
Bayesian RL. We also consider Bayesian RL in this work when learning with general function
approximation. In the Bayesian setting, P вӢҶ and rвӢҶ are sampled from some known prior distributions
ПҒP and ПҒr . The goal is to minimize the Bayesian regret and the Bayesian query complexity:
                       " T                                     #                      " T      #
                         X
                                           ПҖt0         ПҖt1
                                                                                        X
                                вӢҶ
 BayesRegretT := E            2V (s1 ) вҲ’ V (s1 ) вҲ’ V (s1 ) , BayesQueriesT := E             Zt .
                         t=1                                                                     t=1
Here the expectation is taken with respect to the prior distribution over P вӢҶ and rвӢҶ . We will use
Bayesian supervised learning oracles to compute posteriors over the transition and reward model.

4     A MODEL - FREE RANDOMIZED ALGORITHM FOR LINEAR MDP S
In this section, we present a model-free algorithm for linear MDPs which is defined as follows.
Assumption 4.1 (Linear MDP (Jin et al., 2020)). We assume a known feature map П• : S Г— A вҶ’
Rd , an unknown (signed) measure Вө : S вҶ’ Rd , and an unknown vector ОёrвӢҶ such that for any
(s, a) вҲҲ S Г— A, we have P вӢҶ (sвҖІ | s, a) R= П•вҠӨ (s, a) В· Вө(sвҖІ вҲҡ  ) and rвӢҶ (s, a) = П•вҠӨ (s, a) В· ОёrвӢҶ . We assume
вҲҘП•(s, a)вҲҘ2 вүӨ 1 for all (s, a) вҲҲ S Г—A, S вҲҘВө(s)вҲҘ2 ds вүӨ d, and вҲҘОёrвӢҶ вҲҘ2 вүӨ B for some B > 0. For a
                                                              PH
trajectory П„ = (s1 , a1 , . . . , sH , aH ), we define П•(П„ ) = h=1 П•(sh , ah ) and assume вҲҘП•(П„ )вҲҘ2 вүӨ 1.
Linear MDPs can capture tabular MDPs by setting d = |S||A| and П•(s, a) to be the one-hot encoding
of (s, a). In this case, we have вҲҘП•(П„ )вҲҘ2 вүӨ H. However, we can scale it down to get вҲҘП•(П„ )вҲҘ2 вүӨ 1 at
the expense of scaling B up by H. We define ОҳB = {Оё вҲҲ Rd : вҲҘОёвҲҘ2 вүӨ B}, which contains ОёrвӢҶ .

4.1   A LGORITHM

The algorithm, called PR-LSVI, is presented in Algorithm 1. At the beginning of episode k, it first
computes the maximum likelihood estimate Оёbr,t (Line 3). Computation-wise, while the likelihood


                                                     4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


objective is not guaranteed to be concave due to the generality of ОҰ, efficient algorithms exist in
certain common scenarios. For example, if ОҰ(x) = 1/(1 + exp(вҲ’x)), it recovers the BTL model
(Example 3.2). In this case, the MLE objective is concave in Оё and thus can be solved in polynomial
running time. Moreover, we emphasize that the reward is learned under trajectory-wise features,
which is different from the standard RL setting where it is learned under state-action features.
Given the MLE Оёbr,t , it next samples Оёr,t from a Gaussian distribution centered at Оёbr,t (Line 4). Note
that the covariance matrix ОЈвҲ’1 tвҲ’1 uses trajectory-wise features (Line 16) which allows the random-
ized Gaussian vector to capture trajectory-wise uncertainty of the learned reward. The noise aims
to encourage exploration. Then, it computes the least-squares estimate of the state-action value
function ОёbP,t,h for each h вҲҲ [H] and samples ОёP,t,h from a Gaussian distribution centered at ОёbP,t,h
(Lines 7-8). Similar to the reward model, the noise is added to the state-value function to encourage
exploration. We then define the value function Qt,h and V t,h as
               Qt,h (s, a) := П•(s, a)вҠӨ Оёr,t + Пүt,h (s, a),       V t,h (s) := max Qt,h (s, a)             (1)
                                                                               a

and the function Пү : S Г— A вҶ’ R is defined as
                П•(s, a)вҠӨ ОёP,t,h
              пЈұ
              пЈҙ                                               if вҲҘП•(s, a)вҲҘОЈвҲ’1 вүӨ ОұL
              пЈҙ
              пЈІ                                                            tвҲ’1,h

 Пүt,h (s, a) = ПҒ(s, a) П•(s, a)вҠӨ ОёP,t,h + (1 вҲ’ ПҒ(s, a))(H вҲ’ h) if ОұL < вҲҘП•(s, a)вҲҘОЈвҲ’1 вүӨ ОұU
              пЈҙ                                                                  tвҲ’1,h
              пЈіH вҲ’ h
              пЈҙ
                                                              if вҲҘП•(s, a)вҲҘОЈвҲ’1 > ОұU
                                                                                         tвҲ’1,h

where ПҒ(s, a) = (ОұU вҲ’ вҲҘП•(s, a)вҲҘОЈвҲ’1 )/(ОұU вҲ’ ОұL ) interpolates between the two regimes to en-
                                    tвҲ’1,h
sure continuity. This truncation trick is from Zanette et al. (2020) and is crucial. It controls the
abnormally high value estimates. Specifically, when вҲҘП•(s, a)вҲҘОЈвҲ’1 is large, the uncertainty in the
                                                                      tвҲ’1,h

direction of П•(s, a) is large, which makes the estimate П•(s, a)вҠӨ ОёP,t,h abnormally large. In this case,
we have to truncate it to H вҲ’ h. Moreover, we note that the usual вҖңvalue clippingвҖқ trick (i.e., simply
constraining the value function within the range of [0, H вҲ’ h + 1] by clipping) cannot easily work
here since it introduces bias to the random walk analysis, also pointed out by Zanette et al. (2020).
Then, the algorithm computes the greedy policy ПҖt0 with respect to Qt,h . The comparator policy ПҖt1 is
                                                                 0
simply set to the greedy policy from the previous episode, ПҖtвҲ’1       . In other words, we are comparing
the two most recent greedy policies. This is different from previous work, which compares the
current greedy policy with a fixed comparator (Wang et al., 2023). Analytically, for our algorithm,
the cumulative regret incurred by ПҖt1 for all t вҲҲ [T ] is equivalent to that incurred by ПҖt0 for all t вҲҲ [T ].
Hence, it suffices to compute the regret for one of them and multiply it by two to get the total regret.
Given the trajectories П„t0 and П„t1 generated by ПҖt0 and ПҖt1 , we compute the expected absolute reward
difference between the trajectories under the same noisy distribution of the reward parameter:
                                             h                                i
                                   E           (П•(П„t0 ) вҲ’ П•(П„t1 ))вҠӨ (Оё0 вҲ’ Оё1 ) .                  (2)
                         Оё0 ,Оё1 вҲјN (Оёbr,t ,Пғr2 ОЈвҲ’1
                                                tвҲ’1 )

This represents the uncertainty of the preference between the two trajectories, and we make a
query only when it is larger than a threshold Пө (Line 13). Intuitively, we only make a query on
two trajectories when we are uncertain about the preference (e.g., the expected disagreement
between two randomly sampled reward models is large). Computationally, we can estimate this
expectation by drawing polynomially many reward models from the distribution N (Оёbr,t , Пғr2 ОЈвҲ’1tвҲ’1 )
and computing the empirical average. The deviation of the empirical average to the true mean
can be easily bounded by standard concentration inequalities. We simply use expectation here for
analytical simplicity. If the query condition is triggered, we make a query for feedback on П„t0 , П„t1 ,
and update the trajectory-wise feature covariance matrix accordingly.

4.2   A NALYSIS

The theoretical results of Algorithm 1 are stated in Theorem 4.2. The detailed assignment of hyper-
parameters can be found in Table 1, and the proof is provided in Appendix B.
                             вҲҡ
Theorem 4.2. DefineвҲҡ    Оі = Оә + B 2 , which characterizes the difficulty of estimating the reward
model. Set Пғr = Оҳ(Оіe                e 3/2 d2 Оі), ОұU = (d5/2 H 3/2 Оі)вҲ’1 , ОұL = ОұU /2, and О» = 1.
                         d), ПғP = Оҳ(H


                                                        5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 1 Preference-based and Randomized Least-Squares Value Iteration (PR-LSVI)
Require: STD Пғr , ПғP , threshold Пө, value cutoff parameters ОұL , ОұU , and regularization parameter О».
 1: Let ПҖ00 be an arbitrary policy, ОЈ0 вҶҗ О»I, ОЈ0,h вҶҗ О»I (вҲҖh вҲҲ [H]).
 2: for t = 1, . . . , T do
                                 PtвҲ’1
 3:   Оёbr,t вҶҗ arg maxОёвҲҲОҳB s=1 Zs ln(os ОҰ((П•(П„s1 )вҲ’П•(П„s0 ))вҠӨ Оё)+(1вҲ’os )ОҰ((П•(П„s0 )вҲ’П•(П„s1 ))вҠӨ Оё))
 4:   Оёr,t вҲј N (Оёbr,t , Пғr2 ОЈвҲ’1
                              tвҲ’1 )
 5:   ОёP,t,H вҶҗ 0, ОёP,t,H вҶҗ 0
       b
 6:   for h = H вҲ’ 1, . . . , 1 do
                                PtвҲ’1
 7:       ОёbP,t,h вҶҗ ОЈвҲ’1 tвҲ’1,h (
                                         0      0              0
                                  i=1 П•(si,h , ai,h )V t,h+1 (si,h+1 ))
                                   2  вҲ’1
 8:       ОёP,t,h вҲј N (ОёbP,t,h , Пғ ОЈ
                              P   tвҲ’1,h    )
 9:      Define Qt,h and V t,h as in (1).
10:   end for
11:   Set ПҖt0 вҶҗ {ПҖt,h
                   0       0
                       : ПҖt,h  (s) = arg maxa Qt,h (s, a), вҲҖs вҲҲ S, h вҲҲ [H]} and ПҖt1 вҶҗ ПҖtвҲ’1
                                                                                       0
                                                                                           .
                0    0         1      1
12:   Sample П„t вҲј ПҖt and П„t вҲј ПҖt .
13:   Zt вҶҗ 1{EОё0 ,Оё1 вҲјN (Оёbr,t ,Пғ2 ОЈвҲ’1 ) [|(П•(П„t0 ) вҲ’ П•(П„t1 ))вҠӨ (Оё0 вҲ’ Оё1 )|] > Пө}
                                 r tвҲ’1
14:   if Zt = 1 then
15:      Query preference feedback ot on {П„t0 , П„t1 }
16:      ОЈt вҶҗ ОЈtвҲ’1 + (П•(П„t0 ) вҲ’ П•(П„t1 ))(П•(П„t0 ) вҲ’ П•(П„t1 ))вҠӨ
17:   else
18:      ОЈt вҶҗ ОЈtвҲ’1
19:   end if
20:   ОЈt,h вҶҗ ОЈtвҲ’1,h + П•(s0t,h , a0t,h )П•вҠӨ (s0t,h , a0t,h ) (вҲҖh вҲҲ [H]).
21: end for


Then, PR-LSVI (Algorithm 1) guarantees the following with probability at least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ:
                           вҲҡ
              e ПөT d1/2 + T В· d3 H 5/2 Оі + d17/2 H 11/2 Оі 3 , QueriesT = O      e d4 Оі 4 /Пө2 .

   RegretT = O

To further study the balance between the regret and the query complexity, we let Пө = T вҲ’ОІ for some
ОІ вүӨ 1/2. Then, the upper bounds in Theorem 4.2 can be rewritten as
                                     e 1вҲ’ОІ ),
                           RegretT = O(T                         e 2ОІ )
                                                      QueriesT = O(T
where we only focus on the dependence on T and omit any other factors for simplicity. We see
that there is a tradeoff in T between the regret and the query complexity вҖ” the smaller regret we
want, the more queries we need to make. For example, when ОІ = 0, the regret is O(T  e ), and the
query complexity is O(1), meaning that we willвҲҡincur linear regret if we donвҖҷt make any query. If
                       e
                                              e T ) while the query complexity increases to O(T
we increase ОІ to 1/2, the regret decreases to O(                                            e ),
meaning that the regret bound is optimal in T but we make queries every episode.
We emphasize that this tradeoff in T is optimal, as evidenced by a lower bound result established by
Sekhari et al. (2023a). Their lower bound was originally proposed for contextual dueling bandits,
which is a special case of our setting. Their results are stated below.
Theorem 4.3. (Sekhari et al., 2023a, Theorem 5) The following вҲҡ     two claims hold: (1) For any algo-
rithm, there exists an instance that leads to RegretT = в„Ұ( T ); (2) For any algorithm achieving an
expected regret upper bound in the form of E[RegretT ] = O(T 1вҲ’ОІ ) for some ОІ > 0, there exists an
instance that results in E[QueriesT ] = в„Ұ(T 2ОІ ).

However, the dependence on other parameters (e.g., d and H) can be loose, and further improvement
may be possible. We leave further investigation of these factors as future work.
Although injecting random noise is inspired by RLSVI (Zanette et al., 2020), we highlight five key
differences between ours and theirs: (1) Since the feedback is trajectory-wise, we need to design ran-
dom noise that preserves the state-action-wise format (so that it can be used in DP) but captures the
trajectory-wise uncertainty. We do this by maintaining ОЈt , which uses trajectory-wise feature differ-
ences; (2) Since the preference feedback is generated from some probabilistic model, we learn the


                                                  6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


reward model via MLE and use MLE generalization bound (Geer, 2000) to capture the uncertainty in
learning. This allows us to use a more general link function ОҰ; (3) We design a new regret decompo-
sition technique to accommodate preference-based feedback. Particularly, we decompose regret to
                                                                      PT                     0      1
characterizes the reward difference between ПҖt0 and ПҖt1 : RegretT вүІ t=1 (V t вҲ’ Vet ) вҲ’ (V ПҖt вҲ’ V ПҖt )
                                  0                       H                                           1
where V t is an estimate of V ПҖt , and Vet := EП„ вҲјПҖt1 [ h=1 П•(sh , ah )вҠӨ Оёr,t ] is an estimate of V ПҖt
                                                       P
under the real transition and the learned reward model. This is different from standard RL (Zanette
et al., 2020), and is necessary since we cannot guarantee the learned reward model will be accurate
in a state-action-wise manner under the preference-based feedback. (4) Our algorithms have a new
randomized active learning procedure for reducing the number of queries, and our analysis achieves
a near-optimal tradeoff between regret and query complexity; (5) In every round t, we propose to
draw a pair of trajectories where one is from the current greedy policy ПҖt0 and the other is from
                                            0
the greedy policy of the previous round, ПҖtвҲ’1  . This ensures ПҖt1 is conditionally independent of the
Gaussian noises at round t, which is the key to optimism (with a constant probability).
Running time. To assess the time complexity of Algorithm 1, assuming finite number of actions2 ,
all steps can be computed in polynomial running time (i.e., polynomial in d, H, A) except the MLE
of the reward model (Line 3), which depends on the link function ОҰ. For the popular BTL model
where ОҰ(x) = 1/(1 + exp(вҲ’x)), the MLE objective is concave with respect to Оё and Оё belongs
to a convex set ОҳB . In this case, we can use any convex programming algorithms for the MLE
procedure (e.g., projected gradient ascent).

5       A MODEL - BASED T HOMPSON SAMPLING ALGORITHM

In this section, we aim to extend to nonlinear function approximation. We do so in a model-based
framework with Thompson sampling (TS). The motivation is that TS is often considered a compu-
tationally more tractable alternative to UCB-style algorithms.

5.1       A LGORITHM

The algorithm, called PbTS, is presented in Algorithm 2. At the beginning of episode k, it computes
the reward model posterior ПҒr,t and the transition model posterior ПҒP,t (Line 3). Then, it samples Pt
and rt from the posteriors and computes the optimal policy ПҖt0 assuming the true reward function
                                                                        ПҖ
is rt and the true model is Pt (Line 5). Here we denote Vr,P              as the state-value function of ПҖ under
reward function r and model P . Note that this oracle is a standard planning oracle. The comparator
policy ПҖt1 is simply set to be the policy from the previous episode, ПҖtвҲ’1         0
                                                                                     , as we did in Algorithm 1.
                                                                      0       1
The two policies then generate respective trajectories П„t and П„t . To decide whether we should
make a query, we compute the uncertainty quantity under the posterior distribution of the reward:
Er,rвҖІ вҲјПҒr,t [|r(П„t0 ) вҲ’ r(П„t1 ) вҲ’ (rвҖІ (П„t0 ) вҲ’ rвҖІ (П„t1 ))|], which is analogous to (2) in Algorithm 1. We make
a query only when it is larger than a threshold Пө. Similar to Algorithm 1, we can approximate this
expectation by sampling polynomial many pairs of r and rвҖІ and then compute the empirical average.

5.2       A NALYSIS

The theoretical results of Algorithm 2 should rely on the complexity of the reward and the transition
model. In our analysis, we employ two complexity measures вҖ” eluder dimension and bracketing
number. We start by introducing a generic notion of в„“p -eluder dimension (Russo & Van Roy, 2013).
Definition 5.1 (в„“p -norm Пө-dependence). Let p > 0. Let X and Y be two sets and d(В·, В·) be a
distance function on Y. Let F вҠҶ X вҶ’ Y be a function class. We say an element x вҲҲ X is в„“p -norm
Пө-dependentPon  {x1 , x2 , . . . , xn } вҠҶ X with respect to F and d if any pair of functions f, f вҖІ вҲҲ F
             n
satisfying i=1 dp (f (xi ), f вҖІ (xi )) вүӨ Пөp also satisfies d(f (x), f вҖІ (x)) вүӨ Пө. Otherwise, we say x is
в„“p -norm Пө-independent of {x1 , x2 , . . . , xn }.
Definition 5.2 (в„“p -norm eluder dimension). The в„“p -norm Пө-eluder dimension of function class F вҠҶ
X вҶ’ Y, denoted by dimp (F, Пө, d), is the length of the longest sequence of elements in X satisfying
that there exists ПөвҖІ вүҘ Пө such that every element in the sequence is в„“p -norm ПөвҖІ -independent of its
predecessors.
    2
        This is to ensure that arg maxa Q(s, a) can be computed efficiently.


                                                         7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 2 Preference-based Thompson Sampling (PbTS)
Require: priors ПҒP and ПҒr , threshold Пө.
 1: Let ПҖ00 be an arbitrary policy.
 2: for t = 1, . . . , T do
 3:   Compute posteriors:
                                      tвҲ’1
                                      YY  H
                ПҒP,t (P ) вҲқ ПҒP (P )             P (s0i,h+1 | s0i,h , a0i,h ),
                                      i=1 h=1
                                     tвҲ’1
                                     Y                                                            Zi
                                           oi ОҰ r(П„i1 ) вҲ’ r(П„i0 ) + (1 вҲ’ oi )ОҰ r(П„i0 ) вҲ’ r(П„i1 )

                 ПҒr,t (r) вҲқ ПҒr (r)                                                                   .
                                     i=1

 4:   Sample Pt вҲј ПҒP,t and rt вҲј ПҒr,t .
 5:   Compute ПҖt0 вҶҗ arg maxПҖ VrПҖt ,Pt (s1 ) and ПҖt1 вҶҗ ПҖtвҲ’1     0
                                                                   .
               0     0       1       1
 6:   Sample П„t вҲј ПҖt and П„t вҲј ПҖt .
 7:   Zt вҶҗ 1{Er,rвҖІ вҲјПҒr,t [|r(П„t0 ) вҲ’ r(П„t1 ) вҲ’ (rвҖІ (П„t0 ) вҲ’ rвҖІ (П„t1 ))|] > Пө}
 8:   if Zt = 1 then
 9:      Query preference feedback ot on {П„t0 , П„t1 }
10:   end if
11: end for


The eluder dimension is non-decreasing in p, i.e., dimp (F, Пө, d) вүӨ dimq (F, Пө, d) for any p вүӨ q. In
the analysis, we will focus on в„“1 - and в„“2 -norm eluder dimension, which have been used in nonlinear
bandits and RL extensively (Wen & Van Roy, 2013; Osband & Van Roy, 2014a; Jain et al., 2015;
Wang et al., 2020; Ayoub et al., 2020; Foster et al., 2021; Ishfaq et al., 2021; Chen et al., 2022;
Liu et al., 2022a; Sekhari et al., 2023a;b). Examples where eluder dimension is small include linear
functions, generalized linear models, and functions in Reproducing Kernel Hilbert Space (RKHS).
The other complexity measure we use is the bracketing number (Van de Geer, 2000).
Definition 5.3 (Bracketing number). Consider a function class F вҠҶ X вҶ’ R. Given two functions
l, u : X вҶ’ R, the bracket [l, u] is defined as the set of functions f вҲҲ F with l(x) вүӨ f (x) вүӨ u(x)
for all x вҲҲ X . It is called an Пү-bracket if вҲҘl вҲ’ uвҲҘ вүӨ Пү. The bracketing number of F w.r.t. the metric
вҲҘ В· вҲҘ, denoted by N[] (Пү, F, вҲҘ В· вҲҘ), is the minimum number of Пү-brackets needed to cover F.
The logarithm of the bracketing number is small in many common scenarios, which has been ex-
tensively examined by previous studies (e.g., Van de Geer (2000)) for deriving MLE generalization
bound (Agarwal et al., 2020; Uehara & Sun, 2021; Liu et al., 2022b; 2023). For example, when F
is finite, the bracketing number is bounded by its size. When F is a d-dimensional linear function
class, the logarithm of the bracketing number is upper bounded by d up to logarithmic factors.
It is worth noting that while we will employ both measures to the model class P, we can not similarly
apply them to the reward class R. Instead, we have to rely on the complexity of the following
function class, which comprises functions mapping pairs of trajectories to reward differences:
                               H
                                                                                                )
                              X
                     0   1           0   0        1    1      i    i    i
    Re := re : re(П„ , П„ ) =      r(sh , ah ) вҲ’ r(sh , ah ), вҲҖП„ = {sh , ah }h , i вҲҲ {0, 1}, r вҲҲ R . (3)
                              h=1

We have to use R e instead of R because we only receive preference feedback, and thus we cannot
guarantee that the learned reward model is accurate state-action-wise. Now we are ready to state our
main results. The proofs are provided in Appendix C.
Theorem 5.4. PbTS (Algorithm 2) guarantees that
                                                     p                               p
                                 2
  BayesRegretT = O T Пө + H В· dim1 P, 1/T В· T В· О№P + Оә В· dim1 R, 1/T В· T В· О№R ,
                       e                                                     e
                                вҲҡ                            Оә2 В· О№
                                Оә T В· О№R
                                                                    R

 BayesQueriesT = O min e                   В· dim1 R, Пө/2 ,
                                                    e                 В· dim2 R, Пө/2
                                                                               e
                                    Пө                            Пө2
where we denote О№P := log(N[] ((HT |S|)вҲ’1 , P, вҲҘ В· вҲҘвҲһ )) and О№R := log(N[] (Оә(2T )вҲ’1 , R,
                                                                                       e вҲҘ В· вҲҘвҲһ )).


                                                           8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Similar to the analysis of Algorithm 1, we study the balance between the Bayesian regret and the
query complexity by setting Пө = T вҲ’ОІ for some ОІ вүӨ 1/2. Then, we can simplify the bounds into
BayesRegretT = O(T e 1вҲ’ОІ ) and

                                          ОІ+ 21                  2ОІ
          BayesQueriesT = O min T
                             e                  В· dim1 R, Пө/2 , T В· dim2 R, Пө/2
                                                         e                  e
                                        |           {z       } |        {z       }
                                                        (i)                   (ii)
where we have hidden factors except T and the eluder dimension for brevity. We see that there is
again a tradeoff in T between the Bayesian regret and the query complexity, similar to the one in
Theorem 4.2. Term (ii) demonstrates that the tradeoff in T is again optimal, evidenced by the lower
bound (Theorem 4.3). Moreover, term (i) further improves the dependence on the eluder dimension
(recalling that в„“1 -norm version is smaller than the в„“2 -norm version). However, the T -dependence is
                                                                             e 2ОІ В· dim1 (R,
worse. It is desired to derive a query complexity upper bound that scales as O(T             e Пө/2)),
attaining the favorable dependence on both T and the eluder dimension. We leave it as future work.
We emphasize that the Bayesian regret analysis in Theorem 5.4 is not a simple extension of pre-
vious TS works. We highlight four main differences: (1) The feedback is preference-based, which
necessitates a new Bayesian regret decomposition:
                    T    h 0                    T
                                      ПҖt0
                                                   h  0
                                                                  ПҖ1
                                                                             0
                                                                                         ПҖ1
                                             i X                                                i
                             ПҖt                        ПҖ                      ПҖ
                    X
 BayesRegretT =           V
                       E rt ,Pt  вҲ’  Vrt ,P вӢҶ  +   E Vrt t,P вӢҶ вҲ’ Vrt t,P вӢҶ вҲ’ VrвӢҶt,P вӢҶ вҲ’ VrвӢҶt,P вӢҶ .
                    t=0                         t=0
                    |          {z           }   |                        {z                        }
                              Tmodel                                   Treward
Here Tmodel and Treward are the respective regret incurred due to model and reward misspecification.
We highlight that Treward characterizes the misspecification in terms of the reward difference be-
tween ПҖt0 and ПҖt1 , which is different from the standard Bayesian RL. (2) Unlike prior works (Russo
& Van Roy, 2014), we do not rely on upper confidence bounds (UCB) or optimism. Instead, we
construct version spaces by classic MLE generalization bound. Taking the reward learning as an
example, given the preference data {П„i0 , П„i1 , oi }tвҲ’1
                                                    i=1 , we construct the version space at round t as
                      (            tвҲ’1
                                                                                           )
                                   X
                                         2             1 0                 1 0

                Vt = r вҲҲ R :           dTV Pr(В· | П„i , П„i , rbt ), Pr(В· | П„i , П„i , r) вүӨ ОІ
                                  i=1
                            PtвҲ’1
where rbt := arg maxr log i=1 Pr(oi | П„i1 , П„i0 , r) is the MLE from the preference data and ОІ is
tuned appropriately to ensure rвӢҶ вҲҲ Vt with high probability. We then show the posterior probability
of rt and rвӢҶ not belonging to Vt is small. (3) Our analysis uses the tighter в„“1 -norm eluder dimension,
which is strictly better than the в„“2 -norm eluder dimension used in prior work. (4) We also equipped
it with a randomized active learning procedure for query complexity minimization.
Computation. The computational bottleneck of Algorithm 2 lies in the computation of the posterior
distribution (Line 3). Prior TS works have used Bootstrapping to approximate posterior sampling
(Osband et al., 2016a; 2023) and achieved competitive performance in common RL benchmarks.
Non-Markovian reward. Algorithm 2 can also be applied to non-Markovian reward (i.e., reward
model is trajectory-wise) without any change. Here we consider Markovian reward for the consis-
tency with Algorithm 1 and for the purpose of using a standard planning oracle for computing an
optimal policy from a reward and transition model. While non-Markovian reward is more general, it
is unclear how to solve the planning problem efficiently even in tabular MDPs. This computational
intractability makes non-Markovian rewards not easily applicable in practice.
Extension to SEC. In Appendix C.4, we extend the eluder dimension in Theorem 5.4 to the Se-
quential Extrapolation Coefficient (SEC) (Xie et al., 2022), which is more general.

6   C ONCLUSION
We use randomization to design algorithms for RL with preference-based feedback. Randomization
allows us to minimize regret and query complexity while at the same time maintaining computation
efficiency. For linear models, our algorithms achieve a near-optimal balance between the worst-case
reward regret and query complexity with computational efficiency. For models beyond linear, using
eluder dimension, we present a TS-inspired algorithm that balances Bayesian regret and Bayesian
query complexity nearly optimally.


                                                    9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Both RW and WS acknowledge support from NSF IIS-2154711, NSF CAREER 2339395, and Cor-
nell Infosys Collaboration.

R EFERENCES
Yasin Abbasi-Yadkori, DaМҒvid PaМҒl, and Csaba SzepesvaМҒri. Improved algorithms for linear stochastic
  bandits. Advances in neural information processing systems, 24, 2011.
Marc Abeille and Alessandro Lazaric. Linear thompson sampling revisited. In Artificial Intelligence
 and Statistics, pp. 176вҖ“184. PMLR, 2017.
Alekh Agarwal. Selective sampling algorithms for cost-sensitive multiclass prediction. In Interna-
  tional Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 1220вҖ“1228. PMLR, 2013.
Alekh Agarwal and Tong Zhang. Model-based rl with optimistic posterior sampling: Structural
  conditions and sample complexity. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:
  35284вҖ“35297, 2022.
Alekh Agarwal, Sham Kakade, Akshay Krishnamurthy, and Wen Sun. Flambe: Structural com-
  plexity and representation learning of low rank mdps. Advances in neural information processing
  systems, 33:20095вҖ“20107, 2020.
Priyank Agrawal, Jinglin Chen, and Nan Jiang. Improved worst-case regret bounds for randomized
  least-squares value iteration. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
  volume 35, pp. 6566вҖ“6573, 2021.
Shipra Agrawal and Randy Jia. Optimistic posterior sampling for reinforcement learning: worst-
  case regret bounds. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 30, 2017.
Alex Ayoub, Zeyu Jia, Csaba Szepesvari, Mengdi Wang, and Lin Yang. Model-based reinforcement
  learning with value-targeted regression. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
  463вҖ“474. PMLR, 2020.
Mohammad Gheshlaghi Azar, Ian Osband, and ReМҒmi Munos. Minimax regret bounds for reinforce-
 ment learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 263вҖ“272. PMLR, 2017.
Viktor Bengs, Aadirupa Saha, and Eyke HuМҲllermeier. Stochastic contextual dueling bandits under
  linear stochastic transitivity models. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 1764вҖ“
  1786. PMLR, 2022.
Ralph Allan Bradley and Milton E Terry. Rank analysis of incomplete block designs: I. the method
  of paired comparisons. Biometrika, 39(3/4):324вҖ“345, 1952.
Nicolo Cesa-Bianchi, GaМҒbor Lugosi, and Gilles Stoltz. Minimizing regret with label efficient pre-
  diction. IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 51(6):2152вҖ“2162, 2005.
Niladri Chatterji, Aldo Pacchiano, Peter Bartlett, and Michael Jordan. On the theory of reinforce-
  ment learning with once-per-episode feedback. Advances in Neural Information Processing Sys-
  tems, 34:3401вҖ“3412, 2021.
Xiaoyu Chen, Han Zhong, Zhuoran Yang, Zhaoran Wang, and Liwei Wang. Human-in-the-loop:
  Provably efficient preference-based reinforcement learning with general function approximation.
  In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 3773вҖ“3793. PMLR, 2022.
Paul F Christiano, Jan Leike, Tom Brown, Miljan Martic, Shane Legg, and Dario Amodei. Deep
  reinforcement learning from human preferences. Advances in neural information processing sys-
  tems, 30, 2017.
Ofer Dekel, Claudio Gentile, and Karthik Sridharan. Selective sampling and active learning from
  single and multiple experts. The Journal of Machine Learning Research, 13(1):2655вҖ“2697, 2012.

                                                10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Simon Du, Sham Kakade, Jason Lee, Shachar Lovett, Gaurav Mahajan, Wen Sun, and Ruosong
  Wang. Bilinear classes: A structural framework for provable generalization in rl. In International
  Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 2826вҖ“2836. PMLR, 2021.
Miroslav DudДұМҒk, Katja Hofmann, Robert E Schapire, Aleksandrs Slivkins, and Masrour Zoghi. Con-
 textual dueling bandits. In Conference on Learning Theory, pp. 563вҖ“587. PMLR, 2015.
Yonathan Efroni, Nadav Merlis, and Shie Mannor. Reinforcement learning with trajectory feedback.
  In Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence, volume 35, pp. 7288вҖ“7295, 2021.
Dylan Foster, Alexander Rakhlin, David Simchi-Levi, and Yunzong Xu. Instance-dependent com-
  plexity of contextual bandits and reinforcement learning: A disagreement-based perspective. In
  Conference on Learning Theory, pp. 2059вҖ“2059. PMLR, 2021.
Sara A Geer. Empirical Processes in M-estimation, volume 6. Cambridge university press, 2000.
Aditya Gopalan and Shie Mannor. Thompson sampling for learning parameterized markov decision
  processes. In Conference on Learning Theory, pp. 861вҖ“898. PMLR, 2015.
Steve Hanneke and Liu Yang. Minimax analysis of active learning. J. Mach. Learn. Res., 16(1):
  3487вҖ“3602, 2015.
Steve Hanneke and Liu Yang. Toward a general theory of online selective sampling: Trading off
  mistakes and queries. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp.
  3997вҖ“4005. PMLR, 2021.
Haque Ishfaq, Qiwen Cui, Viet Nguyen, Alex Ayoub, Zhuoran Yang, Zhaoran Wang, Doina Precup,
  and Lin Yang. Randomized exploration in reinforcement learning with general value function
  approximation. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 4607вҖ“4616. PMLR, 2021.
Ashesh Jain, Brian Wojcik, Thorsten Joachims, and Ashutosh Saxena. Learning trajectory pref-
  erences for manipulators via iterative improvement. Advances in neural information processing
  systems, 26, 2013.
Ashesh Jain, Shikhar Sharma, Thorsten Joachims, and Ashutosh Saxena. Learning preferences
  for manipulation tasks from online coactive feedback. The International Journal of Robotics
  Research, 34(10):1296вҖ“1313, 2015.
Chi Jin, Zhuoran Yang, Zhaoran Wang, and Michael I Jordan. Provably efficient reinforcement
  learning with linear function approximation. In Conference on Learning Theory, pp. 2137вҖ“2143.
  PMLR, 2020.
Chi Jin, Qinghua Liu, and Sobhan Miryoosefi. Bellman eluder dimension: New rich classes of rl
  problems, and sample-efficient algorithms. Advances in neural information processing systems,
  34:13406вҖ“13418, 2021.
Michael Laskey, Sam Staszak, Wesley Yu-Shu Hsieh, Jeffrey Mahler, Florian T Pokorny, Anca D
 Dragan, and Ken Goldberg. Shiv: Reducing supervisor burden in dagger using support vectors
 for efficient learning from demonstrations in high dimensional state spaces. In 2016 IEEE Inter-
 national Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pp. 462вҖ“469. IEEE, 2016.
Hunter Lightman, Vineet Kosaraju, Yuri Burda, Harrison Edwards, Bowen Baker, Teddy Lee, Jan
  Leike, John Schulman, Ilya Sutskever, and Karl Cobbe. LetвҖҷs verify step by step. In The Twelfth
  International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023.
Qinghua Liu, Alan Chung, Csaba SzepesvaМҒri, and Chi Jin. When is partially observable reinforce-
  ment learning not scary? In Conference on Learning Theory, pp. 5175вҖ“5220. PMLR, 2022a.
Qinghua Liu, Csaba SzepesvaМҒri, and Chi Jin. Sample-efficient reinforcement learning of partially ob-
  servable markov games. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:18296вҖ“18308,
  2022b.
Qinghua Liu, Praneeth Netrapalli, Csaba Szepesvari, and Chi Jin. Optimistic mle: A generic model-
  based algorithm for partially observable sequential decision making. In Proceedings of the 55th
  Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, pp. 363вҖ“376, 2023.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Ellen Novoseller, Yibing Wei, Yanan Sui, Yisong Yue, and Joel Burdick. Dueling posterior sam-
  pling for preference-based reinforcement learning. In Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial
  Intelligence, pp. 1029вҖ“1038. PMLR, 2020.
Ian Osband and Benjamin Van Roy. Model-based reinforcement learning and the eluder dimension.
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 27, 2014a.
Ian Osband and Benjamin Van Roy. Near-optimal reinforcement learning in factored mdps. Ad-
  vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 27, 2014b.
Ian Osband, Daniel Russo, and Benjamin Van Roy. (more) efficient reinforcement learning via
  posterior sampling. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 26, 2013.
Ian Osband, Charles Blundell, Alexander Pritzel, and Benjamin Van Roy. Deep exploration via
  bootstrapped dqn. Advances in neural information processing systems, 29, 2016a.
Ian Osband, Benjamin Van Roy, and Zheng Wen. Generalization and exploration via random-
  ized value functions. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 2377вҖ“2386. PMLR,
  2016b.
Ian Osband, Zheng Wen, Seyed Mohammad Asghari, Vikranth Dwaracherla, Morteza Ibrahimi,
  Xiuyuan Lu, and Benjamin Van Roy. Approximate thompson sampling via epistemic neural
  networks. In Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, pp. 1586вҖ“1595. PMLR, 2023.
Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong
  Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, et al. Training language models to follow
  instructions with human feedback. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:
  27730вҖ“27744, 2022.
David Pollard. Empirical processes: theory and applications. Ims, 1990.
Nikita Puchkin and Nikita Zhivotovskiy. Exponential savings in agnostic active learning through
  abstention. In Conference on Learning Theory, pp. 3806вҖ“3832. PMLR, 2021.
SteМҒphane Ross, Narek Melik-Barkhudarov, Kumar Shaurya Shankar, Andreas Wendel, Debadeepta
   Dey, J Andrew Bagnell, and Martial Hebert. Learning monocular reactive uav control in cluttered
   natural environments. In 2013 IEEE international conference on robotics and automation, pp.
   1765вҖ“1772. IEEE, 2013.
Daniel Russo and Benjamin Van Roy. Eluder dimension and the sample complexity of optimistic
  exploration. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 26, 2013.
Daniel Russo and Benjamin Van Roy. Learning to optimize via posterior sampling. Mathematics of
  Operations Research, 39(4):1221вҖ“1243, 2014.
Aadirupa Saha, Aldo Pacchiano, and Jonathan Lee. Dueling rl: Reinforcement learning with trajec-
  tory preferences. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 6263вҖ“
  6289. PMLR, 2023.
John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy
  optimization algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347, 2017.
Ayush Sekhari, Karthik Sridharan, Wen Sun, and Runzhe Wu. Contextual bandits and imitation
  learning with preference-based active queries. Advances in Neural Information Processing Sys-
  tems, 36, 2023a.
Ayush Sekhari, Karthik Sridharan, Wen Sun, and Runzhe Wu. Selective sampling and imitation
  learning via online regression. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2023b.
Nisan Stiennon, Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Daniel Ziegler, Ryan Lowe, Chelsea Voss, Alec Radford,
  Dario Amodei, and Paul F Christiano. Learning to summarize with human feedback. Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:3008вҖ“3021, 2020.
Masatoshi Uehara and Wen Sun. Pessimistic model-based offline reinforcement learning under
 partial coverage. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Sara Van de Geer. Empirical Processes in M-estimation, volume 6. Cambridge university press,
  2000.
Ruosong Wang, Russ R Salakhutdinov, and Lin Yang. Reinforcement learning with general value
  function approximation: Provably efficient approach via bounded eluder dimension. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:6123вҖ“6135, 2020.
Yuanhao Wang, Qinghua Liu, and Chi Jin. Is rlhf more difficult than standard rl? arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2306.14111, 2023.
Zheng Wen and Benjamin Van Roy. Efficient exploration and value function generalization in de-
  terministic systems. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 26, 2013.
Runzhe Wu, Masatoshi Uehara, and Wen Sun. Distributional offline policy evaluation with pre-
  dictive error guarantees. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 37685вҖ“37712.
  PMLR, 2023a.
Yue Wu, Tao Jin, Hao Lou, Farzad Farnoud, and Quanquan Gu. Borda regret minimization for
  generalized linear dueling bandits. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08816, 2023b.
Tengyang Xie, Dylan J Foster, Yu Bai, Nan Jiang, and Sham M Kakade. The role of coverage in
  online reinforcement learning. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Represen-
  tations, 2022.
Yichong Xu, Ruosong Wang, Lin Yang, Aarti Singh, and Artur Dubrawski. Preference-based re-
  inforcement learning with finite-time guarantees. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 33:18784вҖ“18794, 2020.
Yisong Yue and Thorsten Joachims. Beat the mean bandit. In Proceedings of the 28th international
  conference on machine learning (ICML-11), pp. 241вҖ“248. Citeseer, 2011.
Yisong Yue, Josef Broder, Robert Kleinberg, and Thorsten Joachims. The k-armed dueling bandits
  problem. Journal of Computer and System Sciences, 78(5):1538вҖ“1556, 2012.
Andrea Zanette, David Brandfonbrener, Emma Brunskill, Matteo Pirotta, and Alessandro Lazaric.
  Frequentist regret bounds for randomized least-squares value iteration. In International Confer-
  ence on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 1954вҖ“1964. PMLR, 2020.
Wenhao Zhan, Masatoshi Uehara, Nathan Kallus, Jason D Lee, and Wen Sun. Provable offline
 reinforcement learning with human feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.14816, 2023a.
Wenhao Zhan, Masatoshi Uehara, Wen Sun, and Jason D Lee. How to query human feedback
 efficiently in rl? arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.18505, 2023b.
Han Zhong, Wei Xiong, Sirui Zheng, Liwei Wang, Zhaoran Wang, Zhuoran Yang, and Tong Zhang.
  Gec: A unified framework for interactive decision making in mdp, pomdp, and beyond. CoRR,
  2022.
Banghua Zhu, Michael Jordan, and Jiantao Jiao. Principled reinforcement learning with human feed-
  back from pairwise or k-wise comparisons. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
  pp. 43037вҖ“43067. PMLR, 2023.
Yinglun Zhu and Robert Nowak. Efficient active learning with abstention. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 35:35379вҖ“35391, 2022.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A     C OMPUTATIONAL CHALLENGES IN RL WITH PREFERENCE - BASED
      FEEDBACK


For RL with preference-based feedback, there is currently no algorithm that achieves sublinear
worst-case regret and computational efficiency simultaneously, even for tabular MDPs. In this sec-
tion, we discuss the challenges that hindered previous works from being computationally efficient.
Specifically, the reasons are twofold:
(1) Trajectory-wise information. The feedback is trajectory-wise, meaning that we only receive in-
formation about cumulative rewards instead of per-step rewards. In this case, there is no longer a
ground truth per-step reward signal. To see this, consider an MDP with two steps and a trajectory
with a cumulative reward of 1. Then, we cannot decide the respective per-step reward for the two
steps вҖ” it could be that the first step has reward 1 and the second has reward 0, or both have reward
0.5. The preference-based feedback is strictly harder than trajectory-wise reward feedback, and
thus the same issue persists. This invalidates all algorithms relying on per-step reward information
(e.g., UCBVI (Azar et al., 2017)) and necessitates leveraging feedback signal at a trajectory level.
However, trajectory-level approaches typically entail maintaining a version space via trajectory con-
straints (Saha et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2022; Zhan et al., 2023a), and the computational complexity
of searching within this version space is at least exponential in the length of the episode. Some
works circumvent this computational obstacle by additional assumptions (e.g., explorability (Chat-
terji et al., 2021)), which are restrictive and do not generally hold even in tabular MDPs.
(2) Preference-based information. The feedback relies on a pair of policies. Standard algorithms
based on a single policy become computationally intractable when adapting to this setting since
optimizing over a pair of policies simultaneously is qualitatively different. For example, Zhan
et al. (2023b); Saha et al. (2023) use the idea from optimal design and need the computation or-
acle: arg maxПҖ,ПҖвҖІ вҲҲО  вҲҘEs,aвҲјПҖ П•(s, a) вҲ’ Es,aвҲјПҖвҖІ П•(s, a)вҲҘA for some positive definite matrix A. Here
вҲҘxвҲҘ2A := xвҠӨ Ax, and П• is some state-action wise feature.3 It is unclear how to implement this oracle
since standard planning approaches relying on dynamic programming cannot be applied here. Addi-
tionally, these methods also require actively maintaining a policy space О  by eliminating potentially
sub-optimal policies. The policy class can be exponentially large even in tabular settings, so it is
unclear how to maintain a valid policy space in a computationally tractable manner.
These challenges motivate us to devise a novel algorithm using a technique distinct from previous
approaches. Our solution centers around the concept of randomization, which allows us to balance
exploration and exploitation and thus enable standard efficient computation oracles (e.g., DP-style
planning oracle like value iteration).



B     P ROOF OF T HEOREM 4.2

B.1    N OTATIONS

We define some symbols and their values in Table 1. We have categorized them into four classes for
the ease of reference.
The concept of covering number is defined below, which will be used to bound the statistical error
of our algorithm.
Definition B.1 (Covering number). Consider a function class F вҠҶ X вҶ’ R. The Пү-cover of a
function fb вҲҲ F is defined as the set of functions f вҲҲ F for which вҲҘf вҲ’ fbвҲҘ вүӨ Пү. The covering
number of F w.r.t. the metric вҲҘ В· вҲҘ denoted by N (Пү, F, вҲҘ В· вҲҘ) is the minimum number of Пү-covers
needed to cover F.


    3
      These prior work typically assume trajectory wise feature П•(П„ ) for a state-action wise trajectory П„ .
However, even when specializing to state-action-wise features, these algorithms are still not computationally
tractable even in tabular MDPs.


                                                     14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                             Table 1: Symbols and their respective values.

 Symbol                                                  Value
                                          (1) Error components
   Оҫr,t                                             Оёr,t вҲ’ Оёbr,t
  ОҫP,t,h                                        RОёP,t,h   вҲ’ ОёbP,t,h
                                          вҲ’1
   О»t,h                                О»ОЈtвҲ’1,h sвҖІ Вөh (s )V t,h+1 (sвҖІ ) dsвҖІ
                                                       вӢҶ вҖІ

   О·r,t              P                               Оёbr,t вҲ’ ОёrвӢҶ
                      tвҲ’1
             ОЈвҲ’1

  О·P,t,h      tвҲ’1,h   i=1 П•(si,h , ai,h ) V t,h+1 (si,h+1   ) вҲ’  Es i,h+1
                                                                           V t,h+1 (si,h+1 ) si,h , ai,h
                                          R вӢҶ вҖІ                    вҖІ
                                                                     ) dsвҖІ
   вӢҶ

  ОёP,t,h                                   sвҖІ Вөh (s )   V  t,h+1 (s
                                   (2) Statistical upper bounds
                                                p
   Пөr,Оҫ                  r                    Пғr 2d log(2dT /Оҙ)

   Пөr,О·                   80Оәd log 24BT 2 /(ОәОҙ) + 168B 2 d log(6BT 2 /Оҙ) + 4О»B 2
                                                                вҲҡ
  Vmax                                    H(2 + (Пөr,Оҫ + вҲҡПөr,О· )/ О»)
   ПөО»                                           p Vmax О»d
  ПөP,Оҫ                                      Пғ P   2d log(2dHT
                                                                /Оҙ) вҲҡ
                                       2                      2Vmax dt+ПөP,Оҫ +Пөr,Оҫ
    О№Пө                     log 12HT (T + О»)Vmax B +                   вҲҡ
                                                                        О»
    ПҮ                                      (defined
                                                  q in Lemma B.3)
   ПөвҖІP,О·                         вҲҡ6 + 16dVmax О№Пө вҲ’ log (ОұU вҲ’ ОұL )ОҙО»

                                   О»                     q
   ПөP,О·                             ПҮ В· вҲҡ6О» + 16dVmax О№Пө вҲ’ log ОҙО»
                                             (3) Value cutoff
 Lt,h (s)                                 1{вҲҘП•(s, ПҖt,h (s))вҲҘОЈвҲ’1           вүӨ ОұL }
                                                                 tвҲ’1,h

 LвҲҒt,h (s)                                1{вҲҘП•(s, ПҖt,h (s))вҲҘОЈвҲ’1           > ОұL }
                                                                 tвҲ’1,h
                                                   2dH          О»+T

  Lmax                                              Оұ2L
                                                        В· log    О»

                                          (4) Hyperparameters
   Пғr                                                    Пөr,О· вҲҡ
   ПғP                                              (ПөP,О· + ПөО» ) H
   ОұU                                           (ПөP,Оҫ + ПөP,О· + ПөО» )вҲ’1
   ОұL                                          (ПөP,Оҫ + ПөP,О· + ПөО» )вҲ’1 /2
    О»                                                     1


                                                    15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B.2   S UPPORTING LEMMAS

Lemma B.2 (Covering number of Euclidean balls). (Pollard, 1990) Let ОҳB := {Оё вҲҲ Rd : вҲҘОёвҲҘ2 вүӨ
B}. Then we have
                              N (Пү, ОҳB , вҲҘ В· вҲҘ2 ) вүӨ (3B/Пү)d .
Lemma B.3. There exists ПҮ = O(log(ПөP,Оҫ + ПөP,О· + ПөО» )) such that ПөвҖІP,О· вүӨ ПөP,О· (recalling that ПҮ is
in the definition of ПөP,О· ).

Proof of Lemma B.3. By definition, we have
                          6
                                         q
                ПөвҖІP,О· = вҲҡ + 16dVmax О№Пө вҲ’ log (ОұU вҲ’ ОұL )ОҙО»

                           О»
                          6              p
                      = вҲҡ + 16dVmax О№Пө вҲ’ log(ОҙО») вҲ’ log(ОұU вҲ’ ОұL )
                           О»
                          6
                                         q
                      = вҲҡ + 16dVmax О№Пө вҲ’ log(ОҙО») + log 2(ПөP,Оҫ + ПөP,О· + ПөО» )
                           О»

                               6             p
                      вүӨ ПҮ вҲҡ + 16dVmax О№Пө вҲ’ log(ОҙО»)
                                О»
                      = ПөP,О· .
Here the third equality is by the definition of ОұL and ОұU . The inequality holds by setting ПҮ =
O(log(ПөP,Оҫ + ПөP,О· + ПөО» )) to be large enough.
                                                    вӢҶ
Lemma B.4. It holds that О·P,t,h + О»t,h = ОёbP,t,h вҲ’ ОёP,t,h for any t вҲҲ [T ] and h вҲҲ [H].

Proof of Lemma B.4. By definition, we have
     О·P,t,h + О»t,h
                  XtвҲ’1                                                                       !
      = ОЈвҲ’1

           tвҲ’1,h       П•(si,h , ai,h ) V t,h+1 (si,h+1 ) вҲ’ E V t,h+1 (si,h+1 ) si,h , ai,h
                                                                    sh+1
                    i=1
                        Z
         + О»ОЈвҲ’1
             tвҲ’1,h            ВөвӢҶh (sвҖІ )V t,h+1 (sвҖІ ) dsвҖІ
                         sвҖІ
                                  tвҲ’1
                                                                              !вҠӨ Z
                                  X
      = ОёbP,t,h вҲ’ ОЈвҲ’1                                                                    ВөвӢҶh (sвҖІ ) V t,h+1 (sвҖІ ) dsвҖІ

                   tвҲ’1,h                П•(si,h , ai,h )П•(si,h , ai,h ) + О»I
                                  i=1                                               sвҖІ
                    Z
                         ВөвӢҶh (sвҖІ )    V t,h+1 (sвҖІ ) dsвҖІ

      = ОёbP,t,h вҲ’
                    sвҖІ
                   вӢҶ
      = ОёbP,t,h вҲ’ ОёP,t,h .


The following lemma is adapted from Zanette et al. (2020, Lemma 1) to our setting.
Lemma B.5 (One-step decomposition). For any t вҲҲ [T ], h вҲҲ [H], s вҲҲ S, a вҲҲ A, and policy ПҖ, we
have
  П•(s, a)вҠӨ Оёr,t + ОёP,t,h вҲ’ QПҖh (s, a)


            = П•(s, a)вҠӨ (Оҫr,t + ОҫP,t,h + О·r,t + О·P,t,h вҲ’ О»t,h ) + E V t,h+1 (sвҖІ ) вҲ’ Vh+1
                                                                                    ПҖ
                                                                                        (sвҖІ ) s, a .

                                                                               sвҖІ


Proof. We have
            П•(s, a)вҠӨ Оёr,t + ОёP,t,h вҲ’ QПҖh (s, a)


            = П•(s, a)вҠӨ Оёr,t + ОёP,t,h вҲ’ П•(s, a)вҠӨ ОёrвӢҶ вҲ’ E[Vh+1
                                                         ПҖ
                                                             (sвҖІ ) | s, a]

                                                                     sвҖІ

             = П•(s, a)вҠӨ (Оёr,t вҲ’ Оёbr,t ) + П•(s, a)вҠӨ (ОёP,t,h вҲ’ ОёbP,t,h ) + П•(s, a)вҠӨ (Оёbr,t вҲ’ ОёrвӢҶ )
                 + П•(s, a)вҠӨ ОёbP,t,h вҲ’ E[V ПҖ (sвҖІ ) | s, a].
                                                    h+1
                                               sвҖІ



                                                           16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


For the last but one term, we note that

П•(s, a)вҠӨ ОёbP,t,h
                            tвҲ’1
                                                                           !
                            X
= П•(s, a)  вҠӨ
               ОЈвҲ’1
                tвҲ’1,h             П•(si,h , ai,h )V t,h+1 (si,h+1 )
                            i=1
                            tвҲ’1
                                                                                  !
                            X
           вҠӨ
               ОЈвҲ’1                П•(si,h , ai,h ) E V t,h+1 (si,h+1 ) si,h , ai,h + П•(s, a)вҠӨ О·P,t,h

= П•(s, a)       tвҲ’1,h
                                                     sh+1
                            i=1
                            tвҲ’1                                        Z                                     !
                            X
= П•(s, a)  вҠӨ
               ОЈвҲ’1
                tвҲ’1,h             П•(si,h , ai,h )П•(si,h , ai,h )   вҠӨ
                                                                                ВөвӢҶh (sвҖІ )V t,h+1 (sвҖІ ) dsвҖІ       + П•(s, a)вҠӨ О·P,t,h
                            i=1                                            sвҖІ
               Z                                                                   Z
= П•(s, a)  вҠӨ
                    ВөвӢҶh (sвҖІ )V t,h+1 (sвҖІ ) dsвҖІ вҲ’ О»П•(s, a)вҠӨ ОЈвҲ’1
                                                            tвҲ’1,h                           ВөвӢҶh (sвҖІ )V t,h+1 (sвҖІ ) dsвҖІ + П•(s, a)вҠӨ О·P,t,h
            sвҖІ                                                                         sвҖІ
= E V t,h+1 (sвҖІ ) s, a вҲ’ П•(s, a)вҠӨ О»t,h + П•(s, a)вҠӨ О·P,t,h .

   sвҖІ

Plugging this back, we get

        П•(s, a)вҠӨ Оёr,t + ОёP,t,h вҲ’ QПҖh (s, a)


        = П•(s, a)вҠӨ (Оёr,t вҲ’ Оёbr,t ) + П•(s, a)вҠӨ (ОёP,t,h вҲ’ ОёbP,t,h ) + П•(s, a)вҠӨ (Оёbr,t вҲ’ ОёrвӢҶ )
           + E V t,h+1 (sвҖІ ) вҲ’ Vh+1ПҖ
                                      (sвҖІ ) s, a вҲ’ П•(s, a)вҠӨ О»t,h + П•(s, a)вҠӨ О·P,t,h

              sвҖІ


        = П•(s, a)вҠӨ (Оҫr,t + ОҫP,t,h + О·r,t + О·P,t,h вҲ’ О»t,h ) + E V t,h+1 (sвҖІ ) вҲ’ Vh+1  ПҖ
                                                                                          (sвҖІ ) s, a .

                                                                                   sвҖІ

This completes the proof.

Lemma B.6. For any t вҲҲ [T ], if Zt = 0, then we have
                                                                    вҲҡ
                                          вҲҘП•(П„t0 ) вҲ’ П•(П„t1 )вҲҘОЈвҲ’1 вүӨ Пө ПҖ/(2Пғr ).
                                                                   tвҲ’1


Proof. By the definition of Zt , we have

             ПөвүҘ                   E                |(П•(П„t0 ) вҲ’ П•(П„t1 ))вҠӨ (Оё0 вҲ’ Оё1 )|
                    Оё0 ,Оё1 вҲјN (Оёbr,t ,Пғr2 ОЈвҲ’1
                                           tвҲ’1 )

                                                                           вҲ’1/2
                =             E          |(П•(П„t0 ) вҲ’ П•(П„t1 ))вҠӨ Пғr ОЈtвҲ’1 (u0 вҲ’ u1 )|
                    u0 ,u1 вҲјN (0,Id )
                                                           вҲҡ     вҲ’1/2
                =         E           |(П•(П„t0 ) вҲ’ П•(П„t1 ))вҠӨ 2Пғr ОЈtвҲ’1 u|
                    uвҲјN (0,Id )
                    вҲҡ                      q
                                                       вҲ’1/2                                                       вҲ’1/2
                = Пғr 2            E            uвҠӨ ОЈtвҲ’1 (П•(П„t0 ) вҲ’ П•(П„t1 ))(П•(П„t0 ) вҲ’ П•(П„t1 ))вҠӨ ОЈtвҲ’1 u
                            uвҲјN (0,Id )
                    вҲҡ
                = Пғr 2            E        вҲҘuвҲҘОЈвҲ’1/2 (П•(П„ 0 )вҲ’П•(П„ 1 ))(П•(П„ 0 )вҲ’П•(П„ 1 ))вҠӨ ОЈвҲ’1/2 .
                            uвҲјN (0,Id )             tвҲ’1       t        t           t          t      tвҲ’1



We then apply Lemma D.9 and obtain
                        v
                        u          вҲ’1/2                                     вҲ’1/2
                                              0       1     0         1
                   вҲҡ t 2 tr ОЈtвҲ’1 (П•(П„t ) вҲ’ П•(П„t ))(П•(П„t ) вҲ’ П•(П„t ))вҠӨ ОЈtвҲ’1
                        u
             Пө вүҘ Пғr 2 В·
                                                        ПҖ
                       s
                                                вҲ’1/2 вҲ’1/2
                         (П•(П„t0 ) вҲ’ П•(П„t1 ))вҠӨ ОЈtвҲ’1 ОЈtвҲ’1 (П•(П„t0 ) вҲ’ П•(П„t1 ))
               = 2Пғr В·
                                                   ПҖ
                 2Пғr
               = вҲҡ В· вҲҘП•(П„t0 ) вҲ’ П•(П„t1 )вҲҘОЈвҲ’1 .
                   ПҖ                        tвҲ’1


Hence, we complete the proof.


                                                                  17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B.3   S TATISTICAL UPPER BOUNDS

Lemma B.7 (Gaussian noise). Each of the following holds with probability at least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ:

      1. вҲҘОҫr,t вҲҘОЈtвҲ’1 вүӨ Пөr,Оҫ for all t вҲҲ [T ],

      2. вҲҘОҫP,t,h вҲҘОЈtвҲ’1,h вүӨ ПөP,Оҫ for all t вҲҲ [T ] and h вҲҲ [H].


Proof of Lemma B.7. It simply follows from Lemma D.3 and the union bound.

Lemma B.8. Fix t вҲҲ [T ]. It holds with probability at least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ that
             tвҲ’1                                      2
             X                         вҠӨ   вӢҶ
                     П•(П„s0 ) вҲ’ П•(П„s1 )    Оёr вҲ’ Оёbr,t
             s=1
                     tвҲ’1                                                 2
                     X                                    вҠӨ   вӢҶ
               вүӨ8            E       П•(П„s0 ) вҲ’ П•(П„s1 )       Оёr вҲ’ Оёbr,t    + 168B 2 d log(3T B/Оҙ).
                            0 1
                           П„s ,П„s
                     s=1

Here the expectation is taken over the randomness of sampling П„s0 and П„s1 from ПҖs0 and ПҖs1 , respec-
tively.


Proof of Lemma B.8. Let Оҳ  B denote an Пү-covering of ОҳB with respect to вҲҘ В· вҲҘ2 for some Пү > 0.
                          g
                                         d
By Lemma B.2, we have |Оҳ  g B | вүӨ (3B/Пү) . Moreover, for any s вҲҲ [t вҲ’ 1], by Cauchy-Schwarz
inequality, it holds that
                                      вҠӨ   вӢҶ      2
                                                                       2            2
              П•(П„s0 ) вҲ’ П•(П„s1 )          Оёr вҲ’ Оёe   вүӨ П•(П„s0 ) вҲ’ П•(П„s1 ) 2 В· ОёrвӢҶ вҲ’ Оёe 2 вүӨ 16B 2 .

Then, by Lemma D.4 and union bound over Оҳ
                                        g B , it holds that

              tвҲ’1                                  2
              X                         вҠӨ   вӢҶ
                      П•(П„s0 ) вҲ’ П•(П„s1 )    Оёr вҲ’ Оёe
               s=1
                     tвҲ’1                                           2
                     X                                  вҠӨ   вӢҶ
                вүӨ2             E      П•(П„s0 ) вҲ’ П•(П„s1 )    Оёr вҲ’ Оёe + 64B 2 d log(3B/(ПүОҙ))                 (4)
                              0 1
                            П„s ,П„s
                      s=1


for all Оёe вҲҲ ОҳgB with probability at least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ. Now we consider an arbitrary Оё вҲҲ ОҳB and let
Оёe вҲҲ Оҳ
     g B  be the closest to Оё. Then, by triangle inequality and Cauchy-Schwarz inequality, we have
the following two ineuqalities:
                                        вҠӨ             2
                 П•(П„s0 ) вҲ’ П•(П„s1 ) (ОёrвӢҶ вҲ’ Оё)
                                          вҠӨ   вӢҶ         2
                   вүӨ 2 П•(П„s0 ) вҲ’ П•(П„s1 )       Оёr вҲ’ Оёe + 2вҲҘП•(П„s0 ) вҲ’ П•(П„s1 )вҲҘ22 вҲҘОё вҲ’ ОёвҲҘ
                                                                                     e2
                                                                                       2
                                                        2
                                           вҠӨ
                   вүӨ 2 П•(П„s0 ) вҲ’ П•(П„s1 )       ОёrвӢҶ вҲ’ Оёe + 8Пү 2 ,



and
                                   вҠӨ   вӢҶ      2
                 П•(П„s0 ) вҲ’ П•(П„s1 )    Оёr вҲ’ Оёe
                                                вҠӨ                 2
                   вүӨ 2 П•(П„s0 ) вҲ’ П•(П„s1 )            (ОёrвӢҶ вҲ’ Оё)         + 2вҲҘП•(П„s0 ) вҲ’ П•(П„s1 )вҲҘ22 вҲҘОё вҲ’ ОёвҲҘ
                                                                                                    e2
                                                                                                      2
                                                вҠӨ                 2
                   вүӨ 2 П•(П„s0 ) вҲ’ П•(П„s1 )            (ОёrвӢҶ вҲ’ Оё)         + 8Пү 2


                                                             18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Applying these inequalities and (4), we get
           tвҲ’1                                                   2
           X                                     вҠӨ
                      П•(П„s0 ) вҲ’ П•(П„s1 )              (ОёrвӢҶ вҲ’ Оё)
           s=1
                      tвҲ’1                                          2
                      X                                 вҠӨ   вӢҶ
                 вүӨ2           П•(П„s0 ) вҲ’ П•(П„s1 )            Оёr вҲ’ Оёe + 8Пү 2 t
                      s=1
                      tвҲ’1                                             2
                      X                                    вҠӨ   вӢҶ
                 вүӨ4           E          П•(П„s0 ) вҲ’ П•(П„s1 )    Оёr вҲ’ Оёe + 128B 2 d log(3B/(ПүОҙ)) + 8Пү 2 t
                             0 1
                            П„s ,П„s
                      s=1
                      tвҲ’1                                           2
                      X                                    вҠӨ
                 вүӨ8           E          П•(П„s0 ) вҲ’ П•(П„s1 ) (ОёrвӢҶ вҲ’ Оё) + 128B 2 d log(3B/(ПүОҙ)) + 40Пү 2 t
                             0 1
                            П„s ,П„s
                      s=1
                      tвҲ’1                                           2
                      X                                    вҠӨ
                 вүӨ8           E          П•(П„s0 ) вҲ’ П•(П„s1 ) (ОёrвӢҶ вҲ’ Оё) + 168B 2 d log(3T B/Оҙ)
                             0 1
                            П„s ,П„s
                      s=1

where the last step holds by setting Пү = 1/t.

Lemma B.9 (Reward estimation error). It holds with probability at least 1вҲ’Оҙ that вҲҘО·r,t вҲҘОЈtвҲ’1 вүӨ Пөr,О·
for all t вҲҲ [T ].

Proof of Lemma B.9. Since Оёbr,t is the MLE, by Lemma D.10, we have
  tвҲ’1
  X
             d2TV Pr В· П„s0 , П„s1 , ОёrвӢҶ , Pr В· П„s0 , П„s1 , Оёbr,t    вүӨ 10 log N[] (2T )вҲ’1 , R, вҲҘ В· вҲҘвҲһ /Оҙ

          E
         0 1
        П„s ,П„s
  s=1
                                                                                                         (5)

with probability at least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ, where R denotes the set of probability distributions of preference
feedback and Pr(В·) denotes the preference feedback generating probability. Now we upper bound
the covering number of R by the covering number of ОҳB . We notice the following:

                     sup Pr o П„ 0 , П„ 1 , ОёвӢҶ вҲ’ Pr o П„ 0 , П„ 1 , Оёbr,t

                                                                 r
                            o,П„ 0 ,П„ 1
                                                                  вҠӨ                         вҠӨ
                       = sup ОҰ                  П•(П„ 0 ) вҲ’ П•(П„ 1 ) ОёrвӢҶ вҲ’ ОҰ П•(П„ 0 ) вҲ’ П•(П„ 1 ) Оёbr,t
                            П„ 0 ,П„ 1
                                                                  вҠӨ вӢҶ
                       вүӨОәвҲ’1 sup                 П•(П„ 0 ) вҲ’ П•(П„ 1 )

                                                                    Оёr вҲ’ Оёbr,t
                                     П„ 0 ,П„ 1

                       вүӨОәвҲ’1 sup вҲҘП•(П„ 0 ) вҲ’ П•(П„ 1 )вҲҘ2 вҲҘОёrвӢҶ вҲ’ Оёbr,t вҲҘ2
                                     П„ 0 ,П„ 1
                               вҲ’1
                       вүӨ2Оә             вҲҘОёrвӢҶ вҲ’ Оёbr,t вҲҘ2
where the equality holds since the feedback o is binary, the first inequality is Lemma D.1, and the last
inequality is by the condition that вҲҘП•(П„ )вҲҘ2 вүӨ 1 for any trajectory П„ . This means that an Пү-covering
of the space of parameter Оё implies a 2ПүОәвҲ’1 -covering of the space of the probability distribution of
the preference feedbacks. Hence, (5) can be further upper bounded by
                                 tвҲ’1
                                 X
                                                d2TV Pr В· П„s0 , П„s1 , ОёrвӢҶ , Pr В· П„s0 , П„s1 , Оёbr,t

                                             E
                                            0 1
                                          П„s ,П„s
                                 s=1

                                 вүӨ 10 log N[] (2T )вҲ’1 , R, вҲҘ В· вҲҘвҲһ /Оҙ

                                 вүӨ 10 log N Оә/(4T ), ОҳB , вҲҘ В· вҲҘ2 /Оҙ

                                 вүӨ 10d log 12BT /(ОәОҙ)                                                    (6)


                                                                     19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


where the last inequality is Lemma B.2. For the left side, we note that
                 tвҲ’1
                 X
                             d2TV Pr В· П„s0 , П„s1 , ОёrвӢҶ , Pr В· П„s0 , П„s1 , Оёbr,t

                          E
                         0 1
                       П„s ,П„s
                 s=1
                 tвҲ’1
                 X                                         вҠӨ вӢҶ                       вҠӨ   2
             =            E ОҰ         П•(П„s0 ) вҲ’ П•(П„s1 )     Оёr вҲ’ ОҰ П•(П„s0 ) вҲ’ П•(П„s1 ) Оёbr,t
                         0 1
                       П„s ,П„s
                 s=1
                       tвҲ’1                                             2
                       X                                вҠӨ   вӢҶ
             вүҘОәвҲ’1                E    П•(П„s0 ) вҲ’ П•(П„s1 )    Оёr вҲ’ Оёbr,t
                                0 1
                             П„s ,П„s
                       s=1
                         tвҲ’1                            2
              1          X               вҠӨ   вӢҶ
             вүҘ ОәвҲ’1     П•(П„s0 ) вҲ’ П•(П„s1 )    Оёr вҲ’ Оёbr,t    вҲ’ 21ОәвҲ’1 B 2 d log(3T B/Оҙ)                   (7)
              8    s=1

with probability at least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ, where the first inequality is by Lemma D.1 and the last inequality is
by Lemma B.8. Furthermore, we have
      tвҲ’1                                         2
      X                            вҠӨ   вӢҶ
             П•(П„s0 ) вҲ’ П•(П„s1 )        Оёr вҲ’ Оёbr,t
      s=1
                       tвҲ’1
                     вҠӨ X                                            вҠӨ   вӢҶ
    = ОёrвӢҶ вҲ’ Оёbr,t               П•(П„s0 ) вҲ’ П•(П„s1 ) П•(П„s0 ) вҲ’ П•(П„s1 )

                                                                       Оёr вҲ’ Оёbr,t
                         s=1
                     вҠӨ                                  вҠӨ
    = ОёrвӢҶ вҲ’ Оёbr,t        ОЈtвҲ’1 ОёrвӢҶ вҲ’ Оёbr,t вҲ’ ОёrвӢҶ вҲ’ Оёbr,t О»I ОёrвӢҶ вҲ’ Оёbr,t вүҘ вҲҘО·r,t вҲҘ2ОЈtвҲ’1 вҲ’ 4О»B 2         (8)

Putting (6), (7), and (8) together, we get

               вҲҘО·r,t вҲҘ2ОЈtвҲ’1 вүӨ 80Оәd log 12BT /(ОәОҙ) + 168B 2 d log(3T B/Оҙ) + 4О»B 2

with probability at least 1 вҲ’ 2Оҙ. Adjusting Оҙ to Оҙ/2 and taking the union bound over t вҲҲ [T ] yields
the desired result.
Lemma B.10 (One-step transition estimation error). Assume the events defined in Lemma B.7 hold.
Then, the following claim holds for all t вҲҲ [T ] and h вҲҲ [H] with probability at least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ: if
maxs |V t,h+1 (s)| вүӨ Vmax , it holds that вҲҘО·P,t,h вҲҘОЈtвҲ’1,h вүӨ ПөP,О· .

Proof of Lemma B.10. By definition, we have
                  tвҲ’1
                  X

вҲҘО·P,t,h вҲҘОЈtвҲ’1,h =     П•(si,h , ai,h ) V t,h+1 (si,h+1 ) вҲ’ E V t,h+1 (si,h+1 ) si,h , ai,h                    .
                                                                   si,h+1
                       i=1                                                                         ОЈвҲ’1
                                                                                                    tвҲ’1,h


Towards an upper bound of the above, we will conduct some covering arguments. To that end, we
first derive the upper bounds of norms of Оёr,t and ОёP,t,h .

Bounding the в„“2 -norms of Оёr,t and ОёP,t,h . For Оёr,t , applying triangle inequality, we have
вҲҘОёr,t вҲҘ2 вүӨ вҲҘОҫr,t вҲҘ2 + вҲҘОёbr,t вҲҘ2 вүӨ вҲҘОҫr,t вҲҘ2 + B. For вҲҘОҫr,t вҲҘ2 , we have
                     q                         q                          q                 вҲҡ
          вҲҘОҫr,t вҲҘ2 = Оҫr,tвҠӨ ОЈвҲ’1/2 ОЈ1/2 Оҫ      вүӨ    вҲҘОҫ    вҲҘ      вҲҘОҫ  вҲҘ вҲ’1 вүӨ  Пөr,Оҫ В· вҲҘОҫr,t вҲҘ2 / О»
                               tвҲ’1   tвҲ’1 r,t         r,t ОЈtвҲ’1 r,t ОЈ
                                                                            tвҲ’1

                                                                                               вҲ’1/2
where in the last step we applied Lemma B.7 and the fact that вҲҘОҫr,t вҲҘОЈвҲ’1 вүӨ вҲҘОҫr,t вҲҘ2 вҲҘОЈtвҲ’1 вҲҘ2 вүӨ
          вҲҡ                                      вҲҡ                          tвҲ’1
                                                                                вҲҡ
вҲҘОҫr,t вҲҘ2 / О». This implies that вҲҘОҫr,t вҲҘ2 вүӨ Пөr,Оҫ / О», and thus, вҲҘОёr,t вҲҘ2 вүӨ Пөr,Оҫ / О» + B.
For ОёP,t,h , we have вҲҘОёP,t,h вҲҘ2 вүӨ вҲҘОҫP,t,h вҲҘ2 + вҲҘОёbP,t,h вҲҘ2 . For вҲҘОҫP,t,h вҲҘ2 , following a similar argument
as above, we have
                             q                                     q                    вҲҡ
                вҲҘОҫP,t,h вҲҘ2 вүӨ вҲҘОҫP,t,h вҲҘОЈtвҲ’1,h вҲҘОҫP,t,h вҲҘОЈвҲ’1 вүӨ ПөP,Оҫ В· вҲҘОҫP,t,h вҲҘ2 / О»,
                                                                 tвҲ’1,h


                                                            20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                                      вҲҡ
which implies that вҲҘОҫP,t,h вҲҘ2 вүӨ ПөP,Оҫ / О». For вҲҘОёbP,t,h вҲҘ2 , we have
                                                          tвҲ’1
                                                                                                   !
                                      вҲ’1/2 вҲ’1/2
                                                          X
                    вҲҘОёbP,t,h вҲҘ2 =    ОЈtвҲ’1,h ОЈtвҲ’1,h              П•(si,h , ai,h )V t,h+1 (si,h+1 )
                                                          i=1                                           2
                                                    tвҲ’1
                                      вҲ’1/2
                                                    X
                                вүӨвҲҘОЈtвҲ’1,h вҲҘ2 В·             П•(si,h , ai,h )V t,h+1 (si,h+1 )
                                                    i=1                                       ОЈвҲ’1
                                                                                               tвҲ’1,h
                                        v
                                        u tвҲ’1
                                 вҲҡ    вҲҡ uX                                     2
                                   вҲ’1
                                вүӨ О» В· tВ·t     П•(si,h , ai,h )V t,h+1 (si,h+1 ) ОЈвҲ’1
                                                                                                    tвҲ’1,h
                                                      i=1
                                                           v
                                                           u tвҲ’1
                                 вҲҡ     вҲҡ                   uX                          2
                                вүӨ О»вҲ’1 В· t В· Vmax          В·t     вҲҘП•(s     i,h , ai,h )вҲҘОЈвҲ’1
                                                                                         tвҲ’1,h
                                                                i=1
                                          вҲҡ
                                    Vmax dt
                                вүӨ     вҲҡ
                                        О»
where the second inequality is by the JensenвҖҷs inequality, the third inequality is by the condition that
maxs |V t,h (s)| вүӨвҲҡVmax , and вҲҡthe last
                                    вҲҡ inequality is by Lemma D.7. Putting these together, we get
вҲҘОёP,t,h вҲҘ2 вүӨ ПөP,Оҫ / О» + Vmax dt/ О».

Covering construction. With these bounds in hand, we can now proceed with a covering con-
struction. First define
QОёr ,ОёP ,ОЈ (s, a)
                          вҠӨ
                  пЈұ
                  пЈІП•(s, a)  ОёP
                  пЈҙ                                          if вҲҘП•(s, a)вҲҘОЈ вүӨ ОұL
             вҠӨ                    вҠӨ
   := П•(s, a) Оёr + ПҒ(s, a) П•(s, a) ОёP + (1 вҲ’ ПҒ(s, a))(H вҲ’ h) if ОұL < вҲҘП•(s, a)вҲҘОЈ вүӨ ОұU ,
                  пЈҙ
                    H вҲ’h                                     if вҲҘП•(s, a)вҲҘОЈ > ОұU
                  пЈі

VОёr ,ОёP ,ОЈ (s) := max QОёr ,ОёP ,ОЈ (s, a).                                                                    (9)
                     a

where ПҒ(s, a) := ОұU вҲ’вҲҘП•(s,a)вҲҘ
                     ОұU вҲ’ОұL
                              ОЈ
                                . This definition aims to mimic the behavior of Algorithm 1. Then,
we define the space of parameters as follows
                n                                  вҲҡ                   вҲҡ            вҲҡ
          U := (Оёr , ОёP , ОЈ) : вҲҘОёr вҲҘ2 вүӨ B + Пөr,Оҫ / О», вҲҘОёP вҲҘ2 вүӨ (Vmax dt + ПөP,Оҫ )/ О»,
                                        вҲҡ                                              o
                               вҲҘОЈвҲҘF вүӨ d/О», ОЈ = ОЈвҠӨ , ОЈ вӘ° 0, вҲҘVОёr ,ОёP ,ОЈ вҲҘвҲһ вүӨ Vmax .
                                                                                       вҲҡ
Clearly, Оёr,t and ОёP,t,h satisfy the constraints of Оёr and ОёP . Moreover, вҲҘОЈвҲ’1
                                                                            tвҲ’1 вҲҘF вүӨ       dвҲҘОЈвҲ’1
                                                                                              tвҲ’1 вҲҘ2 вүӨ
вҲҡ                  вҲ’1
  d/О», and thus ОЈtвҲ’1 satisfies the constraint of ОЈ. Hence, we have (Оёr,t , ОёP,t,h , ОЈtвҲ’1 ) вҲҲ U.
                                                                                                        2
By Lemma B.2, the size of an Пү-covering of U by treating it as a subset of R2d+d can be bounded
by
                          пЈ«              вҲҡ            вҲҡ             вҲҡ      вҲҡ      пЈ¶2d+d2
                            3 (B + Пөr,Оҫ / О») + (Vmax dt + ПөP,Оҫ )/ О» + d/О»
      N (Пү, U, вҲҘ В· вҲҘ2 ) вүӨ пЈӯ                                                       пЈё
                                                     Пү

We denote the covering set by U.e We will write N := N (Пү, U, вҲҘ В· вҲҘ2 ) for simplicity when there is no
ambiguity. We note that it is possible that not all points in Ue belong to U. However, we can project
all points to U so it becomes a 2Пү-covering of U. We will omit this subtlety.

Covering argument. For any (Оёr , ОёP , ОЈ) вҲҲ U, we define
                         xi,Оёr ,ОёP ,ОЈ := VОёr ,ОёP ,ОЈ (si,h+1 ) вҲ’ E [VОёr ,ОёP ,ОЈ (sвҖІ ) | si,h , ai,h ] .
                                                                   sвҖІ



                                                             21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


By construction, we have |xi,Оёr ,ОёP ,ОЈ | вүӨ 2Vmax , so it is 4Vmax -subgaussian conditioning on
(si,h , ai,h ). Hence, for all (Оёr , ОёP , ОЈ) вҲҲ U,
                                               e we have
                                                    s
              tвҲ’1
              X
                                                         2
                                                                     t
                  П•(si,h , ai,h )xi,Оёr ,ОёP ,ОЈ     вүӨ 32Vmax d log 1 +     + log(N/Оҙ)        (10)
              i=1                             вҲ’1
                                                                     О»
                                                 ОЈtвҲ’1,h


with probability at least 1вҲ’Оҙ by Lemma D.5 and the union bound over U.       e Now consider an arbitrary
tuple (Оёr , ОёP , ОЈ) вҲҲ U and the nearest point (ОёМғr , ОёМғP , ОЈ) вҲҲ U. Then, we have
                                                           e    e

      tвҲ’1
      X
            П•(si,h , ai,h )xi,Оёr ,ОёP ,ОЈ
      i=1                                   ОЈвҲ’1
                                             tвҲ’1,h

      tвҲ’1
      X                                                    tвҲ’1
                                                           X
  вүӨ         П•(si,h , ai,h )xi,ОёМғr ,ОёМғP ,ОЈ
                                        e            +           П•(si,h , ai,h )(xi,Оёr ,ОёP ,ОЈ вҲ’ xi,ОёМғr ,ОёМғP ,ОЈ
                                                                                                             e)
      i=1                                   ОЈвҲ’1
                                             tвҲ’1,h
                                                           i=1                                                         ОЈвҲ’1
                                                                                                                        tвҲ’1,h

      tвҲ’1
      X                                                  tвҲ’1
                                                         X
  вүӨ         П•(si,h , ai,h )xi,ОёМғr ,ОёМғP ,ОЈ
                                        e            +         вҲҘП•(si,h , ai,h )вҲҘОЈвҲ’1               В· max |xi,Оёr ,ОёP ,ОЈ вҲ’ xi,ОёМғr ,ОёМғP ,ОЈ
                                                                                                                                     e|
                                                                                          tвҲ’1,h         i
      i=1                                   ОЈвҲ’1
                                             tвҲ’1,h
                                                         i=1

      tвҲ’1
      X                                                  вҲҡ
  вүӨ         П•(si,h , ai,h )xi,ОёМғr ,ОёМғP ,ОЈ
                                        e            +       О»вҲ’1 В· t В· max |xi,Оёr ,ОёP ,ОЈ вҲ’ xi,ОёМғr ,ОёМғP ,ОЈ
                                                                                                        e|
                                                                                  i
      i=1                                   ОЈвҲ’1
                                             tвҲ’1,h

                                                                                          вҲҡ
where the last step is by the fact that вҲҘП•(si,h , ai,h )вҲҘОЈвҲ’1             О»вҲ’1 . Observing the derived upper
                                                                                      вүӨ
                                                                              tвҲ’1,h

bound above, the first term is already bounded by (10) since (ОёМғr , ОёМғP , ОЈ)  e вҲҲ U.
                                                                                   e To bound the second
term, we note that, by the definiton of xi,Оёr ,ОёP ,ОЈ and xi,ОёМғr ,ОёМғP ,ОЈ
                                                                      e,


                                           e | вүӨ2 max VОёr ,ОёP ,ОЈ (s) вҲ’ VОёМғr ,ОёМғP ,ОЈ
              |xi,Оёr ,ОёP ,ОЈ вҲ’ xi,ОёМғr ,ОёМғP ,ОЈ                                      e (s)
                                                     s

                                              =2 max max QОёr ,ОёP ,ОЈ (s, a) вҲ’ max QОёМғr ,ОёМғP ,ОЈ
                                                                                            e (s, a)
                                                     s           a                                  a

                                              вүӨ2 max QОёr ,ОёP ,ОЈ (s, a) вҲ’ QОёМғr ,ОёМғP ,ОЈ
                                                                                    e (s, a)
                                                     s,a


We assume Пү вүӨ (ОұU вҲ’ ОұL )2 (and this will be satisfied later when we specify the value of Пү).
Recall that we have three cases in the definition of QОёr ,ОёP ,ОЈ (s, a) (see (9)), and we will refer to them
as Case L, Case M, and Case U. There are in total 6 possible combinations of cases for the pair
QОёr ,ОёP ,ОЈ (s, a), QОёМғr ,ОёМғP ,ОЈ
                              e (s, a), and we will discuss them one by one below. For the ease of notation,
we denote Q(s, a) and Q(s,     e a) as shorthand for QОё ,Оё ,ОЈ (s, a) and Q
                                                                          r   P   e (s, a).        ОёМғr ,ОёМғP ,ОЈ


(1) Case L + Case U.   This is impossible, because, in this case, we have |вҲҘП•вҲҘОЈ вҲ’ вҲҘП•вҲҘОЈ e| >
                                               p            q            q
ОұU вҲ’ ОұL , but we also have |вҲҘП•вҲҘОЈ вҲ’ вҲҘП•вҲҘОЈ            вҠӨ          П•вҠӨ ОЈП•|        |П•вҠӨ (ОЈ вҲ’ ОЈ)П•|
                                        e | = | П• ОЈП• вҲ’                вүӨ                   вүӨ
                                                                  e                  e
                        вҲҡ
q
  вҲҘП•вҲҘ2 вҲҘОЈ вҲ’ ОЈвҲҘ
            e F вҲҘП•вҲҘ2 вүӨ Пү < ОұU вҲ’ ОұL .


(2) Both are Case L. Then we immediately have

           e a)| = П•(s, a)вҠӨ (Оёr + ОёP вҲ’ ОёМғr вҲ’ ОёМғP ) вүӨ вҲҘП•(s, a)вҲҘ2 вҲҘОёr вҲ’ ОёМғr вҲҘ2 + вҲҘОёP вҲ’ ОёМғP вҲҘ2 вүӨ 2Пү.
|Q(s, a) вҲ’ Q(s,


(3) Both are Case U. Then we immediately have

                          e a)| = П•(s, a)вҠӨ (Оёr вҲ’ ОёМғr ) вүӨ |П•(s, a)вҲҘ2 В· вҲҘОёr вҲ’ ОёМғr вҲҘ2 вүӨ Пү.
               |Q(s, a) вҲ’ Q(s,


                                                                     22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


(4) Case L + Case M. Without loss of generality, we assume Q(s, a) is in Case M and Q(s,
                                                                                    e a) is
in Case L. Then we have
                         e a)| вүӨПҒ(s, a) П•(s, a)вҠӨ (Оёr + ОёP вҲ’ ОёМғr вҲ’ ОёМғP )
              |Q(s, a) вҲ’ Q(s,

                                       + (1 вҲ’ ПҒ(s, a)) П•(s, a)вҠӨ (ОёМғr + ОёМғP ) вҲ’ (H вҲ’ h)
                                    вүӨПҒ(s, a) В· 2Пү + (1 вҲ’ ПҒ(s, a)) В· 2Vmax

Recall that ПҒ(s, a) := ОұU вҲ’вҲҘП•(s,a)вҲҘ
                          ОұU вҲ’ОұL
                                    ОЈ
                                      , so 1 вҲ’ ПҒ(s, a) := вҲҘП•(s,a)вҲҘ
                                                             ОұU вҲ’ОұL
                                                                   ОЈ вҲ’ОұL
                                                                         . Futhermore,
                         вҲҘП•(s, a)вҲҘОЈ вҲ’ ОұL         вҲҘП•(s, a)вҲҘОЈ вҲ’ вҲҘП•(s, a)вҲҘОЈ  e + вҲҘП•(s, a)вҲҘОЈ e вҲ’ ОұL
         1 вҲ’ ПҒ(s, a) =                       =
                              ОұU вҲ’ ОұL                               Оұ вҲ’ ОұL
                                                     p            qU
                      вҲҘП•(s, a)вҲҘОЈ вҲ’ вҲҘП•(s, a)вҲҘОЈ           П•вҠӨ ОЈП• вҲ’ П•вҠӨ ОЈП•    e
                   вүӨ                              =
                                                e
                               ОұU вҲ’ ОұL                      ОұU вҲ’ ОұL
                      q                      q
                                                                             вҲҡ
                        |П•вҠӨ (ОЈ вҲ’ ОЈ)П•|
                                    e           вҲҘП•вҲҘ2 вҲҘОЈ вҲ’ ОЈвҲҘe 2 вҲҘП•вҲҘ2           Пү
                   вүӨ                     вүӨ                             вүӨ
                          ОұU вҲ’ ОұL                   ОұU вҲ’ ОұL               ОұU вҲ’ ОұL
where the first inequality                          e is in Case L. Inserting this back, we get |Q(s, a)вҲ’
                           is by the condition that Q
                         вҲҡ
e a)| вүӨ 2Пү + max . 2V      Пү
Q(s,               ОұU вҲ’ОұL


(5) Case M + Case U. Without loss of generality, we assume Q(s, a) is in Case M and Q(s,  e a) is
in Case U. Then we have
            e a)| вүӨПҒ(s, a) П•(s, a)вҠӨ (Оёr + ОёP вҲ’ (H вҲ’ h)) + (1 вҲ’ ПҒ(s, a)) |(H вҲ’ h) вҲ’ (H вҲ’ h)|
|Q(s, a) вҲ’ Q(s,
                                                                                          вҲҡ
                                                                                    2Vmax Пү
                     =ПҒ(s, a) П•(s, a)вҠӨ (Оёr + ОёP вҲ’ (H вҲ’ h)) вүӨ ПҒ(s, a) В· 2Vmax вүӨ
                                                                                     ОұU вҲ’ ОұL
where the last inequality is from
                      ОұU вҲ’ вҲҘП•(s, a)вҲҘОЈ        ОұU вҲ’ вҲҘП•(s, a)вҲҘОЈ вҲ’ вҲҘП•(s, a)вҲҘОЈ e + вҲҘП•(s, a)вҲҘОЈ
           ПҒ(s, a) =                     =
                                                                                       e
                           ОұU вҲ’ ОұL                             ОұU вҲ’ ОұL
                                                 q            p
                   вҲҘП•(s, a)вҲҘОЈ   вҲ’ вҲҘП•(s, a)вҲҘ ОЈ       П•вҠӨ ОЈП•
                                                        e вҲ’ П•вҠӨ ОЈП•
                 вүӨ                            =
                              e
                            ОұU вҲ’ ОұL                     ОұU вҲ’ ОұL
                   q                     q
                                                                      вҲҡ
                     |П•вҠӨ (ОЈ вҲ’ ОЈ)П•|
                                e           вҲҘП•вҲҘ2 вҲҘОЈ вҲ’ ОЈвҲҘe 2 вҲҘП•вҲҘ2        Пү
                 вүӨ                    вүӨ                           вүӨ         .
                       ОұU вҲ’ ОұL                  ОұU вҲ’ ОұL             ОұU вҲ’ ОұL
where the first inequality is by the condition that Q
                                                    e is in Case U.

                                                                               Оұ вҲ’вҲҘП•(s,a)вҲҘ
(6) Both are Case M. Denote ПҒ(s, a) = ОұU вҲ’вҲҘП•(s,a)вҲҘ
                                               ОұU вҲ’ОұL
                                                       ОЈ
                                                         and ПҒe(s, a) = U ОұU вҲ’ОұL ОЈe . Then, we
have
                                                        q
                            вҲҘП•(s, a)вҲҘОЈ                                             вҲҡ
                                     e вҲ’ вҲҘП•(s, a)вҲҘОЈ       вҲҘП•вҲҘ2 вҲҘОЈe вҲ’ ОЈвҲҘF вҲҘП•вҲҘ2         Пү
     |ПҒ(s, a) вҲ’ ПҒe(s, a)| =                          вүӨ                        вүӨ          ,
                                    ОұU вҲ’ ОұL                    ОұU вҲ’ ОұL          ОұU вҲ’ ОұL
                                                          вҲҡ
                                                          Пү
which also implies |(1 вҲ’ ПҒ(s, a)) вҲ’ (1 вҲ’ ПҒe(s, a))| вүӨ ОұU вҲ’Оұ L
                                                              . Hence, we have
                    e a)| вүӨ ПҒ(s, a)П•(s, a)вҠӨ (Оёr + ОёP ) вҲ’ ПҒe(s, a)П•(s, a)вҠӨ (ОёМғr + ОёМғP )
         |Q(s, a) вҲ’ Q(s,
                                 + |(1 вҲ’ ПҒ(s, a))(H вҲ’ h) вҲ’ (1 вҲ’ ПҒe(s, a))(H вҲ’ h)|
                               вүӨ ПҒ(s, a)П•(s, a)вҠӨ (Оёr + ОёP ) вҲ’ ПҒ(s, a)П•(s, a)вҠӨ (ОёМғr + ОёМғP )

                                 + ПҒ(s, a)П•(s, a)вҠӨ (ОёМғr + ОёМғP ) вҲ’ ПҒe(s, a)П•(s, a)вҠӨ (ОёМғr + ОёМғP )
                                + |(1 вҲ’ ПҒ(s, a))(H вҲ’ h) вҲ’ (1 вҲ’ ПҒe(s, a))(H вҲ’ h)|
                                          вҲҡ          вҲҡ
                                      Vmax Пү       H Пү
                               вүӨ2Пү +           +
                                      ОұU вҲ’ ОұL     ОұU вҲ’ ОұL

                                                   23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Putting Everything Together. Taking the maximum of the six cases, we conclude that
                                                            вҲҡ
                                                       2Vmax Пү
                            |Q(s, a) вҲ’ Q(s, a)| вүӨ 2Пү +
                                       e
                                                       ОұU вҲ’ ОұL
                     2
              U вҲ’ОұL
We set Пү = Оұ2tV max
                       and obtain
                                                                                         2
                                                                             ОұU вҲ’ ОұL              1   3
                                     |Q(s, a) вҲ’ Q(s,
                                                e a)| вүӨ 2                                    +      вүӨ
                                                                              2tVmax              t   t
where we leverage the condition that ОұL , ОұU вүӨ 1. Thus, we have
                                                                                          6
                                                           e | вүӨ 2 max Q(s, a) вҲ’ Q(s, a) вүӨ .
                              |xi,Оёr ,ОёP ,ОЈ вҲ’ xi,ОёМғr ,ОёМғP ,ОЈ                     e
                                                                   s,a                    t

Final Bound. The covering argument is now complete, and we can use it to derive an upper bound
for вҲҘО·P,t,h вҲҘОЈtвҲ’1,h . To that end, we note that, for О·P,t,h , there must exists (Оёr , ОёP , ОЈ) вҲҲ U and its
                        P , ОЈ) вҲҲ U such that
closest element (Оёer , Оёf   e    e

        вҲҘО·P,t,h вҲҘОЈtвҲ’1,h
              tвҲ’1
              X
        =            П•(si,h , ai,h ) V t,h+1 (si,h+1 ) вҲ’ E [V t,h+1 (si,h+1 ) | si,h , ai,h ]
                                                                    si,h+1
               i=1                                                                                                ОЈвҲ’1
                                                                                                                   tвҲ’1,h

              tвҲ’1
              X
        =            П•(si,h , ai,h )xi,Оёr ,ОёP ,ОЈ
               i=1                                     ОЈвҲ’1
                                                        tвҲ’1,h

              tвҲ’1
              X                                                      tвҲ’1
                                                                     X
        =            П•(si,h , ai,h )xi,ОёМғr ,ОёМғP ,ОЈ              +          П•(si,h , ai,h ) xi,Оёr ,ОёP ,ОЈ вҲ’ xi,ОёМғr ,ОёМғP ,ОЈ
               i=1                                     ОЈвҲ’1
                                                        tвҲ’1,h
                                                                     i=1                                                       ОЈвҲ’1
                                                                                                                                tвҲ’1,h


where the second term is bounded by
                                            tвҲ’1
                                            X
                                                  П•(si,h , ai,h ) xi,Оёr ,ОёP ,ОЈ вҲ’ xi,ОёМғr ,ОёМғP ,ОЈ
                                            i=1                                                       ОЈвҲ’1
                                                                                                       tвҲ’1,h

                                       tвҲ’1
                                       X
                                   вүӨ              П•(si,h , ai,h ) xi,Оёr ,ОёP ,ОЈ вҲ’ xi,ОёМғr ,ОёМғP ,ОЈ
                                                                                                      ОЈвҲ’1
                                                                                                       tвҲ’1,h
                                       i=1
                                    вҲҡ
                                   вүӨ О»вҲ’1 В· t В· max |xi,Оёr ,ОёP ,ОЈ вҲ’ xi,ОёМғr ,ОёМғP ,ОЈ |
                                                i
                                      вҲҡ
                                   вүӨ6/ О»,
and, applying (10), the first term is bounded by
    tвҲ’1
    X
            П•(si,h , ai,h )xi,ОёМғr ,ОёМғP ,ОЈ
    i=1                                      ОЈвҲ’1
                                              tвҲ’1,h
    s
                    t
вүӨ    2
  32Vmax  d log 1 +      + log(N/Оҙ)
                    О»
                                                         вҲҡ          вҲҡ            вҲҡ   вҲҡ
 v       пЈ«                                пЈ«                                                 пЈ¶пЈ¶
 u
 u
 u

                     t
                                            3 (B + Пөr,Оҫ / О») + (Vmax dt + ПөP,Оҫ )/ О» + d/О»
вүӨt32Vmax
     2   пЈӯd log 1 +      + (2d + d2 ) log пЈӯ                                                 пЈёпЈё
                    О»                                              ПүОҙ

                                                               вҲҡ           вҲҡ           вҲҡ    вҲҡ
      v                                   пЈ«                                                       пЈ¶
      u
                                               2 t2 (B + Пө
                                            12Vmax        r,Оҫ / О») + (Vmax dt + ПөP,Оҫ )/ О» +  d/О»
      u
      u            t
=Vmax t32d log 1 +     + 32(2d + d2 ) log пЈӯ                                                       пЈё
                   О»                                             (ОұU вҲ’ ОұL )2 Оҙ



                                                                       24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


where the second inequality is by inserting the upper bound of the covering number N , and the
equality is by inserting the value of Пү. The last line looks complicated and we can further simplify
it and get
       tвҲ’1
       X
             П•(si,h , ai,h )xi,ОёМғr ,ОёМғP ,ОЈ
       i=1                                   ОЈвҲ’1
                                              tвҲ’1,h

                                              вҲҡ            вҲҡ          вҲҡ   вҲҡ
            v пЈ«                                                                пЈ¶
            u
            u
            u      12Vmax t(t + О») (B + Пөr,Оҫ / О») + (Vmax dt + ПөP,Оҫ )/ О» + d/О»
   вүӨ16dVmax tlog пЈӯ                                                             пЈё.
                                              (ОұU вҲ’ ОұL )ОҙО»

Plugging these upper bounds back, we obtain
вҲҘО·P,t,h вҲҘОЈtвҲ’1,h
                                                   вҲҡ            вҲҡ              вҲҡ     вҲҡ
              v пЈ«                                                                           пЈ¶
              u
   6
              u      12Vmax t(t + О»)  (B + Пө r,Оҫ /   О») + (Vmax   dt + Пө P,Оҫ )/  О» +   d/О»
вүӨ вҲҡ + 16dVmax tlog пЈӯ
              u
                                                                                            пЈё.
    О»                                             (ОұU вҲ’ ОұL )ОҙО»

Applying union bound over all t вҲҲ [T ] and h вҲҲ [H], the upper bound exactly becomes ПөвҖІP,О· . Further
invoking Lemma B.3 finishes the proof.
Lemma B.11 (Boundness of value functions and transition estimation Error). Assume the events
define in Lemmas B.7 and B.9 hold. Then, the following holds with probability at least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ:

      1. maxs,a |Qt,h (s, a)| вүӨ Vmax for all t вҲҲ [T ] and h вҲҲ [H].

      2. вҲҘО·P,t,h вҲҘОЈtвҲ’1,h вүӨ ПөP,О· for all t вҲҲ [T ] and h вҲҲ [H].
      3. вҲҘО»t,h вҲҘОЈtвҲ’1,h вүӨ ПөО» for all t вҲҲ [T ] and h вҲҲ [H].

The first statement implies maxs |V t,h (s)| вүӨ Vmax for all t вҲҲ [T ] and h вҲҲ [H].

Proof. We prove the three statements together by induction.
                                                                            вҲҡ
For the first statement, we define Vmax,h := (H вҲ’ h + 1)(1 + (Пөr,Оҫ + Пөr,О· )/ О»), and we will actually
show that maxs,a |Qt,h (s, a) вҲ’ QвӢҶh (s, a)| вүӨ Vmax,h in the induction, which immediately leads to
maxs,a |Qt,h (s, a)| вүӨ Vmax,h + (H вҲ’ h + 1) вүӨ Vmax .

Base. For h = H, we can directly apply Lemma B.10 without the transition argument, which
leads to the desired upper bound of вҲҘО·P,t,H вҲҘОЈtвҲ’1,h . Moreover, the upper bound of вҲҘО»t,h вҲҘОЈtвҲ’1,h also
trivially holds. For an upper bound on the value function, we immediately have
          Qt,H (s, a) вҲ’ QвӢҶH (s, a) = П•(s, a)вҠӨ (Оёr,t вҲ’ ОёrвӢҶ ) вүӨ вҲҘП•(s, a)вҲҘОЈвҲ’1 вҲҘОёr,t вҲ’ ОёrвӢҶ вҲҘОЈtвҲ’1
                                                                        tвҲ’1
                                                                 вҲҡ
by Cauchy-Schwarz inequality. We note that вҲҘП•(s, a)вҲҘОЈвҲ’1 вүӨ О» and вҲҘОёr,t вҲ’ ОёrвӢҶ вҲҘОЈtвҲ’1 вүӨ вҲҘОҫr,t +
                                                                    вҲ’1
                                                          tвҲ’1
О·r,t вҲҘОЈtвҲ’1 вүӨ вҲҘОҫr,t вҲҘОЈtвҲ’1 + вҲҘО·r,t вҲҘОЈtвҲ’1 вүӨ Пөr,Оҫ + Пөr,О· . Hence, we have
                                                                 вҲҡ
                       Qt,H (s, a) вҲ’ QвӢҶH (s, a) вүӨ (Пөr,Оҫ + Пөr,О· )/ О» вүӨ Vmax,H .

Inductive Steps. Now consider h < H. By induction hypothesis, we have maxt,s |V t,h+1 (s)| вүӨ
Vmax . Thus, we can apply Lemma B.10 and get вҲҘО·P,t,h вҲҘОЈtвҲ’1,h вүӨ ПөP,О· . For the upper bound of
вҲҘО»t,h вҲҘОЈtвҲ’1,h , by definition, we have
                                            Z
                          вҲҘО»t,h вҲҘОЈtвҲ’1,h = О»   ВөвӢҶh (sвҖІ )V t,h+1 (sвҖІ ) dsвҖІ
                                                      sвҖІ                                 ОЈвҲ’1
                                                                                          tвҲ’1,h

                                                 вҲҡ    Z
                                                вүӨ О»             ВөвӢҶh (sвҖІ )V t,h+1 (sвҖІ ) dsвҖІ
                                                           sвҖІ                                2
                                                     вҲҡ
                                                вүӨVmax О»d = ПөО»


                                                                25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                          вҲ’1/2       вҲҡ
where the second inequality is by вҲҘОЈtвҲ’1,h вҲҘ2 вүӨ           О», and the last inequality is by Assumption 4.1.
For the upper bound on the value function, consider the following three cases.

Case 1: вҲҘП•(s, a)вҲҘОЈвҲ’1     вүӨ ОұL . We apply Lemma B.5 and get
                    tвҲ’1,h


 |П•(s, a)вҠӨ Оёr,t + ОёP,t,h вҲ’ QвӢҶh (s, a)|



= П•(s, a)вҠӨ (Оҫr,t + ОҫP,t,h + О·r,t + О·P,t,h вҲ’ О»t,h ) + E V t,h+1 (sвҖІ ) вҲ’ Vh+1
                                                                        вӢҶ
                                                                            (sвҖІ ) s, a

                                                           sвҖІ

вүӨ П•(s, a)вҠӨ (Оҫr,t + О·r,t ) + П•(s, a)вҠӨ (ОҫP,t,h + О·P,t,h вҲ’ О»t,h ) + E V t,h+1 (sвҖІ ) вҲ’ Vh+1
                                                                                    вӢҶ
                                                                                        (sвҖІ ) s, a

                                                                 sвҖІ

                вҲҡ                                                                       вҲҡ
вүӨ(Пөr,Оҫ + Пөr,О· )/ О» + вҲҘП•(s, a)вҲҘОЈвҲ’1 (ПөP,Оҫ + ПөP,О· + ПөО» ) + (H вҲ’ h)(1 + Пөr,Оҫ + Пөr,О· )/ О»
                                tвҲ’1,h
                вҲҡ                                      вҲҡ
вүӨ(Пөr,Оҫ + Пөr,О· )/ О» + 1 + (H вҲ’ h)(1 + Пөr,Оҫ + Пөr,О· )/ О»
                                 вҲҡ
=(H вҲ’ h + 1)(1 + Пөr,Оҫ + Пөr,О· )/ О»
=Vmax,h
where the second inequality is by Cauchy-Schwarz inequality, Lemmas B.7 and B.9, and the induc-
tion hypothesis. The third inequality is by the condition that вҲҘП•(s, a)вҲҘОЈвҲ’1 вүӨ ОұL and the definition
                                                                         tвҲ’1,h
of ОұL .

Case 2: вҲҘП•(s, a)вҲҘОЈвҲ’1         > ОұU . We have
                    tвҲ’1,h


       |Qt,h (s, a) вҲ’ QвӢҶh (s, a) вүӨ|П•(s, a)вҠӨ Оёr,t + H вҲ’ h вҲ’ QвӢҶh (s, a)|
                                     =|П•(s, a)вҠӨ (Оҫr,t + О·r,t ) + H вҲ’ h + П•(s, a)вҠӨ ОёrвӢҶ вҲ’ QвӢҶh (s, a)|
                                                     вҲҡ
                                     вүӨ(Пөr,Оҫ + Пөr,О· )/ О» + (H вҲ’ h + 1)
                                     вүӨVmax,h
where we used the fact that 0 вүӨ П•(s, a)вҠӨ ОёrвӢҶ вүӨ 1 and 0 вүӨ QвӢҶh (s, a) вүӨ H вҲ’ h + 1, which leads to
вҲ’(H вҲ’ h + 1) вүӨ П•(s, a)вҠӨ ОёrвӢҶ вҲ’ QвӢҶh (s, a) вүӨ 1.

Case 3: ОұL < вҲҘП•(s, a)вҲҘОЈвҲ’1            вүӨ ОұU . Denoting ПҒ := ПҒ(s, a) for simplicity, we have
                             tвҲ’1,h


  Qt,h (s, a) вҲ’ QвӢҶh (s, a)

вүӨПҒ П•(s, a)вҠӨ Оёr,t + ОёP,t,h вҲ’ QвӢҶh (s, a) + (1 вҲ’ ПҒ) П•(s, a)вҠӨ Оёr,t + H вҲ’ h вҲ’ QвӢҶh (s, a)

                                 вҲҡ
вүӨПҒ(H вҲ’ h + 1) 1 + (Пөr,Оҫ + Пөr,О· )/ О» + (1 вҲ’ ПҒ) П•(s, a)вҠӨ (Оҫr,t + О·r,t ) + H вҲ’ h + П•(s, a)вҠӨ ОёrвӢҶ вҲ’ QвӢҶh (s, a)
                                 вҲҡ                              вҲҡ
вүӨПҒ(H вҲ’ h + 1) 1 + (Пөr,Оҫ + Пөr,О· )/ О» + (1 вҲ’ ПҒ) (Пөr,Оҫ + Пөr,О· )/ О» + (H вҲ’ h + 1)
вүӨVmax,h
where we have used the similar arguments from Case 1 and 2.
Taking the maximum over the three cases, we conclude that
                                      |Qt,h (s, a) вҲ’ QвӢҶh (s, a)| вүӨ Vmax,h
which implies maxs,a |Qt,h (s, a)| вүӨ Vmax .
Lemma B.12 (High probability bounds вҖ“ summary). All of the following events hold simultaneously
with probability at least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ:

     1. вҲҘОҫr,t вҲҘОЈtвҲ’1 вүӨ Пөr,Оҫ for all t вҲҲ [T ]
     2. вҲҘОҫP,t,h вҲҘОЈtвҲ’1,h вүӨ ПөP,Оҫ for all t вҲҲ [T ] and h вҲҲ [H].


                                                      26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


           3. вҲҘО·r,t вҲҘОЈtвҲ’1 вүӨ Пөr,О· for all t вҲҲ [T ].
           4. вҲҘО·P,t,h вҲҘОЈtвҲ’1,h вүӨ ПөP,О· for all t вҲҲ [T ] and h вҲҲ [H].

           5. вҲҘО»t,h вҲҘОЈtвҲ’1,h вүӨ ПөО» for all t вҲҲ [T ] and h вҲҲ [H].

           6. |Qt,h (s, a)| вүӨ Vmax and |V t,h (s)| вүӨ Vmax for all (s, a) вҲҲ S Г— A, t вҲҲ [T ], and h вҲҲ [H].

Proof of Lemma B.12. The first and second statements are by Lemma B.7. The third is by
Lemma B.9. The last three are by Lemma B.11. Then we take a union bound over all of them.

B.4        B OUNDING REGRET

We define
                                                       "H                    #
                                                        X
                                                                         вҠӨ
                                         Vet = E             П•(sh , ah ) Оёr,t .
                                                 1
                                               П„ вҲјПҖt
                                                       h=1

Lemma B.13. Assume all events listed in Lemma B.12 hold. Fix t вҲҲ [T ]. Then, we have (V вӢҶ вҲ’
                 1
V t ) + (Ve вҲ’ V ПҖt ) вүӨ 0 with probability at least F2 (вҲ’1) where F denotes the CDF of a standard
normal distribution (i.e., N (0, 1)).

Proof. Define the indicators
                                            n                             o
                               LвӢҶt,h (s) :=1 вҲҘП•(s, ПҖ вӢҶ (s))вҲҘОЈвҲ’1 вүӨ ОұL ,
                                                              tвҲ’1,h
                                            n                               o
                                 вӢҶ                          вӢҶ
                               Mt,h (s) :=1 ОұL < вҲҘП•(s, ПҖ (s))вҲҘОЈвҲ’1 вүӨ ОұU ,
                                                                    tвҲ’1,h
                                            n                             o
                                 вӢҶ                   вӢҶ
                               Ut,h (s) :=1 вҲҘП•(s, ПҖ (s))вҲҘОЈвҲ’1 > ОұU .
                                                                   tвҲ’1,h


We note that they are independent of the random noises at episode t and only depends on the infor-
mation up to episode t вҲ’ 1. Then, we can decompose V вӢҶ вҲ’ V t :
         V вӢҶ вҲ’ V t = E V1вӢҶ (s1 ) вҲ’ V t,1 (s1 ) = E QвӢҶ1 (s1 , ПҖ вӢҶ (s1 )) вҲ’ Qt,1 (s1 , ПҖt,1
                                                                                       0

                                                                                          (s1 ))
                      s1                             s1

                   вүӨ E Q1 (s1 , ПҖ (s1 )) вҲ’ Qt,1 (s1 , ПҖ вӢҶ (s1 ))
                           вӢҶ      вӢҶ

                      s1

                   = E LвӢҶt,1 (s1 ) QвӢҶ1 (s1 , ПҖ вӢҶ (s1 )) вҲ’ Qt,1 (s1 , ПҖ вӢҶ (s1 ))

                      s1
                              вӢҶ
                                 (s1 ) QвӢҶ1 (s1 , ПҖ вӢҶ (s1 )) вҲ’ Qt,1 (s1 , ПҖ вӢҶ (s1 ))

                      + E Mt,1
                         s1
                              вӢҶ
                                (s1 ) QвӢҶ1 (s1 , ПҖ вӢҶ (s1 )) вҲ’ Qt,1 (s1 , ПҖ вӢҶ (s1 ))

                      + E Ut,1
                               s1
                         =:TL + TM , +TU .
Now we establish upper bounds for each term. For TU , we have
        вӢҶ          вӢҶ        вӢҶ                       вӢҶ

   E Ut,1 (s1 ) Q1 (s1 , ПҖ (s1 )) вҲ’ Qt,1 (s1 , ПҖ (s1 ))
   s1

          (s1 ) QвӢҶ1 (s1 , ПҖ вӢҶ (s1 )) вҲ’ П•(s1 , ПҖ вӢҶ (s1 ))вҠӨ Оёr,t вҲ’ (H вҲ’ 1)
        вӢҶ
 = E Ut,1
   s1

          (s1 ) QвӢҶ1 (s1 , ПҖ вӢҶ (s1 )) вҲ’ П•(s1 , ПҖ вӢҶ (s1 ))вҠӨ ОёrвӢҶ вҲ’ П•(s1 , ПҖ вӢҶ (s1 ))вҠӨ (О·r,t + Оҫr,t ) вҲ’ (H вҲ’ 1)
        вӢҶ
 = E Ut,1
   s1
      h                              вҠӨ                i
           вӢҶ
 вүӨ E вҲ’Ut,1    (s1 )П•(s1 , ПҖ вӢҶ (s1 )) (О·r,t + Оҫr,t )
      s1

where the inequality holds since
               QвӢҶ1 (s1 , ПҖ вӢҶ (s1 )) вҲ’ П•(s1 , ПҖ вӢҶ (s1 ))вҠӨ ОёrвӢҶ вҲ’ (H вҲ’ 1)
             =П•(s1 , ПҖ вӢҶ (s1 ))вҠӨ ОёrвӢҶ + E [V2вӢҶ (s2 ) | s1 , ПҖ вӢҶ (s1 )] вҲ’ П•(s1 , ПҖ вӢҶ (s1 ))вҠӨ ОёrвӢҶ вҲ’ (H вҲ’ 1) вүӨ 0.
                                       s2



                                                           27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


For TL , we have
       вӢҶ          вӢҶ         вӢҶ                       вӢҶ

  E Lt,1 (s1 ) Q1 (s1 , ПҖ (s1 )) вҲ’ Qt,1 (s1 , ПҖ (s1 ))
  s1

= E LвӢҶt,1 (s1 ) QвӢҶ1 (s1 , ПҖ вӢҶ (s1 )) вҲ’ П•(s1 , ПҖ вӢҶ (s1 ))вҠӨ (Оёr,t + ОёP,t,h )

  s1

= E LвӢҶt,1 (s1 ) вҲ’П•(s1 , ПҖ вӢҶ (s1 ))вҠӨ (Оҫr,t + ОҫP,t,1 + О·r,t + О·P,t,1 вҲ’ О»t,1 ) + E V2вӢҶ (s2 ) вҲ’ V t,2 (sвҖІ ) s1 , ПҖ вӢҶ (s1 )

  s1                                                                                              s2


where the last equality is by Lemma B.5.
For TM , we have
       вӢҶ         вӢҶ        вӢҶ                       вӢҶ

  E Mt,1 (s1 ) Q1 (s1 , ПҖ (s1 )) вҲ’ Qt,1 (s1 , ПҖ (s1 ))
  s1

= E Mt,1 (s1 ) ПҒ(s1 , ПҖ вӢҶ (s1 )) QвӢҶ1 (s1 , ПҖ вӢҶ (s1 )) вҲ’ П•(s1 , ПҖ вӢҶ (s1 ))вҠӨ (Оёr,t + ОёP,t,1 )
         вӢҶ
  s1

                     + 1 вҲ’ ПҒ(s1 , ПҖ (s1 ))        вӢҶ
                                                               QвӢҶ1 (s1 , ПҖ вӢҶ (s1 )) вҲ’ П•(s1 , ПҖ вӢҶ (s1 ))вҠӨ Оёr,t вҲ’ (H вҲ’ h)

вүӨ E Mt,1 (s1 ) ПҒ(s1 , ПҖ (s1 )) вҲ’ П•(s1 , ПҖ вӢҶ (s1 ))вҠӨ (Оҫr,t + ОҫP,t,1 + О·r,t + О·P,t,1 вҲ’ О»t,1 )
        вӢҶ               вӢҶ
  s1

         вӢҶ               вҖІ        вӢҶ
                                                           вӢҶ
                                                                              вӢҶ       вҠӨ
  + E V2 (s2 ) вҲ’ V t,2 (s ) s1 , ПҖ (s1 )    + 1 вҲ’ ПҒ(s1 , ПҖ (s1 )) (вҲ’П•(s1 , ПҖ (s1 ))) (О·r,t + Оҫr,t )
       s2


where the inequality is by similar arguments as in the case of TU and TL .
So putting TL , TM , TU together, we have

 VвӢҶвҲ’Vt

вүӨE      вӢҶ
       Ut,1          вӢҶ
            (s1 ) + Mt,1 (s1 )(1 вҲ’ ПҒ(s1 , ПҖ вӢҶ (s1 ))) (вҲ’П•(s1 , ПҖ вӢҶ (s1 )))вҠӨ (О·r,t + Оҫr,t )
 s1
     |                     {z                        }
                                     вӢҶ (s )
                                =:U Mt,1 1

       + LвӢҶt,1 (s1 ) + Mt,1
                        вӢҶ
                            (s1 )ПҒ(s1 , ПҖ вӢҶ (s1 ))   вҲ’ П•(s1 , ПҖ вӢҶ (s1 ))вҠӨ (Оҫr,t + ОҫP,t,1 + О·r,t + О·P,t,1 вҲ’ О»t,1 )
        |                 {z                       }
                                  вӢҶ (s )
                              =:LMt,1 1


                                                                              + E V2вӢҶ (s2 ) вҲ’ V t,2 (sвҖІ ) s1 , ПҖ вӢҶ (s1 )

                                                                                s2


Keeping expanding the last term, we arrive at
                          " H                      hвҲ’1
                                                                      !
                           X                       Y
  вӢҶ                                    вӢҶ                   вӢҶ
                                                                          вҲ’П•(sh , ah )вҠӨ (Оҫr,t + О·r,t )

V вҲ’Vt вүӨ EвӢҶ                          U Mt,h (sh )         LMt,i (si )
                   П„ вҲјПҖ
                              h=1                  i=1
                              H     h
                                                      !                                                                    #
                              X     Y
                                            вӢҶ                             вҠӨ

                          +               LMt,i (si )     вҲ’П•(sh , ah ) (Оҫr,t + ОҫP,t,h + О·r,t + О·P,t,h вҲ’ О»t,h )
                              h=1   i=1
                          " H                      hвҲ’1                    h
                                                                                              !
                           X                       Y                      Y
                                       вӢҶ                   вӢҶ                      вӢҶ
                                                                                                  вҲ’П•(sh , ah )вҠӨ (Оҫr,t + О·r,t )

                = EвӢҶ                U Mt,h (sh )         LMt,i (si ) +          LMt,i (si )
                   П„ вҲјПҖ
                              h=1                  i=1                    i=1
                              H h
                                                      !                                                    #
                              X Y
                                            вӢҶ
                                                          вҲ’П•(sh , ah )вҠӨ (ОҫP,t,h + О·P,t,h вҲ’ О»t,h )

                          +               LMt,i (si )
                              h=1   i=1
                                               H
                                               X
                =:(вҲ’П•вӢҶr )вҠӨ (Оҫr,t + О·r,t ) +          (вҲ’П•вӢҶP,h )вҠӨ (ОҫP,t,h + О·P,t,h вҲ’ О»t,h )
                                               h=1


                                                                 28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


where in the last step we defined П•вӢҶr and П•вӢҶP,h as
                        "H                   hвҲ’1               h
                                                                            !           #
                         X                   Y                 Y
             вӢҶ                       вӢҶ             вӢҶ               вӢҶ
           П•r := E вӢҶ           U Mt,h (sh )      LMt,i (si ) +   LMt,i (si ) П•(sh , ah ) ,
                         П„ вҲјПҖ
                                     h=1                            i=1                   i=1
                                 "    h
                                                                !               #
                                      Y
              П•вӢҶP,h := E вӢҶ                    вӢҶ
                                            LMt,i (si ) П•(sh , ah ) .
                         П„ вҲјПҖ
                                      i=1
                                                   1
Now we also decompose Vet вҲ’ V ПҖt and get
                                                                    "H               #вҠӨ
                                               ПҖt1
                                                                     X
                                                                                                   Оёr,t вҲ’ ОёrвӢҶ

                                     Vet вҲ’ V           = E                 П•(sh , ah )
                                                           1
                                                          П„ вҲјПҖt
                                                                     h=1
                                                                    "H               #вҠӨ
                                                                     X
                                                       = E                 П•(sh , ah )      (Оҫr,t + О·r,t )
                                                           1
                                                          П„ вҲјПҖt
                                                                     h=1

                                                       =:(П•et )вҠӨ (Оҫr,t + О·r,t ) .
Combining the decomposition together, we obtain
                            1
    (V вӢҶ вҲ’ V t ) + (Ve вҲ’ V ПҖt )
                                       H
                                                                                                     !
                                       X
вүӨ       (вҲ’П•вӢҶr )вҠӨ (Оҫr,t + О·r,t ) +            (вҲ’П•вӢҶP,h )вҠӨ (ОҫP,t,h + О·P,t,h вҲ’ О»t,h )                        + П•eвҠӨ
                                                                                                             t (Оҫr,t + О·r,t )
                                       h=1
                   вҠӨ                        H
                                            X
= П•et вҲ’ П•вӢҶ             (Оҫr,t + О·r,t ) +            (вҲ’П•вӢҶP,h )вҠӨ (ОҫP,t,h + О·P,t,h вҲ’ О»t,h )
                                            h=1

вүӨвҲҘП•et вҲ’ П•вӢҶ вҲҘОЈвҲ’1 вҲҘО·r,t вҲҘОЈtвҲ’1 + (П•et вҲ’ П•вӢҶ )вҠӨ Оҫr,t
                   tвҲ’1

        H                                                          H
                                                                     П•вӢҶP,h вҠӨ ОҫP,t,h
        X                                                         X
    +         вҲҘП•вӢҶP,h вҲҘОЈвҲ’1        вҲҘО·P,t,h вҲҘОЈtвҲ’1,h + вҲҘО»t,h вҲҘОЈtвҲ’1,h вҲ’
                         tвҲ’1,h
        h=1                                                                              h=1
                                      v
                                      uH                                                           q                        H
                                                                                                                                 П•вӢҶP,h вҠӨ ОҫP,t,h
                                      uX                                                                                    X
        вӢҶ                   вӢҶ вҠӨ
вүӨвҲҘП•t вҲ’ П• вҲҘОЈвҲ’1 Пөr,О· вҲ’ (П•t вҲ’ П• ) Оҫr,t + t
  e                   e                  вҲҘП•вӢҶP,h вҲҘ2ОЈвҲ’1                                          В·       H(ПөP,О· + ПөО» )2 вҲ’
                   tвҲ’1                                                              tвҲ’1,h
                                                                     h=1                                                   h=1

= вҲҘП•et вҲ’ П•вӢҶ вҲҘОЈвҲ’1 Пөr,О· вҲ’ (П•et вҲ’ П•вӢҶ )вҠӨ Оҫr,t
              tвҲ’1
  |                 {z                  }
                           (a)
      v
      uH                                             q                 H
                                                                         П•вӢҶP,h вҠӨ ОҫP,t,h
      uX                                                               X
    + t  min 1, вҲҘП•вӢҶP,h вҲҘ2ОЈвҲ’1                        В· H(ПөP,О· + ПөО» )2 вҲ’
                                           tвҲ’1,h
            h=1                                                                      h=1
        |                                                  {z                                                   }
                                                          (b)

where the second inequality is by Cauchy-Schwarz inequality, the third inequality is Lemma B.12
and Cauchy-Schwarz inequality again, and the last step is by the fact that вҲҘП•вӢҶP,h вҲҘ2ОЈвҲ’1 вүӨ 1/О» вүӨ 1.
                                                                                                                         tвҲ’1,h



For (a), we note that (П•et вҲ’ П•вӢҶ )вҠӨ Оҫr,t вҲј N (0, Пғr2 вҲҘП•et вҲ’ П•вӢҶ вҲҘ2ОЈвҲ’1 ). So by setting Пғr вүҘ Пөr,О· , we have
                                                                                           tвҲ’1
(a) вүӨ 0 with probability at least F(вҲ’1).
                                PH                              PH
For (b), similarly, we note that h=1 П•вӢҶP,h вҠӨ ОҫP,t,h вҲј N (0, ПғP
                                                             2          вӢҶ    2
                                                                  h=1 вҲҘП•P,h вҲҘОЈвҲ’1 ). So by set-
                                                                               tвҲ’1,h
         p
ting ПғP вүҘ H(ПөP,О· + ПөО» )2 , we have (b) вүӨ 0 with probability at least F(вҲ’1).

Conclusion. Finally, we note that (a) and (b) are independent, so the probability that both (a) and
(b) hold is at least F2 (вҲ’1).


                                                                           29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Lemma B.14. It holds that
                                                     T X
                                                     X H
                                                                   LвҲҒt,h (st,h ) вүӨ Lmax .
                                                         t=1 h=1


Proof. Denote at,h = ПҖt (st,h ). Then, we have
                           T X
                           X H                                T X
                                                              X H  n                                                      o
                                           LвҲҒt,h (st,h ) =        1 вҲҘП•(st,h , at,h )вҲҘ2ОЈвҲ’1                           2
                                                                                                                 > ОұL
                                                                                                         tвҲ’1,h
                           t=1 h=1                            t=1 h=1
                                                 пЈұ                                        пЈј
                           T X
                           X H                   пЈІ вҲҘП•(st,h , at,h )вҲҘ2ОЈвҲ’1                  пЈҪ
                                                                             tвҲ’1,h
                       вүӨ                   min                      2                ,1
                           t=1 h=1
                                                 пЈі                 ОұL                     пЈҫ
                                     H      T
                         1 XX          n                          o
                       вүӨ  2         min вҲҘП•(st,h , at,h )вҲҘ2ОЈвҲ’1 , 1
                        ОұL                                 tвҲ’1,h
                            h=1 t=1

                        H             О»+T
                       вүӨ 2 В· 2d log         = Lmax
                        ОұL             О»
where the second inequality uses the fact that ОұL < 1, and the last inequality is by Lemma D.6.

Lemma B.15. Assume all events listed in Lemma B.12 hold. Then, the following holds
                                                          вҲҡ
  X
               0               1
     (V t вҲ’ V ПҖt ) вҲ’ (Vet вҲ’ V ПҖt ) =Oe Vmax Lmax + Vmax HT
    t
                                                                                              вҲҡ           вҲҡ
                                                                                                                       вҲҡ

                                                                                                        ПөT ПҖ
                                                                    + (Пөr,Оҫ + Пөr,О· )              dT + Lmax +              HT +
                                                                                                         2Пғr
                                                                                           вҲҡ           вҲҡ
                                                                    + (ПөP,Оҫ + ПөP,О· + ПөО» ) H dT + Lmax + HT .


Proof. By definition, we have
    T
    X                0               1
           (V t вҲ’ V ПҖt ) вҲ’ (Vet вҲ’ V ПҖt )
    t=1
    T                                                      T X
                                                             H
                                          ПҖ0
    X                 h                                 i X
                                                                                                   П•(sh , ah ) Оёr,t вҲ’ ОёrвӢҶ

=            E         Qt,1 (s1 , a1 ) вҲ’ Q1 t (s1 , a1 ) вҲ’                                E
                 0                                                                       1
    t=1 s1 ,a1 вҲјПҖt                                                      t=1 h=1 sh ,ah вҲјПҖt

By triangle inequality, we have
    T                                                                   T X
                                                                          H
                                                       ПҖ0
    X                 h                                               i X
вүӨ            E         Lt,1 (st,1 ) Qt,1 (s1 , a1 ) вҲ’ Q1 t (s1 , a1 ) вҲ’                                       E        П•(sh , ah ) (Оҫr,t + О·r,t )
                  0                                                                                                1
    t=1 s1 ,a1 вҲјПҖt                                                                            t=1 h=1 sh ,ah вҲјПҖt
               T
               X                     h                   i
    + 2Vmax                E             LвҲҒt,1 (st,1 )
                                 0
               t=1 s1 ,a1 вҲјПҖt

For the first term, conditioning on Lt,1 (st,1 ), we have
    T
                                                                     ПҖ0
    X                 h                                                             i
=            E         Lt,1 (st,1 ) П•(s1 , a1 )вҠӨ (Оёr,t + ОёP,t,1 ) вҲ’ Q1 t (s1 , a1 )
                  0
    t=1 s1 ,a1 вҲјПҖt
        T X
        X H                                                                      T
                                                                                 X                      h             i
    вҲ’                 E         П•(sh , ah ) (Оҫr,t + О·r,t ) + 2Vmax                            E          LвҲҒt,1 (st,1 )
                            1                                                                       0
        t=1 h=1 sh ,ah вҲјПҖt                                                           t=1 s1 ,a1 вҲјПҖt



                                                                        30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Applying triangle inequality again, we get
    T                                                                       T X
                                                                              H
                                                           ПҖ0
    X                   h                                                 i X
вүӨ              E          П•(s1 , a1 )вҠӨ (Оёr,t + ОёP,t,1 ) вҲ’ Q1 t (s1 , a1 ) вҲ’                                             E           П•(sh , ah ) (Оҫr,t + О·r,t )
                    0                                                                                                           1
    t=1 s1 ,a1 вҲјПҖt                                                                                        t=1 h=1 sh ,ah вҲјПҖt
                T
                X                        h                i
    + 2Vmax                  E               LвҲҒt,1 (st,1 )
                                     0
                t=1 s1 ,a1 вҲјПҖt
        T
                                                                             ПҖ0
        X                    h                                                              i
    +              E          LвҲҒt,1 (st,1 ) П•(s1 , a1 )вҠӨ (Оёr,t + ОёP,t,1 ) вҲ’ Q1 t (s1 , a1 )
                         0
        t=1 s1 ,a1 вҲјПҖt

Applying Lemma B.5 and the triangle inequality, we get
    T                                        T X
                                               H
                                  ПҖ0
    X            h                        i X
вүӨ             E 0 V t,2 (s2 ) вҲ’ V2 t (s2 ) вҲ’                                            E       П•(sh , ah ) (Оҫr,t + О·r,t )
                                                                                            1
    t=1 s2 вҲјПҖt                                                        t=1 h=2 sh ,ah вҲјПҖt
        T
                                                                                                                                                           !
        X
                                 вҠӨ                                                                                             вҠӨ
    +               E         П• (s1 , a1 )(Оҫr,t + ОҫP,t,1 + О·r,t + О·P,t,1 вҲ’ О»t,1 ) вҲ’                                 E         П• (s1 , a1 )(Оҫr,t + О·r,t )
        t=1    s1 ,a1 вҲјПҖt0                                                                                      s1 ,a1 вҲјПҖt1

                T
                X                        h                      i
    + 2Vmax                  E               LвҲҒt,1 (st,1 )
                                     0
                t=1 s1 ,a1 вҲјПҖt
        T
                                                                             ПҖ0
        X                    h                                                              i
    +              E          LвҲҒt,1 (st,1 ) П•(s1 , a1 )вҠӨ (Оёr,t + ОёP,t,1 ) вҲ’ Q1 t (s1 , a1 )
                         0
        t=1 s1 ,a1 вҲјПҖt

Keep expanding the first term, we get
              T
              X                   0               1
                        (V t вҲ’ V ПҖt ) вҲ’ (Vet вҲ’ V ПҖt )
              t=1
                             H X
                             X T                                h                   i
              вүӨ 2Vmax                                 E             LвҲҒt,h (st,h )
                                              sh ,ah вҲјПҖt0
                             h=1 t=1
                      T
                    H X
                                                                                                             ПҖ0
                    X                                     h                                                                i
                +                             E               LвҲҒt,h (st,h ) П•(sh , ah )вҠӨ (Оёr,t + ОёP,t,h ) вҲ’ Qht (sh , ah )
                           s ,a вҲјПҖt                   0
                    h=1 t=1 h h
                       T X
                         H
                                                                                                                                    !
                       X                                                                                 вҠӨ
                +                                 E                 E          П•(sh , ah ) вҲ’ П•(e
                                                                                               sh , e
                                                                                                    ah ) (Оҫr,t + О·r,t )
                       t=1 h=1           sh ,ah вҲјПҖt0 s   ah вҲјПҖt1
                                                     eh ,e

                       T X
                       X H
                +                             E           П•вҠӨ (sh , ah ) ОҫP,t,h + О·P,t,h вҲ’ О»t,h
                                                      0
                       t=1 h=1 sh ,ah вҲјПҖt
              =: T1 + T2 + T3 + T4 .

We bound each term separately.

Bounding T1 .            By HoeffdingвҖҷs inequality and Lemma B.14, we have
                                          H X T h                     r
                                         X
                                                  вҲҒ
                                                             i          HT
                              T1 вүӨ 2Vmax         Lt,h (st,h ) + 2Vmax      log(1/Оҙ)
                                                                         2
                                         h=1 t=1
                                                  r                !
                                                     HT
                                 вүӨ 2Vmax Lmax +            log(1/Оҙ) .
                                                       2

with probability at least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ.


                                                                                    31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Bounding T2 . By definition and Lemma B.4, we have
     H
     X   XT
T2 =           E       LвҲҒt,h (st,h ) П•(sh , ah )вҠӨ (Оҫr,t + О·r,t + ОёrвӢҶ + ОҫP,t,h + О·P,t,h + О»t,h + ОёP,t,h
                                                                                                 вӢҶ
                                                                                                       )
                                 0
       h=1   t=1 sh ,ah вҲјПҖt

            ПҖ0
         вҲ’ Qht (sh , ah )

       H T
                                                                                   ПҖ0
       X X
   вүӨ                    E             Lt,h (st,h ) П•(sh , ah )вҠӨ (ОёrвӢҶ + ОёP,t,h
                                       вҲҒ                                вӢҶ
                                                                              ) вҲ’ Qht (sh , ah )
                                 0
       h=1   t=1 sh ,ah вҲјПҖt

         + П•вҠӨ (sh , ah )(Оҫr,t + О·r,t ) + П•вҠӨ (sh , ah )(ОҫP,t,h + О·P,t,h + О»t,h )

       H T
                                                                                   ПҖ0
       X X
   вүӨ                    E             Lt,h (st,h ) П•(sh , ah )вҠӨ (ОёrвӢҶ + ОёP,t,h
                                       вҲҒ                                вӢҶ
                                                                              ) вҲ’ Qht (sh , ah )
                                 0
       h=1   t=1 sh ,ah вҲјПҖt
         + вҲҘП•(sh , ah )вҲҘОЈвҲ’1 (вҲҘОҫr,t вҲҘОЈtвҲ’1 + вҲҘО·r,t вҲҘОЈtвҲ’1 )
                                     tвҲ’1

         + вҲҘП•(sh , ah )вҲҘОЈвҲ’1                  (вҲҘОҫP,t,h вҲҘОЈtвҲ’1,h + вҲҘО·P,t,h вҲҘОЈtвҲ’1,h + вҲҘО»t,h вҲҘОЈtвҲ’1,h )   .
                                     tвҲ’1,h



                                                                                  ПҖ0
We note that |П•(sh , ah )вҠӨ (ОёrвӢҶ + ОёP,t,h
                                    вӢҶ
                                         )| вүӨ Vmax and |Qht (sh , ah )| вүӨ Vmax . Moreover, we have
                       вҲҡ                                    вҲҡ
вҲҘП•(sh , ah )вҲҘОЈвҲ’1 вүӨ 1/ О» and вҲҘП•(sh , ah )вҲҘОЈвҲ’1 вүӨ 1/ О». Apply triangle inequality and inserting
               tвҲ’1                              tвҲ’1,h
these upper bounds back, we obtain
       H     T
                                                                        ПҖ0
      X     X
T2 вүӨ               E      LвҲҒt,h (st,h ) П•(sh , ah )вҠӨ (ОёrвӢҶ + ОёP,t,h
                                                             вӢҶ
                                                                   ) вҲ’ Qht (sh , ah )
                                 0
       h=1   t=1 sh ,ah вҲјПҖt
             H X
             X T
                                             вҲҒ
         +                   E              Lt,h (st,h )вҲҘП•(sh , ah )вҲҘОЈвҲ’1 (вҲҘОҫr,t вҲҘОЈtвҲ’1 + вҲҘО·r,t вҲҘОЈtвҲ’1 )
                                                                            tвҲ’1
                        sh ,ah вҲјПҖt0
             h=1 t=1
             H X
             X T
         +                   E                 LвҲҒt,h (st,h )вҲҘП•(sh , ah )вҲҘОЈвҲ’1 (вҲҘОҫP,t,h вҲҘОЈtвҲ’1,h + вҲҘО·P,t,h вҲҘОЈtвҲ’1,h + вҲҘО»t,h вҲҘОЈtвҲ’1,h )
                                                                          tвҲ’1,h
                        sh ,ah вҲјПҖt0
             h=1 t=1
                 H X
                 X T
   вүӨ 2Vmax                           E             LвҲҒt,h (st,h )
                            sh ,ah вҲјПҖt0
                 h=1 t=1

             вҲҡ         H X
                       X T
         +       О»вҲ’1                         E         LвҲҒt,h (st,h )(Пөr,Оҫ + Пөr,О· + ПөP,Оҫ + ПөP,О· + ПөО» )
                                      sh ,ah вҲјПҖt0
                       h=1 t=1
       H X
         T
       X                                       Пөr,Оҫ + Пөr,О· + ПөP,Оҫ + ПөP,О· + ПөО»
   =                   E LвҲҒt,h (st,h ) 2Vmax +               вҲҡ                  .
              s ,a вҲјПҖt0
       h=1 t=1 h h
                                                               О»
       |            {z                }
                           (вҲ—)

We notice that (вҲ—) can be bounded by HoeffdingвҖҷs inequality and Lemma B.14, as we did similarly
for T1 :
                                              r
                                                  HT
                                (вҲ—) вүӨ Lmax +          log(1/Оҙ)
                                                   2
Hence, we have
                                         r                !
                                               HT                   Пөr,Оҫ + Пөr,О· + ПөP,Оҫ + ПөP,О· + ПөО»
             T2 вүӨ      Lmax +                     log(1/Оҙ)  2Vmax +               вҲҡ
                                                2                                   О»
with probability at least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ.


                                                                       32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Bounding T3 . By definition, we have
     T
     X
T3 =      E E П•(П„ ) вҲ’ П•(e
              0        1
                              П„ ) (Оҫr,t + О·r,t )
      t=1 П„ вҲјПҖt П„eвҲјПҖt
By Cauchy-Schwarz inequality, we have
    XT
  вүӨ      E 0 E 1 П•(П„ ) вҲ’ П•(e П„ ) вҲ’1 вҲҘОҫr,t вҲҘОЈtвҲ’1 + вҲҘО·r,t вҲҘОЈtвҲ’1
                                                 ОЈtвҲ’1
     t=1 П„ вҲјПҖt П„eвҲјПҖt
                  T
                  X
   вүӨ Пөr,Оҫ + Пөr,О·    E 0 E 1 П•(П„ ) вҲ’ П•(e
                                      П„)
                                                                    ОЈвҲ’1
                   t=1 П„ вҲјПҖt П„eвҲјПҖt                                   tвҲ’1
                                  вҲҡ
Since вҲҘП•(П„ ) вҲ’ П•(eП„ )вҲҘОЈвҲ’1 вүӨ 2/ О», by HoeffdingвҖҷs inequality, we have
                        tвҲ’1

                       T
                                               r             !
                   X                             2T log(1/Оҙ)
   вүӨ Пөr,Оҫ + Пөr,О·            П•(П„ ) вҲ’ П•(e
                                      П„ ) вҲ’1 +
                      t=1
                                         ОЈtвҲ’1         О»
                     T                                                  T
                                                                                                                   r               !
                     X                                                  X                                              2T log(1/Оҙ)
   = Пөr,Оҫ + Пөr,О·                 Zt П•(П„ ) вҲ’ П•(e
                                              П„)                    +         (1 вҲ’ Zt ) П•(П„ ) вҲ’ П•(e
                                                                                                  П„)           +                    .
                           t=1
                                                           ОЈвҲ’1
                                                            tвҲ’1         t=1
                                                                                                        ОЈвҲ’1
                                                                                                         tвҲ’1                О»
                           |               {z                   }       |                 {z               }
                                           (i)                                            (ii)

To bound (i), we have
                                         T
                                         X
                                                        вҲҡ

                                 (i) =         Zt min 2/ О», П•(П„ ) вҲ’ П•(e
                                                                      П„)
                                                                                            ОЈвҲ’1
                                                                                             tвҲ’1
                                         t=1
                                      v
                                      u T
                                      u X                          2
                                     вүӨtT  Zt min 4/О», П•(П„ ) вҲ’ П•(e
                                                                П„ ) вҲ’1
                                                                                                 ОЈtвҲ’1
                                               t=1
                                       v
                                       u T
                                       u X                        2
                                     вүӨ2tT  Zt min 1, П•(П„ ) вҲ’ П•(e
                                                               П„ ) вҲ’1
                                                                                             ОЈtвҲ’1
                                                 t=1
                                         s
                                                                О» + 4T
                                     вүӨ2      T В· 2d log
                                                                   О»
where the last inequality is Lemma D.6. To bound (ii), we have
                                                   T
                                                   X
                                         (ii) =      (1 вҲ’ Zt ) П•(П„ ) вҲ’ П•(e
                                                                         П„)
                                                                                          ОЈвҲ’1
                                                                                           tвҲ’1
                                                   t=1
                                                   T
                                                   X                  вҲҡ
                                               вүӨ         (1 вҲ’ Zt ) В· Пө ПҖ/(2Пғr )
                                                   t=1
                                                  вҲҡ
                                               вүӨПөT ПҖ/(2Пғr )
where the first inequality is by Lemma B.6. Putting the two upper bounds together, we have
                               s                                        r              !
                                                            вҲҡ

                                            О» + 4T                         2T log(1/Оҙ)
       T3 вүӨ Пөr,Оҫ + Пөr,О· 2 T В· 2d log                   + ПөT ПҖ/(2Пғr ) +                   .
                                               О»                                О»

Bounding T4 . By Cauchy-Schwarz inequality, we have
       XT X  H
  T4 вүӨ           E    вҲҘП•(sh , ah )вҲҘОЈвҲ’1   вҲҘОҫP,t,h вҲҘОЈtвҲ’1,h + вҲҘО·P,t,h вҲҘОЈtвҲ’1,h + вҲҘО»t,h вҲҘОЈtвҲ’1,h
                                 0                     tвҲ’1,h
         t=1 h=1 sh ,ah вҲјПҖt
                         H X
                         X T
     вүӨ ПөP,Оҫ + ПөP,О· + ПөО»                                E       вҲҘП•(sh , ah )вҲҘОЈвҲ’1
                                                                                  tвҲ’1,h
                                                 sh ,ah вҲјПҖt0
                                     h=1 t=1



                                                                    33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                                вҲҡ
Since вҲҘП•(sh , ah )вҲҘОЈвҲ’1      вүӨ 1/ О», by HoeffdingвҖҷs inequality, we have
                    tвҲ’1,h

                          H X
                            T
                                                                     r!
                          X                             T H log(1/Оҙ)
     вүӨ ПөP,Оҫ + ПөP,О· + ПөО»       вҲҘП•(sh , ah )вҲҘОЈвҲ’1     +
                                             tвҲ’1,h            2О»
                          h=1 t=1
                           H X T
                                                                      r              !
                          X            n вҲҡ                       o      T H log(1/Оҙ)
     = ПөP,Оҫ + ПөP,О· + ПөО»           min 1/ О», вҲҘП•(sh , ah )вҲҘОЈвҲ’1       +
                                                           tвҲ’1,h             2О»
                          h=1 t=1
                         пЈ«    v                                                         пЈ¶
                           H u      T                                  r
                          X   u X                                          T H log(1/Оҙ)
     вүӨ ПөP,Оҫ + ПөP,О· + ПөО» пЈӯ     tT       min 1/О», вҲҘП•(sh , ah )вҲҘ2ОЈвҲ’1     +                 пЈё
                                   t=1
                                                               tвҲ’1,h            2О»
                                h=1

Since О» вүҘ 1, we have
                        пЈ«   v                                                                                пЈ¶
                          H u  T                                                             r
                         X  u X                                                                  T H log(1/Оҙ) пЈё
     вүӨ ПөP,Оҫ + ПөP,О· + ПөО» пЈӯ   tT   min 1, вҲҘП•(sh , ah )вҲҘ2ОЈвҲ’1                                +
                                           t=1
                                                                             tвҲ’1,h                    2О»
                                h=1
                                  s                                  r                   !
                                                       О»+T               T H log(1/Оҙ)
     вүӨ ПөP,Оҫ + ПөP,О· + ПөО»   H           T В· 2d log                 +
                                                        О»                     2О»

where the last inequality is Lemma D.6.

Conclusion. Combining the above bounds, we have
    T
    X               0               1
          (V t вҲ’ V ПҖt ) вҲ’ (Vet вҲ’ V ПҖt )
    t=1
                         r              !
                           HT
   вүӨ 2Vmax Lmax +              log(1/Оҙ)
                            2
                     r                !
                         HT                       Пөr,Оҫ + Пөr,О· + ПөP,Оҫ + ПөP,О· + ПөО»
       + Lmax +              log(1/Оҙ)     2Vmax +               вҲҡ
                          2                                       О»
                            s                            вҲҡ      r               !
                                          О» + 4T      ПөT ПҖ         2T log(1/Оҙ)
       + Пөr,Оҫ + Пөr,О·       2 T В· 2d log            +          +
                                             О»         2Пғr              О»
                                   s                         r               !
                                                 О»+T           T H log(1/Оҙ)
       + ПөP,Оҫ + ПөP,О· + ПөО»        H T В· 2d log             +
                                                   О»                 2О»
                        r               !
                           HT
   вүӨ 4Vmax Lmax +              log(1/Оҙ)
                            2
                            s                            вҲҡ                p            !
                                          О» + 4T      ПөT ПҖ Lmax + 2 T H log(1/Оҙ)/2
       + Пөr,Оҫ + Пөr,О·       2 T В· 2d log            +          +              вҲҡ
                                             О»         2Пғr                     О»
                                   s                                   p             !
                                                 О»+T         Lmax + 2 T H log(1/Оҙ)/2
       + ПөP,Оҫ + ПөP,О· + ПөО»        H T В· 2d log             +              вҲҡ
                                                   О»                       О»
                             вҲҡ

   =Oe Vmax Lmax + Vmax HT

                          вҲҡ                          вҲҡ
                                         вҲҡ

                                                  ПөT ПҖ
       + (Пөr,Оҫ + Пөr,О· )     dT + Lmax + HT +
                                                   2Пғr
                                вҲҡ                вҲҡ
       + (ПөP,Оҫ + ПөP,О· + ПөО» ) H dT + Lmax + HT              .


                                                       34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Lemma B.16 (Regret decomposition). Assume all events listed in Lemma B.12 hold. Then, we have
               T
               X                              1
                     (V вӢҶ вҲ’ V t ) + (Vet вҲ’ V ПҖt )
               t=1
                             T
                       1    X
                                           ПҖt0       et вҲ’ V ПҖt1 ) + (V ПҖt0 вҲ’ V вҲ’        ПҖt1   etвҲ’ )

               вүӨ                 (V t вҲ’  V     ) вҲ’ (V                          t ) вҲ’ (V     вҲ’ V
                   F2 (вҲ’1) t=1
                                  r                      !
                         2Vmax        T log(1/Оҙ)
                    + 2                             + 4Оҙ
                         F (вҲ’1)            2
with probability at least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ.

Proof. We note that, at any round t вҲҲ [T ], conditioning on all information collected up to round
t вҲ’ 1, the randomness of V t and Vet only comes from the randomness of Gaussian noise vari-
ables Оҫr,t , ОҫP,t,1 , . . . , ОҫP,t,H . In other words, the values of V t and Vet are determined once given
these Gaussian noise variables. In light of this, we write out the dependence on the Gaussian
noise variables explicitly: we treat V t and Vet as functions of Оҫr,t , ОҫP,t,1 , В· В· В· , ОҫP,t,H and define
                                                вҲ’      вҲ’                вҲ’
V t [Оҫr,t , ОҫP,t,1 , В· В· В· , ОҫP,t,H ] and Vet [Оҫr,t , ОҫP,t,1 , В· В· В· , ОҫP,t,H ] as the values of V t and Vet obtained at
round t with the Gaussian noise variables Оҫr,t , ОҫP,1 , В· В· В· , ОҫP,H . Then, we define a notion of вҖңworst-
caseвҖқ Gaussian noise variables as follows:
  вҲ’
Оҫr,t , ОҫвҲ’ , В· В· В· , ОҫвҲ’
       P,t,1             P,t,H   :=      arg min                   вҲ’
                                                           V t [Оҫr,t  , Оҫ вҲ’ , В· В· В· , Оҫ вҲ’ ] вҲ’ Vet [Оҫr,t
                                                                       P,t,1          P,t,H
                                                                                                    вҲ’
                                                                                                        , ОҫвҲ’ , В· В· В· , ОҫвҲ’ ]
                                                                                                              P,t,1     P,t,H
                                  вҲ’     вҲ’            вҲ’
                                 Оҫr,t ,ОҫP,t,1 ,В·В·В· ,ОҫP,t,H
                                              вҲ’                                              вҲ’
                                    s.t.    вҲҘОҫr,t вҲҘОЈtвҲ’1 вүӨ Пөr,Оҫ         and      вҲҖh вҲҲ [H] : вҲҘОҫP,t,h вҲҘОЈtвҲ’1,h вүӨ ПөP,Оҫ .
                         вҲ’
And we denote V t and VetвҲ’ as the value functions specified by Оҫr,t
                                                                вҲ’      вҲ’
                                                                    , ОҫP,t,1            вҲ’
                                                                             , В· В· В· , ОҫP,t,H :
                     вҲ’       вҲ’      вҲ’                вҲ’
                V t := V t [Оҫr,t , ОҫP,t,1 , В· В· В· , ОҫP,t,H ],          VetвҲ’ := Vet [Оҫr,t
                                                                                     вҲ’      вҲ’
                                                                                         , ОҫP,t,1            вҲ’
                                                                                                  , В· В· В· , ОҫP,t,H ].
                  вҲ’
In other words, V t and VetвҲ’ are counterparts of V t and Vet that attain the smallest difference, V t вҲ’ Vet ,
while the noise variables still satisfy the high probability bounds. By Lemma B.12, we immediately
have                                        вҲ’
                       Pr(Elow ) := Pr V t вҲ’ VetвҲ’ вүӨ V t вҲ’ Vet вүҘ 1 вҲ’ Оҙ/T.                              (11)
We note that here we have Оҙ/T instead of Оҙ because we are considering a fixed t and the results of
Lemma B.12 are derived by the union bound over all t вҲҲ [T ] вҖ” thus, the probability of the event
Elow is at least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ/T for a single t.
                                                                          1
Then, we denote Eopt as the event that V t вҲ’ Vet вүҘ V вӢҶ вҲ’ V ПҖt . Thus, by Lemma B.13, we have
                2
Pr(Eopt ) вүҘ F (вҲ’1). Moreover, we denote palg as the randomness of the algorithm. Then, we
define the joint distribution popt of V t and Vet by restricting palg to the event Eopt . Specifically, it is
defined as                                   (
                                               palg (V t , Vet )/ Pr(Eopt ) if Eopt
                         popt (V t , Vt ) :=
                                     e
                                               0                            otherwise
Let z := V t вҲ’ Vet . Then, we have
                                               1                   вҲ’                 1
               (V вӢҶ вҲ’ V t ) + (Vet вҲ’ V ПҖt ) вүӨV вӢҶ вҲ’ V t + VetвҲ’ вҲ’ V ПҖt
                                                              вҲ’
                                                    h                               1
                                                                                      i
                                            = E       V вӢҶ вҲ’ V t вҲ’ z + z + VetвҲ’ вҲ’ V ПҖt
                                             zвҲјpopt
                                                            вҲ’
                                                    h                i
                                            вүӨ E       z вҲ’ V t + VetвҲ’
                                                       zвҲјpopt

                                                              1{Eopt } В· palg (z)
                                                       Z
                                                                                           вҲ’
                                                   =                              В· (z вҲ’ V t + VetвҲ’ ) dz
                                                        z        Pr(Eopt )
                                                                                     вҲ’
                                                                h                              i
                                                                                            вҲ’
                                                   =         E 1{Eopt } z вҲ’ V t + Vet            / Pr(Eopt )
                                                       zвҲјpalg



                                                                  35
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


where the second inequality is by the definition of popt , which rules out the case that Eopt does not
hold. Considering the event Elow , we have
                         1
(V вӢҶ вҲ’ V t ) + (Vet вҲ’ V ПҖt )
                                                                                    i
                                вҲ’                                         вҲ’
             h                            i          h
                                       вҲ’
 вүӨ     E 1{Eopt }1{Elow } z вҲ’ V t + Vet     + E 1{Eopt }1{Elow вҲҒ
                                                                  } z вҲ’ V t + VetвҲ’     / Pr(Eopt )
     zвҲјpalg                                   zвҲјpalg
                                                                        i
                                вҲ’
             h                            i          h
                                       вҲ’                       вҲҒ
 вүӨ     E 1{Eopt }1{Elow } z вҲ’ V t + Vet     + E 1{Eopt }1{Elow    }4Vmax / Pr(Eopt )
     zвҲјpalg                                   zвҲјpalg

                                вҲ’
             h                            i
                                       вҲ’
 вүӨ     E 1{Eopt }1{Elow } z вҲ’ V t + Vet     + 4Vmax Оҙ/T / Pr(Eopt )
       zвҲјpalg

where the last inequality is by (11). For the first term, we have
                                          вҲ’
              h                                      i
                                                 вҲ’
         E 1{Eopt }1{Elow } z вҲ’ V t + Vet
       zвҲјpalg
                                    вҲ’
                 h                            i
       вүӨ E 1{Elow } z вҲ’ V t + VetвҲ’
          zвҲјpalg
                           вҲ’                                      вҲ’
                 h                   i           h                          i
       = E         z вҲ’ V t + VetвҲ’ + E 1{Elow           вҲҒ
                                                          } z вҲ’ V t + VetвҲ’
          zвҲјpalg                          zвҲјpalg
                           вҲ’
                 h                   i
                                  вҲ’
       вүӨ E         z вҲ’ V t + Vet       + 4Vmax Оҙ/T
          zвҲјpalg
                            вҲ’
            h                        i
       = E V t вҲ’ Vet вҲ’ V t + VetвҲ’ + 4Vmax Оҙ/T
                                                             вҲ’
            h           0               1
                                           i      h     0            1
                                                                              i
       = E (V t вҲ’ V ПҖt ) вҲ’ (Vet вҲ’ V ПҖt ) + E (V ПҖt вҲ’ V t ) вҲ’ (V ПҖt вҲ’ VetвҲ’ ) + 4Vmax Оҙ/T.

                                             вҲ’
where the first inequality holds since z вҲ’ V t + VetвҲ’ вүҘ 0 conditioning on Elow , and the second
inequality is by (11) again.
Recall that Pr(Eopt ) вүҘ F2 (вҲ’1). Inserting all of these back, we obtain
T
X                              1
      (V вӢҶ вҲ’ V t ) + (Vet вҲ’ V ПҖt )
t=1
                           T   h
                                                                                                                 !
                                                                         вҲ’
                                                           i   h                           i
                                        ПҖ0             ПҖ1         ПҖ0             ПҖ1
                           X
       вҲ’2                                                                                вҲ’
вүӨF          (вҲ’1) 8Vmax Оҙ +    E (V t вҲ’ V t ) вҲ’ (Vet вҲ’ V t ) + E (V t вҲ’ V t ) вҲ’ (V t вҲ’ Vet )
                              t=1
                             T
                                                                               вҲ’
                             X                 0               1         0               1

вүӨ FвҲ’2 (вҲ’1) 8Vmax Оҙ +                 (V t вҲ’ V ПҖt ) вҲ’ (Vet вҲ’ V ПҖt ) + (V ПҖt вҲ’ V t ) вҲ’ (V ПҖt вҲ’ VetвҲ’ )
                             t=1
                  r              !
                      T log(1/Оҙ)
       + 2Vmax                    .
                           2

where the last inequality is the HoeffdingвҖҷs inequality.

Given all these lemmas, we are ready to establish an upper bound of regret. We first note that, since
ПҖt1 = ПҖtвҲ’1
         0
              for all t, the regret incurred by ПҖt1 for all t is equivalent to that incurred by ПҖt0 for all t.
Hence, it suffices to compute the regret incurred by ПҖt0 for t вҲҲ [T ] and multiply it by two to get the
total regret.
We start with the following regret decomposition:
                T                          T                         XT
                               ПҖt0                             ПҖt1              ПҖt0 ПҖt1
                X                          X
                         вӢҶ                     вӢҶ
RegretT вүӨ              V вҲ’V              =    V вҲ’ V t + Vt вҲ’ V
                                                        e           +    V t вҲ’ V + V вҲ’ Vt .
                                                                                        e
                t=1                        t=1                            t=1
                                          |            {z             }
                                                      (вҲ—)



                                                       36
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


By Lemma B.16, we can further decompose (вҲ—) and obtain
                  T                                           XT
            1    X
                         ПҖt0    вҲ’     вҲ’      ПҖt1          1              ПҖt0 ПҖt1
RegretT вүӨ 2            V вҲ’ V t + Vt вҲ’ Vt
                                    e              + 1+ 2         V t вҲ’ V + V вҲ’ Vt
                                                                                 e
         F (вҲ’1) t=1                                    F (вҲ’1) t=1
                 |              {z               }            |          {z        }
                                       (i)                                                                   (ii)
                            r                       !
                  2Vmax         T log(1/Оҙ)
            +                              + 4Оҙ .
                  F2 (вҲ’1)            2

We note that both (i) and (ii) can be bounded by Lemma B.15:
                                                     вҲҡ

               (i), (ii) вүӨ O Vmax Lmax + Vmax HT
                            e

                                                    вҲҡ                    вҲҡ
                                                                 вҲҡ

                                                                       ПөT ПҖ
                                 + (Пөr,Оҫ + Пөr,О· )     dT + Lmax + HT +
                                                                        2Пғr
                                                          вҲҡ           вҲҡ
                                 + (ПөP,Оҫ + ПөP,О· + ПөО» ) H dT + Lmax + HT

Inserting this back, we obtain
                                                   вҲҡ

                RegretT = O Vmax Lmax + Vmax HT
                            e

                                                  вҲҡ                    вҲҡ
                                                               вҲҡ

                                                                     ПөT ПҖ
                                + (Пөr,Оҫ + Пөr,О· )    dT + Lmax + HT +
                                                                      2Пғr
                                                        вҲҡ           вҲҡ
                                + (ПөP,Оҫ + ПөP,О· + ПөО» ) H dT + Lmax + HT
                                        вҲҡ

                                + Vmax T

To compute this quantity, we note the following asymptotic rate:
                           вҲҡ
                      e d Оә + B2
      вҖў Пөr,Оҫ + Пөr,О· = O
                                           вҲҡ
      вҖў ПөP,Оҫ + ПөP,О· + ПөО» = O e d5/2 H 3/2 Оә + B 2

      вҖў Lmax = O  e d6 H 4 (Оә + B 2 )

Hence, we have
                        вҲҡ   вҲҡ
                                         p
                    e ПөT d + T В· d3 H 5/2 Оә + B 2 + d17/2 H 11/2 (Оә + B 2 )3/2 .
          RegretT = O


B.5   B OUNDING NUMBER OF QUERIES

Recall that the number of queries are computed via
                  T        T
                                   (                                                                                )
                 X        X                                            h                                     i
  QueriesT =        Zt =     Zt 1           E                              (П•(П„t0 ) вҲ’ П•(П„t1 ))вҠӨ (Оё0 вҲ’ Оё1 )       >Пө .
                   t=1       t=1        Оё0 ,Оё1 вҲјN (Оёbr,t ,Пғr2 ОЈвҲ’1
                                                               tвҲ’1 )


Notice that Cauchy-Schwarz inequality implies

           E      (П•(П„t0 ) вҲ’ П•(П„t1 ))вҠӨ (Оё0 вҲ’ Оё1 ) вүӨ вҲҘП•(П„t0 ) вҲ’ П•(П„t1 )вҲҘОЈвҲ’1
                                                            E вҲҘОё0 вҲ’ Оё1 вҲҘОЈtвҲ’1
         Оё0 ,Оё1                                                                    tвҲ’1 Оё
                                                                                           0 ,Оё1
                                                                       p
          1    0        1                         2                  2 2Пғr2 d
       вүӨ вҲҡ вҲҘП•(П„t ) вҲ’ П•(П„t )вҲҘ2 E вҲҘОё0 вҲ’ Оё1 вҲҘОЈtвҲ’1 вүӨ вҲҡ E вҲҘОё0 вҲ’ Оё1 вҲҘОЈtвҲ’1 вүӨ вҲҡ
           О»                 Оё0 ,Оё1                О» Оё0 ,Оё1               О»
where the second inequality is by вҲҘОЈвҲ’1
                                    tвҲ’1 вҲҘ2 = 1/О», and the last step is by the fact that Оё0 вҲ’Оё1 follows
N (0, 2Пғr2 ОЈвҲ’1
                                                        p
            tвҲ’1 ) and Lemma   D.3. We denote  О¶ := 2Пғ r   2d/О»   for the ease of notation. Then, we


                                                        37
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


have
                        T
                        X                                    h                                      i
           QueriesT =         Zt 1 min О¶, E                      (П•(П„t0 ) вҲ’ П•(П„t1 ))вҠӨ (Оё0 вҲ’ Оё1 )          >Пө
                                                    Оё0 ,Оё1
                        t=1
                        T
                        X                                    h                                      i
                    вүӨ         Zt 1 min 1, E                      (П•(П„t0 ) вҲ’ П•(П„t1 ))вҠӨ (Оё0 вҲ’ Оё1 )          > Пө/О¶
                                                    Оё0 ,Оё1
                        t=1

Applying Cauchy-Schwarz inequality, we have
                 XT                                                      2
                                               0        1 вҠӨ                      2  2
      QueriesT вүӨ    Zt 1 min 1, E          (П•(П„t ) вҲ’ П•(П„t )) (Оё0 вҲ’ Оё1 )       > Пө /О¶ .
                                               Оё0 ,Оё1
                    t=1


Let u0 , u1 denotes two independent standard Gaussian variables with zero mean and identity covari-
                                                                   вҲ’1/2
ance matrix. Then, Оё0 вҲ’ Оё1 has the same joint distribution as Пғr ОЈtвҲ’1 (u0 вҲ’ u1 ). Hence, we can
rewrite the expectation in the indicator as
                                         2                                                   2
                0        1 вҠӨ                              0        1 вҠӨ      вҲ’1/2

    E       (П•(П„t ) вҲ’ П•(П„t )) (Оё0 вҲ’ Оё1 )     = E      П•(П„t ) вҲ’ П•(П„t ) Пғr ОЈtвҲ’1 (u0 вҲ’ u1 )
  Оё0 ,Оё1                                                  u0 ,u1

Furthermore, we have
                                                       2
                       0         1 вҠӨ    вҲ’1/2

         E       П•(П„t ) вҲ’ П•(П„t ) Пғr ОЈtвҲ’1 (u0 вҲ’ u1 )
       u0 ,u1
              h                   вҠӨ                                                       i
                                       вҲ’1/2                    вҠӨ    вҲ’1/2
     = E        П•(П„t0 ) вҲ’ П•(П„t1 ) Пғr ОЈtвҲ’1 (u0 вҲ’ u1 ) (u0 вҲ’ u1 ) Пғr ОЈtвҲ’1 П•(П„t0 ) вҲ’ П•(П„t1 )
       u0 ,u1
                          вҠӨ               h                      i
                                  вҲ’1/2                         вҠӨ     вҲ’1/2
     = П•(П„t0 ) вҲ’ П•(П„t1 ) Пғr ОЈtвҲ’1 E (u0 вҲ’ u1 ) (u0 вҲ’ u1 ) Пғr ОЈtвҲ’1 П•(П„t0 ) вҲ’ П•(П„t1 ) .

                                           u0 ,u1

For the expectation in the middle, we have
                          h                    i
                                             вҠӨ        вҠӨ           вҠӨ
                      E (u0 вҲ’ u1 ) (u0 вҲ’ u1 ) = E[u0 u0 ] + E[u1 u1 ] = 2I
                    u0 ,u1

where we have used the fact that E[u0 uвҠӨ1 ] = 0 by independence. Therefore, we have
                                                            2
                                                вҠӨ
                     E        П•(П„t0 ) вҲ’ П•(П„t1 ) (Оё0 вҲ’ Оё1 )
                     Оё0 ,Оё1
                                       вҠӨ   вҲ’1/2        вҲ’1/2
                   = П•(П„t0 ) вҲ’ П•(П„t1 ) Пғr ОЈtвҲ’1 (2I)Пғr ОЈtвҲ’1 П•(П„t0 ) вҲ’ П•(П„t1 )


                                                     2
                   =2Пғr2 П•(П„t0 ) вҲ’ П•(П„t1 ) ОЈвҲ’1 .
                                                         tвҲ’1


Inserting this back, we obtain
                                 T         n   n                             o          o
                                 X                                        2
              QueriesT вүӨ               Zt 1 min 1, 2Пғr2 П•(П„t0 ) вҲ’ П•(П„t1 ) ОЈвҲ’1 > Пө2 /О¶ 2
                                                                                         tвҲ’1
                                 t=1
                                 T
                                                                                                 Пө2
                                               n                        o
                                 X                                   2
                             вүӨ         Zt 1 min 1, П•(П„t0 ) вҲ’ П•(П„t1 ) ОЈвҲ’1 >
                                 t=1
                                                                                   tвҲ’1         2О¶ 2 Пғr2
                                           T
                              2О¶ 2 Пғr2 X         n
                                                         0         1 2
                                                                           o
                             вүӨ           Z t min  1, П•(П„t  ) вҲ’ П•(П„t )  вҲ’1
                                Пө2 t=1                                ОЈtвҲ’1

                              2О¶ 2 Пғ 2

                                               О» + 4T
                             вүӨ 2 r В· 2d log
                                Пө                 О»
where the last step is Lemma D.6. Plugging the value of О¶ and all other variables, we obtain
                               32Пғr4 d2
                                                               4
                                                               d (Оә + B 2 )2

                                              О» + 4T
                    QueriesT вүӨ          log             =O e                    .
                                 О»Пө2             О»                   Пө2

                                                                 38
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C     P ROOF OF T HEOREM 5.4
We first present some supporting results in Appendix C.1. Then, we prove the upper bound of
Bayesian regret in Appendix C.2 and the number of queries in Appendix C.3.

C.1     S UPPORTING LEMMAS

In Appendix C.1.1, we establish some supporting results for a probability estimation problem in the
frequentist setting. In Appendix C.1.2, we adapt these results to the Bayesian setting. The Bayesian
results will be heavily used later in the proof of Theorem 5.4 in Appendices C.2 and C.3.

C.1.1     S UPPORTING RESULTS FROM FREQUENTIST SETTING
Consider a conditional probability estimation problem. Let X and Y be the instance space and the
target space, respectively. Let F : (X Г— Y) вҶ’ R be a function class. We are given a dataset
                 n
D := {(xi , yi )}i=1 where xi вҲј Di and yi вҲј f вӢҶ (x, В·). We assume f вӢҶ вҲҲ F. Regarding the data
generation process, we assume the data distribution Di is history-dependent, i.e., xi can depend
on the previous samples: x1 , y1 , . . . , xiвҲ’1 , yiвҲ’1 for any i вҲҲ [n]. Our goal is to estimate the true
conditional probability f вӢҶ using the dataset D.
At a high level, this problem is designed to capture both the reward learning and the model learning
problems in the RL setting. Specifically, in the reward learning problem, we will instantiate X =
S Г— A and Y = {0, 1}, where we recall that S and A are the state space and the action space,
respectively, and the preference feedback is binary. In the model learning problem, we can instantiate
X = S Г— A and Y = S. We abstract these two problems into this conditional probability estimation
problem to make the analysis more concise. However, one caveat is that all we derived in this section
are frequentist results, while we are considering Bayesian RL. Thus, the results are not directly
applicable. In Appendix C.1.2, we will adapt these frequentist results to the Bayesian setting so that
they can be applied.
Now we establish some important results for this problem. First, we have the following lemma,
which is a consequence of Lemma D.10.
Lemma C.1 (MLE generalization bound). Fix Оҙ вҲҲ (0, 1). Follow the setting stated above. Let fb be
the maximum likelihood estimator:
                                             Xn
                                fb = arg max     log f (xi , yi ).
                                                  f вҲҲF      i=1

Define the version space:
                               (             n
                                                                                                  )
                                             X
                       VF = f вҲҲ F :                  d2TV       fb(xi , В·), f (xi , В·) вүӨ ОІF (n)
                                               i=1
                                          вҲ’1
where ОІF (n) := 98 log(2N[] ((n|Y|)            , F, вҲҘ В· вҲҘвҲһ )/Оҙ). Then, the following holds

      (i) f вӢҶ вҲҲ V F with probability at least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ,
      (ii) for any f, f вҖІ вҲҲ V F , it holds that
                                       n
                                       X
                                             d2TV f (xi , В·), f вҖІ (xi , В·) вүӨ 4ОІF (n).
                                       i=1


Proof of Lemma C.1. We first construct an auxiliary version space V
                                                                  e as follows
         (          n
                                                                                         )
                   X
    F                         2                                            вҲ’1
  Ve = f вҲҲF :           E d        fb(x, В·), f (x, В·) вүӨ 10 log N[] (n|Y|) , F, вҲҘ В· вҲҘвҲһ /Оҙ
                                     TV
                              xвҲјDi
                        i=1

                     e F with probability at least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ. To prove (i), we will show that whenever
By Lemma D.10, f вӢҶ вҲҲ V
f вҲҲ V , we have f вҲҲ V F as well with high probability. Let F[] denote an (n|Y|)вҲ’1 -bracket of F
 вӢҶ   e F          вӢҶ



                                                            39
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


with respect to вҲҘ В· вҲҘвҲһ . Then for all f[] вҲҲ F[] , the following holds with probability at least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ by
Lemma D.4 and the union bound on F[] ,

      n
      X
            d2TV f[] (xi , В·), f вӢҶ (xi , В·)

      i=1
                    n
                    X
                              2               вӢҶ                         вҲ’1

             вүӨ2            E dTV f[] (x, В·), f (x, В·) + 4 log N[] (n|Y|) , F, вҲҘ В· вҲҘвҲһ /Оҙ .                (12)
                          xвҲјDi
                    i=1


Now for any f вҲҲ F, there must exist f[] вҲҲ F[] such that вҲҘf вҲ’ f[] вҲҘвҲһ вүӨ (n|Y|)вҲ’1 , which impies the
following
                     n
                     X                                     n                     n
                                                          X                      X
                           d2TV f (xi , В·), f[] (xi , В·) вүӨ   |Y|2 вҲҘf вҲ’ f[] вҲҘ2вҲһ вүӨ   nвҲ’2 = 1/n,            (13)
                     i=1                                 i=1                           i=1
               n
               X                                         Xn                            Xn
                          2
                                                                 |Y|2 вҲҘf вҲ’ f[] вҲҘ2вҲһ вүӨ         nвҲ’2 = 1/n

                       E dTV f (x, В·), f[] (x, В·) вүӨ                                                      (14)
                     xвҲјDi
               i=1                                       i=1                           i=1

Hence, for all f вҲҲ F, we have
            n
            X
                d2TV f (xi , В·), f вӢҶ (xi , В·)

            i=1
             Xn                                        n
                                                       X
                   d2TV f[] (xi , В·), f вӢҶ (xi , В·) + 2   d2TV f (xi , В·), f[] (xi , В·)

       вүӨ2
             i=1                                      i=1
              Xn
                    d2TV f[] (xi , В·), f вӢҶ (xi , В·) + 2/n

       вүӨ2
              i=1
             n
             X
                        2               вӢҶ                         вҲ’1

       вүӨ4            E dTV f[] (x, В·), f (x, В·) + 8 log N[] (n|Y|) , F, вҲҘ В· вҲҘвҲһ /Оҙ + 2/n
                    xвҲјDi
             i=1
             Xn
                        2              вӢҶ                          вҲ’1
       вүӨ8            E dTV (f (x, В·), f (x, В·)) + 8 log N[] (n|Y|) , F, вҲҘ В· вҲҘвҲһ /Оҙ + 10/n.
                    xвҲјDi
              i=1

with probability at least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ. Here the second inequality uses (13), the third uses (12), and the last
uses (14). Therefore, for any possible value of the estimator fb, conditioning on f вӢҶ вҲҲ Ve F , we have

            n
            X
                d2TV fb(xi , В·), f вӢҶ (xi , В·)

            i=1
             Xn
                        2             вӢҶ                         вҲ’1
       вүӨ8            E dTV fb(x, В·), f (x, В·) + 8 log N[] (n|Y|) , F, вҲҘ В· вҲҘвҲһ /Оҙ + 10/n
                    xвҲјDi
             i=1

       вүӨ88 log N[] (n|Y|)вҲ’1 , F, вҲҘ В· вҲҘвҲһ /Оҙ + 10/n

       вүӨ98 log N[] (n|Y|)вҲ’1 , F, вҲҘ В· вҲҘвҲһ /Оҙ

with probability at least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ. Here the second inequality is by the definition of V    e F . The last
inequality holds since it is reasonable to assume that the bracketing number is at least some constant
so that log(N[] ((n|Y|)вҲ’1 , F, вҲҘ В· вҲҘвҲһ )/Оҙ) > 1 вүҘ 1/n.

The above means whenever f вӢҶ вҲҲ V   e F , we have f вӢҶ вҲҲ V F as well with probability at least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ.
       вӢҶ
Since f вҲҲ V e with probability at least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ, we have f вӢҶ вҲҲ V F with probability at least 1 вҲ’ 2Оҙ.
             F

Adjusting Оҙ completes the proof of (i).


                                                            40
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


For (ii), we have
       Xn                             Xn                                                      2
           d2TV f (x, В·), f вҖІ (x, В·) вүӨ     dTV f (x, В·), fb(x, В·) + dTV fb(x, В·), f вҖІ (x, В·)
      i=1                              i=1
                                       n
                                       X                               Xn
                                  вүӨ          2d2TV f (x, В·), fb(x, В·) +   2d2TV fb(x, В·), f вҖІ (x, В·)
                                       i=1                              i=1
                                  вүӨ4ОІF (n)
where the second inequality is by the fact that (a + b)2 вүӨ 2a2 + 2b2 for any a and b, and the third
inequality is by the definition of V F .

Next, we further assume that the function class F is parameterized by a function class G via a
link function ОҰ. The reason for this assumption is that we want to capture the structure of the
reward learning problem, where the feedback generating distribution is parameterized by the reward
function via a link function ОҰ.
Assumption C.2 (Binary label and function parameterization.). Assume Y = {0, 1} is binary, and
there is a function class G вҠҶ X вҶ’ [0, G] that parameterizes F via a link function ОҰ. Specifically,
we assume                n                                                    o
                   F = f (x, 0) = ОҰ g(x) , f (x, 1) = 1 вҲ’ ОҰ(g(x)) : g вҲҲ G ,
where we further assume ОҰ satisfies Assumption 3.1. For any f вҲҲ F, let gf denote the function g
that parameterizes f . We define gb := gfb and g вӢҶ := gf вӢҶ .

As a preliminary note, the function class G will actually correspond to the function class R
                                                                                           e (3) later
in the proof.
We should emphasize again that, although the function class G aims to capture the structure of the
reward learning problem, the function class F will be used to capture both the reward learning
and the model learning problems. When it is applied to the model learning problem, we can simply
ignore the function class G and any results that are related to G. On the other hand, when it is applied
to the reward learning problem, such a function class G will be helpful to derive some results in the
reward function itself.
Before diving into the analysis of the function class G, we first introduce the following lemma which
shows that the bracketing numbers of F and G are bounded by each other.
Lemma C.3. Under Assumption C.2, for any Пү > 0, we have

 N[] Пү, F, вҲҘ В· вҲҘвҲһ вүӨ N[] ОәПү, G, вҲҘ В· вҲҘвҲһ             and     N[] ОәПү, G, вҲҘ В· вҲҘвҲһ вүӨ N[] Пү, F, вҲҘ В· вҲҘвҲһ .

Proof. For any f, f вҖІ вҲҲ F, we assume they are parameterized by g := gf and g вҖІ := gf вҖІ , respectively.
Then, we have
        sup |f (x, y) вҲ’ f вҖІ (x, y))| = sup ОҰ g(x) вҲ’ ОҰ g вҖІ (x) вүӨ ОәвҲ’1 sup |g(x) вҲ’ g вҖІ (x)|

         x,y                             x                                      x
where the inequality is Lemma D.1. Hence, if we have a ОәПү-bracket of G in the infinite norm, then
we have an Пү-bracket of F in the infinite norm. This proves the first claim. For the second claim,
by Lemma D.1, we have
        sup |g(x) вҲ’ g вҖІ (x)| вүӨ Оә sup ОҰ g(x) вҲ’ ОҰ g вҖІ (x) = Оә sup |f (x, y) вҲ’ f вҖІ (x, y)| .

            x                      x                                    x,y
This proves the second claim.

Then, Lemma C.1 leads to similar results with a version space constructed on G.
Corollary C.4. Under Assumption C.2, define
                            (            n
                                                                        )
                                        X                      2
                     VG = g вҲҲ G :             gb(xi ) вҲ’ g(xi ) вүӨ ОІG (n)
                                               i=1
where ОІG (n) := 98Оә2 log(2N[] (Оә(n|Y|)вҲ’1 , G, вҲҘ В· вҲҘвҲһ )/Оҙ) and we denote gb := gfb as the function
that parameterizes the maximum likelihood estimator fb. Then, the following holds


                                                      41
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


     (1) g вӢҶ вҲҲ V G with probability at least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ
     (2) for any g, g вҖІ вҲҲ V G , we have
                                              n
                                              X                         2
                                                     g(xi ) вҲ’ g вҖІ (xi ) вүӨ 4ОІG (n).
                                              i=1


Proof of Corollary C.4. To prove (i), we claim that for any f вҲҲ V F (defined in Lemma C.1), we
have gf вҲҲ V G as well. To see this, we note that
                n                         2        n
               X
                                                 2
                                                   X                           2
                     E     g
                           b (x) вҲ’ gf (x)   вүӨ  Оә      E ОҰ gb(x) вҲ’ ОҰ gf (x)
                        xвҲјDi                                          xвҲјDi
                  i=1                                           i=1
                      n
                      X                                    2           n
                                                                       X
               =Оә2           E     fb(x, 0) вҲ’ f (x, 0)         = Оә2               2
                                                                               E dTV fb(x, В·), f (x, В·)
                            xвҲјDi                                              xвҲјDi
                      i=1                                               i=1
where the inequality is Lemma D.1, and the last equality holds since we assume Y = {0, 1} is
binary. Hence, for any f вҲҲ V F , it holds that
             X n                         2       n
                                                 X
                                               2       2
                    E gb(x) вҲ’ gf (x) вүӨОә            E dTV fb(x, В·), f (x, В·)
                      xвҲјDi                                       xвҲјDi
                i=1                                        i=1
                                                    вүӨОә2 ОІF (n)
                                                    =Оә2 В· 98 log(2N[] ((n|Y|)вҲ’1 , F, вҲҘ В· вҲҘвҲһ )/Оҙ)
By Lemma C.3, we have
            log(2N[] ((n|Y|)вҲ’1 , F, вҲҘ В· вҲҘвҲһ )/Оҙ) вүӨ log(2N[] (Оә(n|Y|)вҲ’1 , G, вҲҘ В· вҲҘвҲһ )/Оҙ).
Hence, we have
                             X  n                       2
                                     E gb(x) вҲ’ gf (x) вүӨ ОІG (n)
                                            xвҲјDi
                                      i=1

which implies gf вҲҲ V G . Therefore, whenever f вӢҶ вҲҲ V F , we have gf вӢҶ вҲҲ V G as well. Since f вӢҶ вҲҲ V F
with probability at least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ, we have gf вӢҶ вҲҲ V G with probability at least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ. This completes the
proof of (i).
Now we prove (2). For any g, g вҖІ вҲҲ V G , we have
    Xn                      2    Xn                      2   n
                                                             X                       2
         g(xi ) вҲ’ g вҖІ (xi ) вүӨ 2         gb(xi ) вҲ’ g(xi ) + 2     gb(xi ) вҲ’ g вҖІ (xi ) вүӨ 4ОІG (n)
      i=1                               i=1                                    i=1
where the first inequality is by the fact that (a + b)2 вүӨ 2a2 + 2b2 for any a and b.

C.1.2     A DAPTING RESULTS INTO BAYESIAN SETTING
Now we change the setting defined in Appendix C.1.1 into a Bayesian online setting. The reason for
this adaptation is to make these results applicable to the Bayesian RL setting. We formally define
the Bayesian online conditional probability estimation problem below.
Let X and Y be the instance space and the target space, respectively. Let F : (X Г— Y) вҶ’ R be
a function class. The interaction proceeds for T rounds. At each round t вҲҲ [T ], we observe an
instance xt вҲҲ X and need to outputs a function ft вҲҲ F as our prediction. Then, the label yt вҲҲ Y
is revealed. We assume that xi вҲј Di for some distribution Di and yi вҲј f вӢҶ (x, В·). We assume the
true conditional distribution f вӢҶ is sampled from some known prior distribution ПҒ вҲҲ вҲҶ(F) at the
beginning. Regarding the data generation process, we assume the data distribution Di is history-
dependent, i.e., xi can depend on the previous samples: x1 , y1 , . . . , xiвҲ’1 , yiвҲ’1 for any i вҲҲ [n].
Denote Ht as the history up to round t, i.e., Ht = {x1 , f1 , y1 , x2 , f2 , y2 , . . . , xt , ft , yt }. Define the
maximum likelihood estimator of f вӢҶ on the dataset {(xs , ys )}tвҲ’1s=1 as ft , i.e.,
                                                                             b
                                                               tвҲ’1
                                                               X
                                        fbt = arg max                log f (xs , ys ).
                                                    f вҲҲF       s=1


                                                               42
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Similar to the previous section, we will also consider the presence of a function class G (Assump-
tion C.2) in the analysis presented in this section. ItвҖҷs worth noting that although Assumption C.2
is initially introduced in the frequentist setting, when we mention that Assumption C.2 holds in this
section, we are actually considering the Bayesian setting.
Lemma C.5. It holds that
      T
      X                   h                         i   q
                                         вҖІ                  вҖІ (T ) В· dim F, 1/T В· log(T )

             E         E вҖІ dTV f (xt ), f (xt ) HtвҲ’1 вүӨ 6 T ОІF           1                                                  (15)
            HtвҲ’1    f,f
      t=1


and
                             T
                             X                       h                         i
                                                       2            вҖІ               вҖІ

                                      E           E вҖІ dTV f (xt ), f (xt ) HtвҲ’1 вүӨ 4ОІF (T ) + 2                             (16)
                                     HtвҲ’1       f,f
                             t=1

           вҖІ
where ОІF     (t) := 98 log(2T N[] ((t|Y|)вҲ’1 , F, вҲҘ В· вҲҘвҲһ )), and f, f вҖІ are sampled from the posterior of f вӢҶ
conditioning on HtвҲ’1 in the inner conditional expectation. Moreover, if F is parameterized by G
(i.e., if Assumption C.2 holds), we have

      T
      X                      h                                         i          q
                                                      вҖІ
              E         EвҖІ       g(xt ) вҲ’ g (xt ) HtвҲ’1                         вүӨ 6 T ОІGвҖІ (T ) В· dim1 G, 1/T В· log(GT )     (17)
             HtвҲ’1      g,g
       t=1


and
                              T                           h                          i
                              X
                                                                           вҖІ
                                                                               2
                                          E           E       g(xt ) вҲ’ g (xt )   HtвҲ’1 вүӨ 4ОІGвҖІ (T ) + 2                      (18)
                                     HtвҲ’1         g,g вҖІ
                              t=1


where ОІGвҖІ (t) := 98Оә2 log(2GT N[] (Оә(t|Y|)вҲ’1 , G, вҲҘ В· вҲҘвҲһ )), and g, g вҖІ are sampled from the posterior
of g вӢҶ conditioning on HtвҲ’1 in the inner conditional expectation.



Proof of Lemma C.5. We will only prove (15) and (16) since the proof of (17) and (18) is almost
identical.
Proof of (15). We define the version space at round t for t вҲҲ [T ] as follows
                                      (                       tвҲ’1
                                                                                                                   )
                                                              X
                             VtF =        f вҲҲF :                    d2TV       ft (xs , В·), f (xs , В·) вүӨ ОІF (t вҲ’ 1)
                                                                               b
                                                              s=1


where fbt is the maximum likelihood estimator on the dataset {(xs , ys )}tвҲ’1
                                                                         s=1 . This construction aims
to mimic the version space V F defined in Lemma C.1, which enable us to apply Lemma C.1.
We first split the left side of (15) into two cases based on whether f and f вҖІ belong to VtF :

                       T
                       X                    h                         i
                                                          вҖІ

                                 E        E dTV f (xt ), f (xt ) HtвҲ’1
                             HtвҲ’1      f,f вҖІ
                       t=1
                       T
                                      "
                       X                      h                                              i
                                                      F      вҖІ   F               вҖІ

                   =             E         E вҖІ 1 f вҲҲ Vt and f вҲҲ Vt dTV f (xt ), f (xt ) HtвҲ’1
                             HtвҲ’1         f,f
                       t=1
                                                                                                                       #
                                          h                                                    i
                                      + E 1 f МёвҲҲ VtF or f вҖІ МёвҲҲ VtF dTV f (xt ), f вҖІ (xt ) HtвҲ’1

                                              f,f вҖІ

                 =:T1 + T2 .


                                                                                43
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


To bound T2 , since the total variation distance is upper bounded by 1, we have
                              T
                                      "                                      #
                            X                h                              i
                                                       F     вҖІ    F
                      T2 вүӨ         E     E 1 f МёвҲҲ Vt or f МёвҲҲ Vt        HtвҲ’1
                                          HtвҲ’1         f,f вҖІ
                                    t=1
                                    T
                                    X                     h                                            i
                                                                  F     вҖІ    F
                                =             E         E 1 f МёвҲҲ Vt or f МёвҲҲ Vt                  HtвҲ’1
                                          HtвҲ’1        f,f вҖІ
                                    t=1
                                    T
                                    X                 h                                    i
                                вүӨ             E    2 E 1 f вӢҶ МёвҲҲ VtF            HtвҲ’1
                                          HtвҲ’1           fвӢҶ
                                    t=1
                                      T
                                      X
                                                              1 f МёвҲҲ VtF
                                                                 вӢҶ
                                =2                E
                                            HtвҲ’1      ,f вӢҶ
                                      t=1
                                      T
                                      X                  h                            i
                                                             вӢҶ   F                вӢҶ
                                =2            E        E 1 f МёвҲҲ Vt            f
                                            fвӢҶ    HtвҲ’1
                                      t=1
                          вүӨ2T Оҙ
where the second inequality holds by the union bound and the condition that f and f вҖІ have the
same posterior distributions as f вӢҶ conditioning on HtвҲ’1 . The last two equalities holds by the law of
probability. The last inequality is Lemma C.1.
Now letвҖҷs bound T1 . We first notice that we can replace the expectation with the supremum:
                                 T
                                          "                              #
                                X
                                                                 вҖІ

                          T1 вүӨ        E      sup dTV f (xt ), f (xt ) .
                                                  HtвҲ’1         f,f вҖІ вҲҲVtF
                                            t=1
Applying Lemma D.12, we have
                                        p
                                  T1 вүӨ 4 T ОІF (t вҲ’ 1) В· dim1 F, 1/T В· log T
Combining the upper bounds of T1 and T2 and setting Оҙ = 1/T , we complete the proof of (15).
Proof of (16). We split the left side of (16) into two cases based on whether f and f вҖІ belong to VtF :
           XT             h                              i
                             2             вҖІ

                E     E dTV f (xt ), f (xt ) HtвҲ’1
                 HtвҲ’1     f,f вҖІ
           t=1
               T
               X                    h                                             i
                                           F      вҖІ   F  2            вҖІ

           вүӨ          E           E 1 f вҲҲ Vt and f вҲҲ Vt dTV f (xt ), f (xt ) HtвҲ’1
                     HtвҲ’1     f,f вҖІ
               t=1
                     T
                     X                      h                                                       i
                                                     F      вҖІ     F  2              вҖІ

                 +           E            E  1 f вҲҲ
                                                 Мё Vt  or f   вҲҲ
                                                              Мё Vt  dTV f (x t ), f   (x t )  H tвҲ’1
                            HtвҲ’1      f,f вҖІ
                     t=1
            =: T3 + T4 .
Following a similar argument as in the proof of (15) above, we have T4 вүӨ 2T Оҙ. For T3 , by the
definition o VtF , we directly have T3 вүӨ 4ОІF (T ). Setting Оҙ = 1/T , we complete the proof of (16).
Proof of (17) and (18). An identical argument can be applied to prove (17) and (18) leveraging
Corollary C.4.
Lemma C.6. Under Assumption C.2, it holds that
          XT             h                           i
                                       вҖІ
              E    1  EвҖІ   g(x t ) вҲ’ g   (xt ) H tвҲ’1   > Пө
                   HtвҲ’1             g,g
             t=1
                                  пЈұ q                                                                   пЈј
                                  пЈІ 9 T ОІGвҖІ (T )                             21ОІ вҖІ (T )                 пЈҪ
                                                                                G
                     вүӨ min                                    В· dim1 G, Пө/2 ,           В· dim 2 (G, Пө/2)  .
                                  пЈі           Пө                                 Пө2                      пЈҫ

where ОІGвҖІ (t) := 98Оә2 log(2GT N[] (Оә(t|Y|)вҲ’1 , G, вҲҘВ·вҲҘвҲһ )). In the inner expectation, g, g вҖІ are sampled
from the posterior of g вӢҶ conditioning on HtвҲ’1 .


                                                                       44
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Proof of Lemma C.6. We define the version space at round t for t вҲҲ [T ] as follows
                        (           tвҲ’1
                                                                            )
                                    X                        2
                     G
                    Vt = g вҲҲ G :          gbt (xs ) вҲ’ g(xs ) вүӨ ОІG (t вҲ’ 1)
                                                            s=1
where recall that gbt is defined as the function that parameterizes the maximum likelihood estimator
on the dataset {(xs , ys )}tвҲ’1        bt = gfbt ). This construction aims to mimic the version space V G
                           s=1 (i.e., g
defined in Corollary C.4, which enable us to apply Corollary C.4.
We first split the left side into two cases based on whether both g and g вҖІ belong to VtG :
         XT                   h                       i
                                          вҖІ
                E 1 E g(xt ) вҲ’ g (xt ) HtвҲ’1 > Пө
                HtвҲ’1          g,g вҖІ
          t=1
          T
                       "
          X                         h                                                                     i
                                            G      вҖІ   G
      =          E      1        E вҖІ 1 g вҲҲ Vt and g вҲҲ Vt                      g(xt ) вҲ’ g вҖІ (xt ) HtвҲ’1
                HtвҲ’1          g,g
          t=1
                            h                                                                         i      #
                        + E 1 g МёвҲҲ VtG or g вҖІ МёвҲҲ VtG                                 вҖІ
                                                                           g(xt ) вҲ’ g (xt ) HtвҲ’1          >Пө
                            g,g вҖІ

          T
                       "                                                                                            #
          X                        h                                                                      i
                                          G      вҖІ   G
      вүӨ          E      1        E 1 g вҲҲ Vt and g вҲҲ Vt                        g(xt ) вҲ’ g вҖІ (xt ) HtвҲ’1         > Пө/2
                HtвҲ’1          g,g вҖІ
          t=1
                     T
                                    "                                                                                    #
                     X                          h                                                                i
                                                        G     вҖІ    G                          вҖІ
                +           E           1     E 1 g МёвҲҲ Vt or g МёвҲҲ Vt                 g(xt ) вҲ’ g (xt ) HtвҲ’1 > Пө/2
                           HtвҲ’1             g,g вҖІ
                     t=1
     =:T1 + T2 .
Here the inequality is due to the fact that 1{a + b > c} вүӨ 1{a > c/2} + 1{b > c/2} for any a, b, c.
To bound T2 , recalling that g(В·) вҲҲ [0, G], then we have
                      T
                               "                                                 #
                     X                   h                               i
                                                   G    вҖІ   G
               T2 вүӨ       E 1 E 1 g МёвҲҲ Vt or g МёвҲҲ Vt В· G HtвҲ’1 > Пө/2
                                 HtвҲ’1               g,g вҖІ
                           t=1
                                    T                                                            i
                           2G X                        h
                                                               G     вҖІ    G
                       вүӨ           E                 E 1 g МёвҲҲ Vt or g МёвҲҲ Vt               HtвҲ’1
                            Пө t=1 HtвҲ’1              g,g вҖІ

                               T                                                     i
                           2G X          h
                                             вӢҶ    G
                       вүӨ           E 2 EвӢҶ 1 g МёвҲҲ Vt                           HtвҲ’1
                            Пө t=1 HtвҲ’1 g
                                    T
                         4G X
                                         1 g МёвҲҲ VtG
                                            вӢҶ
                       =           E
                          Пө t=1 g ,HtвҲ’1
                                 вӢҶ


                             T                              i
                         4G X            h
                                              вӢҶ     G     вӢҶ
                       =        E E 1 g МёвҲҲ Vt           g
                          Пө t=1 gвӢҶ HtвҲ’1
                    4GT Оҙ
                       вүӨ   .
                       Пө
where the second inequality is by the fact that 1{a > b} вүӨ a/b for any a вүҘ 0 and b > 0, the
third inequality holds since g and g вҖІ are identically distributed as g вӢҶ conditioning on HtвҲ’1 , the two
equalities holds by the law of probability, and the last inequality is Corollary C.4.
Now let us bound T1 . We first notice that we can replace the expectation with the supremum:
                             T
                                      " (                                 )#
                            X
                                                              вҖІ
                      T1 вүӨ        E 1        sup g(xt ) вҲ’ g (xt ) > Пө/2
                                              HtвҲ’1            g,g вҖІ вҲҲVtG
                                        t=1
Recall that, for any g вҲҲ VtG , we have
                                  tвҲ’1
                                 X                                       2
                                                        g(xs ) вҲ’ gb(xs ) вүӨ ОІG (t вҲ’ 1).
                                              s=1



                                                                      45
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Hence, applying Lemma D.11, we get
              ( p                    !                                               )
                 2 T ОІG (t вҲ’ 1)                        4ОІ (t вҲ’ 1)
                                                          G
   T1 вүӨ min                       + 1 В· dim1 G, Пө/2 ,              + 1 dim2 (G, Пө/2)
                      Пө/2                                  Пө2 /4
              ( p                                                         )
                5 T ОІG (t вҲ’ 1)                17ОІ (t вҲ’ 1)
                                                  G
       вүӨ min                   В· dim1 G, Пө/2 ,            В· dim2 (G, Пө/2)
                     Пө                              Пө2

Combining the upper bounds of T1 and T2 , we obtain
       T
       X                  h                          i
             E 1    EвҖІ        g(xt ) вҲ’ g вҖІ (xt ) HtвҲ’1 > Пө
                    g,g
       t=1
                              ( p                                                       )
         4GT Оҙ                 5 T ОІG (t вҲ’ 1)                17ОІ (t вҲ’ 1)
                                                                G
       вүӨ       + min                          В· dim1 G, Пө/2 ,            В· dim2 (G, Пө/2) .
           Пө                        Пө                             Пө2

Setting Оҙ = 1/(T G), the parameter ОІG (tвҲ’1) becomes ОІGвҖІ (tвҲ’1), which is upper bounded by ОІGвҖІ (T ).
Then, we finish the proof.

C.2   B OUNDING BAYESIAN REGRET

Now we are ready to prove Theorem 5.4. We will prove the upper bound on the Bayesian regret in
this section and prove the upper bound on the number of queries in the next section.
For the ease of notation, we will omit the dependence of the state-value function on the initial state
s1 and simply write V := V1 (s1 ) for any state-value function V throughout the proof.
                                                          0
We start by simplifying the Bayesian regret. Since ПҖt1 = ПҖtвҲ’1 , we have
                                    " T                           #
                                      X
                                               вӢҶ      ПҖt0   ПҖt1
             BayesRegretT = E              2V вҲ’ V вҲ’ V
                                   r вӢҶ ,P вӢҶ
                                              t=1
                                              " T                                              #
                                               X
                                                           вӢҶ         ПҖt0                0
                                                                                       ПҖtвҲ’1
                                 = E                 2V вҲ’ V                   вҲ’V
                                   вӢҶ вӢҶ
                                   r ,P
                                              t=1
                                              " T                             #               "T вҲ’1                    #
                                               X                                               X
                                                       вӢҶ            ПҖt0                                вӢҶ     ПҖt0
                                 = E                 V вҲ’V                         + E                 V вҲ’V
                                   вӢҶ вӢҶ
                                   r ,P                                             вӢҶ вӢҶr ,P
                                              t=1                                              t=0
                                              " T                              #
                                               X
                                                           вӢҶ         ПҖt0
                                 вүӨ2 E                  V вҲ’V                        .
                                    вӢҶ вӢҶ
                                     r ,P
                                               t=0

Hence, we only need to consider the regret incurred by ПҖt0 . We defined Vr,P  ПҖ
                                                                                as the state-value
function of policy ПҖ with reward function r and model P . Given that, we can express the Bayesian
regret as
                                                " T                         #
                                                                   ПҖt0
                                                 X  вӢҶ
                                                         ПҖ
                       BayesRegretT вүӨ 2 E             VrвӢҶ ,P вӢҶ вҲ’ VrвӢҶ ,P вӢҶ
                                                     r вӢҶ ,P вӢҶ
                                                                  t=0

We reformulate the expectation by first taking the expectation of the historical data up to round
t вҲ’ 1 and then taking the conditional expectation of P вӢҶ and rвӢҶ . Concretely, we denote HtвҲ’1 =
{П„10 , П„11 , (o1 ), . . . , П„tвҲ’1
                             0      1
                                 , П„tвҲ’1 , (otвҲ’1 )} as the history up to round t вҲ’ 1, and then we have
                                               T
                                                                                    ПҖ0
                                               X                     h вӢҶ                        i
                    BayesRegretT вүӨ2                   E          E    VrПҖвӢҶ ,P вӢҶ вҲ’ VrвӢҶt,P вӢҶ HtвҲ’1
                                                     HtвҲ’1 r ,P  вӢҶ  вӢҶ
                                               t=0
                                               T                     h 0
                                                                                   ПҖ0
                                                                                              i
                                                                        ПҖ
                                               X
                                          =2          E          E    Vrt t,Pt вҲ’ VrвӢҶt,P вӢҶ HtвҲ’1 .
                                                     HtвҲ’1 r ,P  вӢҶ  вӢҶ
                                               t=0



                                                               46
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


For the equality above, we note that (rt , Pt ) and (rвӢҶ , P вӢҶ ) are identically distributed given HtвҲ’1 and
                                                                                                            ПҖ0               вӢҶ
ПҖt0 and ПҖ вӢҶ are the respective optimal policies of (rt , Pt ) and (rвӢҶ , P вӢҶ ). Hence, Vrt t,Pt and VrПҖвӢҶ ,P вӢҶ
are identically distributed given HtвҲ’1 , which is the reason that we can do the replacement in the
conditional expectation. Next, we proceed by decomposing the regret:
                      T            h 0
                                                ПҖ0         ПҖ0          ПҖ1         ПҖ1         ПҖ0
                                                                                                          i
                                      ПҖ
                     X
BayesRegretT =2            E вӢҶE вӢҶ Vrt t,Pt вҲ’ Vrt t,P вӢҶ + Vrt t,P вӢҶ вҲ’ VrвӢҶt,P вӢҶ + VrвӢҶt,P вӢҶ вҲ’ VrвӢҶt,P вӢҶ HtвҲ’1
                               HtвҲ’1 r ,P
                         t=0
                         T                    h 0
                                                            ПҖ0          ПҖ0          ПҖ1          ПҖ1         ПҖ0
                                                                                                                       i
                                                 ПҖ
                         X
                    =2             E      E    Vrt t,Pt вҲ’ Vrt t,P вӢҶ + Vrt t,P вӢҶ вҲ’ Vrt t,P вӢҶ + VrвӢҶt,P вӢҶ вҲ’ VrвӢҶt,P вӢҶ HtвҲ’1
                               HtвҲ’1 r ,P вӢҶ  вӢҶ
                         t=0
                         T  h 0
                                          ПҖ0          ПҖ0          ПҖ1          ПҖ1         ПҖ0
                                                                                                i
                               ПҖ
                         X
                    =2     E Vrt t,Pt вҲ’ Vrt t,P вӢҶ + Vrt t,P вӢҶ вҲ’ Vrt t,P вӢҶ + VrвӢҶt,P вӢҶ вҲ’ VrвӢҶt,P вӢҶ
                         t=0
                       T                        T
                                                                                                                         !
                          h 0
                                      ПҖt0
                                                   h 0
                                                                  ПҖ1          ПҖ1         ПҖ0
                                             i X                                                i
                             ПҖt                       ПҖ
                       X
                    =2     V
                         E rt ,Pt вҲ’ Vrt ,P вӢҶ  +   E Vrt t,P вӢҶ вҲ’ Vrt t,P вӢҶ + VrвӢҶt,P вӢҶ вҲ’ VrвӢҶt,P вӢҶ
                           t=0                                       t=0
                           |                 {z              }       |                        {z                     }
                                         =:Tmodel                                          =:Treward
                                                                                                                         (19)
                                               ПҖt0               ПҖt1
Here we added and substracted V               rt ,P вӢҶ   and V   r вӢҶ ,P вӢҶ   in the first equality. For the second equality, we
                                                                                                                         ПҖ1
                 0
note that ПҖt1 = ПҖtвҲ’1 is measurable with respect to HtвҲ’1 (i.e., E[ПҖt1 | HtвҲ’1 ] = ПҖt1 ).4 Hence, VrвӢҶt,P вӢҶ
         ПҖ1
and Vrt t,P вӢҶ are identically distributed conditioning on HtвҲ’1 .
Next, we will show that the two terms, Tmodel and Treward , arise from the estimation errors in the
model and reward, respectively.

Bounding Tmodel .     By simulation lemma (Lemma D.2) and the tower rule, we have
                      пЈ®                                                     пЈ№
                       XT X H
          Tmodel вүӨH E пЈ°             E    dTV Pt (sh , ah ), P вӢҶ (sh , ah ) пЈ»
                                                        ПҖ0
                             t=0 h=1 (sh ,ah )вҲјdht
                           " T H                                                     #
                            XX
                                                                           вӢҶ
                  =H E                   dTV Pt (sh , ah ), P (sh , ah )
                             t=0 h=1
                           " T H                                                                       #
                            XX                  h                                     i
                                                                     вӢҶ
                  =H E                       E вӢҶ dTV Pt (sh , ah ), P (sh , ah ) HtвҲ’1
                                         Pt ,P
                             t=0 h=1
                       H
                                   " T                                                                 #
                       X            X           h                                     i
                                                                     вӢҶ
                  =H           E             E вӢҶ dTV Pt (sh , ah ), P (sh , ah ) HtвҲ’1
                                         Pt ,P
                       h=1         t=0
                                                  q
                  вүӨO H 2 В· dim1 P, 1/T В· log(T ) В· T log(T N[] ((HT |S|)вҲ’1 , P, вҲҘ В· вҲҘвҲһ ))
where the last step is Lemma C.5.

Bounding Treward . By the definition of state-value function, we have
                        T
                        X
                                     0          1       вӢҶ 1        вӢҶ 0
              Treward =        r
                           E t t  (П„   ) вҲ’ r (П„
                                            t t   ) + r  (П„t ) вҲ’ r  (П„t )
                                   t=0
                                   T
                                   X
                                                      0          1      вӢҶ 1       вӢҶ 0
                               =     E (1 вҲ’ Zt ) rt (П„t ) вҲ’ rt (П„t ) + r (П„t ) вҲ’ r (П„t )
                                   t=0
                                     T
                                     X
                                                 0          1      вӢҶ 1       вӢҶ 0
                                   +   E Zt rt (П„t ) вҲ’ rt (П„t ) + r (П„t ) вҲ’ r (П„t ) .
                                       t=0
   4
       Strictly speaking, ПҖt1 is measurable with respect to the Пғ-algebra generated by Ht .


                                                                     47
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


For the first term, by the query condition, it holds that

        T
        X
                           0          1      вӢҶ 1       вӢҶ 0
          E (1 вҲ’ Zt ) rt (П„t ) вҲ’ rt (П„t ) + r (П„t ) вҲ’ r (П„t )
        t=0
        T
                "
        X
                        0        1       вҖІ 0       вҖІ 1              0 1

    =         E 1 E |r(П„t ) вҲ’ r(П„t ) вҲ’ (r (П„t ) вҲ’ r (П„t ))| HtвҲ’1 , П„t , П„t вүӨ Пө
        t=0
                                                                                                    #
                                                                0          1      вӢҶ 1       вӢҶ 0
                                                           rt (П„t ) вҲ’ rt (П„t ) + r (П„t ) вҲ’ r (П„t )

        T
                                 "
        X
                             1 E |r(П„t0 ) вҲ’ r(П„t1 ) вҲ’ (rвҖІ (П„t0 ) вҲ’ rвҖІ (П„t1 ))| HtвҲ’1 , П„t0 , П„t1 вүӨ Пө

    =               E0     E
                         1
        t=0 HtвҲ’1 ,П„t ,П„t
                                                                                                                     #
                                                      rt (П„t0 ) вҲ’ rt (П„t1 ) + rвӢҶ (П„t1 ) вҲ’ rвӢҶ (П„t0 ) HtвҲ’1 , П„t0 , П„t1

        T
                             "
        X
                             1 E |r(П„t0 ) вҲ’ r(П„t1 ) вҲ’ (rвҖІ (П„t0 ) вҲ’ rвҖІ (П„t1 ))| HtвҲ’1 , П„t0 , П„t1 вүӨ Пө

    =               E0   1
        t=0 HtвҲ’1 ,П„t ,П„t
                                                                                                            #
                                                   h                                                       i
                                                         0          1      вӢҶ 1       вӢҶ 0            0 1
                                                  E rt (П„t ) вҲ’ rt (П„t ) + r (П„t ) вҲ’ r (П„t ) HtвҲ’1 , П„t , П„t

    вүӨ T Пө.

Here the first equality is by definition. The second equality is by the law of probability. The third
equality holds since the indicator is measurable with respect to HtвҲ’1 , П„t0 , and П„t1 . The last inequality
is by the indicator and the fact that rt and rвӢҶ have the same posterior conditioning on HtвҲ’1 . Plugging
this upper bound back, we have

                                 T
                                 X
                                             0          1      вӢҶ 1       вӢҶ 0
         Treward вүӨT Пө +            E Zt rt (П„t ) вҲ’ rt (П„t ) + r (П„t ) вҲ’ r (П„t )
                                 t=0
                                 T
                                 X
                                                      0          1      вӢҶ 1       вӢҶ 0
                    =T Пө +              E Zt E вӢҶ rt (П„t ) вҲ’ rt (П„t ) + r (П„t ) вҲ’ r (П„t ) HtвҲ’1 .
                                       HtвҲ’1       rt ,r
                                 t=0


In the inner expectation of the second term above, we notice that both rt and rвӢҶ are sampled from
the posterior of rвӢҶ conditioning on HtвҲ’1 . Thus, we can invoke the second statement in Lemma C.5
where the function g corresponds to rt and the function g вҖІ corresponds to rвӢҶ . This gives

                                 r                                                                  !

 Treward вүӨ O T Пө +                   T Оә2 log HT N[] (Оә(2T )вҲ’1 , R,
                                                                 e вҲҘ В· вҲҘвҲһ ) В· dim1 R,
                                                                                    e 1/T В· log(HT ) .



Conclusion. Given the upper bounds on Tmodel and Treward , ignoring logarithmic factors on T
and H, we conclude that

                                        q
                   e H 2 В· dim1 P, 1/T В· T log(N[] ((HT |S|)вҲ’1 , P, вҲҘ В· вҲҘвҲһ ))
    BayesRegretT = O
                                                                                                 !
                                                               r

                                                       e                         вҲ’1
                                      + T Пө + Оә В· dim1 R, 1/T В· T log N[] (Оә(2T ) , R, вҲҘ В· вҲҘвҲһ ) .
                                                                                    e



                                                                  48
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C.3     B OUNDING NUMBER OF QUERIES

It holds that
                         " T             #
                          X
  BayesQueriesT = E                 Zt
                              t=0
                       T                                        h
                       X                                                                                        i
                                                                    (r(П„t0 ) вҲ’ r(П„t1 ) вҲ’ rвҖІ (П„t0 ) вҲ’ rвҖІ (П„t1 )) > Пө .

                   =             E  Z t 1                E
                              HtвҲ’1                r,r вҖІ вҲјПҒr,t
                        t=0

We notice that, in the inner expectaion, r and rвҖІ are sampled from the posterior of rвӢҶ conditioning
on HtвҲ’1 (recalling the definition of ПҒr,t ). Thus, we can invoke Lemma C.6 where the function g
corresponds to r and the function g вҖІ corresponds to rвҖІ . This gives
                                     вҲҡ
                                      9 T ОІR                     21ОІ
                                                                        R
          BayesQueriesT вүӨ min                  В· dim1 R, Пө/2 ,
                                                         e                В· dim2 (R, Пө/2) .
                                                                                  e
                                          Пө                          Пө2
where the inequality is Lemma C.6 and ОІR := 98Оә2 log(2T HN[] (Оә(2T )вҲ’1 , R,
                                                                         e вҲҘ В· вҲҘвҲһ )).

C.4     G ENERALIZING T HEOREM 5.4 THROUGH SEC

In this section, we show that the dependence on the eluder dimension in Theorem 5.4 can be gener-
alized to the Sequential Extrapolation Coefficient (SEC) (Xie et al., 2022). It have been shown by
Xie et al. (2022) that the SEC can be upper bounded by the eluder dimenion, the Bellman-eluder
dimension (Jin et al., 2021), and the bilinear rank (Du et al., 2021). Thus, SEC is a more general
measure of complexity.
We start by introducing the Bayesian Sequential Extrapolation Coefficient (Bayesian SEC) in the
preference-based feedback, which is a variant of the original SEC to accommodate the Bayesian and
preference-based learning setting. We define the Bayesian SEC for a model class P as
                         пЈ®                                           P                                                       2    пЈ№
                                                                         H                                  вӢҶ
                                                                         h=1 Es,aвҲјdht [dTV (Pt (В· | s, a), P (В· | s, a))]
                                                         T
                                                         X                         ПҖ

BayesSECP (P) := E пЈ°                   sup
                     пЈҜ                                                                                                            пЈә
                                                                    PtвҲ’1 PH                   2
                                                                                                                                  пЈ»
                 вӢҶ вӢҶ
                 r ,P            P1 ,...,PT вҲҲP         1вҲЁ                i=1   h=1 Es,aвҲјdПҖi [dTV (Pt (В· | s, a), P (В· | s, a))]
                                                                                                                  вӢҶ
                               0 1           0   1 t=1                                   h
                             (ПҖ1 ,ПҖ1 ),...,(ПҖT ,ПҖT )

and the Bayesian SEC for a reward function class R as
                         пЈ®                                                          h                                           i       пЈ№
                                                                                            0          1       вӢҶ  1      вӢҶ  0 2
                                                         T
                                                         X       EП„t0 вҲјПҖt0 ,П„t1 вҲјПҖt1 rt (П„t ) вҲ’ rt (П„t ) + r (П„t ) вҲ’ r (П„t )
BayesSECR (R) := E пЈ°                   sup
                     пЈҜ                                                                    h                                             пЈә
                 вӢҶ вӢҶ
                  r ,P
                                                                 PtвҲ’1                             0          1         1         0 2
                                                                                                                                       iпЈ»
                                                         t=1 1 вҲЁ                             rt (П„i ) вҲ’ rt (П„i ) + r (П„i ) вҲ’ r (П„i )
                                   r1 ,...,rT вҲҲR                                                                    вӢҶ         вӢҶ
                                0 1            0   1              i=1 EП„i0 вҲјПҖi0 ,П„i1 вҲјПҖi1
                              (ПҖ1 ,ПҖ1 ),...,(ПҖT  ,ПҖT )


We note that the Bayesian SEC can be easily reduced to the frequentist SEC by specifying the prior
on rвӢҶ and P вӢҶ to be the Dirac delta function. We note that our definition of the reward function SEC
involves squaring within the expectation in the numerator rather than externally, potentially making
it larger.
Now, we are ready to state the generalization of Theorem 5.4.
Theorem C.7. PbTS (Algorithm 2) guarantees that

                                 p                            p
  BayesRegretT = O  e T Пө + H BayesSECP (P) В· T H В· О№P + BayesSECR (R) В· T В· Оә2 В· О№R ,
                        2
 BayesQueriesT = O  e Оә В· BayesSECR (R) В· О№R .
                                    Пө2
where we denote О№P := log(N[] ((HT |S|)вҲ’1 , P, вҲҘ В· вҲҘвҲһ )) and О№R := log(N[] (Оә(2T )вҲ’1 , R,
                                                                                       e вҲҘ В· вҲҘвҲһ )).

The proofs are provided in the following sections (Appendices C.4.1 and C.4.2).

C.4.1    B OUNDING BAYESIAN REGRET VIA SEC
We first prove the upper bound on the Bayesian regret. Following (19), it suffices to separately
bound Tmodel and Treward via SEC. We start with Tmodel .


                                                                    49
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Bounding Tmodel .        By simulation lemma (Lemma D.2), we have

                              пЈ®                                                                 пЈ№
                               XT X
                                  H
                 Tmodel вүӨ H E пЈ°                    E         dTV Pt (sh , ah ), P вӢҶ (sh , ah ) пЈ»
                                                        ПҖ0
                                     t=0 h=1 (sh ,ah )вҲјdht



where dПҖh (s, a) denotes the probability of ПҖ reaching (s, a) at time step h. By multiplying and
dividing by the same term, we obtain the following.

                     пЈ®
                        PH                                       вӢҶ
                 T           E           ПҖt0 dTV Pt (sh , ah ), P (sh , ah )
              пЈҜX         h=1  (sh ,ah )вҲјdh
  Tmodel вүӨH E пЈҜ     r
              пЈ°         PtвҲ’1 PH                      2                   вӢҶ
                t=0  1 вҲЁ i=0 h=1 E              ПҖ 0 dTV Pt (sh , ah ), P (sh , ah )
                                                 i (sh ,ah )вҲјdh
                                      v                                                                              пЈ№
                                      u    tвҲ’1 X
                                               H
                                      u    X
                                     Г—t1 вҲЁ                                  d2TV Pt (sh , ah ), P вӢҶ (sh , ah ) пЈ»
                                      u                                                                        пЈә
                                                                E
                                                                  ПҖ0
                                               i=0 h=1 (sh ,ah )вҲјdhi
             v пЈ®
             u
             u

                          PH                                                  2 пЈ№
                                                                 вӢҶ
                           h=1 E(s ,a )вҲјdПҖt0 dTV Pt (sh , ah ), P (sh , ah )
             u пЈҜ T                                                                 пЈә
             u пЈҜX                 h h    h
          вүӨH uE пЈҜ
             u                                                                     пЈә
                                                                                   пЈә
             t пЈ° t=0 1 вҲЁ tвҲ’1 H E                    2
                         P   P                                          вӢҶ
                                               ПҖ 0 dTV Pt (sh , ah ), P (sh , ah )
                                                                                   пЈ»
                                     i=0     h=1   (sh ,ah )вҲјdhi
                 |                                        {z                                               }
                                                          (i)
                                v     пЈ®                                                                              пЈ№
                                u
                                uXT        X   H
                                           tвҲ’1 X
                               Г—t   E пЈ°1 вҲЁ                                       d2TV Pt (sh , ah ), P вӢҶ (sh , ah ) пЈ»
                                u
                                                                    E
                                                                            ПҖ0
                                       t=0         i=0 h=1 (sh ,ah )вҲјdhi
                                 |                                          {z                                           }
                                                                            (ii)

Here we note that a вҲЁ b := max(a, b) вүӨ a + b for a, b вүҘ 0. The last step above is the Cauchy-
Schwarz inequality. We observe that term (i) is exactly bounded by the Bayesian SEC of models.
For term (ii), we can invoke (16) in Lemma C.5 since Pt has an identical posterior distribution as P вӢҶ
                                                                 вҲҡ
given the historical data up to round t вҲ’ 1. This gives (ii) вүӨ O(
                                                               e T H В· О№P ). Plugging these back,
we obtain
                                           p
                                       e H BayesSECP (P) В· T H В· О№P
                              Tmodel вүӨ O


Bounding Treward . The reward part can be bounded similarly, except that we need to additionally
consider the query conditions. To begin with, by the definition of state-value function, we have

          T
          X
                   0          1      вӢҶ 1       вӢҶ 0
Treward =   E rt (П„t ) вҲ’ rt (П„t ) + r (П„t ) вҲ’ r (П„t )
           t=0
  T
  X                                                       T
                                                          X
                     0          1      вӢҶ 1       вӢҶ 0                  0          1      вӢҶ 1       вӢҶ 0
=   E (1 вҲ’ Zt ) rt (П„t ) вҲ’ rt (П„t ) + r (П„t ) вҲ’ r (П„t ) +   E Zt rt (П„t ) вҲ’ rt (П„t ) + r (П„t ) вҲ’ r (П„t ) .
   t=0                                                                        t=0
   |                             {z                                     }    |                            {z                 }
                                 (i)                                                                      (ii)

Following the same argument as in the proof of Appendix C.2, we can bound (i) as (i) вүӨ T Пө. Now
we proceed to bound (ii), which is the regret incurred when making queries. By multiplying and


                                                       50
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


dividing by the same term, we obtain the following.
                             пЈ®
         T
         X                пЈҜ         E Zt rt (П„t0 ) вҲ’ rt (П„t1 ) + rвӢҶ (П„t1 ) вҲ’ rвӢҶ (П„t0 ) ПҖt0 , ПҖt1 , rt , Zt
(ii) =             E      пЈҜr
                0  1               PtвҲ’1 h                                                                              i
               ПҖ ,ПҖ ,r ,Z
                          пЈ°                                                                  2
                        t   t
         t=0    t   t
                                1 вҲЁ i=0 E Zt (rt (П„i0 ) вҲ’ rt (П„i1 ) + rвӢҶ (П„i1 ) вҲ’ rвӢҶ (П„i0 )) ПҖt0 , ПҖt1 , rt , Zt
                               v            "                                                                             #пЈ№
                               u
                               u    tвҲ’1
                                    X                                                           2
                              Г—t1 вҲЁ     E Zt rt (П„i0 ) вҲ’ rt (П„i1 ) + rвӢҶ (П„i1 ) вҲ’ rвӢҶ (П„i0 )             ПҖt0 , ПҖt1 , rt , Zt пЈ»
                                                 П„t0 ,П„t1
                                           i=0
    v
    u                            пЈ®                                                                               2       пЈ№
    u T
                                     [Z   (r (П„ 0 ) вҲ’ r (П„ 1 ) + r вӢҶ (П„ 1 ) вҲ’ r вӢҶ (П„ 0 )) | ПҖ 0 , ПҖ 1 , r , Z ]
    uX                             E    t   t t         t t            t            t        t      t    t    t
   вүӨu
                             пЈҜ                                                                                          iпЈә
    t     E                  пЈ°    PtвҲ’1 h                                                          2
                                                                                                                         пЈ»
        0 1                                           0          1         вӢҶ  1         вӢҶ   0           0    1
           t=0 ПҖt ,ПҖt ,rt ,Zt 1 вҲЁ   i=0 E Zt (rt (П„i ) вҲ’ rt (П„i ) + r (П„i ) вҲ’ r (П„i ))                ПҖt , ПҖt , rt , Zt
         |                                                 {z                                                            }
                                                          (iii)
                             v                  "
                             u T
                             uX           tвҲ’1
                                          X                                                              2 #!
                           Г—t        1вҲЁ       E Zt rt (П„i0 ) вҲ’ rt (П„i1 ) + rвӢҶ (П„i1 ) вҲ’ rвӢҶ (П„i0 )
                                     t=0              i=0
                                 |                                                 {z                                              }
                                                                                  (iv)

where the last inequality is Cauchy-Schwarz inequality. We observe that term (iii) is exactly bounded
by the Bayesian SEC of reward   вҲҡ functions via JensenвҖҷs inequality. For term (iv), we invoke (18) in
Lemma C.5 and get (iv) вүӨ O(   e Оә2 T В· О№R ). Now plugging these upper bounds back, we get

                                                                 p
                                 Treward вүӨ T Пө + O
                                                 e                      BayesSECR (R) В· Оә2 T В· О№R .


Conclusion. Given the upper bounds on Tmodel and Treward , we conclude that
                                                                               !
                    p                                p
                 e H BayesSECP (P) В· T H В· О№P + T Пө + BayesSECR (R) В· Оә2 T В· О№R .
   BayesRegretT вүӨO



C.4.2       B OUNDING NUMBER OF QUERIES VIA SEC

By the definition of Zt , we have
                                 " T         #              " T           #
                                  X                          X
   BayesQueriesT = E                       Zt = E                   Zt2
                                     t=0                    t=0
                                 " T                                                                                    #
                                  X                                 h                                              i
                                                                        (r(П„t0 ) вҲ’ r(П„t1 ) вҲ’ rвҖІ (П„t0 ) вҲ’ rвҖІ (П„t1 )) > Пө

                            =E             Zt 1             E
                                                      r,r вҖІ вҲјПҒr,t
                                     t=0
                                 " T                                                                                                        #
                                                                    h                                                          i
                                  X                                                                                        2
                                                                        (r(П„t0 ) вҲ’ r(П„t1 )           r (П„t0 ) вҲ’ rвҖІ (П„t1 ))
                                                                                                      вҖІ                                2

                            =E             Zt 1             E                                    вҲ’                                 >Пө
                                                      r,r вҖІ вҲјПҒr,t
                                     t=0
                                 " T                                                            #
                              1   X                 h
                                                          0        1
                                                                          вҖІ 0       вҖІ 1     2
                                                                                              i
                            вүӨ 2E      Zt E            (r(П„t ) вҲ’ r(П„t ) вҲ’ r (П„t ) вҲ’ r (П„t ))
                             Пө    t=0
                                        r,r вҖІ вҲјПҒr,t
                                 " T                                                                #
                              1   X           h
                                                       0        1
                                                                        вӢҶ 0       вӢҶ 1     2
                                                                                                  i
                            = 2E      Zt E (rt (П„t ) вҲ’ rt (П„t ) вҲ’ r (П„t ) вҲ’ r (П„t )) HtвҲ’1 .
                             Пө    t=0
                                        r,r вҖІ


                                                                          51
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Here the last step is by the definition of ПҒr,t . Now we swap the order of expectation and get
BayesQueriesT
      " T                                                                                              #
   1   X           h
                                0          1
                                                       вӢҶ 0        вӢҶ 1
                                                                         2 0 1 вӢҶ                     i
вүӨ 2E          E Zt (rt (П„t ) вҲ’ rt (П„t ) вҲ’ r (П„t ) вҲ’ r (П„t ))                 ПҖt , ПҖt , r , rt , Zt
   Пө         0 1
        t=0 П„t ,П„t
      пЈ®                      h                                                     2 0 1 вӢҶ                      i
         T                               0           1          вӢҶ 0
                       0 ,П„ 1 Zt (rt (П„ ) вҲ’ rt (П„ ) вҲ’ r (П„ ) вҲ’ r (П„ ))
                                                                          вӢҶ 1
   1    X          E П„ t   t             t           t             t         t          ПҖ t , ПҖt , r  , rt , Zt
= 2 EпЈ°                              h                                                                                   i
   Пө                                            0 ) вҲ’ r (П„ 1 ) вҲ’ r вӢҶ (П„ 0 ) вҲ’ r вӢҶ (П„ 1 )) 2 ПҖ 0 , ПҖ 1 , r вӢҶ , r , Z
                   PtвҲ’1
        t=0 1 вҲЁ            E  0
                     i=0 П„i ,П„i   1  Z t (rt (П„i        t  i           i            i            i     i         t    t

                   tвҲ’1
                                                                                                                     !#
                   X           h                                                     2 0 1 вӢҶ                       i
                                           0            1        вӢҶ 0        вӢҶ 1

        Г— 1вҲЁ               E Zt (rt (П„i ) вҲ’ rt (П„i ) вҲ’ r (П„i ) вҲ’ r (П„i ))                 ПҖi , ПҖi , r , rt , Zt
                                П„i0 ,П„i1
                          i=0
     пЈ®                 h                                                         2 0 1 вӢҶ                    i     пЈ№
                                      0            1         вӢҶ 0        вӢҶ 1
  1 пЈ° X T      E 0   1
                П„t ,П„t   Z t   (rt (П„t  ) вҲ’  rt (П„t  )  вҲ’  r  (П„t ) вҲ’ r  (П„t ))      ПҖ t , ПҖt , r , rt , Zt
вүӨ 2E                           h                                                                                 iпЈ»
 Пө                                           0 ) вҲ’ r (П„ 1 ) вҲ’ r вӢҶ (П„ 0 ) вҲ’ r вӢҶ (П„ 1 )) 2 ПҖ 0 , ПҖ 1 , r вӢҶ , r , Z
               PtвҲ’1
       t=0 1 вҲЁ       E  0    1
                           i=0  Z     (r  (П„
                                      П„i ,П„i         t   t   i         t   i            i              i         i      i        t     t

                      2

            Г—O
             e Оә В· О№R
where in the last step we applied JensenвҖҷs inequality to the first multiplicative term and applied (18)
in Lemma C.5 to the second term. We observe that the first term can be bounded by SEC, and thus
we obtain
                                                 2
                                                Оә В· BayesSECR (R) В· О№R
                        BayesQueriesT вүӨ O    e                                 .
                                                             Пө2

D     T ECHNICAL LEMMAS
Lemma D.1. Under Assumption 3.1, we have Оә(ОҰ(a) вҲ’ ОҰ(b)) вүӨ a вҲ’ b вүӨ Оә(ОҰ(a) вҲ’ ОҰ(b)) for any
a, b вҲҲ [0, H].
                                                Ra
Proof of Lemma D.1. We note that ОҰ(a) вҲ’ ОҰ(b) = b ОҰвҖІ (x) dx and
                                       Z a
     вҲ’1                         вҖІ
   Оә (a вҲ’ b) вүӨ (a вҲ’ b) inf ОҰ (x) вүӨ         ОҰвҖІ (x) dx вүӨ (a вҲ’ b) sup ОҰвҖІ (x) вүӨ ОәвҲ’1 (a вҲ’ b).
                                      xвҲҲ[a,b]                    b                           xвҲҲ[a,b]



Lemma D.2 (Simulation lemma). For any models P, Pb and any policy ПҖ, we have
                                           H
                                           X
      ПҖ
     VP,1 (s1 ) вҲ’ VPbПҖ,1 (s1 ) вүӨ                         E                 E      VPbПҖ,h+1 (sвҖІ ) вҲ’         E          VPbПҖ,h+1 (sвҖІ )
                                                 (sh ,ah )вҲјdПҖ    вҖІ
                                                            P,h s вҲјP (sh ,ah )                       sвҖІ вҲјP
                                                                                                         b(sh ,ah )
                                           h=1
                                               H
                                               X
                                      вүӨH                     E        dTV P (В· | sh , ah ), Pb(В· | sh , ah )
                                                     (sh ,ah )вҲјdПҖ
                                                                P,h
                                               h=1

where dПҖP,h (s, a) is the probability of ПҖ reaching (s, a) at time step h given model P .
Lemma D.3 (Gaussian concentration). Let Пө вҲј N (0, cОЈвҲ’1 ) for c вҲҲ R+ and ОЈ a positive definite
matrix. Then, for any Оҙ > 0, we have
                      p
     1. Pr вҲҘПөвҲҘОЈ > 2cd log(2d/Оҙ) вүӨ Оҙ.
                           вҲҡ
       2. E [вҲҘПөвҲҘОЈ ] вүӨ           cd.

Proof of Lemma D.3. The proof of the first inequality is provided in Abeille & Lazaric (2017, Ap-
pendix A). We provide a proof here for completeness. Let О· вҲј N (0, Id ) where Id denotes the
d-dimensional identity matrix. Fix an arbitrary Оұ. We have
                         вҲҡ                                                         2
           Pr вҲҘО·вҲҘ2 > Оұ d вүӨ Pr вҲғi : |О·i | > Оұ вүӨ d Pr |О·1 | > Оұ вүӨ d В· 2eвҲ’Оұ /2


                                                                      52
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


where the second inequality is the union bound, and the last inequality is thepstandard concentration
inequality for one-dimensional Gaussian random variable. We choose Оұ = 2 log(2d/Оҙ) and get
                                            p
                                 Pr вҲҘО·вҲҘ2 > 2d log(2d/Оҙ) вүӨ Оҙ.

Let B denote the square root of ОЈ, i.e., BB = ОЈ. Then, we have
                          вҲҡ           q
                                          вҲҡ вҲ’1  вҠӨ        вҲҡ вҲ’1   вҲҡ
                  вҲҘПөвҲҘОЈ = ПөвҠӨ ОЈПө =           cB О· BB         cB О· = cвҲҘО·вҲҘ2                                            (20)
Hence, it holds that
                        p                         p
               Pr вҲҘПөвҲҘОЈ > 2cd log(2d/Оҙ) = Pr вҲҘО·вҲҘ2 > 2d log(2d/Оҙ) вүӨ Оҙ.

This proves the first inequality. To prove the second inequality, we note that, by (20),
                                       вҲҡ              вҲҡ q              вҲҡ
                          E [вҲҘПөвҲҘОЈ ] = c E [вҲҘО·вҲҘ2 ] вүӨ c E [О· вҠӨ О·] = cd.



The following inequalities are well-known, and we use the version in Zhu & Nowak (2022).
Lemma D.4. (Zhu & Nowak, 2022) Let {Xt }tвүӨT be a sequence of positive valued random variables
adapted to a filtration Ft , and let Et [В·] := E[В· | FtвҲ’1 ]. If Xt вүӨ B almost surely, then with probability
at least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ, the following holds:
                                 T                T
                                 X             3X
                                       Xt вүӨ          Et [Xt ] + 4B log(1/Оҙ),
                                 t=1
                                               2 t=1
                                 T
                                 X                     T
                                                       X
                                       Et [Xt ] вүӨ 2          Xt + 8B log(1/Оҙ).
                                 t=1                   t=1
                                                                                                вҲһ
Lemma D.5 (Self-normalized process). (Abbasi-Yadkori et al., 2011) Let {xi }i=1 be a real valued
                                                     вҲһ
stochastic process sequence over the filtration {Fi }i=1 . Let xi be conditionally B-subgaussian
                      вҲһ
given FiвҲ’1 . Let {П•i }i=1 with П•i вҲҲ FiвҲ’1 be a stochastic process in Rd with each вҲҘП•i вҲҘ в©Ҫ LП• .
                  PiвҲ’1
Define ОЈi = О»I + j=1 П•i П•вҠӨ  i . Then for any Оҙ > 0 and all i в©ҫ 0, with probability at least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ

 kвҲ’1            2                                                    !                                 !             !
                                           1/2
 X
                          2      det (ОЈi )       det(О»I)вҲ’1/2                    2
                                                                                            О» + kL2П•
       П•i x i         в©Ҫ 2B log                                           в©Ҫ 2B       d log                  + log(1/Оҙ)
                                                 Оҙ                                             О»
 i=1            ОЈвҲ’1
                 k

Lemma D.6 (Elliptical potential lemma). (Abbasi-Yadkori et al., 2011) Following the setting of
Lemma D.5, we have                                                !
                         k
                       X         n
                                        2
                                            o           О» + kL2П•
                            min 1, вҲҘП•i вҲҘОЈвҲ’1 в©Ҫ 2d log
                        i=1
                                          i                 О»
Lemma D.7 (Sum of features). (Jin et al., 2020) Following the setting of Lemma D.5, we have
                                                 kвҲ’1
                                                 X           2
                                                       вҲҘП•i вҲҘОЈвҲ’1 в©Ҫ d
                                                                 k
                                                 i=1


The following lemma converts the TV distance between Gaussian distributions into the distance
between their means.
Lemma D.8. Assume p1 = N (Вө1 , Пғ 2 I) and p2 = N (Вө2 , Пғ 2 I) are two Gaussian distributions over
Rd . Assume вҲҘВө1 вҲ’ Вө2 вҲҘ2 вүӨ m. Then, we have
                            (r            )                                   r
                                 1      1                                          1
          вҲҘВө1 вҲ’ Вө2 вҲҘ2 В· min          ,       вүӨ dTV (p1 , p2 ) вүӨ вҲҘВө1 вҲ’ Вө2 вҲҘ2 В·
                               2eПҖПғ 2 2m                                        2ПҖПғ 2
                                                                              | {z }
                                                                               =: C2
                        |       {z         }
                                       =: C1


                                                          53
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Proof. Without loss of generality, we can rotate and translate the Rd space and assume that p1 =
N (0, Пғ 2 I) and p2 = N (Оұ В· e1 , Пғ 2 I) where Оұ = вҲҘВө1 вҲ’ Вө2 вҲҘ2 and e1 = [1, 0, . . . , 0] вҲҲ Rd . It is clear
that the total variation distance is preserved. Then, by definition,
                                Z                              Z
                              1
             dTV (p1 , p2 ) =           |p1 (x) вҲ’ p2 (x)| dx =            p1 (x) вҲ’ p2 (x) dx
                              2 xвҲҲRd                            xВ·e1 вүӨОұ/2

where the last step holds since p1 (x) вҲ’ p2 (x) вүҘ 0 if and only if x В· e1 вүӨ Оұ/2. Note that the above
formulation is independent of any dimension except for first dimension, so we can marginize other
dimensions and reduce into a one-dimensional problem:
                                        Z
                       dTV (p1 , p2 ) =        N (x | 0, Пғ 2 ) вҲ’ N (x | Оұ, Пғ 2 ) dx
                                            xвүӨОұ/2

                                      = F (Оұ/(2Пғ)) вҲ’ F (вҲ’Оұ/(2Пғ))
                                        Z Оұ/(2Пғ)
                                      =          N (x | 0, 1) dx
                                            вҲ’Оұ/(2Пғ)

where we denote F as the CDF of standard Gaussian N (0, 1) in the middle step. Below we show
that the above integral is upper bounded by C2 Оұ and lower bounded by C1 Оұ.

Upper bound. For an upper bound, we note that for any v > 0, we have
                   Z v                                             r
                                                                     2
                       N (x | 0, 1) dx вүӨ 2v В· max N (x | 0, 1) вүӨ v     .
                    вҲ’v                         x                     ПҖ
Inserting v = Оұ/(2Пғ), we obtain the desired upper bound.

Lower bound. For a lower bound, we note that for any 0 < v вүӨ m/(2Пғ), if v < 1, we have
    Z v                                                                                 r
                                                                              eвҲ’1/2        2
        N (x | 0, 1) dx вүҘ 2v max N (x | 0, 1) вүҘ 2vN (1 | 0, 1) = 2v В· вҲҡ             =vВ·      .
     вҲ’v                        xвҲҲ[вҲ’v,v]                                         2ПҖ        eПҖ
When v вүҘ 1, we have
            Z v                     Z Пғ
                                                                            1       Пғ
                 N (x | 0, 1) dx вүҘ         N (x | 0, 1) dx вүҲ 0.6827 вүҘ v В·      вүҘvВ· .
              вҲ’v                       вҲ’Пғ                                  2v       m
Combining the two cases together, we have
                           Z v                             (r         )
                                                                 2 Пғ
                                N (x | 0, 1) dx вүҘ v В· min         ,      .
                            вҲ’v                                  eПҖ m
Inserting v = Оұ/(2Пғ), we obtain the desired lower bound.
Lemma D.9. Let x вҲј N (0, Id ) and A be a positive semi-definite matrix. Then, we have
                                               r
                                                  2 tr(A)
                                   E вҲҘxвҲҘA вүҘ               .
                                   x                 ПҖ

Proof. Let P denote the orthogonal matrix diagonalizing
                                                    вҲҡ        A, i.e.,pA = P ОӣP вҠӨ where Оӣ =
diag(О»1 , . . . , О»d ). Then, we have Ex вҲҘxвҲҘA = Ex x Ax = Ey y вҠӨ Оӣy where y = P вҠӨ x вҲј
                                                       вҠӨ
N (0, Id ). Now we consider the following optimization problem:
                         p
   min f (M ) := E y вҠӨ M y where M := {M вӘ° 0 : M is diagonal and tr(M ) = tr(Оӣ)}.
   M вҲҲM              y

Then, we have Оӣ вҲҲ M and Ex вҲҘxвҲҘA = f (Оӣ). Thus, the solution to the above optimization problem
is a lower bound of Ex вҲҘxвҲҘA . Since f (M ) is concave in M , it must attain the minimum on the
bounary of M. By symmetry of entries in the diagonal, we know that the minimizer must have
tr(Оӣ) at one entry and 0 at all other entries. Hence, the minimum value is
                                                              r
                                                                2 tr(Оӣ)
                               q              p
                                         2
                            E tr(Оӣ)y1 = tr(Оӣ) E |y1 | =                 .
                            y                         y            ПҖ
We finish the proof by noticing that tr(Оӣ) = tr(A).


                                                      54
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


The following lemma was originally established by Agarwal et al. (2020) and later adapted by Wu
et al. (2023a) to accommodate infinitely large function classes.
Lemma D.10 (Maximum likelihood estimation). (Wu et al., 2023a, Lemma C.3) Consider a se-
quential conditional probability estimation problem. Let X and Y be the instance space and the
target space, respectively. Let F : (X Г— Y) вҶ’ R denote the function class. We are given a dataset
                 n
D := {(xi , yi )}i=1 where xi вҲј Di and yi вҲј f вӢҶ (x, В·). We assume f вӢҶ вҲҲ F. For the data generating
process, we assume the data distribution Di is history-dependent, i.e., xi can depend on the previ-
ous samples: x1 , y1 , . . . , xiвҲ’1 , yiвҲ’1 for any i вҲҲ [n]. We fix Оҙ вҲҲ (0, 1). Let fb denote the maximum
likelihood estimator,
                                                      Xn
                                        fb = arg max      log f (xi , yi ).
                                            f вҲҲF      i=1

Then, we have
             n
             X
                       2             вӢҶ                          вҲ’1
                    E dTV fb(x, В·), f (x, В·) вүӨ 10 log N[] (n|Y|) , F, вҲҘ В· вҲҘвҲһ /Оҙ                     (21)
                   xвҲјDi
             i=1
                                                                                               R
with probability at least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ. Here |Y| denotes the total measure of space Y, i.e., |Y| :=   Y
                                                                                                   1 dy.

D.1   E LUDER DIMENSION

The following lemmas are adapted from Russo & Van Roy (2013) and Liu et al. (2022a).
Lemma D.11. Following the notation of Definition 5.2, define
                            (           tвҲ’1
                                                                      )
                                        X
                                              2

                      Ft = f вҲҲ F :           d f (xs ), fbt (xs ) вүӨ ОІ
                                                s=1

where fbt вҲҲ F is an arbitrary function. Then, we have
               T
                    (                               )   вҲҡ
              X
                                         вҖІ              2 TОІ
                  1     sup d (f (xt ), f (xt )) вүҘ Пү вүӨ        + 1 dim1 (F, Пү),                      (22)
              t=1     f,f вҖІ вҲҲFt                           Пү
               T
                    (                               )
              X
                                         вҖІ              4ОІ
                  1     sup d (f (xt ), f (xt )) вүҘ Пү вүӨ     + 1 dim2 (F, Пү)                          (23)
              t=1     f,f вҖІ вҲҲFt                         Пү2

for any constant Пү > 0.

Proof of Lemma D.11. We first prove (22) and then (23).

Proof of (22).     We begin by showing that if
                                      sup d (f (xt ), f вҖІ (xt )) вүҘ Пү
                                    f,f вҖІ вҲҲFt

for some t вҲҲ [T ], then xt is Пү-dependent on at most 2ОІ/Пү disjoint subsequence of its predeces-
sors. To see this, we note that, if xt is Пү-dependent on a subsequence (xi1 , xi2 , . . . , xin ) of its
predecessors, we must have
                                    n
                                    X
                                          d f (xis ) вҲ’ f вҖІ (xis ) > Пү.

                                    s=1

Hence, if xt is Пү-dependent on l disjoint subsequences, we have
                                     tвҲ’1
                                     X
                                           d f (xs ), f вҖІ (xs ) > lПү.

                                                                                                    (24)
                                     s=1



                                                      55
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


For the left-hand side, we also have
       tвҲ’1
       X                             tвҲ’1                        tвҲ’1
                                    X                          X
              d f (xs ), f вҖІ (xs ) вүӨ                                d fbt (xs ), f вҖІ (xs )

                                         d f (xs ), fbt (xs ) +
        s=1                          s=1                         s=1
                                      v                             v
                                      u tвҲ’1                         u tвҲ’1
                                   вҲҡ uX                          вҲҡ uX
                                  вүӨ T t      2
                                            d f (xs ), ft (xs ) + T t
                                                       b                  d2 fbt (xs ), f вҖІ (xs )
                                            s=1                                  s=1
                                    p
                                  вүӨ2 T ОІ                                                                    (25)

where the first inequality is the triangle inequality,вҲҡ
                                                      and the second inequality holds by the definition
of Ft . Combining (24) and (25), we get that l вүӨ 2 T ОІ/Пү.
Next, we show that for any sequence (xвҖІ1 , . . . , xвҖІП„ ), there is at least one element that is Пү-dependent
on at least П„ /d вҲ’ 1 disjoint subsequence of its predecessors, where d := dim1 (F, Пү). To show this,
let m be the integer satisfying md + 1 вүӨ П„ вүӨ md + d. We will construct m disjoint subsequences,
B1 , . . . , Bm . At the beginning, let Bi = (xвҖІi ) for i вҲҲ [m]. If xвҖІm+1 is Пү-dependent on each
subsequence B1 , . . . , Bm , then we are done. Otherwise, we select a subsequence Bi which xвҖІm+1
is Пү-independent of and append xвҖІm+1 to Bi . We repeat this process for all elements with indices
j > m + 1 until either xвҖІj is Пү-dependent on each subsequence or j = П„ . For the latter, we have
Pm
   i=1 |Bi | вүҘ md, and since each element of a subsequence Bi is Пү-independent of its predecesors,
we must have |Bi | = d for all i. Then, xП„ must be Пү-dependent on each subsequence by the
definition of eluder dimension.
Finally, letвҖҷs set the sequence (xвҖІ1 , . . . xвҖІП„ ) to be the subsequence of (x1 , . . . , xT ) consisting of ele-
ments xt for which d (f (xt ), f вҖІ (xt )) > Пү. As we have established, we have

                                                      вҲҡ
      1. each xвҖІi is в„“1 -norm Пү-dependent on at most 2 T ОІ/Пү disjoint subsequences, and

      2. some xвҖІi is в„“1 -norm Пү-dependent on at least П„ /d вҲ’ 1 disjoint subsequences.

                                    вҲҡ                           вҲҡ
Therefore, we must have П„ /d вҲ’ 1 вүӨ 2 T ОІ/Пү, implying that П„ вүӨ (2 T ОІ/Пү + 1)d.

Proof of (23). The proof is quite similar to the proof of (22). For в„“2 -norm, following the same
argument, we can show the following:


      1. each xвҖІi is в„“2 -norm Пү-dependent on at most 4ОІ/Пү 2 disjoint subsequences, and

      2. some xвҖІi is в„“2 -norm Пү-dependent on at least П„ /d вҲ’ 1 disjoint subsequences.


Therefore, we must have П„ /d вҲ’ 1 вүӨ 4ОІ/Пү 2 , implying that П„ вүӨ (4ОІ/Пү 2 + 1)d.

Lemma D.12. Following the setting of Lemma D.11, assume d(В·, В·) is upper bounded by D вүӨ ОІ.
Then, we have
                    T
                    X                                 p
                          sup d f (xt ), f вҖІ (xt ) вүӨ 4 T ОІ В· dim1 (F, 1/T ) В· log(DT )

                            вҖІ
                    t=1 f,f вҲҲFt



Proof of Lemma D.12. For notational simplicity, we denote

                                        wt := sup d f (xt ), f вҖІ (xt )

                                                f,f вҖІ вҲҲFt



                                                            56
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Now we fix a constant вҲҶ > 0, and then we have
                      XT       XT Z D
                         wt =          1{wt вүҘ Оҙ} dОҙ
                        t=1        t=1   0
                                      T
                                   Z DX
                               =               1{wt вүҘ Оҙ} dОҙ
                                    0    t=1
                                                T
                                             Z DX
                               вүӨвҲҶT +                   1{wt вүҘ Оҙ} dОҙ
                                             вҲҶ   t=1
                                     Z D  вҲҡ
                                          2 TОІ
                               вүӨвҲҶT +              + 1 dim1 (F, Оҙ) dОҙ
                                      вҲҶ       Оҙ
                                     Z D вҲҡ
                                        3 TОІ
                               вүӨвҲҶT +            В· dim1 (F, Оҙ) dОҙ
                                      вҲҶ    Оҙ
                                      p
                               вүӨвҲҶT + 3 T ОІ В· dim1 (F, вҲҶ) В· log(D/вҲҶ)


where the second inequality is Lemma D.11, and the last inequality uses the fact that dim1 (F, Оҙ) is
non-increasing in Оҙ. We can conclude the proof by setting вҲҶ = 1/T .


                                                       57
