Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


STIMULUS: ACHIEVING FAST C ONVERGENCE AND
L OW S AMPLE C OMPLEXITY IN S TOCHASTIC M ULTI -
O BJECTIVE L EARNING
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                           A BSTRACT

         Recently, multi-objective optimization (MOO) problems have received increasing
         attention due to their wide range of applications in various fields, such as machine
         learning (ML), operations research, and many engineering applications. However,
         MOO algorithm design remains in its infancy and many existing MOO methods
         suffer from unsatisfactory convergence performance. To address this challenge, in
         this paper, we propose an algorithm called STIMULUS (stochastic path-integrated
         multi-graident recursive estimator), a new and robust approach for solving MOO
         problems. Different from the traditional methods, STIMULUS introduces a sim-
         ple yet powerful recursive framework for updating stochastic gradient estimates.
         This methodology improves convergence performance by reducing the variance in
         multi-gradient estimation, leading to more stable convergence paths. In addition,
         we introduce an enhanced version of STIMULUS , termed STIMULUS-M, which
         incorporates the momentum term to further expedite convergence. One of the
         key contributions of this paper is the theoretical analysis for both STIMULUS and
         STIMULUS-M, where we establish an O( T1 ) convergence rate for both  meth-
                                                                               √
         ods, which implies a state-of-the-art sample complexity of O n + nϵ−1 under
         non-convexity settings. In the case where the objectives are strongly convex,
         we further establish a linear convergence rate of√O(exp −µT ) of the proposed
         methods, which suggests an even stronger O (n + n ln(µ/ϵ)) sample complexity.
         Moreover, to further alleviate the periodic full gradient evaluation requirement in
         STIMULUS and STIMULUS-M , we further propose enhanced versions with adap-
         tive batching called STIMULUS+ /STIMULUS-M+ and provide their theoretical
         analysis. Our extensive experimental results verify the efficacy of our proposed
         algorithms and their superiority over existing methods.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Since its inception as a discipline, machine learning (ML) has heavily relied on optimization formula-
tions and algorithms. While traditional ML problems generally focus on minimizing a single loss
function, many emergent complex-structured multi-task ML problems require balancing multiple
objectives that are often conflicting (e.g., multi-agent reinforcement learning (Parisi et al., 2014),
multi-task fashion representation learning (Jiao et al., 2022; 2023), multi-task recommendation
system (Chen et al., 2019; Zhou et al., 2023), multi-model learning in video captioning (Pasunuru &
Bansal, 2017), and multi-label learning-to-rank (Mahapatra et al., 2023a;b)). Such ML applications
necessitate solving multi-objective optimization (MOO) problems, which can be expressed as:
                                 min F(x) := [f1 (x), · · · , fS (x)],                            (1)
                                 x∈D

where x ∈ D ⊆ Rd represents
                          Pn the model parameters, and each fs denotes the objective function of
task s ∈ [S], fs (x) = n1 j=1 fsj (x; ξsj ), n denotes the total number of samples, ξsj denotes the
j-th sample for taks s. However, unlike traditional single-objective optimization, there may not exist
a common x-solution in MOO that can simultaneously minimize all objective functions. Instead,
a more relevant optimality criterion in MOO is the notion of Pareto-optimal solutions, where no
objective can be further improved without sacrificing other objectives. Moreover, in settings where
the set of objective functions are non-convex, searching for Pareto-optimal solutions is intractable


                                                  1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


in general. In such scenarios, the goal of MOO is usually weakened to finding a Pareto-stationary
solution, where no improving direction exists for any objective without sacrificing other objectives.
To date, existing MOO algorithms in the literature can be generally categorized as gradient-free
and gradient-based methods. Notably, gradient-based methods have attracted increasing attention
recently due to their stronger empirical performances (see Section 2 for more detailed discussions).
Specifically, following a similar token of (stochastic) gradient descent methods for single-objective
optimization, (stochastic) multi-gradient descent (MGD/SMGD) algorithms have been proposed
in (Fliege et al., 2019; Fernando et al., 2022; Zhou et al., 2022b; Liu & Vicente, 2021). The basic
idea of MGD/SMGD is to iteratively update the x-variable following a common descent direction
for all the objectives through a time-varying convex combination of (stochastic) gradients of all
objective functions. Although MGD-type algorithms enjoy a fast O(1/T ) convergence rate (T
denotes the number of iterations) in finding a Pareto-stationary solution, their O(n) per-iteration
computation complexity in full multi-gradient evaluations becomes prohibitive when the dataset size
n is large. Further, in finding an ϵ-stationary point for non-convex MOO (typical in ML), the high
overall O(nϵ−1 ) sample complexity of MGD-type methods is not acceptable when n is large. As a
result, SMGD-type algorithms are often more favored in practice thanks to the lower per-iteration
computation complexity in evaluating stochastic multi-gradients. However, due to the
                                                                                   √ noisy stochastic
multi-gradient evaluations, SMGD-type algorithms typically exhibit a slow O(1/ T ) convergence
rate, which also induces a high O(ϵ−2 ) sample complexity. Exacerbating the problem is the fact that,
due to the complex coupling algorithmic structure between multiple objectives, SMGD-type methods
are prone to divergence problems, particularly in scenarios with small batch and high variance (Liu &
Vicente, 2021; Zhou et al., 2022a). In light of these major limitations of SMGD-type algorithms, a
fundamental question naturally emerges:
Is it possible to develop fast-convergent stochastic MOO algorithms in the sense of matching the
convergence rate of deterministic MGD-type methods, while having a low per-iteration computation
complexity as in SMGD-type algorithms, as well as achieving a low overall sample complexity?
As in traditional single-objective optimization, a natural idea to achieve both fast convergence and
low sample complexity in MOO is to employ the so-called “variance reduction” (VR) techniques to
tame the noise in stochastic multi-gradients in SMGD-type methods. However, due to the complex
coupling nature of MOO problems, developing VR-assisted algorithms for SMGD-type algorithms is
far more challenging than their single-objective counterparts. First, since SMGD-type methods aim to
identify the Pareto front (i.e., the set of all Pareto-optimal/stationary solutions), it is critical to ensure
that the use of VR techniques does not introduce new bias into the already-noisy SGMD-type search
process, which drives the search process toward certain regions of the Pareto front. Second, how
to maintain solution diversity discovered by VR-assisted SMGD-type search process is challenging
and yet important, particularly for the non-convex MOO problems. Last but the least, conducting
theoretical analysis to prove the convergence performance of some proposed VR-based SMGD-
type techniques also contains multiple challenges, including how to quantify multiple conflicting
objectives, navigating trade-offs between them, handling the non-convexity objective functions, and
managing the computational cost of evaluations. All of these analytical challenges are quite different
from those in single-objective optimization theoretical analysis. To adapt variance reduction methods
in SMGD-type algorithms, specialized proofs and analyses are needed to effectively tackle these
challenges and facilitate efficient exploration of the Pareto optimality/stationarity.
The major contribution of this paper is that we overcome the aforementioned technical challenges and
develop a suite of new VR-assisted SMGD-based MOO algorithms called STIMULUS (stochastic
path-integrated multi-gradient recursive estimator) to achieve both fast convergence and low sample
complexity in MOO. Our main technical results are summarized as follows:


• We propose a path-integrated recursive variance reduction technique in STIMULUS that is carefully
  designed for updating stochastic multi-gradient estimates. This technique not only enhances
  computational efficiency but also significantly reduces multi-gradient estimation variance, leading
  to more stable convergence trajectories and overcoming the divergence problem of SMGD. We
  theoretically establish a convergence rate of O(1/T ) for STIMULUS√  in non-convex settings (typical
  in ML), which further implies a low sample complexity of O n + nϵ−1 . In the special setting

  where the objectives are strongly convex, we show that STIMULUS has a linear    √convergence rate
  of O(exp(−µT )), which implies an even lower sample complexity of O (n + n ln(µ/ϵ)).


                                                      2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


• To further improve the performance of STIMULUS, we develop an enhanced version called
  STIMULUS-M that incorporates momentum information to expedite convergence speed. Also, to
  relax the requirement for periodic full multi-gradient evaluations in STIMULUS and STIMULUS-
  M, we propose two enhanced variants called STIMULUS+ and STIMULUS-M+ based on adaptive
  batching, respectively. We provide theoretical convergence and sample complexity analyses for
  all these enhanced variants. These enhanced variants expand the practical utility of STIMULUS,
  offering efficient solutions that not only accelerate optimization processes but also alleviate compu-
  tational burdens in a wide spectrum of multi-objective optimization applications.
• We conduct extensive numerical experiments on a variety of challenging MOO problems to empiri-
  cally verify our theoretical results and illustrate the efficacy of the STIMULUS algorithm family.
  All our experimental results demonstrate the efficiency and superiority of the STIMULUS algorithm
  family over existing state-of-the-art MOO methods. These results also underscore the robustness,
  scalability, and flexibility of our STIMULUS algorithm family in complex MOO applications.

2    P RELIMINARIES AND R ELATED W ORK
To facilitate subsequent technical discussions, in this section, we first provide a primer on MOO
fundamentals and formally define the notions of Pareto optimality/stationarity, ϵ-stationarity in MOO,
and the associated sample complexity. Then, we will give an overview of the most related work in
the MOO literature, thus putting our work into comparative perspectives.
1) Multi-objective optimization: A primer. As introduced in Section 1, MOO aims to optimize
multiple objectives in Eq. (1) simultaneously. However, since in general there may not exist an
x-solution that minimizes all objectives at the same time in MOO, the more appropriate notion of
optimality in MOO is the so-called Pareto optimality, which is formally defined as follows:
Definition 1 ((Weak) Pareto Optimality). Given two solutions x and y, x is said to dominate y
only if fs (x) ≤ fs (y), ∀s ∈ [S] and there exists at least one function, fs , where fs (x) < fs (y). A
solution x is Pareto optimal if no other solution dominates it. A solution x is defined as weakly Pareto
optimal if there is no solution y for which fs (x) > fs (y), ∀s ∈ [S].

Finding a Pareto-optimal solution in MOO is as complex as solving single-objective non-convex
optimization problems and is NP-Hard in general. Consequently, practical efforts in MOO often aim
to find a solution that meets the weaker notion called Pareto-stationarity (a necessary condition for
Pareto optimality), which is defined as follows Fliege & Svaiter (2000); Miettinen (2012):
Definition 2 (Pareto Stationarity). A solution x is Pareto-stationary if no common descent direction
d ∈ Rd exists such that ∇fs (x)⊤ d < 0, ∀s ∈ [S].

It is worth noting that, since non-convex MOO problems are intractable in general, the goal in solving
non-convex MOO problems is often to identify Pareto-stationary points that serve as the necessary
condition for Pareto-optimality. Note also that in the special setting with strongly convex objective
functions, Pareto-stationary solutions are Pareto-optimal.
Following directly from Pareto-stationarity in Definition 2, gradient-based MOO algorithms strive to
find a common descent (i.e., improving) direction d ∈ Rd , such that ∇fs (x)⊤ d ≤ 0, ∀s ∈ [S]. If
such a direction does not exist at x, then x is Pareto-stationary according to Definition 2. Toward
this end, the MGD method (Désidéri, 2012) identifies an optimal weight λ∗ for the multi-gradient
set ∇F(x) ≜ {∇fs (x), ∀s ∈ [S]} by solving λ∗ (x) ∈ argminλ∈C ∥λ⊤ ∇F(x)∥2 . Consequently,
the common descent direction can be defined as d = λ⊤ ∇F(x). Then, MGD follows the iterative
update rule x ← x − ηd in the hope that a Pareto-stationary point can be reached, where η signifies a
learning rate. SMGD Liu & Vicente (2021) follows a similar approach, but with full multi-gradients
being replaced by stochastic multi-gradients. For both MGD and    P SMGD, it has been shown that if
∥λ⊤ ∇F(x)∥ = 0 for some λ ∈ C, where C ≜ {y ∈ [0, 1]S , s∈[S] ys = 1}, then x is a Pareto
stationary solution Fliege et al. (2019); Zhou et al. (2022b).
Next, to define sample complexity in MOO, we first need the following definition of ϵ-stationarity:
Definition 3 (ϵ-stationarity). In MOO,P   a point is ϵ-stationary if the common descent direction d at x
satisfies the following condition: E∥ s∈[S] λst ∇fs (xt )∥2 ≤ ϵ in non-convex MOO problems and
E[ s∈[S] λst [fs (xt ) − fs (x∗ )]] < ϵ in strongly-convex MOO problems.
  P


                                                   3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 1: Convergence comparisons between MOO algorithms, where n is the size of dataset; ϵ is
the convergence error. Our proposed algorithms are marked in a shaded background.

                                                              Non-convex case                         Strongly-Convex case
               Algorithm             Multi-gradient
                                                        Rate           Samp. Complex.          Rate               Samp. Complex.
                                                          1
                                                                         O nϵ−1

       MGD (Fliege et al., 2019)     Deterministic     O  T                                O(exp(−µT ))           O (n ln(µ/ϵ))

                                                      O √1               O ϵ−2                O T1                  O ϵ−1

       SMGD (Yang et al., 2022)        Stochastic
                                                          T

                                                      O √1               O ϵ−2                    1
                                                                                                                     O ϵ−1

      MoCo (Fernando et al., 2022)     Stochastic                                             O   T
                                                          T

                                                      O √1               O ϵ−2                    1
                                                                                                                     O ϵ−1

    CR-MOGM (Zhou et al., 2022b)       Stochastic                                             O   T
                                                           T
                                                                            √                                         √
                                                          1
                                                                                nϵ−1

      STIMULUS/ STIMULUS-M             Stochastic     O   T        O n+                    O(exp(−µT )) O n +             n ln(µ/ϵ)
                                                                            √                                         √
    STIMULUS+ / STIMULUS-M+                               1
                                                                                nϵ−1

                                       Stochastic     O   T        O n+                    O(exp(−µT )) O n +             n ln(µ/ϵ)


We note that the quantity ∥d∥2 = ∥λ⊤ ∇F(x)∥2 can be used as a metric for evaluating the conver-
gence speed of MOO algorithms in the non-convex setting (Fliege et al., 2019; Zhou et al., 2022b;
Fernando et al., 2022). On the other
                                   P hand, in the context of more manageable strongly convex
MOO problems, the optimality gap s∈[S] λs [fs (x) − fs (x∗ )] is usually used as the convergence
metric (Liu & Vicente, 2021), where x∗ denotes the Pareto-optimal point.
With the notion of ϵ-stationarity in MOO, we are now in a position to define the concept of sample
complexity in MOO as follows:
Definition 4 (Sample Complexity). The sample complexity in MOO is defined as the total number
of incremental first-order oracle (IFO) calls required by an MOO algorithm to converge to an
ϵ-stationary point, where one IFO call evaluates the multi-gradient ∇x fsj (x; ξsj ) for all tasks s.

2) Overview of MOO Algorithms: As mentioned in Section 1, MOO algorithms can be classified
into two primary categories. The first category is usually referred to as gradient-free methods. Typical
gradient-free methods include evolutionary MOO algorithms and Bayesian MOO algorithms (Zhang
& Li, 2007; Deb et al., 2002; Belakaria et al., 2020; Laumanns & Ocenasek, 2002). These techniques
are suitable for small-scale problems but inefficient in solving high-dimensional MOO models (e.g.,
deep neural networks). In contrast, the second class is gradient-based MOO methods (Fliege & Svaiter,
2000; Désidéri, 2012; Fliege et al., 2019; Peitz & Dellnitz, 2018; Liu & Vicente, 2021), which have
shown to be more effective in solving high-dimensional MOO problems. As discussed in Section 1,
the most notable gradient-based MOO algorithms include multi-gradient descent (MGD) (Fliege
et al., 2019) and stochastic
                   √         multi-gradient descent (SMGD) (Liu & Vicente, 2021), which achieves
O(1/T ) and O(1 T ) convergence rates, respectively. Although SMGD is easier to implement in
practice thanks to the use of stochastic multi-gradient, it has been shown that the noisy common
descent direction in SMGD could potentially cause divergence (cf. the example in Sec. 4 in (Zhou
et al., 2022b)). There also have been recent works on using momentum-based methods for bias
mitigation in MOO, and these methods are further applied within the context of bi-level√ optimization
problems. (Zhou et al., 2022b; Fernando et al., 2022). Note, however, that the O(1/ T ) convergence
rates of (Zhou et al., 2022b; Fernando et al., 2022) remain unsatisfactory compared to the O(1/T )
convergence rate of our STIMULUS algorithm family. For easier comparisons, we summarize the
state-of-the-art gradient-based MOO algorithms and their convergence rate results under non-convex
and strongly convex settings in Table 1.

3     T HE STIMULUS A LGORITHM FAMILY
In this section, we first present the basic version of the STIMULUS algorithm in Section 3.1, which
is followed by the momentum and adaptive-batching variants in Sections 3.2 and 3.3, respectively.

3.1     T HE STIMULUS A LGORITHM

Our STIMULUS algorithm is presented in Algorithm 1, where we propose a new variance-reduced
(VR) multi-gradient estimator. It can be seen from Algorithm 1 that our proposed VR approach has
a double-loop structure, where the inner loop is of length q > 0. More specifically, different from
MGD where a full multi-gradient direction ust = ∇fs (xt ), ∀s ∈ [S] is evaluated in all iterations, our


                                                                   4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


STIMULUS algorithm only evaluates a full multi-gradient every q iterations (i.e., mod(t, q) = 0).
For other iterations t with mod(t, q) ̸= 0, our STIMULUS algorithm uses a stochastic multi-gradient
estimator ust based on a mini-batch A with a recursive correction term as follows:
                              1 X
              ust = ust−1 +         (∇fsj (xt ; ξsj ) − ∇fsj (xt−1 ; ξsj )) , for all s ∈ [S].  (2)
                             |A|
                                      j∈A

                                               Algorithm 1 STIMULUS algorithm and its variants.
Eq. (2) shows that the estimator is con-
structed iteratively based on information Require: Initial point x0 , parameters T , q.
from xt−1 and ust−1 , both of which are ob- 1: Initialize: Choose x0 .
tained from the previous update. We will 2: for t = 0, 1, . . . , T do
show later in Section 4 that, thanks to the q- 3: if mod(t, q) = 0 then
                                                4:     if STIMULUS or STIMULUS-M        then
periodic full multi-gradients and the recur- 5:           Compute: ust = n1 n
                                                                              P
                                                                                  j=1 ∇fsj (xt ; ξsj ), ∀s ∈
sive correction terms, STIMULUS is able
                                                          [S]
to achieve a convergence rate of O(1/T ). 6:           end if
Moreover, due to the stochastic subsam- 7:             if STIMULUS+ or STIMULUS-M+ then
pling in mini-batch A, STIMULUS has a 8:                  Compute: ust as in Eq. (6).
lower sample complexity than MGD. In 9:                end if
STIMULUS, the update rule for parame- 10: else
ters in x is written as:                       11:     Compute ust as in Eqs. (2).
                                                12: end if
                 xt+1 = xt − ηdt ,          (3) 13: Optimize:minλst ≥0∥ s∈[S] λst ust ∥2 ,s.t., s∈[S] λst=1.
                                                                       P                     P
                                                                    P       s s
where η is the learning rate. Here, dt 14: Compute: dt = s∈[S] λt ut .+
is
Pthe update      direction defined as dt = 15: if STIMULUS or STIMULUS then
          s s               s                 16:      Update: xt+1 = xt − ηdt .
   s∈[S] λt ut , where the λt -values are ob- 17:   end if
tained by solving the following quadratic 18: if STIMULUS-M or STIMULUS-M+ then
optimization problem:                         19:      Update: xt+1 = xt + α(xt − xt−1 ) − ηdt .
        X            2       X                20: end if
min          λst ust , s.t.       λst = 1.(4) 21: end for
λst ≥0
         s∈[S]                s∈[S]

The combined iterative update in Eqs. (3) and (4) follows the same token as in the MGDA algorithm
in (Mukai, 1980; Sener & Koltun, 2018; Lin et al., 2019; Fliege et al., 2019).

3.2      T HE M OMENTUM -BASED STIMULUS-M A LGORITHM

Although it can be shown that STIMULUS achieves a theoretical O(1/T ) convergence rate, it could
be sensitive to the choice of learning rate and suffer from similar oscillation issues in practice
as gradient-descent-type methods do in single-objective optimization when some objectives are
ill-conditioned.
To further improve the empirical performance of STIMULUS, we now propose a momentum-assisted
enhancement for STIMULUS called STIMULUS-M. The rationale behind STIMULUS-M is to take
into account the past trajectories to smooth the update direction. Specifically, in addition to the same
combined iterative update as in Eqs. (3) and (4), the update rule in STIMULUS-M incorporates an
α-parameterized momentum term as follows:
                             xt+1 = xt − ηdt + α(xt − xt−1 ),        ∀s ∈ [S],                           (5)
                                               |    {z    }
                                                      Momentum

where α ∈ (0, 1) is the momentum coefficient.

3.3      T HE A DAPTIVE -BATCHING -BASED STIMULUS+ /STIMULUS-M+ A LGORITHMS

Note that in both STIMULUS and STIMULUS-M, one still needs to evaluate a full multi-gradient
every q iterations, which remains computationally demanding in the large data regime. Moreover, if
the objectives are in an expectation or “online” form rather than the finite-sum setting, it is infeasible
to compute a full multi-gradient. To address these limitations, we propose two adaptive-batching
enhanced versions for STIMULUS and STIMULUS-M called STIMULUS+ and STIMULUS-M+ ,


                                                      5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


respectively.
  Pn           Specifically, rather than using a q-periodic full multi-gradient ust = ∇fs (xt ) =
1
n    j=1 ∇f sj (x t ; ξsj ), ∀s ∈ [S], in iteration t with mod(t, q) = 0, we utilize an adaptive-batching
stochastic multi-gradient as follows:
                                         1 X
                                ust =              ∇fsj (xt ; ξsj ), ∀s ∈ [S],                         (6)
                                       |Ns |
                                          j∈Ns

where Ns is an ϵ-adaptive batch sampled from the dataset uniformly at random with size:
                              |Ns | = min cγ σ 2 γt−1 , cϵ σ 2 ϵ−1 , n .

                                                                                                       (7)
We choose constants cγ ≥ 8, cϵ ≥ η in non-convex case and cγ ≥ 8µ        µ
                                                                η , cϵ ≥ 2 in strongly-convex
                                              2
case (see detailed discussions in Section 4). The σ , represents variance bound of stochastic gradient
                                                                                       2
norms (cf. Assumption. 2). In STIMULUS+ , we choose γt+1 = i=(nk −1)q ∥dqi ∥ , while in the
                                                                      Pt
                                                                       t
momentum based algorithm STIMULUS-M+ , we chooseγt+1 = i=(nk −1)q ∥α(t−i) di ∥2 /q. The
                                                                     P

term γt+1 offers further refinement to improve convergence.

4     PARETO S TATIONARITY C ONVERGENCE A NALYSIS
In this section, we will theoretically analyze the Pareto stationarity convergence performance of our
STIMULUS algorithm family under both non-convex and strongly convex settings. Before presenting
our Pareto stationarity convergence results for our STIMULUS algorithms, we first state two needed
assumptions, which are conventional in the optimization literature:
Assumption 1 (L-Lipschitz Smoothness). There exists a constant L > 0 such that ∥∇fs (x) −
∇fs (y)∥ ≤ L∥x − y∥, ∀x, y ∈ Rd , ∀s ∈ [S].
Assumption 2 (Bounded Variance of Stochastic Gradient Norms). There exists a constant σ > 0
such that for all x ∈ Rd , ∥∇x fs (x; ξ) − ∇x fs (x)∥2 ≤ σ 2 , ∀s ∈ S.

With the assumptions above, we are now in a position to discuss the Pareto stationary convergence of
the STIMULUS family.

4.1   PARETO -S TATIONARITY C ONVERGENCE OF STIMULUS

1) STIMULUS: The Non-convex Setting. First, we show that the basic STIMULUS algorithm
achieves an O(1/T ) convergence rate for non-convex MOO problems as follows. Note that this
result matches that of the deterministic MGD method.
                                                                        1 1
Theorem 1 (STIMULUS for Non-convex MOO). Let ηt = η ≤ min{ 2L             , 2 }. Under Assumption 1,
if at least one objective function fs (·), s ∈ [S] is bounded from below by fsmin , then the sequence
                                           PT −1
{xt } output by STIMULUS satisfies: T1 t=0 E∥ s∈[S] λst ∇fs (xt )∥2 = O(1/T ).
                                                      P

Following from Theorem. 1, we immediately√have the following sample complexity for the
STIMULUS algorithm by choosing q = |A| = ⌈ n⌉:
Corollary 1 (Sample Complexity
                            √      of STIMULUS for Non-convex MOO). By choosing η ≤
       1 1
min{ 2L , 2 }, q = |A| = ⌈ n⌉, the overall sample complexity  of STIMULUS for finding an ϵ-
                                                 √
stationary point for non-convex MOO problems is O nϵ−1 + n .

Several interesting remarks regarding Theorem 1 and Corollary 1 are in order: 1) Our proof of
STIMULUS’s Pareto-stationarity convergence only relies on standard assumptions commonly used in
first-order optimization techniques. This is in stark contrast to prior research, where unconventional
and hard-to-verify assumptions were required (e.g., an assumption on the convergence of x-sequence
is used in Fliege et al. (2019)). 2) While both MGD and our STIMULUS methods share the same
O(1/T ) convergence rate, STIMULUS enjoys a substantially lower sample complexity  √       than MGD.
More specifically, the sample complexity of STIMULUS is reduced by a factor of n when compared
to MGD. This becomes particularly advantageous in the “big data” regime where n is large.
2) STIMULUS: The Strongly Convex Setting. Now, we consider the strongly convex setting, which
is more tractable but still of interest in many learning problems in practice (e.g., multi-objective ridge
regression). In the strongly convex setting, we have the following additional assumption:


                                                    6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Assumption 3 (µ-Strongly Convex Function). Each objective fs (x), s ∈ [S] is a µ-strongly convex
function, i.e., fs (y) ≥ fs (x) + ∇fs (x)(y − x) + µ2 ∥y − x∥2 , ∀x, y, for some µ > 0.

For strongly convex MOO problems, the next result says that STIMULUS achieves a much stronger
expected linear Pareto-optimality convergence performance:
                                                                                         µ
Theorem 2 (STIMULUS for µ-Strongly Convex MOO). Let η ≤ min{ 12 , 2µ         1     1
                                                                                , 8L , 64L 2 }, q = |A| =
 √
⌈ n⌉. Under Assumptions 1–3, pick xt as the final output of STIMULUS with probability wt =
(1 − 3µη  1−t
              . Then, we have Et [ s∈[S] λst [fs (xt ) − fs (x∗ )]] ≤ ∥x0 − x∗ ∥2 µ exp(− 3ηµT
                                  P
       4 )                                                                                      4 ).

Further, Theorem 2 immediately implies following with logarithmic sample
                                                                       √      complexity (in terms of
ϵ) STIMULUS with a proper choice of learning rate and q = |A| = ⌈ n⌉.
Corollary 2 (Sample Complexity of STIMULUS   √     for Solving µ-Strongly Convex MOO). By choosing
                          µ
η ≤ min{ 12 , 2µ
               1    1
                 , 8L , 64L 2 }, q = |A| = ⌈   n⌉}, the overall sample complexity of STIMULUS for
                                           √
solving strongly convex MOO is O (n + n ln(µ/ϵ)).

There are also several interesting insights from Theorem 2 and Corollary 2 regarding STIMULUS’s
performance for solving strongly convex MOO problems: 1) STIMULUS achieves an expected linear
convergence rate of O(µ exp(−µT )). Interestingly, this convergence rate matches that of MGD for
strongly convex MOO problems as well as gradient descent for strongly convex single-objective
optimization. 2) Another interesting feature of STIMULUS for strongly convex MOO stems from its
use of randomly selected outputs xt along with associated weights wt from the trajectory of xt , which
is inspired by the similar idea for stochastic gradient descent (SGD) (Ghadimi & Lan, 2013). Note
that, for implementation in practice, one does not need to store all xt -values. Instead, the algorithm
can be implemented by using a random clock for stopping (Ghadimi & Lan, 2013).

4.2   PARETO S TATIONARITY C ONVERGENCE OF STIMULUS-M

Next, we turn our attention to the Pareto stationarity convergence of the STIMULUS-M algorithm.
Again, we analyze STIMULUS-M for non-convex and strongly convex MOO problems:
                                                                               1 1                 √
Theorem 3 (STIMULUS-M for Non-convex MOO). Let ηt = η ≤ min{ 2L                  , 2 }, q = |A| = ⌈ n⌉.
Under Assumptions 1, if at least one objective function fs (·), s ∈ [S], is bounded from below by fsmin ,
                                                                    PT −1
then the sequence {xt } output by STIMULUS-M satisfies T1 t=0 E∥ s∈[S] λst ∇fs (xt )∥2 =
                                                                               P

O( T1 ).
Similar to the basic STIMULUS algorithm, by choosing the appropriate learning rate and inner loop
length parameters, we immediately have the following sample complexity result for STIMULUS-
M for solving non-convex MOO problems:
Corollary 3 (Sample Complexity of√    STIMULUS-M for Solving Non-convex MOO). By choosing
                 1 1
ηt = η ≤ min{ 2L    , 2 }, q = |A| = ⌈ n⌉. The overall sample complexity of STIMULUS-M under
                                      √ −1
non-convex objective functions is O nϵ + n .
The next two results state the Pareto optimality and sample complexity results for STIMULUS-M:
                                                                                              µ
Theorem 4 (STIMULUS-M for µ-Strongly Convex MOO). Let η ≤ min{ 21 , 2µ             1    1
                                                                                     , 8L , 64L 2 }, q =
       √
|A| = ⌈ n⌉. Under Assumptions 1–3, pick xt as the final output of STIMULUS-M with probability
wt = (1 − 3µη  1−t
                   . Then, we have Et [ s∈[S] λst [fs (xt ) − fs (x∗ )]] ≤ ∥x0 − x∗ ∥2 µ exp(− 3ηµT
                                        P
            4 )                                                                                     4 ).
Corollary 4 (Sample Complexity of STIMULUS-M     √     for Solving Strongly Convex MOO). By choos-
                              µ
ing η ≤ min{ 12 , 2µ
                   1    1
                     , 8L , 64L 2 }, q = |A| = ⌈   n⌉, the overall sample complexity of STIMULUS-
                                                 √
M for solving strongly convex MOO is O (n + n ln(µ/ϵ)).

We remark that the convergence rate upper bound of STIMULUS-M is the same as that in Theorem 2,
which suggests a potentially loose convergence upper bound in Theorem 4 due to the technicality
and intricacies in analyzing momentum-based stochastic multi-gradient algorithms for solving non-
convex MOO problems. Yet, we note that even this potentially loose convergence rate upper bound
in Theorem 4 already suffices to establish a linear convergence rate for STIMULUS-M in solving
strongly convex MOO problems. Moreover, we will show later in Section 5 that this momentum-
assisted method significantly accelerates the empirical convergence speed performance. It is also


                                                   7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                    Task L                                                         Task R                                                         Task L                                                                    Task R
                                                                                                                                                                                    SMGD                                                                      SMGD
       0.025                                                          0.025                                                          0.025                                          MOCO                       0.025                                          MOCO
                                                                                                                                                                                    MGD                                                                       MGD
                                                                                                                                                                                    STIMULATE                                                                 STIMULATE
       0.020                                                                                                                         0.020                                          STIMULATE +                0.020                                          STIMULATE +
                                                                      0.020                                                                                                         STIMULATE-M                                                               STIMULATE-M
                                                                                                                                                                                    STIMULATE-M +                                                             STIMULATE-M +


Loss


                                                               Loss


                                                                                                                              Loss


                                                                                                                                                                                                        Loss
       0.015       SMGD                                                           SMGD                                               0.015
                   MOCO                                               0.015       MOCO                                                                                                                         0.015
                   MGD                                                            MGD
       0.010       STIMULATE                                                      STIMULATE                                          0.010
                   STIMULATE +                                        0.010       STIMULATE +                                                                                                                  0.010
                   STIMULATE-M                                                    STIMULATE-M
       0.005       STIMULATE-M +                                                  STIMULATE-M +                                      0.005
               0   100      200     300      400   500   600                  0   100      200     300      400   500   600                  0   50000   100000   150000   200000     250000   300000                  0   50000   100000   150000   200000     250000   300000
                                   Iteration                                                      Iteration                                              Sample complexity                                                         Sample complexity

  (a) Training loss convergence in terms of iterations.                                                                           (b) Training loss convergence in terms of samples.
                      Figure 1: Training loss convergence comparisons between different MOO algorithms.
worth noting that there are two key differences in the proofs of Theorem 3 and 4 compared to those
of the momentum-based stochastic gradient algorithm for single-objective non-convex optimization:
1) our proof exploits the martingale structure of the ust . This enables us to tightly bound the mean-
                                      2
square error term E ∥∇fs (xt ) − ust ∥ under the momentum scheme. In contrast, in the traditional
analysis of stochastic algorithms with momentum, this error term corresponds to the variance of the
stochastic estimator and is typically assumed to be bounded by a universal constant. 2) Our proof
requires careful manipulation of the bounding strategy to effectively handle the accumulation of the
                                        2
mean-square error E ∥∇fs (xk ) − ust ∥ over the entire optimization trajectory in non-convex MOO.

4.3                 PARETO S TATIONARITY C ONVERGENCE OF STIMULUS+ /STIMULUS-M+

Next, we present the Pareto stationarity convergence and the associated sample complexity results of
the STIMULUS+ /STIMULUS-M+ algorithms for non-convex MOO as follows:
Theorem 5 (STIMULUS+ /STIMULUS-M+ for Non-convex MOO). Let η ≤ min{ 4L                      1 1
                                                                                               , 2 }, q =
         √
|A| = ⌈ n⌉. By choosing cγ and cϵ as such that cγ ≥ 8, and cϵ ≥ η, under Assumptions 1 and 2, if
at least one function fs (·), s ∈ [S] is bounded from below by fsmin , then the sequence {xt } output by
                                               PT −1
STIMULUS+ /STIMULUS-M+ satisfies: T1 t=0 E∥ s∈[S] λst ∇fs (xt )∥2 = O( T1 ).
                                                          P

                                                +
Corollary 5 (Sample Complexity of STIMULUS
                                       √          /STIMULUS-M+ for Non-convex MOO). By
                   1 1
choosing η ≤ min{ 4L , 2 }, q = |A| = ⌈ n⌉, cγ ≥ 8, and cϵ ≥ η. The overall sample complexity of
                                                                         √
STIMULUS+ /STIMULUS-M+ under non-convex objective functions is O nϵ−1 + n .


Theorem 6 (STIMULUS+ /STIMULUS-M+ for µ-Strongly              √         Convex case.). Let η ≤
                      µ           8µ        µ
min{ 12 , 2µ
           1    1
             , 8L , 64L 2 }, cγ ≥  η , cϵ ≥ 2 , q = |A|   = ⌈   n⌉. Under  Assumptions 1- 3, pick xt
as the final output of the STIMULUS+ /STIMULUS-M+ algorithm with weights wt = (1 − 3µη       4 )
                                                                                                 1−t
                                                                                                     .
                           P       s                                 2        3ηµT
Then, it holds that Et [ s∈[S] λt [fs (xt ) − fs (x∗ )]] ≤ ∥x0 − x∗ ∥ µ exp(− 4 ).

Corollary 6 (Sample Complexity of STIMULUS+ /STIMULUS-M+ for √               Strongly Convex MOO).
                                      µ            8µ        µ
By choosing η ≤ min{ 12 , 2µ
                           1    1
                             , 8L , 64L 2 }, cγ  ≥  η , cϵ ≥ 2 , q = |A| = ⌈   n⌉, the overall sample
                         +                      +
                                                                                      √
complexity of STIMULUS /STIMULUS-M for solving strongly MOO is O (n + n ln(µ/ϵ)).

We note that, although the theoretical sample complexity bounds of STIMULUS+ /STIMULUS-
M+ are the same as those of STIMULUS/STIMULUS-M, respectively, the fact that STIMULUS+ and
STIMULUS-M+ do not need full multi-gradient evaluations implies that STIMULUS/STIMULUS-
M use significantly fewer samples than STIMULUS/STIMULUS-M in the large dataset regime. Our
experimental results in the next section will also empirically confirm this.

5                  E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS
In this section, we conduct numerical experiments to verify the efficacy of our STIMULUS algorithm
family. Due to space limitation, we only present experiments for non-convex MOO problems and
relegate experimental results for strongly convex MOO problems in the appendix.
1) Two-Objective Experiments on the MultiMNIST Dataset: First, we test the convergence
performance of our STIMULUS algorithms using the “MultiMNIST” dataset (Sabour et al., 2017),
which is a multi-task learning version of the MNIST dataset (LeCun et al., 1998) from LIBSVM
repository. Specifically, MultiMNIST converts the hand-written classification problem in MNIST
into a two-task problem, where the two tasks are task “L” (to categorize the top-left digit) and
task “R” (to classify the bottom-right digit). The goal is to classify the images of different tasks.


                                                                                                                              8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


We compare our STIMULUS algorithms with MGD, SMGD, and MOCO. All algorithms use the
same randomly generated initial point. The learning rates are chosen as η = 0.3, α = 0.5, constant
c = 32 and solution accuracy ϵ = 10−3 . The batch-size for MOCO and SMGD is 96. The full
batch size for MGD is 1024, and the inner loop batch-size |Ns | for STIMULUS, STIMULUS-M,
STIMULUS+ , STIMULUS-M+ is 96. As shown in Fig. 1(a), SMGD exhibits the slowest convergence
speed, while MOCO has a slightly faster convergence. MGD and our STIMULUS algorithms
have comparable performances. The STIMULUS-M /STIMULUS-M+ algorithms converge faster
than MGD, STIMULUS , and STIMULUS+ , primarily due to the use of momentum. Fig. 1(b)
highlights differences in sample complexity. MGD suffers the highest sample complexity, while
STIMULUS+ and STIMULUS-M+ demonstrate a more efficient utilization of samples in comparison
to STIMULUS and STIMULUS-M. These results are consistent with our theoretical analyses as
outlined in Theorems 1, 3, and 5.
2) Eight-Objective Experiments on the River Flow Dataset:
We further test our algorithms on an 8-task problem with the
river flow dataset (Nie et al., 2017), which is for flow predic-
tion at eight locations in the Mississippi river network. In
this experiment, we set η = 0.001, α = 0.1, the batch size
for MOCO and SMGD is 8, the full batch size for MGD
is 128, and the inner loop batch size |Ns | for STIMULUS,
STIMULUS-M, STIMULUS+ , STIMULUS-M+ is eight. To
better visualize different tasks, we plot the normalized loss
in a radar chart as shown in Fig. 2, where we can see that
our STIMULUS algorithms achieve a much smaller footprint,
which is desirable. Furthermore, we compare the sample com- Figure 2: Training loss conver-
plexity results of all algorithms in Table 3 (relegated to the gence comparison (8-objective).
appendix due to space limitation), which reveals a significant reduction in sample utilization by
STIMULUS+ /STIMULUS-M+ compared to MGD, while achieving better loss compared to SGMD
and MOCO (cf. Fig. 2).                                                      11 10 9 8
                                                                      13 12           7  14                6
3) 40-Objective Experiments with the CelebA Dataset:                     15                              5
                                                                       16                                   4
Lastly, we conduct large-scale 40-objective experiments with 18      17                                        3
                                                                                                              0.008
                                                                                                        0.006 2
                                                                                                     0.005
                                                                                                           0.007
                                                                                                  0.004
the CelebA dataset (Liu et al., 2015), which contains 200K 19                                  0.003
                                                                                            0.002
                                                                                         0.001
                                                                                                                  1
facial images annotated with 40 attributes. Each attribute corre- 2021
                                                                                                                  0
                                                                                                                 39 SMGD
sponds to a binary classification task, resulting in a 40-objective 22                                         38 MOCO
                                                                                                                    MGD
                                                                     23                                       37    STIMULUS
problem. We use a ResNet-18 He et al. (2016) model with-               24                                  36       STIMULUS-M
                                                                         25                             35          STIMULUS +
out the final layer for each attribute, and we attach a linear             2627                  33  34             STIMULUS-M +
layer to each attribute for classification. In this experiment,                 28 29 30 31  32
we set η = 0.0005, α = 0.01, the full batch size for MGD Figure 3: Training loss conver-
is 1024, and the batch size for SMGD and MOCO and the gence comparison (40-task).
inner loop batch size |Ns | for STIMULUS, STIMULUS-M,
STIMULUS+ , STIMULUS-M+ is 32. As shown in Fig. 3, MGD, STIMULUS, STIMULUS-M,
STIMULUS+ , and STIMULUS-M+ significantly outperform SMGD and MOCO in terms of training
loss. Also, we note that STIMULUS+ and STIMULUS-M+ consume fewer sample (approximately
11,000) samples compared to STIMULUS and STIMULUS-M , which consume approximately 13,120
samples, and MGD, which consumes approximately 102,400 samples. These results are consistent
with our theoretical results in Theorems 1, 3, and 5.
6 C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we proposed STIMULUS, a new variance-reduction-based stochastic multi-gradient-
based algorithm to achieve fast convergence and low sample complexity multi-objective optimization
(MOO). We theoretically analyzed the Pareto stationarity convergence and sample complexity of
our proposed STIMULUS algorithms under non-convex and strongly convex settings. To further
enhance the empirical Pareto stationarity convergence of STIMULUS, we further proposed an
algorithms called STIMULUS-M , which incorporates momentum information to expedite con-
vergence. To alleviate the periodic full multi-gradient evaluation requirement in STIMULUS and
STIMULUS-M, we further proposed enhanced versions for both algorithms with adaptive batching
called STIMULUS+ /STIMULUS-M+ . We provided theoretical performance analysis for all en-
hanced algorithms. Collectively, our proposed STIMULUS algorithm family advances the state of
the art of MOO algorithm design and analysis.


                                                               9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Syrine Belakaria, Aryan Deshwal, Nitthilan Kannappan Jayakodi, and Janardhan Rao Doppa.
  Uncertainty-aware search framework for multi-objective bayesian optimization. In Proceedings of
  the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 34, pp. 10044–10052, 2020.
Zhongxia Chen, Xiting Wang, Xing Xie, Tong Wu, Guoqing Bu, Yining Wang, and Enhong Chen.
  Co-attentive multi-task learning for explainable recommendation. In IJCAI, pp. 2137–2143, 2019.
Kalyanmoy Deb, Amrit Pratap, Sameer Agarwal, and TAMT Meyarivan. A fast and elitist multiob-
  jective genetic algorithm: Nsga-ii. IEEE transactions on evolutionary computation, 6(2):182–197,
  2002.
Jean-Antoine Désidéri. Multiple-gradient descent algorithm (mgda) for multiobjective optimization.
  Comptes Rendus Mathematique, 350(5-6):313–318, 2012.
Cong Fang, Chris Junchi Li, Zhouchen Lin, and Tong Zhang. Spider: Near-optimal non-convex
  optimization via stochastic path-integrated differential estimator. In S. Bengio, H. Wallach,
  H. Larochelle, K. Grauman, N. Cesa-Bianchi, and R. Garnett (eds.), Advances in Neural Informa-
  tion Processing Systems, volume 31. Curran Associates, Inc., 2018.
Heshan Fernando, Han Shen, Miao Liu, Subhajit Chaudhury, Keerthiram Murugesan, and Tianyi
  Chen. Mitigating gradient bias in multi-objective learning: A provably convergent stochastic
  approach. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.12624, 2022.
Jörg Fliege and Benar Fux Svaiter. Steepest descent methods for multicriteria optimization. Mathe-
   matical methods of operations research, 51(3):479–494, 2000.
Jörg Fliege, A Ismael F Vaz, and Luı́s Nunes Vicente. Complexity of gradient descent for multiobjec-
   tive optimization. Optimization Methods and Software, 34(5):949–959, 2019.
Saeed Ghadimi and Guanghui Lan. Stochastic first-and zeroth-order methods for nonconvex stochastic
  programming. SIAM Journal on Optimization, 23(4):2341–2368, 2013.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image
  recognition. cvpr. 2016. arXiv preprint arXiv:1512.03385, 2016.
Yang Jiao, Ning Xie, Yan Gao, Chien-Chih Wang, and Yi Sun. Fine-grained fashion representation
  learning by online deep clustering. In European Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 19–35.
  Springer, 2022.
Yang Jiao, Yan Gao, Jingjing Meng, Jin Shang, and Yi Sun. Learning attribute and class-specific
  representation duet for fine-grained fashion analysis. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference
  on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 11050–11059, 2023.
Sai Praneeth Karimireddy, Satyen Kale, Mehryar Mohri, Sashank Reddi, Sebastian Stich, and
  Ananda Theertha Suresh. SCAFFOLD: Stochastic controlled averaging for federated learning.
  In Hal Daumé III and Aarti Singh (eds.), Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on
  Machine Learning, volume 119 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 5132–5143.
  PMLR, 13–18 Jul 2020.
Marco Laumanns and Jiri Ocenasek. Bayesian optimization algorithms for multi-objective optimiza-
 tion. In International Conference on Parallel Problem Solving from Nature, pp. 298–307. Springer,
 2002.
Yann LeCun, Corinna Cortes, and CJ Burges. Mnist handwritten digit database. Available: http://yann.
  lecun. com/exdb/mnist, 1998.
Xi Lin, Hui-Ling Zhen, Zhenhua Li, Qing-Fu Zhang, and Sam Kwong. Pareto multi-task learning.
  Advances in neural information processing systems, 32, 2019.
Suyun Liu and Luis Nunes Vicente. The stochastic multi-gradient algorithm for multi-objective
  optimization and its application to supervised machine learning. Annals of Operations Research,
  pp. 1–30, 2021.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Ziwei Liu, Ping Luo, Xiaogang Wang, and Xiaoou Tang. Deep learning face attributes in the wild. In
  Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on computer vision, pp. 3730–3738, 2015.
Debabrata Mahapatra, Chaosheng Dong, Yetian Chen, and Michinari Momma. Multi-label learning to
  rank through multi-objective optimization. In Proceedings of the 29th ACM SIGKDD International
  Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, 2023a.
Debabrata Mahapatra, Chaosheng Dong, and Michinari Momma. Querywise fair learning to rank
  through multi-objective optimization. In Proceedings of the 29th ACM SIGKDD Conference on
  Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, 2023b.
Kaisa Miettinen. Nonlinear multiobjective optimization, volume 12. Springer Science & Business
  Media, 2012.
Hiroaki Mukai. Algorithms for multicriterion optimization. IEEE transactions on automatic control,
  25(2):177–186, 1980.
Lin Nie, Keze Wang, Wenxiong Kang, and Yuefang Gao. Image retrieval with attribute-associated
  auxiliary references. In 2017 International Conference on Digital Image Computing: Techniques
  and Applications (DICTA), pp. 1–6. IEEE, 2017.
Simone Parisi, Matteo Pirotta, Nicola Smacchia, Luca Bascetta, and Marcello Restelli. Policy gradient
  approaches for multi-objective sequential decision making. In 2014 International Joint Conference
  on Neural Networks (IJCNN), pp. 2323–2330. IEEE, 2014.
Ramakanth Pasunuru and Mohit Bansal. Multi-task video captioning with video and entailment
  generation. In Proceedings of the 55th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
  Linguistics, 2017.
Sebastian Peitz and Michael Dellnitz. Gradient-based multiobjective optimization with uncertainties.
  In NEO 2016, pp. 159–182. Springer, 2018.
Sara Sabour, Nicholas Frosst, and Geoffrey E Hinton. Dynamic routing between capsules. Advances
  in neural information processing systems, 30, 2017.
Ozan Sener and Vladlen Koltun. Multi-task learning as multi-objective optimization. Advances in
  neural information processing systems, 31, 2018.
Yijun Yang, Jing Jiang, Tianyi Zhou, Jie Ma, and Yuhui Shi. Pareto policy pool for model-based
  offline reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.
Qingfu Zhang and Hui Li. Moea/d: A multiobjective evolutionary algorithm based on decomposition.
  IEEE Transactions on evolutionary computation, 11(6):712–731, 2007.
Shiji Zhou, Wenpeng Zhang, Jiyan Jiang, Wenliang Zhong, Jinjie Gu, and Wenwu Zhu. On the
  convergence of stochastic multi-objective gradient manipulation and beyond. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 35:38103–38115, 2022a.
Shiji Zhou, Wenpeng Zhang, Jiyan Jiang, Wenliang Zhong, Jinjie GU, and Wenwu Zhu. On the
  convergence of stochastic multi-objective gradient manipulation and beyond. In Alice H. Oh,
  Alekh Agarwal, Danielle Belgrave, and Kyunghyun Cho (eds.), Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 2022b.
Tianchen Zhou, Michinari Momma, Chaosheng Dong, Fan Yang, Chenghuan Guo, Jin Shang,
  and Jia Kevin Liu. Multi-task learning on heterogeneous graph neural network for substitute
  recommendation. In 19th International Workshop on Mining and Learning with Graphs, 2023.


                                                 11
