Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


SEER: T OWARDS E FFICIENT P REFERENCE - BASED R E -
INFORCEMENT L EARNING VIA A LIGNED E XPERIENCE
E STIMATION
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                             A BSTRACT
         One of the challenges in reinforcement learning lies in the meticulous design
         of a reward function that quantifies the quality of each decision as a scalar
         value. Preference-based reinforcement learning (PbRL) provides an alternative
         approach, avoiding reward engineering by learning rewards based on human pref-
         erences among various trajectories. PbRL involves sampling informative trajec-
         tories, learning rewards from preferences, optimizing policies with learned re-
         wards, and subsequently generating higher-quality trajectories for the next itera-
         tion, thereby creating a virtuous circle. Distinct problems lie in effective reward
         learning and aligning the policy with human preferences, both of which are es-
         sential for achieving efficient learning. Motivated by these considerations, we
         propose an efficient preference-based RL method, dubbed SEER. We leverage
         state-action pairs that are well-supported in the current replay memory to boot-
         strap an empirical Q function (Q),
                                          b which is aligned with human preference. The
         empirical Q function helps SEER to sample more informative pairs for effective
         querying and regularizes the neural Q function (Qθ ), thus leading to a policy that
         is more consistent with human intent. Theoretically, we show that the empirical
         Q function is a lower bound of the oracle Q under human preference. Our ex-
         perimental results over several tasks demonstrate that the empirical Q function is
         beneficial for preference-based RL to learn a more aligned Q function, outper-
         forming state-of-the-art methods by a large margin.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL) has recently demonstrated remarkable proficiency in enabling
agents to excel in complex behaviors across diverse domains, including robotic control and manipu-
lation (Lillicrap et al., 2016; Gu et al., 2017), game playing (Mnih et al., 2013; Vinyals et al., 2019),
and industrial applications (Xu & Yu, 2023). The foundation of success lies in providing a well-
designed reward function. However, setting up a suitable reward function has been challenging for
many reinforcement learning applications (Yahya et al., 2017; Schenck & Fox, 2017). The quality
of the reward function depends heavily on the designer’s understanding of the core logic behind the
problem and relevant background knowledge. For example, formulating a reward function for text
generation presents a significant challenge due to the inherent difficulty in quantifying text quality
on a numerical scale (Wu et al., 2021b; Ouyang et al., 2022). Despite the substantial efforts of ex-
pert engineers in reward engineering, previous research (Victoria et al., 2020; Skalse et al., 2022)
has highlighted various challenges, including phenomena like “reward hacking”. In these scenar-
ios, agents focus solely on maximizing their rewards by exploiting misspecification in the reward
function, often leading to unintended and potentially problematic behaviors.
Recently, preference-based reinforcement learning (PbRL) has gained widespread attention and has
given rise to a series of algorithms (Lee et al., 2021b; Park et al., 2022; Liu et al., 2022). Rather
than relying on hand-engineered reward functions, this approach leverages human preferences to
learn a reward model. Specifically, a human can easily provide preference between a pair of trajec-
tories by the agent, thereby implicitly indicating the desired behaviors or the task’s objectives. By
learning from human feedback, the agent is capable of accomplishing specific tasks or mastering
certain behaviors. Recent research in the field of preference-based RL has demonstrated that it can


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                             reward learning from                   human
                                              human preferences                   preferences
                                                                            (2)

                                            (1)



                                 (3)
                                        policy learning
                    environment space     memory space      state visited            state unseen

Figure 1: Framework of SEER. (1) Label rewards using rbψ and construct a non-parametric model
G. (2) Query human preferences and update the reward model rbψ based on them. (3) Update Qθ
                  b bootstrapped from G and optimize policy πϕ .
with regularizing Q
train agents to exhibit novel behaviors and, to some extent, mitigate the challenges of reward hack-
ing. However, existing methods still suffer from feedback inefficiency, limiting the applicability of
preference-based RL in practical scenarios and making its deployment more challenging.
PbRL involves sampling informative trajectories, learning a reward model from preferences, opti-
mizing policy with the reward model, and subsequently generating higher-quality trajectories for the
next iteration, thereby creating a virtuous circle. Prior research (Hejna & Sadigh, 2023; Liu et al.,
2022) observes that the intrinsic inefficiency of reward learning mechanisms results in an increase
in feedback requirements for PbRL. Specifically, a limited set of preference labels can lead to an
imprecise reward function. This inaccuracy in the reward function may cause the Q function to
overfit the erroneous outputs of the reward model, resulting in suboptimal policy, a phenomenon
often referred to as confirmation bias (Pham et al., 2021). Further, the data coverage in the replay
memory is limited to a tiny subset of the whole state-action space. When combined with deep
neural networks, the extrapolation of function approximation may erroneously overestimate out-of-
distribution state-action pairs to have unrealistic values, and the errors will be back-propagated to
previous states (Fujimoto et al., 2019; Kumar et al., 2019; Levine et al., 2020). In an inaccurate
reward model compounded with overestimation bias, a suboptimal policy is extracted from the Q
function that cannot reflect the current knowledge in the replay memory, especially at the beginning
of learning. The suboptimal policy leads to poor trajectory sampling, low-quality human feedback,
less useful reward learning, and thus an inefficient PbRL systm, which indicates the necessity for a
more accurate Q function aligned with human preferences, improving this learning cycle.
In this work, we present SEER, an efficient framework via aligned eStimation from ExpErience
for preference-based Reinforcement learning. By leveraging historical trajectories, it constructs a
non-parametric model for bootstrapping an empirical Q function to enhance and accelerate policy
learning. The advantages of the empirical Q function can be categorized into two main areas. Firstly,
it aids SEER in selecting informative pairs for efficient querying. Secondly, it regularizes the neu-
ral Q function, leading to a policy that is consistent with human preference. Empirical evaluations
across a range of puzzle-solving and construction tasks show that SEER significantly outperforms
the baselines, enhancing feedback efficiency. This superiority is especially pronounced when avail-
able human feedback is limited.
The main contributions of our work can be summarized as follows: First, we propose SEER, a
novel feedback-efficient preference-based RL algorithm that utilizes an empirical Q function to as-
sist in sampling and regularizes the neural Q function for efficient learning. Second, experiments
demonstrate that our method outperforms other state-of-the-art preference-based RL methods and
substantially improves feedback efficiency on various complex tasks. Lastly, leveraging aligned
experience estimation, SEER demonstrates an obvious advantage over baselines, especially when
limited human feedback is available. We also show that SEER can train an accurate Q function and
a better policy.


2   P RELIMINARY

Preference-based Reinforcement Learning. In the reinforcement learning paradigm, a finite
Markov decision process (MDP) is characterized by the tuple ⟨S, A, R, P, γ⟩. This includes the


                                                     2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


state space S, action space A, transition dynamics, reward function, and discount factor. Specifi-
cally, P(s′ |s, a) represents the stochastic dynamics of the environment, indicating the probability
of transitioning to s′ when action a is taken in state s. Meanwhile, R(s, a) denotes the reward ob-
tained by selecting action a in state s. The policy, π(a|s), maps the state space to the action space.
The objective of the agent is to collect trajectories by interacting with the environment, aiming to
maximize the expected return.
In the general framework of preference-based RL from Christiano et al. (2017), there is no reward
function from reward engineering; instead, a reward function estimator rbψ should be learned to be
consistent with the preferences of the human expert. Specifically, a segment σ is a sequence of
states and actions, which is (st+1 , at+1 , · · · , st+k , at+k ). A human expert provides a preference y
on given two segments (σ 0 , σ 1 ), and y is the distribution over {0, 1}, y ∈ {(1, 0), (0, 1), (0.5, 0.5)}.
Following the Bradley-Terry model (Bradley & Terry, 1952), a preference predictor constructed by
the estimate of the reward function rbψ is formulated as follows:
                                                       exp t rbψ (s0t , a0t )
                                                            P
                           0       1
                      Pψ [σ ≻ σ ] =                                                     ,                (1)
                                        exp t rbψ (s0t , a0t ) + exp t rbψ (s1t , a1t )
                                              P                         P

where σ 0 ≻ σ 1 indicates σ 0 aligns more closely with human expert expectations than σ 1 . The
reward model can be learned by minimizing the cross-entropy loss between predictions from pref-
erence predictors and actual human preferences.
                                              h                                                   i
            Lreward (ψ) = −        E           y(0) log Pψ [σ 0 ≻ σ 1 ] + y(1) log Pψ [σ 1 ≻ σ 0 ] .    (2)
                              (σ 0 ,σ ,y)∼D
                                   1


By optimizing the reward function with respect to this loss, segments that align more closely with
human preferences receive a higher cumulative reward.

3     M ETHOD
In this section, we formally present SEER: which is easy to be combined with any existing PbRL
algorithm to improve feedback efficiency. In the following, we first describe how to construct the
non-parametric model including data structure and update rule, then we propose the objective of our
method and training details. The full procedure of our algorithm is summarized in Algorithm 1.

3.1   N ON - PARAMETRIC M ODEL C ONSTRUCTION

Model Structure. We structure the historical trajectories in the replay memory as a non-parametric
model, which is a dynamic and directed graph denoted as G = (V, E). Naturally, each vertex in
the graph stores a state s and its action value estimation Q(s),
                                                           b     leading to the vertex set definition:
V = {s|(s, Q(s))}. As for each directed edge, it represents a transition from state s to s′ via action
            b
a, and it also stores reward estimation rbψ (s, a) and transition visit counts N (s, a, s′ ) for model
                                                         a
updating. The graph edge set is denoted as E = {s → s′ |(a, rbψ (s, a), N (s, a, s′ ), Q(s,
                                                                                        b a)}. For
query efficiency, both vertices and edges have unique keys generated by a hash function, ensuring
a query time complexity of O(1). Additionally, each vertex v maintains an action set ∂A(s) which
denotes actions taken in state s for in-sample updates.
Model Updating. Graph updating mainly includes two parts: the first part is statistical data update,
and the second part is reward relabeling. For statistical data updating, upon observing a transition
(s, a, rbψ (s, a), s′ ), we add a new vertex and edge according to the data structure described above,
initializing Q(s)
               b      = 0 and N (s, a, s′ ) = 1. If the directed edge already exists, we simply increment
the visit count: N (s, a, s′ ) ← N (s, a, s′ ) + 1. Upon meeting the model update criteria, a subset
of graph vertices ∂V ⊆ V is sampled in reverse order, akin to the methods in Rotinov (2019); Lee
et al. (2019), for quickly and efficiently updating. To avoid visiting out-of-sample actions during
updating, we constrain the max-operator in the update rule to operate over ∂A(s) rather than the
entire action space. We update Q    b with value iteration as follows:
                                                                                  !
                                                              X
                                                                      ′         ′
                           Q(s) ← max
                            b                  rbψ (s, a) + γ     pb(s |s, a)Q(s ) ,
                                                                             b                        (3)
                                  a∈∂A(s)
                                                               s′ ∈S


                                                         3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


where pb(s′ |s, a) = N (s, a, s′ )/ s′ N (s, a, s′ ) is the empirical dynamics in the graph. Based on
                                   P
the update rule Eq. (3), there is a specific and essential property for our method: it never queries
values for unseen actions, thus avoiding overestimation. As for the reward relabel, we estimate the
reward on every edge in the graph with reward model rbψ every time this model is updated. In this
way, it maximizes the utilization of historical transitions and mitigates the effects of a non-stationary
reward function.
Sampling Informative Trajectories. In this work, we design a novel strategy for sampling trajec-
tories based on the graph. We initiate by randomly selecting a subset of vertices from the graph
as starting points. From these starting points, we proceed with a forward search along the directed
edges connected to the initial vertices. When a vertex has multiple child nodes, we determine the
next node based on the one with either the highest or lowest action value estimation, or we choose
one randomly. This yields a pair of segments that differ from each other, providing a more informa-
tive pair. We continue this procedure until the segment achieves a predetermined length. A further
advantage of this approach is that it allows us to stitch new trajectories by utilizing the graph’s
structure.

3.2   P OLICY LEARNING

In our method, in addition to the above non-parametric model, we learn another parameterized Qθ
under the framework of maximum entropy reinforcement learning. and the policy π is modeled as a
neural network with parameters ϕ.

For each training iteration, it samples batch data { st , at , st+1 , rbψ (st , at ), Q(s
                                                                                      b t , at ) } from G. The
function Qb is bootstrapped from the graph G constructed by historical trajectories, which is estimated
only by using the state-action pairs in the current replay memory. It serves as a lower bound for
neural Q function (Qθ ). The Qθ should be constrained by Q.     b To achieve this, we introduce a novel
loss to regularize and accelerate policy learning. Drawing inspiration from Haarnoja et al. (2018),
we formulate the distribution-constrained loss Eq. (4) to mitigate overestimation and extrapolation
errors in the neural Q function as follows:
                                              h                             i
                               Ldc (θ) = Es∼G DKL π  b(s)∥πsoft(θ) (s) ,                                    (4)

where the experience policy is denoted by π      b(s) = Softmax(Q(s,   b ·)) and πsoft(θ) (s) =
Softmax(Qθ (s, ·)). It is important to emphasize that the loss only considers the support set ∂A(s)
for a given state s.
For policy learning, it contains two iterations, including soft policy evaluation and soft policy
improvement. During soft policy evaluation, we combine the soft Bellman residual with the
distribution-constrained loss Eq. (4). The parameters θ of the Q function are optimized as follows:
                                h                              i
                                                             2
               JQ (θ) = Eτt ∼G (Qθ (st , at ) − Qtarget ) + λLdc (θ),
                    Qtarget = rbψ (st , at ) + γπϕ (at |st )T Qθ (st , at ) − α log πϕ (at |st ) ,

                                                                                                   (5)
where λ is weight for Ldc . The soft Q target is calculated by using the full action distribution.
τt = (st , at , st+1 , rbψ (st , at )) is the transition at time step t, α is a learnable temperature parameter
that controls the item of entropy.
After the updating of Qθ , policy πϕ is updated by minimizing the following loss, which considers
using an action probability-weighted objective:
                                    h                                            i
                    Jπ (ϕ) = Est ∼G πϕ (at |st )T (α log πϕ (at |st ) − Qθ (st )) .           (6)

Through alternating soft policy evaluation and soft policy improvement, SEER leads to a well-
behaved policy.

3.3   T HEORETICAL ANALYSIS

For completeness, we provide a theoretical analysis to show the property of the empirical Q function,
denoted as Q.
           b To learn Qb , we use Eq. (3) based on the graph. This bootstraps only in-distribution


                                                      4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 1 SEER
Input: preference query frequency K, number of human’s preference labels per session M
 1: Initialize parameters of Qθ , πϕ , rbψ , and preference dataset D ← ∅
 2: Initialize G and πθ with unsupervised exploration
 3: for each iteration do
 4:    Take action at ∼ πθ and collect st+1
 5:   // Query preference and Reward learning
 6:   if iteration % K == 0 then
 7:       for each query step do
 8:          Sample pair of trajectories (σ 0 , σ 1 ) and query human for y
 9:          Store preference data into dataset D ← D ∪ {(σ 0 , σ 1 , y)}
10:       end for
11:       for each gradient step do
12:          Sample batch {(σ 0 , σ 1 , y)i }n  i=1 from D
13:          Optimize Eq. (2) to update rbψ
14:       end for
15:       Relabel the whole graph G using rbψ
16:   end if
17:   // Graph G Construction and Updating
18:   Store transition (st , at , rbψ (st , at ), st+1 ) into Graph G
19:   Update Q  b on each vertex via Eq. (3)
20:   // Policy Learning
21:   Update Qϕ and πθ according to Eq. (5) and Eq. (6), respectively.
22: end for
Output: policy πϕ


actions, which derives a conservative action value estimate. Comparing with the Q function boot-
strapping from the whole action space, Q  b mitigates extrapolation error from out-of-distribution data
and aligns better with encountering rewards, which reflects human preference. The Q       b serves as a
lower bound for Q, and converges to the global optimum as the data coverage increases. The full
proofs of Theorem 3.1 are presented in Appendix A.
Theorem 3.1. Let Qt and Q    b t denote the Q-values learned following Bellman optimality equation
and Eq. (3) at time step t respectively. We have Qt and Q       b t converge to fix points Q∗ and Q b∗ ,
                  ∗                    ∗               ∗            ∗
                                                      b (s, a) − Q (s, a) ≤ 0 ∀(s, a) ∈ S × A. The
limt→∞ Qt = Q , limt→∞ Q       bt = Q b . Further, Q
equation holds if all state-action pairs are visited.

4     E XPERIMENT
In this section, we conduct experiments to compare performance with three recent state-of-the-
art preference-based RL approaches on various puzzle games from Sokoban (Schrader, 2018) and
flexible construction tasks from CraftEnv (Zhao et al., 2023). More details about the tasks used
in our experiments can be found in the Appendix B. More details on tasks can be found in the
appendix. In many cases, it is difficult to clearly distinguish the quality of different trajectories in
these tasks, making them appear “equally poor” before achieving any meaningful goals, making
preference-based learning more challenging.

4.1   S ETUP

In our experiments, we select the state-of-the-art preference-based RL algorithm PEBBLE (Lee
et al., 2021b) as our backbone algorithm, consistent with previous methods. Since PEBBLE employs
the SAC (Haarnoja et al., 2018) algorithm for policy learning, we also compare it to SAC using the
ground truth reward directly, which serves as an upper bound for both the baseline and our method.
We remark that SEER can be seen as an efficient tool that integrates with any preference-based RL
algorithms by substituting the reward learning procedure of its backbone method.
Baselines. We choose the reward-based algorithm SAC and three state-of-the-art preference-based
RL algorithms for comparison:

                                                        5
      Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                 • SAC (Haarnoja et al., 2018): Soft Actor-Critic is the backbone RL algorithm of the below meth-
                   ods, and it receives reward signals from the environment. So, reward-based SAC is considered
                   the upper bound of all algorithms in preference-based RL, where reward is not provided.
                 • PEBBLE (Lee et al., 2021b): The method is a preference-based RL method, which combines
                   unsupervised pre-training with reward learning and relabels all past experience once the reward
                   model is updated.
                 • SURF (Park et al., 2022): The method applies data augmentation to reward learning, specifically
                   utilizing a large amount of unlabeled data by inferring pseudo-labels, which has significantly
                   improved the efficiency of feedback.
                 • MRN (Liu et al., 2022): The method is the current state-of-the-art algorithm in preference-based
                   RL, and it is aware of the performance of the Q function in reward learning through bi-level
                   optimization.
                 • SEER (Ours): The proposed method builds a non-parametric model from past transitions. We
                   can then use this model to create a more accurate empirical Q function, which leads to a better
                   iteration circle for PbRL learning.

                           PEBBLE + SEER                         PEBBLE + MRN                          PEBBLE              PEBBLE + SURF                         SAC (upper bound)
                 12                                                                    12                                                       12
                  8                                                                     8                                                        8
Episode Return


                                                                      Episode Return


                                                                                                                               Episode Return
                  4
                                       12                                               4                                                        4
                  0                                                                     0                                                        0
                                        8
                  4                                                                     4                                                        4
                      Episode Return


                  8                     4                                               8                                                        8
                   0.0                 0.2     0.4
                                              1.0    0.6   0.8                           0.0    0.2    0.4   0.6     0.8
                                                                                                                    1.0                           0.0    0.2   0.4    0.6    0.8     1.0
                             Timesteps     ×10
                                               6                                                   Timesteps     ×10
                                                                                                                     6                                         Timesteps           ×10
                                                                                                                                                                                         6
                          0
                 (a) Push-5x5-1 (feedback=300)                                         (b) Push-6x6-1 (feedback=300)                            (c) Push-7x7-1 (feedback=300)

                 12                     4                                              12
                                                                                                                                                  4
                  8                                                                     8
                                                                                                                               Episode Return
Episode Return


                                                                      Episode Return


                                        8
                  4                                                                     4
                  0                      0.0                0.2                         0      0.4                 0.6                           0.8
                                                                                                                                                 8                    1.0
                                                                                                     Timesteps                                                  ×10
                                                                                                                                                                      6
                  4                                                                     4
                  8                                                                     8
                                                                                                                                                 12
                   0.0                 0.2
                                        1.0    0.4   0.6   0.8                           0.0    0.2    0.4   0.6
                                                                                                              1.0    0.8                           0.0   0.2    0.4    0.6   0.8     1.0
                        Timesteps    ×10
                                         6                                                    Timesteps    ×10
                                                                                                               6                                               Timesteps           ×10
                                                                                                                                                                                         6

           (d) Push-5x5-2 (feedback=1000)                                        (e) Push-6x6-2 (feedback=1000)                            (f) Push-7x7-2 (feedback=1000)

      Figure 2: Training curves of various methods on six puzzle solving tasks from Sokoban. The solid
      line presents the mean values, and the shaded area denotes the standard deviations over five runs.

      Implementation details of SEER. In the experiments, we use the same basic settings used in Lee
      et al. (2021b); Park et al. (2022); Liu et al. (2022), including the unsupervised exploration technique
      and the uncertainty-based trajectories sampling scheme (more details at Appendix C.1). As for the
      reward learning setting, all methods use an ensemble of three reward models with bounded output
      to [−1, 1] via a hyperbolic tangent function. Similar to previous research, we consider the same
      approach for consistent performance evaluation by introducing a scripted teacher. This teacher pro-
      vides preference labels between two trajectory segments to the agent, based on the inherent reward
      function. These preferences accurately mirror the environment’s ground truth reward, enabling a
      quantitative assessment of algorithms through the measurement of true returns. However, it’s cru-
      cial to highlight that the agent cannot directly access this reward in the context of preference-based
      RL.
      We evaluate all methods over five runs independently and report the mean and standard variance of
      the results for each task. For fair comparisons, all methods train with the same network architecture


                                                                                                         6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


and common hyperparameters, except for certain method-specific components. For the number of
human preference feedback, we use 300 preference pairs in Push-5×5-1, Push-6x6-1, Push-7×7-1,
and 1000 preference pairs for others, including Push-5×5-2, Push-6x6-2, Push-7x7-2, Strip-shaped
Building, Block-shaped Building, and Simple Two-Story Building tasks. Within the framework of
SEER, we build a non-parametric model. Upon the termination of each episode, it refines this model,
specifically updating the Q
                          b values on edges and the Vb values on vertices based on the sampled data.
For the baseline implementation, the approaches PEBBLE 1 , SURF 2 , and MRN 3 are implemented
by using their publicly released code. For each run in our experiments, we deploy a single NVIDIA
Tesla V100 GPU and allocate 4 CPU cores for the training process. Further details regarding the
implementation of our approach and the aforementioned baselines are elaborated in Appendix C.

4.2    R ESULTS

Sokoban experiments. A detailed introduction and visualization of the six puzzle-solving tasks
from Sokoban are presented in Appendix B.1. We selected these tasks for our experiments, covering
a range of complexities. Figure 2 depicts the learning curves of the average episode return for SEER
and other baselines in Sokoban tasks. For each task, SAC provides the best performance by using
the ground-truth reward function as the upper bound of performance. From the learning curves, the
performance of SEER outperforms all baselines and presents a significant sample efficiency. Early
in the training process, as shown in Figure 2, SEER rapidly achieves outstanding performance across
multiple tasks. Interestingly, in several tasks, SEER can approach the performance benchmark with
only a few preference labels from humans, showcasing impressive feedback efficiency. We also
notice that certain baselines are considerably affected by randomness on certain tasks. This incon-
sistency results in poor performance in some runs, showing a pronounced variance in results. On
the other hand, the training curves of some methods show a decline on more challenging tasks. This
indicates that these methods are sensitive to the quality of the collected trajectory pairs. Specifically,
if many of the sampled trajectory pairs are of similarly poor quality, it hampers the Q function’s
learning, culminating in inferior policy performance.
Craftenv experiments. For robotic construction tasks, we choose three complex and flexible en-
vironments from CraftEnv: Strip-shaped Building, Block-shaped Building, and Simple Two-Story
Building task. These tasks require agents to master the manipulation of construction components to
realize a desired design, stimulating the complexity of analogous real-world tasks. Task specifics
are provided in Appendix B.2. Figure 3 suggests the learning curves of all methods with the same
number of human preference labels. As shown in Figure 3, SEER significantly improves the perfor-
mance of PEBBLE, both in terms of feedback efficiency and algorithmic performance. We also note
that SEER achieves comparable performance to PEBBLE using significantly fewer samples. For
instance, on the Strip-shaped Building task, SEER exceeds the average performance of PEBBLE
using only 30% of the total samples, highlighting an obvious advantage over PEBBLE (represented
in orange). These findings suggest that SEER significantly reduces the feedback required for solving
complex tasks.
We remark that SEER can effectively leverage state-action pairs in the current replay memory to
bootstrap an empirical Q function. This assists SEER in sampling more informative pairs and regu-
larizes the neural Q function, resulting in a policy that is more consistent with human intent. From
the comparison of the red (Ours) and orange (PEBBLE) curves in the figures, it is obvious that SEER
significantly enhances the performance of PEBBLE. These results from Figure 2 and Figure 3 again
demonstrate that SEER improves the feedback-efficiency of preference-based RL methods on a va-
riety of complex tasks.

4.3    A BLATION S TUDY

Impact on Preference Amounts. To evaluate how the quantity of preferences influences the per-
formance of SEER, we carry out an additional experiment to evaluate SEER’s efficacy with varying
amounts of human preferences. We consider the number of preferences N ∈ {50, 100, 300, 500}
   1
     https://github.com/pokaxpoka/B_Pref
   2
     https://github.com/alinlab/SURF
   3
     https://github.com/RyanLiu112/MRN


                                                    7
           Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                PEBBLE + SEER                                   PEBBLE + MRN                  PEBBLE                         PEBBLE + SURF                                         SAC (upper bound)

     Episode Return   12                                                                                 12                                                       12


                                                                                        Episode Return


                                                                                                                                                 Episode Return
                                            12
                      8                                                                                  8                                                        8
                                             8
                      4                                                                                  4                                                        4
                           Episode Return


                      0
                                             4    0                                                                                                               0
                       0.0                  0.2
                                             1.0   0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
                                                  0.4   0.6         0.8                                                                                            0.0                   0.2     0.4   0.6     0.8     1.0
                            Timesteps     ×10
                                              6              Timesteps    ×10
                                                                              6                                                                                                                  Timesteps           ×10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           6
                         0
              (a) Strip-shaped (feedback=1000) (b) Block-shaped (feedback=1000)                                                                               (c) Two-Story (feedback=1000)

           Figure 3: 4Training curves of all methods on three construction tasks from CraftEnv. The solid line
           presents the mean values, and the shaded area denotes the standard deviations over five runs.
                                             8
           on Sokoban 0.0tasks. The training
                                       0.2   curves of0.4the average episode
                                                                      0.6     return of0.8all methods on
                                                                                                       1.0tasks are in
                                                           Timesteps
           Figure 4. The results indicate that the performance    of the policy gradually improves
                                                                                                       6
                                                                                                   ×10as the number
           of preference labels increases. When provided with sufficient preference labels, SEER can approach
           the performance upper bound. The learning curves depicting the average episode return for all
           methods across tasks are presented in Figure 4. The results suggest that as the number of preference
           labels increases, there’s a corresponding improvement in the policy’s performance. As the provision
           of preference labels increases, SEER is capable of approaching optimal performance for each task.

                                PEBBLE + SEER                                   PEBBLE + MRN                  PEBBLE                         PEBBLE + SURF                                         SAC (upper bound)
                  12                                                           12                                              12                                                       12
   Push-5x5-1


                      8                                                        8                                               8                                                        8
Episode Return


                                                              Episode Return


                                                                                                              Episode Return


                                            12                                                                                                                         Episode Return
                      4                                                        4                                               4                                                        4
                                             8
                      0                                                        0                                               0                                                        0
                           Episode Return


                      4        4                                               4                                               4                                                        4
                       0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0                                  0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0                         0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0                                  0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
                              Timesteps ×106                                           Timesteps ×106                                  Timesteps ×106                                           Timesteps ×106
                                  0
                           (a) feedback=50                                          (b) feedback=100                                (c) feedback=300                                         (d) feedback=500

           Figure 4: 4Training curves of all methods with varying numbers of preference labels on Push-5x5-1.
           The solid line presents the mean values, and the shaded area denotes the standard deviations over
           five runs.
                                             8
           Estimation0.0Error of Qθ . 0.2             0.4 the accuracy
                                       To further analyze            0.6of Qθ , we evaluate
                                                                                     0.8 the mean1.0
                                                                                                  squared error
           (MSE) between ground-truth Q values and QTimesteps                                     6
                                                                                              ×10 and standard
                                                           θ trained by various methods. The mean
           deviation across ten runs are presented in Table 1. SAC serves as the benchmark for Qθ quality, and
           SEER achieves the lowest MSE among all methods. In SEER, Qθ is trained with regularization by
           Q,
            b which serves as a lower bound, effectively reducing overestimation and extrapolation errors in
           Qθ . Consequently, Qθ learned from SEER is notably more accurate than the baselines.

                                                                                       Table 1: MSE of Qθ across ten runs.

                           Task/Algorithm                 PEBBLE                       PEBBLE+SURF                PEBBLE+MRN                   PEBBLE+SEER (Ours)                                            SAC
                            Push-5x5-1                  0.40 ± 0.72                            0.39 ± 0.63                 0.32 ± 0.67                        0.06 ± 0.10                              0.04 ± 0.03
                           Block-shaped                 0.18 ± 0.05                            0.12 ± 0.04                 0.13 ± 0.04                        0.08 ± 0.03                              0.03 ± 0.02



           5               R ELATED WORK
           Preference-based Reinforcement Learning. The idea of learning to solve complex tasks from


                                                                                                                       8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


human feedback instead of explicit reward has been explored widely. However, directly using hu-
man feedback as a reward function or imitating the expert’s demonstrations to guide the learning is
extremely expensive, given the complexity of some scenarios. Some prior works propose effective
approaches that learn a reward model from real humans’ preference-based comparisons of agent’s
behaviors (trajectories) (Christiano et al., 2017; Ibarz et al., 2018). To make things even more ef-
ficient, Lee et al. (2021b) suggests a way to learn that combines unsupervised pre-training with
reward learning and employs reward relabelling technique. Park et al. (2022) introduces SURF,
a semi-supervised reward learning framework that improves reward learning via the pseudo-labels
and temporal cropping augmentation. MRN (Liu et al., 2022) incorporates bi-level optimization for
improving the quality of Q function. Besides, some researches have various considerations, such as
skill extraction (Wang et al., 2022), intrinsic reward (Liang et al., 2022), meta-learning (Hejna III
& Sadigh, 2023), policy optimization (Kang et al., 2023), and these methods have improved the ef-
ficiency to a certain extent. To evaluate the effectiveness and efficiency, Lee et al. (2021a) presents
a benchmark for preference-based RL. Recently, a trend of using numerous existing data and elab-
orate models to promote the further development of this field seems to be emerging (Kim et al.,
2023; Xue et al., 2023; Verma et al., 2023). Preferences-based RL and large-scale language mod-
els mutually promote each other, the former helps the fine-tuning process in LLM (Brown et al.,
2020; Stiennon et al., 2020; Wu et al., 2021a; Nakano et al., 2021; Ouyang et al., 2022), while us-
ing large-scale models as preference models can undoubtedly raise the ability of solving complex
control tasks (Arjona-Medina et al., 2019; Early et al., 2022; Gangwani et al., 2020; Ren et al.,
2022). Our approach differs in that we build a non-parametric model for informative querying and
bootstrapping an empirical Q function to accelerate policy learning.
Graph-based Reinforcement Learning. The graph is a powerful and practical tool to characterize
and solve problems. Prior works have applied graph structure to reinforcement learning. Eysen-
bach et al. (2019) and Zhang et al. (2021) consider constructing replay buffer as a weighted directed
graph, improving the planning ability of the agent. Shrestha et al. (2021) proposes the Deep Aver-
agers with Costs MDP, compiled from a static experience dataset. Zhang et al. (2023) constructs
a graph-based empirical MDP using replay memory, achieving a desirable experimental result by
combining it with conservative estimation. Goal-oriented reinforcement learning (GoRL) allows the
agent to enhance the ability to tackle long-horizon and sparse reward tasks by generating subgoals.
In GoRL, it is a feasible solution to construct abstraction graphs using experience, state-transitions,
or observations (Eysenbach et al., 2019; Shang et al., 2019; Huang et al., 2019; Emmons et al.,
2020; Zhu* et al., 2020). Jin et al. (2022) builds a dynamical graph based on collected transitions
and designs a new sampling method, achieving a more efficient exploration strategy. Furthermore,
Lee et al. (2022) presents a method to decouple the connection between high-level control and low-
level control with a graph in the setting of multi-level control of goal-conditioned RL. In addition,
some works (Zhu et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2021) focus on learning a graph-based world model,
aiming to reduce the difficulty of policy learning.

6   C ONCLUSION
In this work, we introduce SEER, an innovative preference-based RL framework with enhanced
feedback efficiency. We note that SEER is streamlined and lightweight, readily serving as a valu-
able tool to enhance any preference-based RL approaches. It utilizes historical trajectories to build
a non-parametric model, bootstrapping an empirical Q function to constrain the neural Q function,
leading to accelerating and improving policy learning. Overall, the benefits provided by the empiri-
cal Q function may boil down to two directions. On the one hand, it assists SEER in sampling more
informative pairs for effective querying. On the other hand, it serves as lower bounds for the perfor-
mance of the neural Q function and regularizes it during learning, resulting in a policy more aligned
with human intent. The results of experiments on various puzzle-solving tasks and complex con-
struction tasks demonstrate that SEER outperforms the baselines by a large margin and considerably
improves the feedback efficiency. The performance gap between our proposed method and the base-
line is notably evident, particularly when only a minimal amount of human feedback is accessible.
In conclusion, the findings presented in this work offer a fresh perspective on the feedback effi-
ciency improvement of preference-based RL, shedding light on previously unexplored dimensions.
We believe that the proposed method can serve as a valuable asset for researchers and practitioners
in preference-based reinforcement learning. We hope that our work inspires further investigations,
fostering collaborative efforts and innovative approaches in the quest for deeper insights.



                                                  9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Jose A. Arjona-Medina, Michael Gillhofer, Michael Widrich, Thomas Unterthiner, Johannes Brand-
  stetter, and Sepp Hochreiter. Rudder: Return decomposition for delayed rewards. In Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), volume 32, 2019.
Ralph Allan Bradley and Milton E. Terry. Rank analysis of incomplete block designs: I. the method
  of paired comparisons. Biometrika, 39(3/4):324–345, 1952.
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Sandhini Agarwal, Ariel
  Herbert-Voss, Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child, Aditya Ramesh, Daniel Ziegler,
  Jeffrey Wu, Clemens Winter, Chris Hesse, Mark Chen, Eric Sigler, Mateusz Litwin, Scott Gray,
  Benjamin Chess, Jack Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam McCandlish, Alec Radford, Ilya Sutskever,
  and Dario Amodei. Language models are few-shot learners. In Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems (NeurIPS), volume 33, pp. 1877–1901, 2020.
Paul F Christiano, Jan Leike, Tom Brown, Miljan Martic, Shane Legg, and Dario Amodei. Deep
  reinforcement learning from human preferences. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems (NeurIPS), volume 30, 2017.
Joseph Early, Tom Bewley, Christine Evers, and Sarvapali Ramchurn. Non-markovian reward mod-
  elling from trajectory labels via interpretable multiple instance learning. In Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), volume 35, pp. 27652–27663, 2022.
Scott Emmons, Ajay Jain, Misha Laskin, Thanard Kurutach, Pieter Abbeel, and Deepak Pathak.
  Sparse graphical memory for robust planning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems (NeurIPS), volume 33, pp. 5251–5262, 2020.
Ben Eysenbach, Russ R Salakhutdinov, and Sergey Levine. Search on the replay buffer: Bridging
  planning and reinforcement learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
  (NeurIPS), volume 32, 2019.
Scott Fujimoto, David Meger, and Doina Precup. Off-policy deep reinforcement learning without
  exploration. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 2052–2062. PMLR, 2019.
Tanmay Gangwani, Yuan Zhou, and Jian Peng. Learning guidance rewards with trajectory-space
  smoothing. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), volume 33, pp.
  822–832, 2020.
Shixiang Gu, Ethan Holly, Timothy Lillicrap, and Sergey Levine. Deep reinforcement learning for
  robotic manipulation with asynchronous off-policy updates. In IEEE International Conference
  on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pp. 3389–3396, 2017.
Tuomas Haarnoja, Aurick Zhou, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Soft actor-critic: Off-policy
  maximum entropy deep reinforcement learning with a stochastic actor. In International Confer-
  ence on Machine Learning (ICML), volume 80, pp. 1861–1870, 2018.
Joey Hejna and Dorsa Sadigh. Inverse preference learning: Preference-based RL without a reward
  function. 2023.
Donald Joseph Hejna III and Dorsa Sadigh. Few-shot preference learning for human-in-the-loop
  RL. In International Conference on Robot Learning (CoRL), pp. 2014–2025. PMLR, 2023.
Zhiao Huang, Fangchen Liu, and Hao Su. Mapping state space using landmarks for universal goal
  reaching. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), volume 32, 2019.
Borja Ibarz, Jan Leike, Tobias Pohlen, Geoffrey Irving, Shane Legg, and Dario Amodei. Reward
  learning from human preferences and demonstrations in atari. In Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems (NeurIPS), volume 31, 2018.
Tommi Jaakkola, Michael Jordan, and Satinder Singh. Convergence of stochastic iterative dynamic
  programming algorithms. Advances in neural information processing systems, 6, 1993.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Jiarui Jin, Sijin Zhou, Weinan Zhang, Tong He, Yong Yu, and Rasool Fakoor. Graph-enhanced
   exploration for goal-oriented reinforcement learning, 2022.

Yachen Kang, Diyuan Shi, Jinxin Liu, Li He, and Donglin Wang. Beyond reward: Offline
  preference-guided policy optimization. In Proceedings of the 40th International Conference
  on Machine Learning (ICML), volume 202 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp.
  15753–15768, 23–29 Jul 2023.

Changyeon Kim, Jongjin Park, Jinwoo Shin, Honglak Lee, Pieter Abbeel, and Kimin Lee. Pref-
  erence transformer: Modeling human preferences using transformers for RL. In The Eleventh
  International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2023.

Aviral Kumar, Justin Fu, Matthew Soh, George Tucker, and Sergey Levine. Stabilizing off-policy q-
  learning via bootstrapping error reduction. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  32, 2019.

Kimin Lee, Laura Smith, Anca Dragan, and Pieter Abbeel. B-pref: Benchmarking preference-
  based reinforcement learning. In Neural Information Processing Systems Track on Datasets and
  Benchmarks (NeurIPS), volume 1, 2021a.

Kimin Lee, Laura M Smith, and Pieter Abbeel. Pebble: Feedback-efficient interactive reinforcement
  learning via relabeling experience and unsupervised pre-training. In International Conference on
  Machine Learning (ICML), volume 139, pp. 6152–6163, 2021b.

Seungjae Lee, Jigang Kim, Inkyu Jang, and H. Jin Kim. Dhrl: A graph-based approach for long-
  horizon and sparse hierarchical reinforcement learning. In Advances in Neural Information Pro-
  cessing Systems (NeurIPS), volume 35, pp. 13668–13678, 2022.

Su Young Lee, Choi Sungik, and Sae-Young Chung. Sample-efficient deep reinforcement learning
  via episodic backward update. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS),
  volume 32, 2019.

Sergey Levine, Aviral Kumar, George Tucker, and Justin Fu. Offline reinforcement learning: Tuto-
  rial, review, and perspectives on open problems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.01643, 2020.

Xinran Liang, Katherine Shu, Kimin Lee, and Pieter Abbeel. Reward uncertainty for exploration in
  preference-based reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Learning Representa-
  tions (ICLR), 2022.

Timothy P. Lillicrap, Jonathan J. Hunt, Alexander Pritzel, Nicolas Heess, Tom Erez, Yuval Tassa,
  David Silver, and Daan Wierstra. Continuous control with deep reinforcement learning. In Inter-
  national Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2016.

Runze Liu, Fengshuo Bai, Yali Du, and Yaodong Yang. Meta-reward-net: Implicitly differentiable
  reward learning for preference-based reinforcement learning. In Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems (NeurIPS), volume 35, pp. 22270–22284, 2022.

Francisco S Melo. Convergence of q-learning: A simple proof. Institute Of Systems and Robotics,
  Tech. Rep, pp. 1–4, 2001.

Neeraj Misra, Harshinder Singh, and Vladimir Hnizdo. Nearest neighbor estimates of entropy.
  American Journal of Mathematical and Management Sciences, 23(3-4):301–321, 2003.

Volodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, David Silver, Alex Graves, Ioannis Antonoglou, Daan
  Wierstra, and Martin A. Riedmiller. Playing atari with deep reinforcement learning. CoRR,
  abs/1312.5602, 2013.

Reiichiro Nakano, Jacob Hilton, Suchir Balaji, Jeff Wu, Long Ouyang, Christina Kim, Christopher
  Hesse, Shantanu Jain, Vineet Kosaraju, William Saunders, Xu Jiang, Karl Cobbe, Tyna Eloundou,
  Gretchen Krueger, Kevin Button, Matthew Knight, Benjamin Chess, and John Schulman. Webgpt:
  Browser-assisted question-answering with human feedback. 2021.


                                               11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong
  Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, John Schulman, Jacob Hilton, Fraser Kel-
  ton, Luke Miller, Maddie Simens, Amanda Askell, Peter Welinder, Paul F Christiano, Jan Leike,
  and Ryan Lowe. Training language models to follow instructions with human feedback. In Ad-
  vances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), volume 35, pp. 27730–27744, 2022.
Jongjin Park, Younggyo Seo, Jinwoo Shin, Honglak Lee, Pieter Abbeel, and Kimin Lee. SURF:
  Semi-supervised reward learning with data augmentation for feedback-efficient preference-based
  reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2022.
Hieu Pham, Zihang Dai, Qizhe Xie, and Quoc V. Le. Meta pseudo labels. In IEEE/CVF Conference
  on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 11557–11568, 2021.
Zhizhou Ren, Ruihan Guo, Yuan Zhou, and Jian Peng. Learning long-term reward redistribution
  via randomized return decomposition. In International Conference on Learning Representations
  (ICLR), 2022.
Herbert Robbins and Sutton Monro. A stochastic approximation method. The annals of mathemati-
  cal statistics, pp. 400–407, 1951.
Egor Rotinov. Reverse experience replay. 2019.
Connor Schenck and Dieter Fox. Visual closed-loop control for pouring liquids. In International
  Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pp. 2629–2636, 2017.
Max-Philipp B. Schrader.          gym-sokoban.        https://github.com/mpSchrader/
 gym-sokoban, 2018.
Wenling Shang, Alexander Trott, Stephan Zheng, Caiming Xiong, and Richard Socher. Learning
 world graphs to accelerate hierarchical reinforcement learning. 2019.
Aayam Kumar Shrestha, Stefan Lee, Prasad Tadepalli, and Alan Fern. Deepaveragers: Offline
  reinforcement learning by solving derived non-parametric {mdp}s. In International Conference
  on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2021.
Joar Skalse, Nikolaus Howe, Dmitrii Krasheninnikov, and David Krueger. Defining and characteriz-
  ing reward gaming. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), volume 35,
  pp. 9460–9471, 2022.
Nisan Stiennon, Long Ouyang, Jeff Wu, Daniel M. Ziegler, Ryan Lowe, Chelsea Voss, Alec Radford,
  Dario Amodei, and Paul F. Christiano. Learning to summarize from human feedback. 2020.
Csaba Szepesvári. Algorithms for reinforcement learning. Synthesis lectures on artificial intelli-
  gence and machine learning, 4(1):1–103, 2010.
Mudit Verma, Siddhant Bhambri, and Subbarao Kambhampati. Exploiting unlabeled data for feed-
 back efficient human preference based reinforcement learning. 2023. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2302.
 08738.
Krakovna Victoria, Mikulik Vladimir, Rahtz Matthew, Everitt Tom, Kumar Ra-
  mana, Kenton Zac, Leike Jan, and Legg Shane.    Specification gaming: the flip
  side of ai ingenuity.    2020.     URL https://www.deepmind.com/blog/
  specification-gaming-the-flip-side-of-ai-ingenuity.
Oriol Vinyals, Igor Babuschkin, Wojciech M. Czarnecki, Michaël Mathieu, Andrew Dudzik, Juny-
  oung Chung, David H. Choi, Richard Powell, Timo Ewalds, Petko Georgiev, Junhyuk Oh, Dan
  Horgan, Manuel Kroiss, Ivo Danihelka, Aja Huang, Laurent Sifre, Trevor Cai, John P. Agapiou,
  Max Jaderberg, Alexander Sasha Vezhnevets, Rémi Leblond, Tobias Pohlen, Valentin Dalibard,
  David Budden, Yury Sulsky, James Molloy, Tom Le Paine, Çaglar Gülçehre, Ziyu Wang, To-
  bias Pfaff, Yuhuai Wu, Roman Ring, Dani Yogatama, Dario Wünsch, Katrina McKinney, Oliver
  Smith, Tom Schaul, Timothy P. Lillicrap, Koray Kavukcuoglu, Demis Hassabis, Chris Apps, and
  David Silver. Grandmaster level in starcraft II using multi-agent reinforcement learning. Nature,
  575(7782):350–354, 2019.


                                                 12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Xiaofei Wang, Kimin Lee, Kourosh Hakhamaneshi, Pieter Abbeel, and Michael Laskin. Skill pref-
  erences: Learning to extract and execute robotic skills from human feedback. In Proceedings of
  the 5th Conference on Robot Learning (CoRL), volume 164 of Proceedings of Machine Learning
  Research, pp. 1259–1268, 08–11 Nov 2022.
Jeff Wu, Long Ouyang, Daniel M. Ziegler, Nisan Stiennon, Ryan Lowe, Jan Leike, and Paul F.
   Christiano. Recursively summarizing books with human feedback. 2021a.
Jeff Wu, Long Ouyang, Daniel M. Ziegler, Nisan Stiennon, Ryan Lowe, Jan Leike, and Paul F.
   Christiano. Recursively summarizing books with human feedback. 2021b.
Yinda Xu and Lidong Yu. Drl-based trajectory tracking for motion-related modules in autonomous
  driving. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.15991, 2023.
Wanqi Xue, Bo An, Shuicheng Yan, and Zhongwen Xu. Reinforcement learning from diverse human
 preferences. 2023. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2301.11774.
Ali Yahya, Adrian Li, Mrinal Kalakrishnan, Yevgen Chebotar, and Sergey Levine. Collective robot
  reinforcement learning with distributed asynchronous guided policy search. In International Con-
  ference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), pp. 79–86, 2017.
Hongming Zhang, Chenjun Xiao, Han Wang, Jun Jin, bo xu, and Martin Müller. Replay memory as
  an empirical MDP: Combining conservative estimation with experience replay. In The Eleventh
  International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2023.
Lunjun Zhang, Ge Yang, and Bradly C Stadie. World model as a graph: Learning latent landmarks
  for planning. In Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML),
  volume 139 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 12611–12620, 18–24 Jul 2021.
Rui Zhao, Xu Liu, Yizheng Zhang, Minghao Li, Cheng Zhou, Shuai Li, and Lei Han. Craftenv: A
  flexible collective robotic construction environment for multi-agent reinforcement learning. In In-
  ternational Conference on Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems (AAMAS), pp. 1164–1172,
  2023.
Deyao Zhu, Li Erran Li, and Mohamed Elhoseiny. Value memory graph: A graph-structured world
  model for offline reinforcement learning. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning
  Representations (ICLR), 2023.
Guangxiang Zhu*, Zichuan Lin*, Guangwen Yang, and Chongjie Zhang. Episodic reinforcement
  learning with associative memory. In International Conference on Learning Representations
  (ICLR), 2020.


                                                 13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A     P ROOF OF T HEOREM

A.1    P ROOF OF T HEOREM 3.1

In this section, we analyze the property of Q   b in finite state-action space S × A. The proof of
                  ∗
limt→∞ Qt = Q has been well-established in previous work (Robbins & Monro, 1951; Jaakkola
et al., 1993; Melo, 2001). Then the proof of limt→∞ Q  bt = Q b ∗ is similar. We first prove the empirical
Bellman operator Eq. (9) is a γ-contraction operator under the supremum norm. Then when updating
in a sampling manner as Eq. (10), it can be considered as a random process. Borrowing an auxiliary
result from stochastic approximation, we prove it satisfies the conditions that guarantee convergence.
Finally, to prove Qb ∗ lower-bounds Q∗ , we rewrite Q b ∗ (s, a) − Q∗ (s, a) based on the standard and
empirical Bellman operators. When the data covers the whole state-action space, we naturally have
Qb ∗ = Q∗ .
For proof simplicity, we use β denotes policies that interact with the environment and form the
current replay memory. We first show existing results for Bellman learning in Eq. (8), and then
prove Theorem 3.1 in three steps. The Bellman (optimality) operator B is defined as:
                                          X
                         (BQ)(s, a) =             P (s′ |s, a)[r + γ max
                                                                      ′
                                                                         Q(s′ , a′ )].                (7)
                                                                        a
                                          s′ ∈S


Previous works have shown the operator B is a γ-contraction with respect to supremum norm:

                                 ∥BQ1 − BQ2 ∥∞ ≤ γ∥Q1 − Q2 ∥∞ ,

the supremum norm ∥v∥∞ = max1≤i≤d |vi |, d is the dimension of vector v. Following Banach’s
fixed-point theorem, Q converges to optimal action value Q∗ if we consecutively apply operator B
to Q, limn→∞ (B)n Q = Q∗ .
Further, the update rule in Eq. (8), i.e. Q-learning, is a sampling version that applies the γ-
contraction operator B to Q.

                                Q(s, a) ← r(s, a) + γ max
                                                       ′
                                                          Q(s′ , a′ ).                                (8)
                                                               a


It can be considered as a random process and will converge to Q∗ , limt→∞ Qt = Q∗ , with some
mild conditions (Szepesvári, 2010; Robbins & Monro, 1951; Jaakkola et al., 1993; Melo, 2001).
Similarly, we define the empirical Bellman (optimality) operator B̂ as:
                                      X
                     (B̂ Q)(s,
                         b     a) =           P (s′ |s, a)[r + γ ′ max
                                                                    ′ ′
                                                                                   b ′ , a′ )].
                                                                                   Q(s                (9)
                                                                   a :β(a |s )>0
                                      s′ ∈S


And the sampling version we used on the graph is:

                                b a) ← r + γ
                                Q(s,           max                    b ′ , a′ ),
                                                                      Q(s                            (10)
                                             ′  ′ ′   a :β(a |s )>0



We split Theorem 3.1 into three lemmas. We first show B̂ is a γ-contraction operator under supre-
mum norm, thus converges to optimal action value Q      b ∗ , limn→∞ (B)n Qb=Q   b ∗ . Then we show the
                                                             ∗                 ∗                       b∗
sampling-based update rule in Eq. (10) converges to Q     b , limt→∞ Q bt = Q b . Finally, we show Q
lower-bounds Q∗ , Q b ∗ (s, a) − Q∗ (s, a) ≤ 0, ∀(s, a) ∈ S × A. And when the data covers the whole
state-action space, i.e. β(a|s) > 0 for all state-action pairs, we naturally have Qb ∗ (s, a) = Q∗ (s, a).

Lemma A.1. The operator B̂ defined in Eq. (9) is a γ-contraction operator under supremum norm,

                                 ∥B̂ Q
                                     b 1 − B̂ Q
                                              b 2 ∥∞ ≤ γ∥Q
                                                         b1 − Q
                                                              b 2 ∥∞ .


                                                       14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Proof. We can rewrite ∥B̂ Q
                          b 1 − B̂ Q
                                   b 2 ∥∞ as

 ∥B̂ Q
     b 1 − B̂ Q
              b 2 ∥∞
         X
= max          P (s′ |s, a)[r + γ ′ max
                                     ′
                                                              b 1 (s′ , a′1 )] − P (s′ |s, a)[r + γ
                                                              Q                                     ′
                                                                                                      max
                                                                                                       ′
                                                                                                                            b 2 (s′ , a′2 )]
                                                                                                                            Q
    s,a                                ′  a1 :β(a1 |s )>0                                                ′a2 :β(a2 |s )>0
          s′ ∈S
            X
= max γ             P (s′ |s, a)[ ′ max
                                     ′
                                                          b 1 (s′ , a′ ) −
                                                          Q          1     ′
                                                                             max
                                                                              ′
                                                                                            b 2 (s′ , a′ )]
                                                                                            Q          2
    s,a                                ′
                                   a1 :β(a1 |s )>0                              ′
                                                                          a2 :β(a2 |s )>0
            s′ ∈S
           X
≤ max γ            P (s′ |s, a)         max             b 1 (s′ , a′1 ) −
                                                        Q                   max             b 2 (s′ , a′2 )
                                                                                            Q
    s,a                            a′1 :β(a′1 |s′ )>0                     ′  ′ ′
                                                                          a2 :β(a2 |s )>0
           s′ ∈S
           X
≤ max γ            P (s′ |s, a)       max            b 1 (s′ , ã) − Q
                                                     Q               b 2 (s′ , ã)
    s,a                           ã:β(ã|s′ )>0
           s′ ∈S
           X
≤ max γ            P (s′ |s, a)       max             b 1 (s̃, ã) − Q
                                                      Q              b 2 (s̃, ã)
    s,a                           s̃,ã:β(ã|s̃)>0
           s′ ∈S
           X
= max γ            P (s′ |s, a)∥Q
                                b1 − Q
                                     b 2 ∥∞
    s,a
           s′ ∈S
    b1 − Q
= γ∥Q    b 2 ∥∞ ,
                                                         ′
                                           P
where the last line follows from               s′ ∈S P (s |s, a) = 1.



                                                                b ∗ , we borrow an auxiliary result
To show the sampling-based update rule in Eq. (10) converges to Q
from stochastic approximation (Robbins & Monro, 1951; Jaakkola et al., 1993).

Theorem A.2. The random process {∆t } taking values in Rn and defined as
                                    ∆t+1 (x) = (1 − αt (x))∆t (x) + αt (x)Ft (x)                                                      (11)
converges to zero w.p.1 under the following assumptions:
   (1) 0 ≤ αt ≤ 1, t αt (x) = ∞ and t αt2 (x) < ∞;
                   P                    P

   (2) ∥E[Ft (x)|Ft ]∥W ≤ γ∥∆t ∥W , with γ < 1;
   (3) V ar[Ft (x)|Ft ] ≤ C(1 + ∥∆t ∥2W ), for C > 0.

W is a norm. In our proof it is supremum norm.

Proof. See Robbins & Monro (1951); Jaakkola et al. (1993).


Lemma A.3. Given any initial estimation Q
                                        b 0 , the following update rule:

    Q
    b t+1 (st , at ) = Q
                       b t (st , at ) + αt (xt , at )[rt + γ                 max          b t (st+1 , a) − Q
                                                                                          Q                b t (st , at )],           (12)
                                                                         a:β(a|st+1 )>0

                                                     b ∗ if
converges w.p.1 to the optimal action-value function Q
                                     X                                                    X
                0 ≤ αt (s, a) ≤ 1,       αt (s, a) = ∞ and                                      αt2 (s, a) < ∞,
                                                      t                                     t

for all (s, a) ∈ S × A.

Proof. Based on Theorem A.2, we prove the update rule in Eq. (12) converges.
Rewrite Eq. (12) as
     b t+1 (st , at ) = (1 − αt (st , at ))Q
     Q                                     b t (st , at ) + αt (xt , at )[rt + γ                      max        Q
                                                                                                                 b t (st+1 , a)]
                                                                                                a:β(a|st+1 )>0


                                                                    15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


         b ∗ (st , at ) from both sides:
Subtract Q
 Q                   b ∗ (st , at )
  b t+1 (st , at ) − Q
= (1 − αt (st , at ))(Q                  b ∗ (st , at )) + αt (xt , at )[rt + γ
                        b t (st , at ) − Q                                                max                           b ∗ (st , at )]
                                                                                                       b t (st+1 , a) − Q
                                                                                                       Q
                                                                                    a:β(a|st+1 )>0

Let
                                          ∆t (s, a) = Q(s,   b ∗ (s, a)
                                                      b a) − Q                                                                 (13)
and
                            Ft (s, a) = r + γ ′ max                  b t (s′ , a′ ) − Q
                                                                     Q                b ∗ (s, a).                              (14)
                                                 ′ ′ a :β(a |s )>0

We get the same random process shown in Theorem A.2 Eq. (11). Then, proving limt→∞ Q   bt = Qb∗
is the same as proving ∆t (s, a) converges to zero with probability 1. We only need to show the
assumptions in Theorem A.2 are satisfied under the definitions of Eqs. (13) and (14).
Theorem A.2 (1) is the same as the condition in Lemma A.3. It is easy to achieve, for example, we
can choose αt (s, a) = 1/t.
For Theorem A.2 (2), we have
                                        X
                E[Ft (s, a)|Ft ] =              P (s′ |s, a)[r + γ ′ max
                                                                       ′ ′
                                                                           b t (s′ , a′ ) − Q
                                                                           Q                b ∗ (s, a)]
                                                                     a :β(a |s )
                                        s′ ∈S

                                     = (B̂ Q
                                           b t )(s, a) − Qb ∗ (s, a)
                                     = (B̂ Q
                                           b t )(s, a) − (B̂ Qb ∗ )(s, a)
Thus,
                                    ∥E[Ft (s, a)|Ft ]∥∞ = ∥(B̂ Q           b ∗ )∥∞
                                                               b t ) − (B̂ Q
                                                        ≤ γ∥Qbt − Q  b ∗ ∥∞
                                                             = γ∥∆t ∥∞ ,
with γ < 1.
For Theorem A.2 (3), we have
  V ar[Ft (s)|Ft ] = E[Ft (s) − E[Ft (s)|Ft ]|Ft ]2
                   = E[Ft (s) − ((B̂ Q                 b ∗ )(s, a))]2
                                     b t )(s, a) − (B̂ Q
                     = E[r + γ ′ max                 b t (s′ , a′ ) − Q
                                                     Q                b ∗ (s, a) − ((B̂ Q                 b ∗ )(s, a))]2
                                                                                        b t )(s, a) − (B̂ Q
                                  ′ ′a :β(a |s )>0

                     = E[r + γ ′ max                 b t (s′ , a′ ) − (B̂ Q
                                                     Q                    b t )(s, a)]2
                                  ′ ′a :β(a |s )>0

                     = V ar[r + γ ′ max                 b t (s′ , a′ )|Ft ]
                                                        Q
                                     ′ ′a :β(a |s )>0

                   b ∗ term to make it close to the RHS in Theorem A.2 (3):
We add and minus a Q
   V ar[r + γ    max      b ∗ (s′ , a′ ) + γ
                          Q                  max     b t (s′ , a′ ) − γ
                                                     Q                  max                                  b ∗ (s′ , a′ )|Ft ]
                                                                                                             Q
                 a′ :β(a′ |s′ )>0                     a′ :β(a′ |s′ )>0                    a′ :β(a′ |s′ )>0


Since r is bounded, thus r + γ maxa′ :β(a′ |s′ )>0 Q          b ∗ (s′ , a′ ) is bounded. And clearly the second
                         b t (s′ , a′ ) − maxa′ :β(a′ |s′ )>0 Q
part maxa′ :β(a′ |s′ )>0 Q                                    b ∗ (s′ , a′ ) can be bounded by ∥∆t ∥∞ with some
constant. Thus, we have
                                        V ar[Ft (s)|Ft ] ≤ C(1 + ∥∆t ∥2∞ ),
for some constant C > 0 under supremum norm. Thus, by Theorem A.2, ∆t converges to zero
w.p.1, i.e., Q
             b t converges to Q    b ∗ w.p.1.

Lemma A.4. The value estimation obtained by Eq. (9) lower-bounds the value estimation obtained
by Eq. (7):
                                 Qb ∗ (s, a) − Q∗ (s, a) ≤ 0                              (15)
for all state-action pairs.


                                                              16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Proof. Following the definition of Eqs. (7) and (9), we can rewrite as
          b ∗ (s, a) − Q∗ (s, a))
      max(Q
       s,a
             b ∗ (s, a) − BQ∗ (s, a))
    = max(B̂ Q
      s,a
           X                                                                          X
    = max(      P (s′ |s, a)[r + γ ′ max                         b ∗ (s′ , â′ )] −
                                                                 Q                            P (s′ |s, a)[r + γ max
                                                                                                                  ′
                                                                                                                     Q∗ (s′ , a′ )])
       s,a                            ′ ′      â :β(â |s )>0                                                    a
                 s′ ∈S                                                                s′ ∈S
             X
    = max            P (s′ |s, a)γ( ′ max               b ∗ (s′ , â′ ) − max Q∗ (s′ , a′ ))
                                                        Q                  ′
       s,a                             ′ ′
                                      â :β(â |s )>0                           a
             s′ ∈S
             X
    ≤ max            P (s′ |s, a)γ(max
                                    ′
                                       b ∗ (s′ , â′ ) − max Q∗ (s′ , a′ ))
                                       Q                  ′
       s,a                              â                          a
             s′ ∈S
             X
    ≤ max            P (s′ |s, a)γ max(Q
                                       b ∗ (s′ , ã) − Q∗ (s′ , ã))
       s,a                             ã
             s′ ∈S
                  X
    ≤ max γ               P (s′ |s, a) max(Q
                                           b ∗ (s̃, ã) − Q∗ (s̃, ã))
       s,a                             s̃,ã
                  s′ ∈S
            b ∗ (s̃, ã) − Q∗ (s̃, ã)) = γ max(Q
    = γ max(Q                                   b ∗ (s, a) − Q∗ (s, a))
         s̃,ã                                           s,a

                                                             ′
                                               P
where the last line follows from                   s′ ∈S P (s |s, a) = 1. Then we have

                                b ∗ (s, a) − Q∗ (s, a)) ≤ γ max(Q
                            max(Q                               b ∗ (s, a) − Q∗ (s, a))
                             s,a                                              s,a
                                                                          2 b ∗ (s, a) − Q∗ (s, a))
                                                                    ≤ γ max(Q
                                                                               s,a

                                                                    ≤ ···
                                                                              b ∗ (s, a) − Q∗ (s, a))
                                                                    ≤ γ n max(Q
                                                                               s,a

                                                               b ∗ (s, a) − Q∗ (s, a)) ≤ 0.
Take limit for both sides and since 0 < γ < 1, we have maxs,a (Q
When β(a|s) > 0 for all state-action pairs, the two contraction operators B̂ and B are the same. And
based on Banach’s fixed-point theorem, there is a unique fixed point. Thus Q    b ∗ (s, a) = Q∗ (s, a) for
                               b ∗ (s, a) − Q∗ (s, a) = 0, (s, a) ∈ S × A holds when β(a|s) > 0 for all
all state-action pairs., i.e., Q
state-action pairs.

Then, we get Theorem 3.1 proved with Lemmas A.1, A.3 and A.4.


B     E NVIRONMENT S PECIFICATIONS

B.1    S OKOBAN

Sokoban (Schrader, 2018), the Japanese word for ’a warehouse keeper’, is a puzzle video game,
which is analogous to the problem of having an agent in a warehouse push some specified boxes
from their initial locations to target locations. Target locations have the same number of boxes. The
goal of the game is to manipulate the agent to move all boxes to the target locations. Specifically,
the game is played on a rectangular grid called a room, and each cell of the room is either a floor or
a wall. At each new episode, the environment will be reset, which means the layout of the room is
randomly generated, including the floors, the walls, the target locations, the boxes’ initial locations,
and the location of the agent. We choose four tasks with different complexities from Push-5×5-1 to
Push-6×6-2, which is shown in Figure 5. The numbers in the task name denote respectively the size
of the grid and the number of boxes.
State Space. The state space consists of all possible images displayed on the screen. Each image has
the same size as the map, and using the way of dividing each pixel of the image by 255 to normalize
into [0,1], we preprocess the image to the inputting state.


                                                                     17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Action Space. The action space of Sokoban has a total of eight actions, composed of moving and
pushing the box in four directions, which are left, right, up, down, push-left, push-right, push-up,
push-down in detail.
Reward Setting. The agent gets a punishment with a -0.1 reward after each time step. Successfully
pushing a box to the target location, can get a +1 reward, and if all boxes are laid in the right
locations, the agent can obtain an extra +10 reward. We set the max episode steps to 120, which
means the cumulative reward during one episode ranges from -12 to 10 plus the number of boxes.


      (a) Push-5x5-1           (b) Push-5x5-2             (c) Push-6x6-1             (d) Push-6x6-2

Figure 5: Visualization of puzzle tasks from Sokoban, which focuses on evaluating the capabilities
of agents in spatial reasoning, logical deduction, and long-term planning.


B.2    C RAFT E NV

Craftenv (Zhao et al., 2023), A Flexible Robotic Construction Environment, is a collection of con-
struction tasks. The agent needs to learn to manipulate the elements, including smartcar, blocks, and
slopes, to achieve a target structure through efficient and effective policy. Each construction task is
a simulation of the corresponding complex real-world task, which is challenging enough for rein-
forcement learning algorithms. Meanwhile, the CraftEnv is highly malleable, enabling researchers
to design their own tasks for specific requirements. The environment is simple to use since it is
implemented by Python and can be rendered using PyBullet. We choose three different designs of
the building tasks, shown in Figure 6, to evaluate our algorithm in CraftEnv.
State Space. We assume that the agent can obtain all the information in the map. Therefore, the state
consists of all knowledge of smartcar, blocks, folded slopes, unfolded slopes’ body, and unfolded
slopes’ foot, including the position and the yaw angle.
Action Space. The available actions of an agent are designed based on real-world smartcar mod-
els, including a total of fifteen actions. Besides all eight directions moving actions, i.e. forward,
backward, left, right, left-forward, left-backward, right-forward, and right-backward, there are
interaction-related actions, designed to simulate the building process in the real world. Specifi-
cally, the agent can act lift and drop actions to decide whether or not to carry the surrounding basic
element, and can flod or unflod slopes to build the complex buildings. In addition, the actions of
rotate-left and rotate-right control the agent to rotate the main body to the left and right, and stop
action is just a non-action.
Reward Setting. CraftEnv is a flexible environment as mentioned above. We can specify our own
reward function for different construction tasks. For the relatively simple tasks of building with
specified shape requirement, we can use discrete reward, where some reward is given when part of
the blueprint is built. While, for building tasks with high complexity, various reward patterns should
be designed to encourage the agent to build with different intentions.


C     E XPERIMENTAL D ETAILS

In this section, we provide the implementation details including basic settings for preference-based
RL, architecture of neural network, hyper-parameters and other training detail.


                                                  18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  (a) The Strip-shaped Building       (b) The Block-shaped Building     (c) The Simple Two-Story Building

Figure 6: Visualization of building tasks from CraftEnv. From left to right are The Strip-shaped
Building, The Block-shaped Building, and The Simple Two-Story Building task respectively.


C.1   BASIC S ETTINGS

In the following section, we provide more details of the unsupervised exploration and the
uncertainty-based sampling scheme, both of which are mentioned in Section 4.1. These are pivotal
techniques in enhancing the feedback efficiency of algorithms, as referenced in Lee et al. (2021b).
To ensure an fair comparison, all preference-based RL algorithms in our experiments incorporate
both unsupervised exploration and uncertainty-based sampling.
Unsupervised Exploration. The technique of unsupervised exploration in preference-based RL is
proposed by Lee et al. (2021b). Designing an intrinsic reward based on the entropy of the state
efficiently encourages the agent to visit more diverse states and generate more various behaviors.
More specifically, it uses a variant of particle-based entropy (Misra et al., 2003) as the estimation of
entropy for the convenience of computation.
Uncertainty-based Sampling. There are some different sampling schemes, including but not lim-
ited to uniform sampling, disagreement sampling, and entropy sampling. The latter two sampling
schemes are classified as uncertainty-based sampling, which has a better performance compared to
uniform sampling intuitively and empirically.

C.2   A RCHITECTURE AND HYPERPARAMETERS .

In this section, we describe the architecture of neural networks of the SAC algorithm, which is used
as the underlying model. Then we present the full list of hyperparameters of SAC, PEBBLE, and the
proposed SEER. The actor of SAC has three layers, specifically, the first layer is the convolutional
layer, composed of 16 kernels with a size of 3. Then we squeeze the output into one dimension
as the input for the last two fully connected layers. The two Q networks of SAC have the same
architecture as that of the actor, one convolutional layer and two fully connected layers. The detailed
parameters of the neural network and hyperparameters during learning are shown in table 2. The
hyperparameters of PEBBLE and SEER, which are different from those of SAC, are presented in
table 3.
                                   Table 2: Hyperparameters of SAC.

 Hyperparameter                   Value                          Hyperparameter                Value
 Number of layers                 3 layers: 1 Conv2d, 2 Linear   Discount                      0.99
 Number of kernels of Conv2d      16                             Batch size                    256
 Size of Kernel of Conv2d         3                              Initial temperature           0.2
 Stride of Conv2d                 1                              (β1 , β2 )                    (0.9,0.999)
 Padding of Conv2d                0                              Update freq                   4
 Hidden units of hidden layer     128                            Critic target update freq     8000
 Activation Function              ReLU                           Critic τ                      1
 Actor optimizer                  Adam                           Exploration                   1
 Critic optimizer                 Adam                           Graph τ (Graph-based)         1.0
 Learning rate                    1e-4                           Policy weight (Graph-based)   1.0


                                                    19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                        Table 3: Hyperparameters of PEBBLE and SEER.

          Hyperparameter           Value    Hyperparameter                                Value
          Length of segment        50       Numbers of reward functions / Ensemble size   3
          Learning rate            0.0003   Top-k                                         5
          Reward batch size        128      Length of segment (SEER)                      20
          Reward update            200      Beta β (SEER)                                 0.5
          Frequency of feedback    2000     Graph update batch size (SEER)                32
          Number of train steps    1e6      Critic update batch size (SEER)               64
          Replay buffer capacity   1e6      Ldc weight λ                                  1


                                                   20
