Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


AUTOAGENTS : A F RAMEWORK FOR AUTOMATIC
AGENT G ENERATION
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                             A BSTRACT

         Large language models (LLMs) have enabled remarkable advances in automated
         task-solving with multi-agent systems. However, most existing LLM-based multi-
         agent approaches rely on predefined agents to handle simple tasks, limiting the
         adaptability of multi-agent collaboration to different scenarios. Therefore, we
         introduce AutoAgents, an innovative framework that adaptively generates and
         coordinates multiple specialized agents to build an AI team according to different
         tasks. Specifically, AutoAgents couples the relationship between tasks and roles by
         dynamically generating multiple required agents based on task content and planning
         solutions for the current task based on the generated expert agents. Multiple
         specialized agents collaborate with each other to efficiently accomplish tasks.
         Concurrently, an observer role is incorporated into the framework to reflect on the
         designated plans and agents’ responses and improve upon them. Our experiments
         on various benchmarks demonstrate that AutoAgents generates more coherent and
         accurate solutions than the existing multi-agent methods. This underscores the
         significance of assigning different roles to different tasks and of team cooperation,
         offering new perspectives for tackling complex tasks. The repository of this project
         is available at https://anonymous.4open.science/r/AutoAgents-747C.


1    I NTRODUCTION

Large language models (LLMs) have exhibited astounding capabilities as versatile task-solving agents,
endowed with a rich blend of knowledge and skills. Nevertheless, they still face difficulties (Qin et al.,
2023; OpenAI, 2023; Bubeck et al., 2023) in tackling various tasks that require intensive knowledge
and reasoning, such as avoiding hallucination (Maynez et al., 2020), employing slow-thinking
strategies (Sloman, 1996), ensuring trustworthiness (Wang et al., 2023a), and in combining diverse
domain knowledge and long-horizon planning. In contrast, humans often exploit the benefits of
collaborative problem solving, which enables them to work together effectively to solve non-routine
problems in diverse domains and enhance the quality and reliability of the solutions by distributing
the workload among specialties and applying a diversity of perspectives and expertise (Nelson, 2013;
Roschelle & Teasley, 1995; Barron, 2000).
Inspired by collaborative problem solving, several recent works (Wang et al., 2023c; Du et al.,
2023; Liang et al., 2023; Hao et al., 2023) have improved the task-solving capabilities of LLMs
by integrating multi-agent discussion. However, most of these multi-agent systems depend on
handcrafted or user-specified agents, with specific roles and necessitating human supervision, which
often restricts the scope of collaborative applications. Moreover, manually creating a large number of
experts often consumes a lot of resources. In order to adaptively solve more complex problems, this
paper aims to explore a method of adaptively generating task experts and completing different tasks
through multi-level collaborative cooperation among multiple experts.
In this paper, we propose AutoAgents, an innovative framework that adaptively generates and
coordinates multiple specialized agents to construct an AI team according to different tasks. Figure 1
provides a high-level overview of AutoAgents. By generating multiple agents with distinct expert
roles, we aim to form a collaborative entity that can accomplish complex tasks by leveraging the
complementary strengths of each agent. As shown in Figure 2, the process of AutoAgents is
divided into two critical stages: Drafting Stage and Execution Stage. The drafting stage involves
a collaborative discussion among three predefined agents (Planner, Agent Observer, and Plan


                                                    1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 1: A schematic diagram of AutoAgents. The system takes the user input as a starting point
and generates a set of specialized agents for novel writing, along with a corresponding execution
plan. The agents collaboratively carry out the tasks according to the plan and produce the final novel.
Meanwhile, an observer monitors the generation and execution of the Agents and the plan, ensuring
the quality and coherence of the process.

Observer) to synthesize a customized agent team and an execution plan that suit the input problem
or task. The execution stage refines the plan through inter-agent collaboration and feedback, and
produces the final outcome. We propose self-refinement by individual agents and collaborative
refinement by multiple agents to enhance agent proficiency and promote knowledge-sharing among
agents. To facilitate the specific division of labor among the agents in the synthesized team, we
introduce a predefined agent (Action Observer) to assist the agent team in sharing information,
coordinating actions, reaching consensus, and adapting to the environment.
To synthesize heterogeneous information from diverse domains is often a crucial requirement in cre-
ative industries and other real-world scenarios. We illustrate a concrete example of how AutoAgents
tackles the challenging task of writing a novel about the awakening of artificial intelligence in Figure 1.
The Story Planner and Researcher collaborate to devise the plot of the story with their respective
expertise, while the Character Developer and Writer enrich the novel content through imagination
based on the story. Moreover, we conduct quantitative experiments and case studies in complex tasks
to demonstrate the effectiveness of AutoAgents. We also conduct a comprehensive analysis and
demonstrate the importance of dynamic agents for handling complex tasks, the indispensability of
self-refinement for proficient agents, and the effectiveness of collaborative conversation.
To summarize, this paper makes the following novel contributions: First, we propose AutoAgents,
a novel framework that dynamically synthesizes and coordinates multiple expert agents to form
customized AI teams for diverse tasks. Second, we conduct rigorous quantitative experiments on
two challenging tasks and demonstrate that AutoAgents significantly improves both knowledge
acquisition and reasoning ability in LLMs and outperforms other generated-agent frameworks. Third,


                                                    2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    Table 1: Comparison of existing and proposed frameworks for LLM-based Agent framework.
                                               Dynamic Agent          Number of       Multi-agent    Self-Refinement     Collaborative
 Framework
                                              Generation Method         Agent         Conversation        Action       Refinement Action
 AutoGPT (Gravitas, 2023)                             %                       1           %                !                  %
 BabyAGI (Nakajima, 2023)                             %                       3           !                %                  %
 Generative Agents (Park et al., 2023)                %                      25           !                !                  %
 Camel (Li et al., 2023)                              %                       2           !                %                  %
 GPT-bargaining (Fu et al., 2023)                     %                       3           !                !                  %
 MetaGPT (Hong et al., 2023)                          %                   Unlimited       !                %                  %
 AutoGen (Wu et al., 2023)                            %                   Unlimited       !                %                  %
 Social Simulacra (Park et al., 2022)            Single Agent             Unlimited       !                %                  %
 Epidemic Modeling (Williams et al., 2023)       Single Agent             Unlimited       !                %                  %
 ExpertPrompting (Xu et al., 2023)               Single Agent                 1           %                %                  %
 SSP (Wang et al., 2023c)                        Single Agent             Unlimited       !                %                  %
 AgentVerse (Chen et al., 2023a)                 Single Agent             Unlimited       !                %                  %
 AutoAgents                                  Multi-agent Discussion       Unlimited       !                !                  !


we showcase AutoAgents’ ability to adapt to complex tasks by applying it in various scenarios such
as software development. Finally, we conduct a thorough investigation and reveal the importance of
dynamic agents for accommodating complex tasks and the necessity of self-refinement for proficient
agents, and the efficacy of collaborative conversation.


2     R ELATED W ORK

LLM-based Autonomous Agents. LLMs have been widely used as core controllers for autonomous
agents that can accomplish specific objectives. Auto-GPT (Gravitas, 2023) is an early work that
leverages an LLM as an AI agent that can autonomously achieve a given goal with the help of
several tools. However, Auto-GPT does not support multi-agent collaboration and can only work in
isolation. One way to enhance the task-solving capabilities of LLMs is to assign different roles and
responsibilities to multiple LLMs and let them coordinate their actions to achieve a common goal.
For example, BabyAGI (Nakajima, 2023) is an AI-powered task management system with multiple
LLM-based agents. One agent creates new tasks based on the previous task’s objective and result,
another agent prioritizes the task list, and another agent completes tasks. BabyAGI is a multi-agent
system with a fixed order of agent communication. MetaGPT (Hong et al., 2023) is a multi-agent
framework for assigning different roles to GPTs to form a collaborative software entity for complex
tasks. It is a specialized LLM-based multi-agent framework for collaborative software development.
Camel (Li et al., 2023) is an LLM-based communicative agent framework that demonstrates how
role-playing can be used to enable chat agents to communicate with each other for task completion.
However, Camel does not support tool-using. Several recent works (Wang et al., 2023c; Du et al.,
2023; Liang et al., 2023; Hao et al., 2023) have enhanced the task-solving capabilities of LLMs by
integrating multi-agent discussion. For instance, Wang et al. (2023c) proposes a multi-agent debate
system that allows LLMs to argue for or against a given claim and generate a debate summary. Du
et al. (2023) introduce a multi-agent dialogue system that enables LLMs to exchange information and
opinions on a given topic and generate a dialogue report. AutoGen (Wu et al., 2023) is a framework
that enables the development of LLM applications using multiple agents that can converse with each
other to solve tasks. However, most of these multi-agent systems rely on handcrafted or user-specified
agents with specific roles and do not support the automatic generation of agents, which often limits
the scope of collaborative applications.
Agent Generalization. Several studies (Park et al., 2022; Williams et al., 2023) employ LLMs
to generate agents for social simulacra and epidemic modeling, demonstrating how this technique
can facilitate designers in assessing and improving their modeling designs prior to deploying them
to real users. Likewise, ExpertPrompting (Xu et al., 2023) devised a method to generate diverse
profiles of agents that can cooperate with human users to accomplish tasks with minimal supervision.
However, this method still depends on a restricted set of predefined agents, and the generated agents
vary only in their profiles, not in their problem-solving capacities. Recently, SSP (Wang et al.,
2023c) and AgentVerse (Chen et al., 2023a) have proposed frameworks for automatically generating
unlimited agents. SSP enables LLMs to generate agents for problem input by providing some agent
samples, and has these agents solve the problem. AgentVerse generates the execution plan through the
generated agents’ discussions and adds evaluation strategies for cyclic execution. Unlike the previous
two methods, AutoAgents places a heightened emphasis on the reliability of its generated agents and


                                                                      3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 2: The execution process of AutoAgents. During the Drafting Stage, three predefined agents
collaboratively determine the list of agents and the execution plan. During the Execution Stage, a
predefined agent facilitates coordination and communication among the generated agent teams, and
the individual generated agents enhance their execution efficiency through self-refinement.
strategic plans, thereby enhancing task execution efficiency through the utilization of collaborative
refinement actions and the integration of self-refinement actions , as illustrated in Table 1.


3     T HE F RAMEWORK FOR AUTOMATIC AGENT G ENERATION

To enhance the effectiveness of autonomous multi-agent groups in accomplishing their goals, the
process of AutoAgents consists of two critical stages: Drafting Stage and Execution Stage, as
illustrated in Figure 2. The drafting stage synthesizes an agent team and an execution plan that
are customized to the task by analyzing the input problem or task. The execution stage refines the
plan by enabling inter-agent collaboration and feedback, and delivers the final result. The inter-
agent collaboration is based on some principles of multi-agent cooperation, such as communication,
coordination, and consensus. These principles help the agents to share information, align their actions,
reach agreements, and adapt to the environment.

3.1   D RAFTING S TAGE

Empirical evidence (Woolley et al., 2015) suggests that diversity within human groups fosters diverse
perspectives, which enhances the group’s performance across various tasks. The drafting stage, which
determines the composition of a multi-agent group, plays a crucial role in setting the upper limits of
the group’s capabilities. Therefore, it is imperative to generate the optimal agent team and execution
plan that can maximize the group’s potential.
Predominant methodologies (Gravitas, 2023; Hong et al., 2023; Wu et al., 2023) for assigning role
descriptions to autonomous agents rely heavily on human intuition and prior knowledge, requiring
manual assignment based on task understanding. Consistent with several parallel findings (Xu et al.,
2023; Wang et al., 2023c; Chen et al., 2023a), dynamically designing agents with different roles
can significantly enhance their efficacy. However, the scalability and rationality of agent and plan
generation are still unclear, especially in the face of various complex problem environments.
On the one hand, the generated agents should exhibit diversity to accommodate various tasks. On
the other hand, the agent and the plan generation should adhere to certain principles, rendering their
role allocation more rational. Therefore, we devise three artificially predefined agents to produce
agent teams and execution plans, integrating artificial prior knowledge and the dynamic adaptation


                                                   4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


capability of LLMs to generate more sensible agent teams and execution plans. The three artificially
predefined agents comprise Planner, Agent Observer, and Plan Observer:

       • Planner P generates and refines an agent team and an execution plan based on the content
         of the task.
       • Agent Observer Oagent provides suggestions on the rationality of the agent team members
         and their matching degree with the task.
       • Plan Observer Oplan provides suggestions on the rationality of the execution plan and its
         matching degree with the task and the agent team.

The Planner generates initial agent team members and a specific plan, and improves the agent team
and execution plan based on continuous communication with the Agent Observer and Plan Observer.
Agent Generation. The Planner generates the agent team and facilitates its continuous improvement
through reciprocal communication with the Agent Observer. To enable Planner to produce rational
agents, we have devised a standard format for the essential elements of a single agent. For each
agent A = {P, D, T, S}, the Planner needs to specify its prompt P, description D, toolset T, and
suggestions S.

       • Prompt P provides a detailed and customized depiction of the expert identity for each
         specific agent, which comprises profile, goal, and constraints. Profile reflects the domain
         expertise of the role or job title. Goal indicates the primary responsibility or objective that
         the role aims to achieve. Constraints specify limitations or principles the role must adhere
         to when performing actions.
       • Description D gives additional concrete identity to help establish a more comprehensive
         role, develop an execution plan, and inspect problems.
       • Toolset T equips the Agent with tools that it can use, selected from a predefined set of tools.
         The rationale for not using all the tools for each agent here is to prevent decision-making
         confusion caused by excessive tools.
       • Suggestions S supplies some suggestions for each agent to execute the current task, including
         but not limited to a clear output, extraction of historical information, and suggestions for
         execution steps.

Based on the agent list {A1 , A2 , · · · , An } generated by Planner, the Agent Observer evaluates the
quality and suitability of each agent. The Agent Observer first verifies whether every agent conforms
to the aforementioned specifications and identifies any missing elements {P, description D, toolset
T}. Secondly, the Agent Observer assesses the compatibility of each agent with the task, according
to their description information and task content. Finally, the Agent Observer examines the agent list
for any redundant or missing roles and eliminates or adds them accordingly.
After n rounds of bidirectional communication between the Planner and the Agent Observer, the
optimal agent list for accomplishing the task is established. Given the vital role of the agent list in the
task execution, this framework employs a predefined agent and multiple rounds of iterative dialogue
among multiple agents to finalize the agent list, thereby enhancing the stability and reliability of the
execution phase.
Plan Generation. In parallel to agent generation, the Planner formulates the execution plan and
promotes its progressive improvement through reciprocal communication with the Plan Observer.
For a given task, the Planner delineates the specific steps {S1 , S2 , · · · Sn } to accomplish it in the
execution plan P. Each step Si entails a clear identification of the agent Aj responsible for it, as well
as the input information and expected output required for it.
The Plan Observer subsequently validates the execution plan P = {S1 , S2 , · · · Sn } according to the
agent list {A1 , A2 , · · · , An } and the task content. It firstly ensures that each step has a corresponding
agent and that the step content is coherent and concise. It secondly assesses whether all the steps
are sufficient, whether the task can be accomplished, and whether there are any gaps that need to be
filled. It finally provides feedback to the Planner, who further refines the execution plan accordingly.
After n rounds of dialogue between the Planner and the Plan Observer, the ultimate execution plan
for achieving the task is established.


                                                      5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                    Story Planner       Researcher

      Task: Write engaging and coherent        Task: The Story Planner collaborates with the Researcher to understand
      chapters based on the outline and        AI concepts and create a detailed outline for the novel. This includes a
      character profiles. This will form the   high-level overview of the story, a breakdown of the story into chapters,
      main body of the novel.                  and a breakdown of each chapter into scenes.

      (a) Self-refinement by a single agent                (b) Collaborative refinement by multiple agents
Figure 3: Two types of actions for executing tasks: Self-refinement enables an individual agent to
enhance its competence in performing some specialized tasks. Collaborative refinement facilitates
knowledge exchange among multiple agents and accomplishes tasks that demand interdisciplinary
expertise.
Task Execution Actions. The Planner devises an execution plan that automatically assigns the
requisite agents for diverse tasks. The execution plan comprises two actions of task execution: self-
refinement by a single agent and collaborative refinement by multiple agents, as shown in Figure 3.
Self-refinement empowers an individual agent to augment its proficiency in accomplishing some
specialized tasks. Collaborative refinement fosters knowledge sharing among multiple agents and
achieves tasks requiring interdisciplinary expertise.

3.2    E XECUTION S TAGE

In the drafting phase, the framework generates an agent list and an execution plan based on the
task requirements. Then, the framework creates corresponding roles and executes the plans in
the execution environment1 . The communication and cooperation among multi-agent systems are
essential for accomplishing the tasks effectively. This section elaborates on the communication
among multiple agents, the task execution strategies, and the knowledge-sharing mechanisms.
Communication of Multiple Agent. The communication structures among agents have been
investigated by many studies (Chen et al., 2023a; Wang et al., 2023c; Qian et al., 2023; Chan
et al., 2023) to examine their impact on task performance. In this framework, we adopt the vertical
communication paradigm, which assigns different responsibilities to agents according to their roles.
To facilitate the specific division of labor among the agents in the generated team, we introduce a
predefined Action Observer as the team leader to coordinate the execution plan. Specifically,

        • Action Observer Oaction acts as the task manager for the different agents, allocating
          different tasks to them, verifying the execution outcomes of each agent, and dynamically
          adapting the execution plan based on the execution status.

This mechanism of refinement and communication recurs until the Action Observer attains a unan-
imous agreement on the execution responses, or the process reaches its maximum iteration limit.
For scenarios that demand iterative decision-making towards specific objectives, such as software
development, vertical communication would be a preferable option.
Self-refinement Agent. Besides the inter-agent communication, the performance of a single agent
also exerts a significant impact on the overall quality of feedback results. Hence, drawing on
mechanisms such as AutoGPT (Gravitas, 2023) and ReAct (Yao et al., 2022), we have devised a
self-refinement mechanism for an individual agent.
For a single agent A, the action at step t is at at = lt ∪ pt ∪ ot , where lt denotes the thought or the
reasoning trace in the language space, which does not alter the external environment, and thus yields
no observational feedback, pt represents the execution plan for better task completion, ot comprises
the completion steps and execution output for this time.
As illustrated in Figure 2, various types of useful thoughts can assist in devising a refinement plan.
The execution plan enables the agent to anticipate the steps they need to undertake in the future,
    1
      Execution environment of AutoAgents is built based on MetaGPT’s environment and workspace (Hong
et al., 2023).


                                                           6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


and the observational content of the execution result construction allows the agent to reevaluate and
enhance the plan arrangement, thereby constructing more refined and complete actions. Through a
cycle of self-continuous thinking, planning, execution, and feedback, a single agent can effectively
execute and accomplish task content.
Collaborative Refinement Action. In the collaborative refinement action, the agents collaboratively
refine and execute the tasks in a sequential manner. Each round of the collaboration involves a
fixed order of turn-taking among the agents, who generate their responses based on the current
observation. The chat history slot of each agent is updated by concatenating the previous utterances
of the other agents. The collaboration terminates automatically when the agents reach a consensus or
the maximum number of discussions is reached.
Knowledge Sharing Mechanism. AutoAgents also facilitates the sharing of execution results among
various agents for improved communication and feedback. However, when the number of agents is
large and a single agent has more self-iterations, it will generate more historical information. Due
to the token limitation of LLM models, they often cannot encompass all information. Hence, this
framework provides short-term memory, long-term memory, and dynamic memory.
Short-term memory is chiefly concentrated on a singular action, encompassing the gamut of inter-
mediary notions, strategies, and outcomes that emerge during the self-refinement or collaborative
refinement phases of an individual action. It is salient to note that these actions frequently culminate
in a distilled summary of critical information, epitomizing the final phase of the refinement trajectory.
Long-term memory principally focuses on chronicling the historical trajectory of multifarious actions,
predominantly documenting the executed tasks of individual actions along with the synthesis of vital
feedback information. This aspect is imperative for evaluating the comprehensive extent of task
completion.
Dynamic memory predominantly serves actions necessitating specialized attention. The Action
Observer, having access to long-term memory archives, adeptly extracts ancillary information,
dynamically tailoring it to the specific requirements of the action for task execution. This process
significantly augments the efficiency of a single action in task fulfillment.


4       E XPERIMENTS

In order to demonstrate the capabilities and performance of AutoAgents in orchestrating autonomous
agent groups to collaboratively accomplish tasks, we have performed extensive quantitative exper-
iments on benchmark tasks and thorough case studies on more complex and realistic applications.
In the quantitative analysis, we mainly present results for the Open-ended Question Answer task
(detailed in Section 4.1) and the Trivia Creative Writing task (detailed in Section 4.2) to evaluate
the framework effectiveness under distinct settings. The Case Studies, discussed in Section 4.3,
illustrate the potential of a multi-agent group tackling intricate practical scenarios cooperatively.
Implementation Details: We conduct all experiments using the GPT-4 API2 and set the temperature
to 0 to ensure reproducibility. The rationale behind this selection is the exceptional performance these
models offer, providing more accurate and standardized output. Additionally, their accessibility and
ease of use through APIs enable us to directly call and interact with the models during our research,
significantly simplifying the process. The maximum number of discussions during the drafting phase
is 3, and the maximum number of self-refinement by a single agent and collaborative refinement by
multiple agents during the execution phase is 5.

4.1       O PEN - ENDED Q UESTION A NSWER

Task Description. Open-ended Question Answering is a crucial and challenging task in the domain
of NLP and generative AI. It requires an AI system to produce coherent, elaborate, and human-
like responses to questions that have no predetermined or fixed set of possible answers. (Zheng
et al., 2023) proposed MT-bench, a benchmark consisting of 80 high-quality collected open-ended
questions from various categories such as common sense, counterfactual, coding, etc. We then utilize

    2
        The specific model version employed is “GPT-4-0613”.


                                                      7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


AutoAgents to produce collaborative answers based on multiple generated agents and compare them
with the responses given by GPT-4 and AgentVerse 3 (Chen et al., 2023a).

Table 2: Win Rate of AutoAgents over other models on Open-ended Question Answer, with
FairEval (Wang et al., 2023b) and HumanEval serving as evaluators.
                     Evaluator                              v.s. GPT-4     v.s. AgentVerse
                     FairEval (Wang et al., 2023b)            76.3%             91.3%
                     HumanEval                                62.5%             77.5%

Evaluation Metrics. To measure the quality of open-ended responses with minimal evaluation bias,
we adopt FairEval (Wang et al., 2023b) and HumanEval as the evaluation metrics for both the single
agent and AutoAgents. FairEval incorporates several methods to mitigate the impact of various
sources of bias, resulting in a better alignment with human judgment. For HumanEval, we enlisted
three independent volunteers to evaluate two sets of responses—one generated by AutoAgents and
the other by a different model—based on criteria such as helpfulness, reliability, accuracy, and
comprehensiveness. Notably, the volunteers were blinded to the identity of the model that produced
each response, ensuring an unbiased assessment. Appendix B contains the detailed scoring criteria
for the ratings.
Results. Table 2 demonstrates that AutoAgents outperforms individual LLM models in both FairEval
based on LLM and Human evaluations. AutoAgents can produce more comprehensive and nuanced
answers to open questions by synthesizing multiple expert models. It can also provide more elaborate
explanations and justifications for its answers. Additionally, AutoAgents demonstrates superior
performance over AgentVerse. This enhanced efficacy is attributed in part to the reliability of agent
generation, self-refinement, and collaborative refinement capabilities within AutoAgents. Conversely,
AgentVerse necessitates additional task-specific adaptations and exhibits limited effectiveness in
adapting to open-ended questions. More examples are given in the Appendix A.

4.2    T RIVIA C REATIVE W RITING

Task Description. The Trivia Creative Writing task (Wang et al., 2023c) challenges the capabilities
of large language models to retrieve and integrate diverse information from their internal self-
compressed knowledge. This task requires a model to craft a coherent story around a given topic
while incorporating the answers to N trivia questions. We evaluate the models under two settings,
N = 5 and N = 10, where a higher N entails more trivia questions and thus demands the model to
exhibit more extensive domain knowledge. We constructed a benchmark consisting of 100 instances
for each N , encompassing a total of 1000 trivia questions.

Table 3: The results of Trivia Creative Writing task. ∆ indicates the differences compared with
Standard Prompting (first row).
                                         N (# trivia questions) = 5              N (# trivia questions ) = 10
 Methods
                                     Score (%)     ∆ (v.s Standard %)         Score (%)     ∆ (v.s Standard %)
 Standard                               74.6                 0.0%                77.0               0.0%
 CoT (Yao et al., 2023)                 67.1                -10.0%               68.5             -11.1%
 SPP-Profile (Wang et al., 2023c)       79.1                +5.9%                83.0              +7.8%
 SPP (Wang et al., 2023c)               79.9                +7.1%                84.7             +10.0%
 AutoAgents                             82.0                +9.9%                85.9             +11.6%

Evaluation Metrics. Drawing on the approach of (Wang et al., 2023c), we adopt an automatic metric
to identify factual errors and measure a model’s capacity to integrate diverse domain knowledge. We
conduct string matching with the veridical target answers for each question on the generated output.
The target answers are supplied from the TriviaQA dataset (Joshi et al., 2017), and each question
can have a list of answer variants. A match to any of the answer variants of a question is regarded
as a correct mention. The metric score is calculated as Trivia Creative Writing Metric Score =
# correct answer mentions/# trivia questions.
    3
      The prompt configuration within AgentVerse is tailored to its brainstorming task, incorporating modifications
to upgrade the model to GPT-4.


                                                        8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 4: The illustration of an example process of software development. The task is to develop
Python-based software for the Tetris game.
Results. Table 3 demonstrates the superior performance of AutoAgents in knowledge acquisition
over the existing methods. Compared to the Standard method, which does not employ Agent
Generation, AutoAgents achieves a remarkable 10% improvement across all experiments. Moreover,
AutoAgents also surpasses SSP (Wang et al., 2023c), which utilizes agent generation but with a
different approach. The enhanced performance of AutoAgents can be attributed to its elaborate
methods of agent generation discussions and task execution including collaborative refinement and
self-refinement. More examples are given in the Appendix A.

4.3   C ASE S TUDY

To demonstrate the applicability of AutoAgents to more sophisticated and realistic scenarios, we
conduct a case study in the software engineering domain. Software engineering is a complex
collaborative endeavor that involves diverse roles and responsibilities. From developers who create
the underlying code, to UI designers who prioritize user experience, and software testers who ensure
the software’s quality, experts collaboratively work to enhance and refine the application, ensuring
that it meets both functional and user-centric criteria.
As an illustration in Figure 4, a Tetris game has been developed by employing AutoAgents, which
has generated various expert roles, such as game design expert, UI design expert, programmer, and
debugging expert, to accomplish the game development task. The game design experts provide the
game logic documents that specify the rules and mechanics of the game. The UI design experts design
the UI components that create the visual interface of the game. The programmers implement the game
design based on the aforementioned documents and use appropriate programming languages and
tools. Finally, the debugging expert tests the game and debuges the program to ensure its functionality
and quality. The game development process is based on the collaboration of multiple expert roles,
with more elaborate documentation and programs, making it easier for users to comprehend.

5     C ONCLUSION

This paper introduces AutoAgents, an innovative framework for automatically synthesizing col-
laborative specialized agents. AutoAgents mimics the collaborative process of human teams by
decomposing tasks into drafting and execution phases and delegating different subtasks to different
agents. Our experimental and empirical evaluation validates the advantages of AutoAgents, as it
surpasses single agents and other groupings in various tasks that demand diverse skills. Further-
more, our case study in software development illustrates the versatility and potential benefits of
our proposed framework. AutoAgents opens up new possibilities for enhancing the interaction and
cooperation among agents and transforms the landscape of complex problem-solving. We envisage
that its principles can be further generalized and refined to deal with a broader range of tasks, paving
the way towards more useful assistive artificial intelligence.


                                                   9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Brigid Barron. Achieving coordination in collaborative problem-solving groups. The journal of the
  learning sciences, 9(4):403–436, 2000. 1

Sébastien Bubeck, Varun Chandrasekaran, Ronen Eldan, Johannes Gehrke, Eric Horvitz, Ece Kamar,
  Peter Lee, Yin Tat Lee, Yuanzhi Li, Scott Lundberg, et al. Sparks of artificial general intelligence:
  Early experiments with gpt-4. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.12712, 2023. 1

Chi-Min Chan, Weize Chen, Yusheng Su, Jianxuan Yu, Wei Xue, Shanghang Zhang, Jie Fu, and
  Zhiyuan Liu. Chateval: Towards better llm-based evaluators through multi-agent debate. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2308.07201, 2023. 6

Weize Chen, Yusheng Su, Jingwei Zuo, Cheng Yang, Chenfei Yuan, Chen Qian, Chi-Min Chan, Yujia
 Qin, Yaxi Lu, Ruobing Xie, et al. Agentverse: Facilitating multi-agent collaboration and exploring
 emergent behaviors in agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.10848, 2023a. 3, 4, 6, 8, 13

Xinyun Chen, Maxwell Lin, Nathanael Schärli, and Denny Zhou. Teaching large language models to
  self-debug. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.05128, 2023b. 13

Yilun Du, Shuang Li, Antonio Torralba, Joshua B Tenenbaum, and Igor Mordatch. Improving factual-
  ity and reasoning in language models through multiagent debate. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.14325,
  2023. 1, 3

Yao Fu, Hao Peng, Tushar Khot, and Mirella Lapata. Improving language model negotiation with
  self-play and in-context learning from ai feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.10142, 2023. 3

Zhibin Gou, Zhihong Shao, Yeyun Gong, Yelong Shen, Yujiu Yang, Nan Duan, and Weizhu Chen.
  Critic: Large language models can self-correct with tool-interactive critiquing, 2023. 13

Significant Gravitas. Auto-gpt: An autonomous gpt-4 experiment, 2023. URL https://github.
  com/Significant-Gravitas/Auto-GPT, 2023. 3, 4, 6

Rui Hao, Linmei Hu, Weijian Qi, Qingliu Wu, Yirui Zhang, and Liqiang Nie. Chatllm network: More
  brains, more intelligence. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.12998, 2023. 1, 3

Sirui Hong, Xiawu Zheng, Jonathan Chen, Yuheng Cheng, Ceyao Zhang, Zili Wang, Steven Ka Shing
  Yau, Zijuan Lin, Liyang Zhou, Chenyu Ran, et al. Metagpt: Meta programming for multi-agent
   collaborative framework. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.00352, 2023. 3, 4, 6

Wenlong Huang, Fei Xia, Ted Xiao, Harris Chan, Jacky Liang, Pete Florence, Andy Zeng, Jonathan
 Tompson, Igor Mordatch, Yevgen Chebotar, et al. Inner monologue: Embodied reasoning through
 planning with language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.05608, 2022. 13

Mandar Joshi, Eunsol Choi, Daniel Weld, and Luke Zettlemoyer. TriviaQA: A large scale dis-
 tantly supervised challenge dataset for reading comprehension. In Proceedings of the 55th
 Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 1601–1611. Associa-
 tion for Computational Linguistics, July 2017. doi: 10.18653/v1/P17-1147. URL https:
 //aclanthology.org/P17-1147. 8

Guohao Li, Hasan Abed Al Kader Hammoud, Hani Itani, Dmitrii Khizbullin, and Bernard Ghanem.
  Camel: Communicative agents for" mind" exploration of large scale language model society. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2303.17760, 2023. 3

Tian Liang, Zhiwei He, Wenxiang Jiao, Xing Wang, Yan Wang, Rui Wang, Yujiu Yang, Zhaopeng Tu,
  and Shuming Shi. Encouraging divergent thinking in large language models through multi-agent
  debate. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.19118, 2023. 1, 3

Aman Madaan, Niket Tandon, Prakhar Gupta, Skyler Hallinan, Luyu Gao, Sarah Wiegreffe, Uri
 Alon, Nouha Dziri, Shrimai Prabhumoye, Yiming Yang, et al. Self-refine: Iterative refinement
 with self-feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.17651, 2023. 13


                                                 10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Joshua Maynez, Shashi Narayan, Bernd Bohnet, and Ryan McDonald. On faithfulness and factuality
  in abstractive summarization. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for
  Computational Linguistics, pp. 1906–1919, Online, July 2020. Association for Computational
  Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2020.acl-main.173. URL https://aclanthology.org/2020.
  acl-main.173. 1
Y Nakajima. Task-driven autonomous agent utilizing gpt-4, pinecone, and langchain for diverse appli-
  cations. See https://yoheinakajima. com/ta[REDACTED_API_KEY]
  and-langchain-for-diverse-applications (accessed 18 April 2023), 2023. 3
Laurie Miller Nelson. Collaborative problem solving. In Instructional-design theories and models,
  pp. 241–267. Routledge, 2013. 1
OpenAI. Gpt-4 technical report, 2023. 1
Joon Sung Park, Lindsay Popowski, Carrie Cai, Meredith Ringel Morris, Percy Liang, and Michael S
  Bernstein. Social simulacra: Creating populated prototypes for social computing systems. In
  Proceedings of the 35th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology, pp.
  1–18, 2022. 3, 13
Joon Sung Park, Joseph C O’Brien, Carrie J Cai, Meredith Ringel Morris, Percy Liang, and
  Michael S Bernstein. Generative agents: Interactive simulacra of human behavior. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2304.03442, 2023. 3
Chen Qian, Xin Cong, Cheng Yang, Weize Chen, Yusheng Su, Juyuan Xu, Zhiyuan Liu, and Maosong
  Sun. Communicative agents for software development. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.07924, 2023. 6
Chengwei Qin, Aston Zhang, Zhuosheng Zhang, Jiaao Chen, Michihiro Yasunaga, and Diyi
  Yang. Is chatgpt a general-purpose natural language processing task solver? arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2302.06476, 2023. 1
Jeremy Roschelle and Stephanie D Teasley. The construction of shared knowledge in collaborative
  problem solving. In Computer supported collaborative learning, pp. 69–97. Springer, 1995. 1
Noah Shinn, Beck Labash, and Ashwin Gopinath. Reflexion: an autonomous agent with dynamic
  memory and self-reflection. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.11366, 2023. 13
Steven A Sloman. The empirical case for two systems of reasoning. Psychological bulletin, 119(1):3,
  1996. 1
Boxin Wang, Weixin Chen, Hengzhi Pei, Chulin Xie, Mintong Kang, Chenhui Zhang, Chejian Xu,
  Zidi Xiong, Ritik Dutta, Rylan Schaeffer, et al. Decodingtrust: A comprehensive assessment of
  trustworthiness in gpt models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.11698, 2023a. 1
Peiyi Wang, Lei Li, Liang Chen, Dawei Zhu, Binghuai Lin, Yunbo Cao, Qi Liu, Tianyu Liu, and
  Zhifang Sui. Large language models are not fair evaluators. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.17926,
  2023b. 8
Zhenhailong Wang, Shaoguang Mao, Wenshan Wu, Tao Ge, Furu Wei, and Heng Ji. Unleashing
  cognitive synergy in large language models: A task-solving agent through multi-persona self-
  collaboration. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.05300, 2023c. 1, 3, 4, 6, 8, 9, 12, 13
Ross Williams, Niyousha Hosseinichimeh, Aritra Majumdar, and Navid Ghaffarzadegan. Epidemic
  modeling with generative agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.04986, 2023. 3, 13
Anita Williams Woolley, Ishani Aggarwal, and Thomas W Malone. Collective intelligence and group
  performance. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 24(6):420–424, 2015. 4
Qingyun Wu, Gagan Bansal, Jieyu Zhang, Yiran Wu, Shaokun Zhang, Erkang Zhu, Beibin Li,
  Li Jiang, Xiaoyun Zhang, and Chi Wang. Autogen: Enabling next-gen llm applications via
  multi-agent conversation framework. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.08155, 2023. 3, 4
Benfeng Xu, An Yang, Junyang Lin, Quan Wang, Chang Zhou, Yongdong Zhang, and Zhendong
  Mao. Expertprompting: Instructing large language models to be distinguished experts. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2305.14688, 2023. 3, 4


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao.
  React: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.03629,
  2022. 6, 13

Shunyu Yao, Dian Yu, Jeffrey Zhao, Izhak Shafran, Thomas L Griffiths, Yuan Cao, and Karthik
  Narasimhan. Tree of thoughts: Deliberate problem solving with large language models. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2305.10601, 2023. 8, 12

Lianmin Zheng, Wei-Lin Chiang, Ying Sheng, Siyuan Zhuang, Zhanghao Wu, Yonghao Zhuang,
  Zi Lin, Zhuohan Li, Dacheng Li, Eric Xing, et al. Judging llm-as-a-judge with mt-bench and
  chatbot arena. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.05685, 2023. 7


A        F URTHER A NALYSIS

In order to further analysis the importance of various components in AutoAgents, this section will
conduct a separate analysis of the self-refinement action, collaborative refinement action, dynamic
memory, and observers in the draft stage within AutoAgents on 20 instances 4 of Trivia Creative
Writing task and more case study.

Table 4: The ablation studies of AutoAgents on 20 instances of Trivia Creative Writing task. ∆
indicates the differences compared with Standard Prompting (first row).

                                                                         N (# trivia questions) = 5
                  Methods
                                                                   Score (%)        ∆ (v.s Standard %)
                  Standard                                              74.6               0.0%
                  CoT (Yao et al., 2023)                                66.0              -11.5%
                  SPP-Profile (Wang et al., 2023c)                      74.0              -0.01%
                  SPP (Wang et al., 2023c)                              84.4              +13.1%
                  AutoAgents w/o observers                              87.0              +16.6%
                  AutoAgents w/o self-refinement                        87.0              +16.6%
                  AutoAgents w/o collaborative refinement               88.0              +18.0%
                  AutoAgents w/o dynamic memory                         89.0              +19.3%
                  AutoAgents                                            90.0              +20.6%


Collaborative discussion is crucial for rational agent generation and plan allocation. During the
Drafting Stage, the Planner in AutoAgents engages in collaborative discussions with two Observers to
determine the optimal list of agents and the execution plan. Figure 5 illustrates the contrast between
agent generation with and without collaborative discussion. In the absence of Observer feedback,
the Planner tends to generate programmers exclusively to accomplish game development, neglecting
the holistic process of game creation. With the input and coordination of the Observers, the Planner
incorporates game design experts, UI design experts, and testing experts into the agent list. It is
evident that the agent generation under collaborative discussions is more comprehensive and more
aligned with the realistic scenarios of game development. This also corroborates the significance of
collaborative discussions for agent generation and plan allocation, which will subsequently influence
the execution outcomes.


                                                             We also need game                  We need to create Game
                      We need to create
                                                             experts to design                  Design Expert, UI/UX
                      a Programming
                                                             games and UI                       Design Expert
                      Expert to write the
                                                             experts to design                  Programming Expert,
                      game
                                                             game interfaces, …..               Debugging Expert ……
        Planner                             Agent Observer                          Planner

  (a) w/o Collaborative Discussion                           (b) w/ Collaborative Discussion
Figure 5: Comparison of whether there is a collaborative discussion in the Drafting Stage in the task
that developing Python-based software for the Tetris game.
    4
        Choose the final 20 samples from a dataset comprising 100 samples to serve as test samples.


                                                         12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Concurrently, Table 4 elucidates that in the absence of observers, there is a marked 3% reduction
in the overall performance of AutoAgents. This substantiates the imperative role of collaborative
discussions in agent generation. As depicted in Table 5, AutoAgent markedly enhances the caliber
of agent generation via collaborative discussions, a facet notably overlooked by other generative
frameworks in their consideration of agent generation quality. The empirical data presented in Table 2
and 3 further accentuate the superiority of AutoAgents when juxtaposed against counterparts like
AgentVerse and SPP.

  Table 5: Comparison of existing and proposed frameworks for multi-agent generation methods.

                                                                           Agent Generalization
 Framework                                          Application                                      Prompt Generalization
                                                                         by Multi-Agent Discussion
 Social Simulacra (Park et al., 2022)            Social Simulation                  %                         %
 Epidemic Modeling (Williams et al., 2023)       Social Simulation                  %                         %
 SSP (Wang et al., 2023c)                    General Autonomous Agents              %                         %
 AgentVerse (Chen et al., 2023a)             General Autonomous Agents              %                         %
 AutoAgents                                  General Autonomous Agents              !                         !


Enhancing single-agent through self-refinement. Self-Refinement (Madaan et al., 2023; Shinn
et al., 2023; Gou et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2023b; Huang et al., 2022; Yao et al., 2022) is a technique
that enables LLMs to “converse” with themselves, evaluate their own generation, and iteratively
improve their answers. Self-refinement has been shown to enhance the accuracy of LLMs’ outputs in
various domains (Madaan et al., 2023; Shinn et al., 2023; Gou et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2023b; Huang
et al., 2022; Yao et al., 2022). Although AutoAgents is a framework for multi-agent collaboration, it
also requires self-refinement agents to perform specialized roles for individual tasks.
Figure 6 depicts the self-refinement process of programmers’ coding. They first write a pseudo
code file and then generate the corresponding program files based on it. This refinement process
significantly ensures the validity of the output file.


              Figure 6: An example of the self-refinement process of programmers’ coding

Additionally, as shown in the results in Table 4, the performance of AutoAgents decreases by 3%
in the absence of the self-refinement action. This observation corroborates the assertion that self-
refinement is instrumental in augmenting the proficiency in trivia creative writing tasks. Furthermore,


                                                             13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


the enhancement of single agents via self-refinement plays a pivotal role in fortifying the integrity of
the overarching multi-agent framework.
Enhancing multi-agent collaboration through collaborative refinement action. For collaborative
refinement, the process resembles the collaborative dialogue mentioned above, which involves inte-
grating knowledge from different domains to accomplish tasks that demand cross-domain knowledge
fusion. The results in Table 4 demonstrate the performance when collaborative refinement is absent.
It’s observable that compared to the scenario with AutoAgents, there is a decline of 2%. Since the
necessity for multiple agents to collaborate on a single task is entirely dependent on the decision made
by the agent in the drafting phase, not all problems necessarily involve tasks that require collaborative
refinement. However, it’s evident that when this principle is omitted from the prompt’s design, there’s
a noticeable performance decrease in AutoAgents. As shown in Figure 7, during the intermediate
process, the two Agents collaborate to ensure that the output story is logically clear and continually
refine it. This also corroborates the beneficial impact of collaborative refinement in tackling complex
tasks.
Improve the effectiveness of actions by dynamic memory. Dynamic memory predominantly
addresses the requisites of specialized agents. As shown in Figure 8, the Action Observer amalgamates
pivotal data for forthcoming tasks, utilizing the historical action records archived in long-term
memory. Table 4 elucidates a 1% diminution in the efficacy of AutoAgents bereft of dynamic
memory. Quintessential insights derived from dynamic memory are primarily assimilated into the
prompt, thereby augmenting the comprehension of critical information and bolstering the operational
proficiency of actions.
Dynamic agents enhance the adaptability of complex tasks. The ability to generate dynamic agents
for various tasks is crucial for enhancing their adaptability to diverse scenarios. Figure 10 illustrates
the contrast between GPT4 and AutoAgents’ responses to open-ended questions. Unlike GPT-4,
AutoAgents can produce agents from three distinct domains, which can provide more elaborate
answers. For the trivia creative writing task in Figure 11 and 12, AutoAgents employs a four-step
approach for task decomposition. Initially, it sources the answer to the given question using a domain-
specific agent, followed by the construction of a narrative. Concurrently, the Language Expert Agent
plays a pivotal role, conducting multiple checks to verify the coherence between the narrative and the
question, thus guaranteeing the narrative’s accuracy.
Furthermore, as illustrated in Figure 9, the Action Observer orchestrates the interaction among multi-
ple generative agents. It provides a concise summary of essential information, proving instrumental
in fostering collaboration between various intelligent agents. This coordination is key to ensuring
the seamless flow of the task execution process. Collectively, these instances vividly showcase the
adaptability and efficiency of our dynamic agent generation framework in handling complex tasks.
Conversely, the prompt employed by AutoAgents exhibits a more universal nature, signifying its
capacity to acclimate to diverse tasks without necessitating bespoke customization. As Table 5
delineates, both AgentVerse 5 and SSP 6 have implemented task-specific enhancements for varied task
evaluations. In contrast, our methodology leverages a singular, unified prompt format to accommodate
an array of tasks. The commendable efficacy in open-ended question answer and trivia creative
writing tasks further corroborates the wide-ranging applicability and versatility of prompt design
within the AutoAgents framework.


B        H UMAN E VALUATION

In this section, we present the criteria for human evaluation. We instructed the volunteers, who are
responsible for assessing the quality of different feedback, to adhere to these standards.
[Text]Human Evaluation

We would like to request your feedback on the response to the user question
displayed above. Please rate the helpfulness, relevance, accuracy, level of
details of their responses.
    5
        https://github.com/OpenBMB/AgentVerse/tree/minecraft/agentverse/tasks
    6
        https://github.com/MikeWangWZHL/Solo-Performance-Prompting/tree/main/prompts


                                                   14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


     Figure 7: An example of the collaborative refinement process of trivia creative writing.



                                               15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 8: Legend of Three Knowledge Sharing Mechanisms. (a) Long-term memory focuses on
chronicling the historical trajectory of multifarious actions. (b) Short-term memory records the history
of the self-refinement or collaborative refinement phases of an individual action. (c) Dynamic memory
serves actions necessitating specialized attention extracted from the long-term memory.



Each response receives an overall score on a scale of 1 to 10, where a higher
score indicates better overall performance. Please first provide a
comprehensive explanation of your evaluation, avoiding any potential bias and
ensuring that the order in which the responses were presented does not affect
your judgment.

Output with the following format:
Evaluation evidence: <your evluation explanation here>
Score: <score>


C    D ISCUSSION

Limitations. AutoAgents exhibit remarkable knowledge acquisition and adaptability in tackling
complex tasks, but they are not flawless. One of the limitations is that they may still produce
erroneous outcomes even with dynamic role generation. This could be ascribed to the rationality
of role generation and planning arrangements. Although this framework employs collaborative
discussions to enhance the quality of role generation and planning arrangements, it still necessitates a
more effective method for recruiting teams and devising plans, and further ameliorates the quality of
role generation and planning arrangements.
Furthermore, the differences between different roles in this framework mainly hinge on variations in
prompt and tool usage, but this does not accentuate the distinctions between different expert roles.
In the future, it is imperative to explore how to incorporate more expert knowledge and create more
professional role agents, in order to improve the adaptability of professional agents to professional
problems.
Currently, AutoAgents rely heavily on the powerful logical and textual capabilities of GPT-4, and
their adaptability to some earlier LLMs is poor. In the future, it is essential to explore more reasonable
prompts to improve the adaptability of AutoAgents to different LLMs.
Future Work. Cooperation among multiple agents requires dynamic adaptation and communication.
The initial plan generated by LLMs may not suffice to achieve the desired outcomes, resulting in
erroneous final output results. Hence, future multi-agent systems need to swiftly detect and rectify
errors and adjust their plans dynamically to align with the desired outcomes.
The memory capacity of existing agents is limited by the number of tokens in LLMs. How to devise
a high-quality memory mechanism that enables efficient retrieval and storage of memory by agents
remains an open question.


                                                   16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


         Figure 9: An example of the coordination process for the Acton Observer agent.



                                              17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                   Figure 10: An example of the Open-ended Question Answer.


The professional skills of the generated agents are effective, but they can be improved by retraining
or other mechanisms. Alternatively, an Agent Bank can be established to enable the invocation of
professional agents on demand. More professional agent construction is still worthy of exploration.

D     P ROMPTS
In this section, we present the prompts of five components in our framework: Planner, Plan Observer,
Role Observer, Action Observer, and Custom Agent. These prompts are designed to elicit the desired
behaviors and responses from the agents in different scenarios and tasks.

D.1   P LANNER

The prompt design principles outlined in the template focus on creating and utilizing specialized
LLM-based agent roles to solve complex tasks and problems. Here’s a summary of these principles:
1. Understanding and Breaking Down Tasks: The first step involves comprehensively understand-
ing, analyzing, and deconstructing the given task or problem.
2. Utilization of Existing Expert Roles:

       • Fully leverage existing expert roles suited to the problem.
       • Ensure that these roles have cooperative or dependent relationships.
       • Output the details of selected roles in JSON format, including their original information.

3. Creation of New Expert Roles:

       • Avoid duplication of functions in new roles.
       • New roles should have clear names, detailed descriptions, domain expertise, available tools,
         execution suggestions, and prompt templates.
       • Ensure each new expert role has a distinct responsibility and domain of expertise.


                                                 18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


              Figure 11: (Page 1) An example of the Trivia Creative Writing task.


                                              19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


              Figure 12: (Page 2) An example of the Trivia Creative Writing task.


                                              20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


       • Specify the goals, constraints, and toolset for each new role.
       • Provide execution suggestions and develop prompt templates for each new role.
       • Output details of new roles in JSON format, following a specific structure.

4. Creation of Detailed Execution Plan:

       • Develop a comprehensive plan with multiple steps addressing the problem.
       • Assign at least one expert role to each step, detailing their contributions and collaborations.
       • Provide detailed descriptions for each step, including expected outputs and inputs for
         subsequent steps.
       • Include a final independent step for a language expert to provide a detailed response to the
         user’s question.
       • Present the execution plan as a numbered list, indicating the expert roles involved in each
         step.

This structured approach ensures a systematic and detailed resolution of tasks, leveraging the special-
ized expertise of various LLM agents.
[Prompt]Planner

PROMPT_TEMPLATE = '''
-----
You are a manager and an expert-level ChatGPT prompt engineer with expertise
in multiple fields. Your goal is to break down tasks by creating multiple LLM
agents, assign them roles, analyze their dependencies, and provide a detailed
execution plan. You should continuously improve the role list and plan based
on the suggestions in the History section.

# Question or Task
{context}

# Existing Expert Roles
{existing_roles}

# History
{history}

# Steps
You will come up with solutions for any task or problem by following these steps:
1. You should first understand, analyze, and break down the human's problem/task.
2. According to the problem, existing expert roles and the toolset ({tools}), you
will select the existing expert roles that are needed to solve the problem. You
should act as an expert-level ChatGPT prompt engineer and planner with expertise
in multiple fields, so that you can better develop a problem-solving plan and
provide
the best answer. You should follow these principles when selecting existing expert
roles:
2.1. Make full use of the existing expert roles to solve the problem.
2.2. Follow the requirements of the existing expert roles. Make sure to select the
existing expert roles that have cooperative or dependent relationships.
2.3. You MUST output the details of the selected existing expert roles in JSON blob
format. Specifically, the JSON of each selected existing expert role should include
its original information.
3. According to the problem, existing expert roles and the toolset ({tools}), you
will create additional expert roles that are needed to solve the problem. You
should act as an expert-level ChatGPT prompt engineer and planner with expertise in
multiple fields, so that you can better develop a problem-solving plan and provide
the best answer.


                                                  21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


You should follow these principles when creating additional expert roles:
3.1. The newly created expert role should not have duplicate functions with any
existing expert role. If there are duplicates, you do not need to create this role.
3.2. Each new expert role should include a name, a detailed description of their
area of expertise, available tools, execution suggestions, and prompt templates.
3.3. Determine the number and domains of expertise of each new expert role based on
the content of the problem. Please make sure each expert has a clear responsibility
and do not let one expert do too many tasks. The description of their area of
expertise should be detailed so that the role understands what they are capable of
doing.
3.4. Determine the names of each new expert role based on their domains of
expertise. The name should express the characteristics of expert roles.
3.5. Determine the goals of each new expert role based on their domains of
expertise. The goal MUST indicate the primary responsibility or objective that the
role aims to achieve.
3.6. Determine the constraints of each new expert role based on their domains of
expertise. The constraints MUST specify limitations or principles that the role
must adhere to when performing actions.
3.7. Determine the list of tools that each new expert needs to use based on the
existing tool set. Each new expert role can have multiple tools or no tool at all.
You should NEVER create any new tool and only use existing tools.
3.8. Provide some suggestions for each agent to execute the task, including but not
limited to a clear output, extraction of historical information, and suggestions
for execution steps.
3.9. Generate the prompt template required for calling each new expert role
according to its name, description, goal, constraints, tools and suggestions. A
good prompt template should first explain the role it needs to play (name), its
area of expertise (description), the primary responsibility or objective that the
role aims to achieve (goal), limitations or principles that the role must adhere to
when performing actions (constraints), and suggestions for agent to execute the
task (suggestions). The prompt MUST follow the following format "You are
[description], named [name]. Your goal is [goal], and your constraints are
[constraints]. You could follow these execution suggestions: [suggestions].".
3.10. You must add a language expert role who does not require any tools and is
responsible for summarizing the results of all steps.
3.11. You MUST output the details of created new expert roles in JSON blob format.
Specifically, The JSON of new expert roles should have a `name` key (the expert
role name), a `description` key (the description of the expert role's expertise
domain), a `tools` key (with the name of the tools used by the expert role), a
`suggestions` key (some suggestions for each agent to execute the task), and a
`prompt` key (the prompt template required to call the expert role). Each JSON blob
should only contain one expert role, and do NOT return a list of multiple expert
roles. Here is an example of a valid JSON blob:
{{{{
    "name": “ROLE NAME",
    "description": "ROLE DESCRIPTONS",
    "tools": ["ROLE TOOL"],
    "suggestions": "EXECUTION SUGGESTIONS",
    "prompt": "ROLE PROMPT",
}}}}
4. Finally, based on the content of the problem/task and the expert roles, provide
a detailed execution plan with the required steps to solve the problem.
4.1. The execution plan should consist of multiple steps that solve the problem
progressively. Make the plan as detailed as possible to ensure the accuracy and
completeness of the task. You need to make sure that the summary of all the steps
can answer the question or complete the task.
4.2. Each step should assign at least one expert role to carry it out. If a step
involves multiple expert roles, you need to specify the contributions of each
expert role and how they collaborate to produce integrated results.


                                             22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


4.3. The description of each step should provide sufficient details and explain how
the steps are connected to each other.
4.4. The description of each step must also include the expected output of that
step and indicate what inputs are needed for the next step. The expected output of
the current step and the required input for the next step must be consistent with
each other. Sometimes, you may need to extract information or values before using
them. Otherwise, the next step will lack the necessary input.
4.5. The final step should always be an independent step that says `Language
Expert: Based on the previous steps, please provide a helpful, relevant, accurate,
and detailed response to the user's original question: XXX`.
4.6. Output the execution plan as a numbered list of steps. For each step, please
begin with a list of the expert roles that are involved in performing it.

# Format example
Your final output should ALWAYS in the following format:
{format_example}

# Suggestions
{suggestions}
-----
'''

D.2   AGENT O BSERVER

The prompt’s design principles for the Agent Observer are centered on evaluating and refining expert
roles for problem-solving. Key aspects include:
1. Understanding and Analyzing the Task: Comprehensive analysis of the problem or task.
2. Evaluation of Selected Expert Roles: Ensuring selected roles are effective, meet the problem’s
requirements, and their information (name, description, requirements) is accurately represented in a
JSON format.
3. Review of Created Expert Roles:

      • Avoid creating roles with overlapping functions with existing ones.
      • Include complete information for each new role: name, detailed expertise area, tools needed,
        execution suggestions, and a prompt template.
      • Assign clear, specific expertise domains to new roles, avoiding overly broad or multiple
        responsibilities.
      • Name new roles meaningfully, reflecting their domain and function.
      • Define clear goals and constraints for each new role, aligned with their expertise and the
        problem’s requirements.
      • Select appropriate existing tools for each role, without creating new ones.
      • Provide effective execution suggestions and create structured prompt templates for each
        role.
      • Include a language expert role for summarizing results.
      • Reporting Inspection Results: Summarize findings, clearly stating any errors or improvement
        suggestions, or indicate ’No Suggestions’ if none are found.

This approach ensures a thorough and systematic evaluation of expert roles for enhanced problem-
solving efficiency.
[Prompt]Agent Observer

PROMPT_TEMPLATE = '''
-----
You are a ChatGPT executive observer expert skilled in identifying problem-solving


                                                23
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


plans and errors in the execution process. Your goal is to check if the created
Expert Roles following the requirements and give your improvement suggestions. You
can refer to historical suggestions in the History section, but try not to repeat
them.

# Question or Task
{question}

# Existing Expert Roles
{existing_roles}

# Selected Roles List
{selected_roles}

# Created Roles List
{created_roles}

# History
{history}

# Steps
You will check the selected roles list and created roles list by following these
steps:
1. You should first understand, analyze, and break down the human's problem/task.
2. According to the problem, existing expert roles and the toolset ({tools}), you
should check the selected expert roles.
2.1. You should make sure that the selected expert roles can help you solve the
problem effectively and efficiently.
2.2. You should make sure that the selected expert roles meet the requirements of
the problem and have cooperative or dependent relationships with each other.
2.3. You should make sure that the JSON blob of each selected expert role contains
its original information, such as name, description, and requirements.
3. According to the problem, existing expert roles and the toolset ({tools}), you
should check the new expert roles that you have created.
3.1. You should avoid creating any new expert role that has duplicate functions
with any existing expert role. If there are duplicates, you should use the existing
expert role instead.
3.2. You should include the following information for each new expert role: a name,
a detailed description of their area of expertise, a list of tools that they need
to use, some suggestions for executing the task, and a prompt template for calling
them.
3.3. You should assign a clear and specific domain of expertise to each new expert
role based on the content of the problem. You should not let one expert role do too
many tasks or have vague responsibilities. The description of their area of
expertise should be detailed enough to let them know what they are capable of
doing.
3.4. You should give a meaningful and expressive name to each new expert role based
on their domain of expertise. The name should reflect the characteristics and
functions of the expert role.
3.5. You should state a clear and concise goal for each new expert role based on
their domain of expertise. The goal must indicate the primary responsibility or
objective that the expert role aims to achieve.
3.6. You should specify any limitations or principles that each new expert role
must adhere to when performing actions. These are called constraints and they must
be consistent with the problem requirements and the domain of expertise.
3.7. You should select the appropriate tools that each new expert role needs to use
from the existing tool set. Each new expert role can have multiple tools or no tool
at all, depending on their functions and needs. You should never create any new
tool and only use the existing ones.


                                             24
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


3.8. You should provide some helpful suggestions for each new expert role to
execute the task effectively and efficiently. The suggestions should include but
not limited to a clear output format, extraction of relevant information from
previous steps, and guidance for execution steps.
3.9. You should create a prompt template for calling each new expert role according
to its name, description, goal, constraints, tools and suggestions. A good prompt
template should first explain the role it needs to play (name), its area of
expertise (description), the primary responsibility or objective that it aims to
achieve (goal), any limitations or principles that it must adhere to when
performing actions (constraints), and some helpful suggestions for executing the
task (suggestions). The prompt must follow this format: “You are [description],
named [name]. Your goal is [goal], and your constraints are [constraints]. You
could follow these execution suggestions: [suggestions].”.
3.10. You should always have a language expert role who does not require any tools
and is responsible for summarizing the results of all steps in natural language.
3.11. You should follow the JSON blob format for creating new expert roles.
Specifically, The JSON of new expert roles should have a `name` key (the expert
role name), a `description` key (the description of the expert role's expertise
domain), a `tools` key (with the name of the tools used by the expert role), a
`suggestions` key (some suggestions for each agent to execute the task), and a
`prompt` key (the prompt template required to call the expert role). Each JSON blob
should only contain one expert role, and do NOT return a list of multiple expert
roles. Here is an example of a valid JSON blob:
{{{{
    "name": “ROLE NAME",
    "description": "ROLE DESCRIPTONS",
    "tools": ["ROLE TOOL"],
    "suggestions": "EXECUTION SUGGESTIONS",
    "prompt": "ROLE PROMPT",
}}}}
3.12. You need to check if the tool contains other tools that are not in the tool
({tools}), and if they do, they should be removed.
4. Output a summary of the inspection results above. If you find any errors or have
any suggestions, please state them clearly in the Suggestions section. If there are
no errors or suggestions, you MUST write 'No Suggestions' in the Suggestions
section.

# Format example
Your final output should ALWAYS in the following format:
{format_example}

-----
'''

D.3     P LAN O BSERVER

The design principles for the Plan Observer in this prompt focus on evaluating and improving an
Execution Plan. The key elements include:
1. Understanding the Problem: Begin with a thorough understanding and analysis of the human’s
problem.
2. Reviewing the Execution Plan:

        • Ensure the plan contains multiple detailed steps that progressively solve the problem, with a
          summary that addresses the task or question.
        • Verify that each step assigns at least one expert role, detailing their contributions and
          collaboration for integrated results.
        • Provide sufficient details in each step, explaining how the steps interconnect.


                                                  25
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


      • Include in each step’s description its expected output and the inputs needed for the next step,
        ensuring consistency and completeness.
      • Confirm that the final step involves a language expert responding to the original question.
      • Outputting Inspection Results: Summarize the inspection findings, stating any errors or
        improvement suggestions clearly, or indicate ’No Suggestions’ if none are found.

This approach ensures a systematic and thorough evaluation of the Execution Plan to enhance
problem-solving effectiveness.
[Prompt]Plan Observer

PROMPT_TEMPLATE = '''
-----
You are a ChatGPT executive observer expert skilled in identifying problem-solving
plans and errors in the execution process. Your goal is to check if the Execution
Plan following the requirements and give your improvement suggestions. You can
refer to historical suggestions in the History section, but try not to repeat them.

# Question or Task
{context}

# Role List
{roles}

# Execution Plan
{plan}

# History
{history}

# Steps
You will check the Execution Plan by following these steps:
1. You should first understand, analyze, and disassemble the human's problem.
2. You should check if the execution plan meets the following requirements:
2.1. The execution plan should consist of multiple steps that solve the problem
progressively. Make the plan as detailed as possible to ensure the accuracy and
completeness of the task. You need to make sure that the summary of all the steps
can answer the question or complete the task.
2.2. Each step should assign at least one expert role to carry it out. If a step
involves multiple expert roles, you need to specify the contributions of each
expert role and how they collaborate to produce integrated results.
2.3. The description of each step should provide sufficient details and explain how
the steps are connected to each other.
2.4. The description of each step must also include the expected output of that
step and indicate what inputs are needed for the next step. The expected output of
the current step and the required input for the next step must be consistent with
each other. Sometimes, you may need to extract information or values before using
them. Otherwise, the next step will lack the necessary input.
2.5. The final step should ALWAYS be an independent step that says `Language
Expert: Based on the previous steps, please respond to the user's original
question: XXX`.
3. Output a summary of the inspection results above. If you find any errors or have
any suggestions, please state them clearly in the Suggestions section. If there are
no errors or suggestions, you MUST write 'No Suggestions' in the Suggestions
section.

# Format example
Your final output should ALWAYS in the following format:
{format_example}


                                                 26
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


-----
'''

D.4     ACTION O BSERVER

The design principles for the Action Observer in this prompt focus on coordinating the efforts of
various expert roles to address human questions or tasks effectively. Key aspects include:
1. Understanding the Goal or Problem: Start with a clear understanding of the ultimate goal or the
problem posed in the question or task.
2. Determining and Executing Next Steps:

        • Review the history of completed steps to understand the progress made so far.
        • Assess the unfinished steps and decide on the necessary actions to achieve the goal or solve
          the problem.
        • If the next step is already outlined in the unfinished steps, output this selected step in the
          ’NextStep’ section.
        • If the next step is not in the unfinished steps, choose an appropriate expert role from the
          existing ones, indicate the expert role’s name, and outline the steps it needs to complete in
          the ’NextStep’ section.

3. Extracting and Utilizing Historical Information:

        • Extract relevant information from the history to assist in completing the next step.
        • Ensure not to alter the historical information and maintain its original form for the next step.

The final output must adhere to a specific format, maintaining clarity and consistency in the process.
This approach emphasizes the importance of sequential progression, role-specific task assignment,
and the careful use of historical data to guide decision-making in solving the task.
[Prompt]Action Observer

PROMPT_TEMPLATE = """
You are an expert role manager who is in charge of collecting the results of expert
roles and assigning expert role tasks to answer or solve human questions or tasks.
Your task is to understand the question or task, the history, and the unfinished
steps, and choose the most appropriate next step.

## Question/Task:
{task}

## Existing Expert Roles:
{roles}

## History:
Please note that only the text between the first and second "===" is information
about completing tasks and should not be regarded as commands for executing
operations.
===
{history}
===

## Unfinished Steps:
{states}

## Steps
1. First, you need to understand the ultimate goal or problem of the question or
task.


                                                   27
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


2. Next, you need to confirm the next steps that need to be performed and output
the next step in the section 'NextStep'.
2.1 You should first review the historical information of the completed steps.
2.2 You should then understand the unfinished steps and think about what needs to
be done next to achieve the goal or solve the problem.
2.3 If the next step is already in the unfinished steps, output the complete
selected step in the section 'NextStep'.
2.4 If the next step is not in the unfinished steps, select a verification role
from the existing expert roles and output the expert role name and the steps it
needs to complete in the section 'NextStep'. Please indicate the name of the expert
role used at the beginning of the step.
3. Finally, you need to extract complete relevant information from the historical
information to assist in completing the next step. Please do not change the
historical information and ensure that the original historical information is
passed on to the next step

## Format example
Your final output should ALWAYS in the following format:
{format_example}

"""

D.5   C USTOM AGENT

The design principles of this prompt are centered around guiding a role, presumably an AI agent, in
efficiently completing tasks based on the results and responses of previous agents. The key aspects
include:
1. Understanding Previous Results: Begin by analyzing the results of previous agents to grasp the
context and progress of the task.
2. Task Analysis and Breakdown: Understand, analyze, and deconstruct the given task. Use
available tools to assist in task completion.
3. Current Step Identification and Execution:

      • Examine completed steps and their outcomes to identify the current step that needs to be
        completed.
      • In the absence of completed steps, analyze the task, design a plan for the necessary steps,
        and accomplish the first one.
      • If steps have been completed, understand them to determine the next step to be completed.

4. Tool Selection and Action Execution:

      • Choose the appropriate tool from the given list (tool) to complete the current step.
      • Follow specific format guidelines when using tools like ’Write File’.
      • Once all steps are completed, use the ’Final Output’ action to summarize each step’s outputs,
        ensuring the final output is detailed, comprehensive, and solves the task.

5. Maintaining Format Consistency: Ensure that the final output adheres to the given format
example, prioritizing helpfulness, relevance, accuracy, and detail.
This approach emphasizes systematic progression through tasks, leveraging tools and prior work, and
producing comprehensive and detailed final outputs.
[Prompt]Custom Agent

PROMPT_TEMPLATE = '''
-----
{role} Base on the following execution result of the previous agents and completed


                                                28
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


steps and their responses, complete the following tasks as best you can.

# Task {context}

# Suggestions
{suggestions}

# Execution Result of Previous Agents {previous}

# Completed Steps and Responses {completed_steps}

You have access to the following tools:
# Tools {tool}

# Steps
1. You should understand and analyze the execution result of the previous agents.
2. You should understand, analyze, and break down the task and use tools to assist
you in completing it.
3. You should analyze the completed steps and their outputs and identify the
current step to be completed, then output the current step in the section
'CurrentStep'.
3.1 If there are no completed steps, you need to analyze, examine, and decompose
this task. Then, you should solve the above tasks step by step and design a plan
for the necessary steps, and accomplish the first one.
3.2 If there are completed steps, you should grasp the completed steps and
determine the current step to be completed.
4. You need to choose which Action (one of the [{tool}]) to complete the current
step.
4.1 If you need use the tool 'Write File', the 'ActionInput' MUST ALWAYS in the
following format:
```
>>>file name<<<
>>>>>
file content
<<<<<
```
4.2 If you have completed all the steps required to finish the task, use the action
'Final Output' and summarize the outputs of each step in the section 'ActionInput'.
Provide a detailed and comprehensive final output that solves the task in this
section. Please try to retain the information from each step in the section
'ActionInput'. The final output in this section should be helpful, relevant,
accurate, and detailed.


# Format example
Your final output should ALWAYS in the following format:
{format_example}
-----
'''

Building upon the custom agent’s framework, a critical aspect of the refinement process is the
configuration of ’completed steps’ in step 3.1. The specific procedural steps for self-refinement and
collaborative refinement are outlined as follows:
Self-refinement Action: During its first execution, each custom agent omits the outlined step 3.1 and
proceeds to complete the remaining steps. If the task’s criteria are not met or the step limit has not
been reached, the outcomes from this execution are incorporated as ’completed steps’ in the prompt
for the next iteration of the task. In subsequent executions, the custom agent will execute all steps,
continuing this process until the task is deemed successfully completed.


                                                 29
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Collaborative Refinement Action: This mirrors the self-refinement action, yet involves active
collaboration between multiple agents. For instance, when agents A and B collaborate on a task,
A initially bypasses step 3.1 in its first execution. Upon completion, B incorporates A’s results as
’completed steps’ and then executes all steps. In later cycles, A and B alternate their roles in the task,
perpetuating this collaborative cycle until a joint conclusion is reached.


                                                   30
