Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


T OWARDS U NDERSTANDING THE E FFECT OF P RE -
TRAINING L ABEL G RANULARITY

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                             A BSTRACT

         In this paper, we study how the granularity of pretraining labels affects the gen-
         eralization of deep neural networks in image classification tasks. We focus on
         the έΑεfine-to-coarseέΑζ transfer learning setting, where the pretraining label space
         is more fine-grained than that of the target problem. Empirically, we show that
         pretraining on the leaf labels of ImageNet21k produces better transfer results on
         ImageNet1k than pretraining on other coarser granularity levels, which supports
         the common practice used in the community. Theoretically, we explain the benefit
         of fine-grained pretraining by proving that, for a data distribution satisfying certain
         hierarchy conditions, 1) coarse-grained pretraining only allows a neural network
         to learn the έΑεcommonέΑζ or έΑεeasy-to-learnέΑζ features well, while 2) fine-grained pre-
         training helps the network learn the έΑεrarerέΑζ or έΑεfine-grainedέΑζ features in addition
         to the common ones, thus improving its accuracy on hard downstream test sam-
         ples in which common features are missing or weak in strength. Furthermore,
         we perform comprehensive experiments using the label hierarchies of iNaturalist
         2021 and observe that the following conditions, in addition to proper choice of
         label granularity, enable the transfer to work well in practice: 1) the pretraining
         dataset needs to have a meaningful label hierarchy, and 2) the pretraining and
         target label functions need to align well.


1   I NTRODUCTION

Modern deep neural networks (DNNs) are highly effective at image classification. In addition to
architectures, regularization techniques, and training methods Pouyanfar et al. (2018); Khan et al.
(2020); LeCun & Bengio (1998); Krizhevsky et al. (2012); Sutskever et al. (2013); Kingma & Ba
(2015); He et al. (2016); Simonyan & Zisserman (2015); Szegedy et al. (2015); Xie et al. (2017);
Ioffe & Szegedy (2015); Srivastava et al. (2014); Zhang et al. (2019), the availability of large datasets
of labeled natural images significantly contributes to the training of powerful DNN-based feature
extractors, which can then be used for downstream image classification tasks Deng et al. (2009);
Krizhevsky (2009); Sun et al. (2017); Zhou et al. (2018); Van Horn et al. (2018). DNN mod-
els, especially the state-of-the-art vision transformers, are well-known to require pre-training on
large datasets for effective (downstream) generalization Dosovitskiy et al. (2021); He et al. (2016);
Krizhevsky et al. (2012). However, another important dataset property that is often overlooked is
the high granularity of the label space: there is limited understanding of why such large pretraining
label granularity is necessary, especially when it can be several orders of magnitude greater than the
granularity of the target dataset.
Studying the effect of pretraining label granularity in general is a challenging task, due to the wide
variety of applications in which transfer learning is used. To make the problem more tractable,
we focus on the following setting. First, we adopt the simplest possible transfer methodology:
pretraining a DNN on an image classification task and then finetuning the model for a target problem
using the pretrained backbone. Second, we focus on the έΑεfine-to-coarseέΑζ transfer direction, where
the source task has more classes than the target task. This transfer setting is common in the empirical
transfer learning works, especially for large models Dosovitskiy et al. (2021); Radford et al. (2021);
Steiner et al. (2022); Zhang et al. (2021); Ridnik et al. (2021).
In this setting, we empirically observed an interesting relationship between the pretraining label
granularity and DNN generalization, which can be roughly summarized as follows:


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    Under certain basic conditions on the pretraining and target label functions, DNNs pretrained at
    reasonably high label granularities tend to generalize better in downstream classification tasks than
    those pretrained at low label granularities.


Figure 1 shows an example of this relationship in the
transfer setting of ImageNet21kέΗΤImageNet1k. Further                                        82


                                                               ImageNet1k validation accuracy
details of this experiment are presented in Section 5.1
and the appendix. In this figure, we observe an increase                                   80
in the networkέΑβs validation accuracy on the target dataset
                                                                                           78
when the pretraining label granularity increases. This
indicates that the pretraining label granularity influences                                76
the features learnt by the neural network, because after
pretraining on ImageNet21k, only the feature extractor                                     74          Baseline, trained on ImageNet1k
is used for finetuning on ImageNet1k.                                                                  WordNet hierarchy, ImageNet21k
                                                                                                102             103               104
Closer examination of Figure 1 suggests that the fea-                                             Number of classes (pretraining)
tures learned by a DNN pretrained at lower granularities
already allow it to classify a significant portion of the         Figure 1: ImageNet21kέΗΤImageNet1k
dataset, and finer-grained pretraining brings incremen-           transfer using a ViT-B/16 model. Black
tal improvements to the networkέΑβs accuracy. This sug-             line: pretrained on the WordNet hierar-
gests two things: first, finer-grained pretraining helps the      chy of IN21k, finetuned on IN1k. Red
DNN learn more features or certain features better than           dotted line: baseline, trained and eval-
pretraining at lower granularities; second, these έΑεfine-          uated on IN1k. When the pretraining
grained featuresέΑζ potentially help the DNN classify a             number of classes is έΙ╝ 103 , even though
small set of samples that are too hard for a DNN pre-             IN21k has about 10 times the samples of
trained at lower granularities. These observations sug-           IN1k, the finetuned networkέΑβs accuracy
gest a correspondence between label hierarchy and fea-            is hardly better than the baselineέΑβs.
ture learnability, similar in spirit to the multi-view data
property pioneered by Allen-Zhu & Li (2023).
Our major findings and contributions are as follows.

    έΑλ (Theoretical Analysis) We provide a theoretical explanation for the empirical observation above.
      Specifically, we prove mathematically that, for a data distribution satisfying certain hierarchy
      conditions, coarse-grained pretraining only allows a neural network to learn the έΑεcommonέΑζ or
      έΑεeasy-to-learnέΑζ features well, while fine-grained pretraining helps the network learn the έΑεrarerέΑζ
      or έΑεfine-grainedέΑζ features in addition to the common ones, thus improving its accuracy on hard
      samples where common features are missing or weak in strength.
    έΑλ (Empirical Analysis) We show that pretraining on the leaf labels of ImageNet21k produced bet-
      ter transfer results on ImageNet1k than pretraining on other coarser granularity levels, which
      supports the common practice used in the community. Furthermore, we conducted comprehen-
      sive experiments using the label hierarchies of iNaturalist 2021, and observed that the following
      conditions, in addition to proper choice of label granularity, enable the transfer to work well in
      practice: 1) the pretraining dataset needs to have a meaningful label hierarchy, 2) the pretraining
      and target label functions need to align well.


2      R ELATED W ORK

2.1     T HEORETICAL WORK

At the theory front, there has been a growing interest in explaining the success of DNNs through the
lens of implicit regularization and bias towards έΑεsimplerέΑζ solutions, which can prevent overfitting
even when DNNs are highly overparameterized Lyu et al. (2021); Kalimeris et al. (2019); Ji &
Telgarsky (2019); De Palma et al. (2019); Huh et al. (2017). However, there is also a competing view
that DNNs can learn overly simple solutions, known as έΑεshortcut learningέΑζ, which can achieve high
training and testing accuracy on in-distribution data but generalize poorly to challenging downstream
tasks Geirhos et al. (2020); Shah et al. (2020); Pezeshki et al. (2021). To our knowledge, Shah et al.
(2020); Pezeshki et al. (2021) are the closest works to ours, as they both demonstrate that DNNs


                                                     2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


tend to perform shortcut learning and respond weakly to features that have a weak έΑεpresenceέΑζ in the
training data. Our work differs from Shah et al. (2020); Pezeshki et al. (2021) in several key ways.
On the practical side, we focus on how the pretraining label space affects classification generaliza-
tion, while Shah et al. (2020); Pezeshki et al. (2021) primarily focus on demonstrating that simplicity
bias can be harmful to generalization. Even though Pezeshki et al. (2021) proposed a regularization
technique to mitigate this, their experiments are too small-scale. On the theory side, Pezeshki et al.
(2021) use the neural tangent kernel (NTK) model, which is unsuitable for analyzing our transfer-
learning type problem because the feature extractor of an NTK model barely changes after pretrain-
ing. The theoretical setting in Shah et al. (2020) is more limited than ours because they use the hinge
loss while we use a more standard exponential-tailed cross-entropy loss. Additionally, our data dis-
tribution assumptions are more realistic, as they capture the hierarchy in natural images, which has
direct impact on the (downstream) generalization power of the pretrained model, according to our
results.
Our theoretical analysis is inspired by a recent line of work that analyzes the feature learning dy-
namics of neural networks. This line of work tracks how the hidden neurons of shallow nonlinear
neural networks evolve to solve dictionary-learning-like problems Allen-Zhu & Li (2022; 2023);
Shen et al. (2022b). In particular, our work adopts a multi-view approach to the data distribution,
which was first proposed in Allen-Zhu & Li (2023), while we initialize our network in a similar
way to Allen-Zhu & Li (2022). However, the learning problems we analyze and the results we aim
to show are significantly different from the existing literature. Therefore, we need to derive the
gradient descent dynamics of the neural network from scratch.


2.2   E XPERIMENTAL WORK

There is a growing body of empirical research on how to improve classification accuracy by manip-
ulating the (pre-)training label space. One line of research focuses on using fine-grained labels to
improve DNNsέΑβ semantic understanding of natural images and their robustness in downstream tasks
Mahajan et al. (2018); Singh et al. (2022); Yan et al. (2020); Shnarch et al. (2022); Juan et al. (2020);
Yang et al. (2021); Chen et al. (2018); Ridnik et al. (2021); Son et al. (2023); Ngiam et al. (2018);
Cui et al. (2018). For example, Mahajan et al. (2018); Singh et al. (2022) use noisy hashtags from
Instagram as pretraining labels, Yan et al. (2020); Shnarch et al. (2022) apply clustering on the data
first and then treat the cluster IDs as pretraining labels, Juan et al. (2020) use the queries from image
search results, Yang et al. (2021) apply image transformations such as rotation to augment the label
space, and Chen et al. (2018); Ridnik et al. (2021) include fine-grained manual hierarchies in their
pretraining processes. Our experimental results corroborate the utility of pretraining on fine-grained
label space. However, we focus on analyzing the operating regime of this transfer method, specifi-
cally how pretraining label granularity, label function alignment, and training set size influence the
quality of the model. We show that this transfer method only works well within a specific operating
regime.
Another line of research focuses on exploiting the hierarchical structures present in (human-
generated) label space to improve classification accuracy at the most fine-grained level Yan et al.
(2015); Zhu & Bain (2017); Goyal & Ghosh (2020); Sun et al. (2017); Zelikman et al. (2022); Silla
& Freitas (2011); Shkodrani et al. (2021); Bilal et al. (2017); Goo et al. (2016). For example, Yan
et al. (2015) adapt the network architecture to learn super-classes at each hierarchical level, Zhu &
Bain (2017) add hierarchical losses in the hierarchical classification task, Goyal & Ghosh (2020)
propose a hierarchical curriculum loss for curriculum learning. In contrast, our work focuses on the
influence of label granularity on the modelέΑβs generalization to target tasks with a coarser label space
than the pretraining one.



3     P ROBLEM F ORMULATION AND I NTUITION

In this section, we introduce the relevant notations and training methodologies, and discuss our
intuition on how label granularity influences DNN feature learning.


                                                   3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


3.1   N OTATIONS AND METHODOLOGY

For a DNN-based classifier, given input image X, we can write its (pre-logit) output for class c as
                                              Fc (X) = έθρac , h(╬α; X)έθσ                                       (1)
where ac is the linear classifier for class c, h(╬α; ┬╖) is the network backbone with parameter ╬α.
In the transfer learning setting, we denote the sets of input samples for the target and source datasets
as X tgt and X src , and the corresponding sets of labels as Y tgt and Y src , respectively. A dataset can be
                                                                                   src       src    src
represented as D = (X , Y). For instance, the source training dataset is Dtrain        = (Xtrain , Ytrain ). The
                                                           src      tgt    tgt
relevant training and testing datasets are denoted as Dtrain , Dtrain , Dtest . Finally, the granularity of a
label set is denoted as G(Y), which represents the total number of classes.
Our transfer learning methodology is as follows. We first pretrain a neural network Fc (┬╖) =
                                                        src
έθρac , h(╬α; ┬╖)έθσ from random initialization using Dtrain      (typically with early stopping). This gives
                                           src                                                        tgt
us the pretrained feature extractor h(╬αtrain ; ┬╖). We then either linear probe or finetune it using Dtrain ,
                     tgt                                                    tgt                     tgt
and evaluate it on Dtest . In contrast, the baseline is simply trained on Dtrain and evaluated on Dtest .

3.2   H OW DOES THE PRETRAINING LABEL GRANULARITY INFLUENCE FEATURE LEARNING ?

To make our discussion in this subsection more concrete, let us consider an example. Suppose we
                                                                    src
have a set of pretraining images that consist of cats and dogs, Dtrain  = Dcat έΙς Ddog . The target
            tgt    tgt
problem (Dtrain , Dtest ) requires the DNN to identify whether the animal in the image is a cat or a
dog.
Intuitively, we can say that a group of images belongs to a class because they share certain visual
έΑεfeaturesέΑζ that are absent, or weak in all other classes. At the coarsest cat-versus-dog hierarchy
level, common cat features distinguish cat images from dog ones; these features are also the most
noticeable because they appear most frequently in the dataset. However, humans can also define
fine-grained classes of cats and dogs based on their breeds. This means that each subclass has its
own unique visual features that are only dominant within that subclass. This leads to an interesting
observation: fine-grained features may be rarer in the dataset, making them more difficult to notice.
We illustrate this observation in Figure 2.

                                   X4       Cat, common            X4       Dog, common
                                        X2 Cat, fine-grained            X2 Dog, fine-grained


                         Persian                                                          Poodle


                        Siamese                                                            Husky


                                        CAT                                     DOG


Figure 2: A simplified symbolic representation of the cat versus dog problem. The common features
(green disk and blue triangle) appear more frequently, thus are more noticeable than the fine-grained
features in the dataset. Furthermore, the learner can approximate the solution to the έΑεcat or dogέΑζ
problem by simply learning the common features.

Now suppose the pretraining label assignment is the binary έΑεcat versus dogέΑζ task. An intelligent
learner can take the arduous route of learning both the common and hard-to-notice fine-grained
features in the two classes. However, the learner can also take έΑεshortcutsέΑζ by learning only the
common features in each class to achieve low training loss. This latter form of learning can harm
the networkέΑβs generalization in downstream classification tasks because the network can be easily
misled by the distracting irrelevant patterns in the image when the common features are weak in
signal strength. One strategy to force the learner to learn the rarer features well is to explicitly label
the fine-grained classes. This means that within each fine-grained class, the fine-grained features


                                                               4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


become as easy to notice as the common features. This forces the network to learn the fine-grained
features to solve the classification problem.

4     T HEORY OF L ABEL G RANULARITY
4.1   S OURCE TRAINING DATA DISTRIBUTION
                                        src
We assume that an input sample in Dtrain    consists of P disjoint
patches of dimension d, in symbols, an input sample X =
(x1 , x2 , ..., xP ) with xp έΙΙ Rd . We consider the setting where             Persian

d is sufficiently large, and all our asymptotic statements are
made with respect to d.
                                                                             Siamese
Building on the discussion in Section 3, we base our data dis-
tribution assumptions for the source dataset on our intuition
about the hierarchy of common-versus-fine-grained features in                 CAT (+ΏζθΠ)
natural images. For simplicity, we consider only two levels of
label hierarchy. The root of this hierarchy has two superclasses
+1 and έΙΤ1. The superclass +1 has k+ subclasses, with nota- Figure 3: A simplified illustration
tion (+, c) for c έΙΙ [k+ ]. The same definition holds for the έΑεέΙΤέΑζ of how our intuition in Section 3
classes. As for the input features, since the common and fine- translates to the definition of an
grained features need to be sufficiently έΑεdifferentέΑζ, we push easy sample.
this intuition to an extreme and assume all the έΑεfeaturesέΑζ (in
their purest form) have zero correlation and equal magnitude. This leads to the following definition.
Definition 4.1 (Features and hierarchy). We define features as elements of a fixed orthonormal
dictionary V = {vi }di=1 έΛΓ Rd . Furthermore, we call v+ έΙΙ V the common feature unique to samples
in class +1, and v+,c έΙΙ V to be the fine-grained feature unique to samples of subclass (+, c).1
Definition 4.2 (Sample generation). For an easy sample X belonging to the (+, c) subclass (for
c έΙΙ [k+ ]), sample its patches as follows:
1. (Common-feature patches) Approximately sέΙΩ patches are common-feature patches, defined as
   xp = ╬▒p v+ + ╬╢p , for some (random) ╬▒p έΚΙ 1, ╬╢p έΙ╝ N (0, ╧Δ╬╢2 Id );
2. (Subclass-feature patches) Approximately sέΙΩ patches are subclass-feature patch, defined as
   xp = ╬▒p v+,c + ╬╢p , for some (random) ╬▒p έΚΙ 1, ╬╢p έΙ╝ N (0, ╧Δ╬╢2 Id );
3. (Noise patches) For the remaining non-feature patches, xp = ╬╢p , where ╬╢p έΙ╝ N (0, ╧Δ╬╢2 Id ).
A hard sample is generated in the same way as easy samples, except the common-feature patches
are replaced by noise patches, and we replace approximately sέΑι number of noise patches by έΑεfeature-
noiseέΑζ patches, which are of the form xp = ╬▒pέΑι vέΙΤ + ╬╢p , where ╬▒pέΑι έΙΙ o(1), and set one of the noise
patches to ╬╢ έΙΩ έΙ╝ N (0, ╧Δ╬╢2έΙΩ Id ) with ╧Δ╬╢ έΙΩ έΚτ ╧Δ╬╢ ; these patches serve the role of έΑεdistracting patternsέΑζ
discussed in Section 3.
Samples belonging to the superclass +1 are the union of the samples of each subclass (+, c). See
Figure 3 for an intuitive illustration of the easy samples.

With the feature-based input sample generation process in place, we can define the source datasetέΑβs
label function, and finally the source training set.
Definition 4.3 (Source datasetέΑβs label mapping). A sample X belongs to the +1 superclass if any
one of its common- or subclass-feature patches contains v+ or v+,c for any c έΙΙ [k+ ]. It belongs to
the (+, c) subclass if any one of its subclass-feature patches contains v+,c .
                                                                                                  src
Definition 4.4 (Source training set). We assume the input samples of the source training set as Xtrain
are generated as in Definition 4.2; the corresponding labels are generated following Definition 4.3.
                                  src
Overall, we denote the dataset Dtrain .

All of the above definitions also hold for the έΑεέΙΤέΑζ classes. To see the full problem setup and parameter
choices, please refer to Appendix B.
    1
      We only consider one feature for each (sub-)class for notational simplicity; our work extends to the multi-
feature case easily.


                                                       5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


4.2    TARGET DATA DISTRIBUTION ASSUMPTIONS

For simplicity and to ensure that baseline and fine-grained training have no unfair advantage over
each other, we make the following assumptions in our theoretical setting: first, the input samples in
the source and target datasets are all generated according to Definition 4.2; second, the true label
function remains the same across the two datasets; third, since we are studying the έΑεfine-to-coarseέΑζ
transfer direction, the target problemέΑβs label space is the root of the hierarchy, meaning that any
                tgt     tgt
element of Ytrain   or Ytest must belong to the label space {+1, έΙΤ1}. Therefore, in our setting, only
  src       tgt
Y and Y can differ (in distribution) due to different choices in the label hierarchy level. This
analysis-oriented setting mirrors the transfer settings in Section 5.2

4.3    L EARNER ASSUMPTIONS

We assume that the learner is a two-layer average-pooling convolutional ReLU network:
                                      Xm       P
                                               X
                           Fc (X) =       ac,r    ╧Δ(έθρwc,r , xp έθσ + bc,r ),                                       (2)
                                             r=1      p=1
where m is a low-degree polynomial in d and denotes the width of the network, ╧Δ(┬╖) = max(0, ┬╖) is
                                                                                   (0)
the ReLU nonlinearity, and c denotes the class.
                                             pWe perform
                                                             an initialization of wc,r έΙ╝ N (0, ╧Δ02 Id )
                                (0)
with ╧Δ02 = 1/poly(d); we set bc,r = έΙΤ╬α ╧Δ0 ln(d) and manually tune it, similar to Allen-Zhu
& Li (2022). Cross-entropy is the training loss for both baseline and transfer training. To simplify
analysis and to focus solely on the learning of the feature extractor, we freeze ac,r = 1 during all
baseline and transfer training phases, and we use the fine-grained model for binary classification as
follows: Fb+ (X) = maxcέΙΙ[k+ ] F+,c (X), FbέΙΤ (X) = maxcέΙΙ[kέΙΤ ] FέΙΤ,c (X).3

4.4    M AIN RESULT: STOCHASTIC GRADIENT DESCENT ON EASY TRAINING SAMPLES

In this subsection, we study how well the neural network generalizes if it is trained via stochastic
gradient descent on easy samples only. In particular, we allow training to run for poly(d) time.
                                                                           tgt
Theorem 4.1 (Coarse-label training: baseline). (Summary). Suppose Dtrain        consists only of easy
samples, and we perform
                        stochastic  gradient descent training: at every iteration t, there is a fresh
                          (t) (t)
set of N iid samples Xn , yn        . Moreover, assume the number of fine-grained classes k+ =
                                        n
kέΙΤ έΙΙ [polyln(d), f (╧Δ╬╢ )], for some function f of the noise standard deviation ╧Δ╬╢ .4
With high probability, with proper choice of step size ╬╖, there exists T έΙΩ έΙΙ poly(d) such that for
any T έΙΙ [T έΙΩh, poly(d)], the training loss satisfies
                                            i        L(F (T ) ) έΚν o(1), and for an easy test sample
                   (T )               (T )
(Xeasy , y), P Fy (Xeasy ) έΚν FyέΑ▓ (Xeasy ) έΚν o(1) for y έΑ▓ έΙΙ {+1, έΙΤ1} έΙΤ {y}. However, for all
                                                         h                          i
                                                           (t)           (t)
t έΙΙ [0, poly(d)], given a hard test sample (Xhard , y), P Fy (Xhard ) έΚν FyέΑ▓ (Xhard ) έΚξ έΕο(1).

To see the full version of this theorem, please see Appendix E; its proofs spans Appendix C to E.
This theorem essentially says that, with a mild lower bound on the number of fine-grained classes,
if we only train on the easy samples with coarse labels, it is virtually impossible for the network to
learn the fine-grained features even if we give it as much practically reachable amount of time and
training samples as possible. Consequently, the network would perform poorly on any challenging
downstream test image: if the image is missing the common features, then the network can be easily
misled by irrelevant features or other potential flaws in the image.
Theorem 4.2 (Fine-grained-label training). (Summary). Assume the same setting in Theorem
4.1, except that we let the labels be fine-grained: train the network on a total of k+ + kέΙΤ sub-
classes instead of 2. With high probability, within poly(d) time, the trained network satisfies
   2
      In this idealized setting, we have essentially made baseline training and coarse-grained pretraining the
                                                                                                      tgt
same procedure. Therefore, an equally valid way to view our theoryέΑβs setting is to consider Dtrain        the same as
  src
Dtrain except with coarse-grained labels. In other words, we pretrain the network on two versions of the source
            src,coarse      src,fine                                       tgt
dataset Dtrain         and Dtrain    , and then compare the two models on Dtest (which has coarse-grained labels).
    3
      See Appendix B and the beginning of Appendix G for details of learner assumptions.
    4
      f (╧Δ╬╢ ) = d0.4 is an example choice.


                                                         6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



 h                  i
    (T )      (T )
P Fby (X) έΚν FbyέΑ▓ (X) έΚν o(1) for y έΑ▓ έΙΙ {+1, έΙΤ1} έΙΤ {y} on the target binary problem on easy
and hard test samples.5

The full version of this result is presented in Appendix G.4, and its proof in Appendix G. After
fine-grained pretraining, the networkέΑβs feature extractor gains a strong response to the fine-grained
features, therefore its accuracy on the downstream hard test samples increases significantly.
One concern about the above theorems is that the neural networks are trained only on easy sam-
ples. As noted in Section 1, samples that can be classified correctly by training only with coarse-
grained labels, or easy samples, should make up the majority of the training and testing samples,
and pretraining at higher label granularities only possibly improves network performance on rare
hard examples. Our theoretical result is intended to present the έΑεfeature-learning biasέΑζ of a neural
network in an exaggerated fashion. Therefore, it is natural to start with the case of έΑεno hard training
examples at allέΑζ. In reality, even if a small portion of hard training samples is present, finite-sized
training datasets can have many flaws that can cause the network to overfit severely before learning
the fine-grained features, especially since rarer features are learnt more slowly and corrupted by
greater amount of noise. We leave these deeper considerations for future theoretical work.6


5       E MPIRICAL R ESULTS

Building on our theoretical analysis in an idealized setting, this section discusses conditions on
the source and target label functions that we observed to be important for fine-grained pretraining to
work in practice. We present the core experimental results obtained on ImageNet21k and iNaturalist
2021 in the main text, and leave the experimental details and ablation studies to Appendix A.

5.1     I MAGE N ET 21 KέΗΤI MAGE N ET 1 K TRANSFER EXPERIMENT

This subsection provides more details about the
experiment shown in Figure 1. Specifically, we             Pretrain on     Hier. lv   G(Y src )   Valid. acc.
show that the common practice of pretraining               IM1k               -        1000         77.91
on ImageNet21k using leaf labels is indeed bet-            IM21k           0 (leaf)    21843        82.51
ter than pretraining at lower granularities in the                            1        5995         81.28
manual hierarchy.
                                                                              2        2281         80.26
Hierarchy definition. The label hierarchy in Im-
ageNet21k is based on WordNet Miller (1995);                                  4         519         77.53
Deng et al. (2009). To define fine-grained la-                                6         160         75.53
bels, we first define the leaf labels of the dataset                          9          38         72.75
as Hierarchy level 0. For each image, we trace
the path from the leaf label to the root using the      Table 1: Cross-dataset transfer. ViT-B/16
WordNet hierarchy. We then set the k-th synset          average finetuning validation accuracy on Ima-
(or the root synset, if it is higher in the hier-       geNet1k, pretrained on ImageNet21k. The base-
archy) as the level-k label of this image. This         line (in red) is taken directly from Dosovitskiy
procedure also applies to the multi-label sam-          et al. (2021). See Appendix A for details.
ples. This is how we generate the hierarchies
shown in Table 1.
Network choice and training. For this dataset, we use the more recent Vision Transformer ViT-B/16
Dosovitskiy et al. (2021). Our pretraining pipeline is almost identical to the one in Dosovitskiy et al.
(2021). For fine-tuning, we experimented with several strategies and report only the best results in
the main text. To ensure a fair comparison, we also used these strategies to find the best baseline
                  tgt
result by using Dtrain for pretraining.
Results. Table 1 shows a clear trend: the best accuracy occurs at the leaf level, and the networkέΑβs
accuracy on ImageNet1k decreases as the pretraining label granularity on ImageNet21k decreases.
    5
     Finetuning Fb can further boost the feature extractorέΑβs response to the true features. See Appendix G.4.
    6
     Allowing a small portion of hard training samples essentially yields a έΑεperturbedέΑζ version of our results in
this paper, which we leave for future work.


                                                       7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                              Retraining Baseline
                                                              One-pass Baseline
                                                              Unique Label per Sample
                                            7.0               Random subclass ID
                                                              ViT-L/14 CLIP Clustering, Per-Class
                                                              ViT-L/14 CLIP Clustering, Whole Dataset
                                                              Manual Hierarchy


               11-superclass Validation Error
                                            6.5



                                            6.0



                                            5.5



                                            5.0


                                                  101   102       103                        104        105
                                                               Number of Classes (pretraining)


Figure 4: In-dataset transfer. ResNet34 validation error (with standard deviation) of finetuning on
11 superclasses of iNaturalist 2021, pretrained on various label hierarchies. The manual hierarchy
outperforms the baseline and every other hierarchy, and exhibits a U-shaped curve.



Interestingly, as the pretraining granularity approaches 1,000, the finetuned accuracies become rela-
tively close to the baselines. This suggests that, even if there is little source-target distribution shift
in the inputs, the label functions align well across the datasets and we pretrain with much more data
than the baseline, we cannot see as much improvement with a poorly chosen pretraining granularity.


5.2   T RANSFER EXPERIMENT ON I NATURALIST 2021

We conduct a systematic study of the transfer method within the label hierarchies of iNaturalist 2021
Horn & macaodha (2021). This dataset is well-suited for our analysis because it has a manually de-
fined label hierarchy that is based on the biological traits of the creatures in the images. Additionally,
the large sample size of this dataset reduces the likelihood of sample-starved pretraining on reason-
ably fine-grained hierarchy levels.
Our experiments on this dataset demonstrate the importance of a meaningful label hierarchy, label
function alignment and appropriate choice of pretraining label granularity.
Relevant datasets. We perform transfer experiments within iNaturalist2021. More specifically, we
       src        tgt
set Xtrain and Xtrain both equal to the training split of the input samples in iNaturalist2021, and set
   tgt
Xtrain to the testing split of the input samples in iNaturalist2021. To focus on the έΑεfine-to-coarseέΑζ
transfer setting, the target problem is to classify the root level of the manual hierarchy, which con-
tains 11 superclasses. To generate a greater gap between the performance of different hierarchies
and to shorten training time, we use the mini version of the training set in all our experiments.
The motivation behind this experimental setting is similar to how we defined our theoryέΑβs data set-
ting: by using exactly the same input samples for the baseline and fine-grained training schemes, we
can be more confident that the choice of (pre-)training label hierarchy is the cause of any changes in
the networkέΑβs accuracy on the target problem.
Alternative hierarchies generation. To better understand the transfer methodέΑβs operating regime, we
experiment with different ways of generating the fine-grained labels for pretraining: we perform
kMeans clustering on the ViT-L/14-based CLIP embedding Radford et al. (2021); Dehghani et al.
(2022) of every sample in the training set and use the cluster IDs as pretraining class labels. We
carry out this experiment in two ways. The green curve in Figure 4 comes from performing kMeans
clustering on the embedding of each superclass separately, while the purple oneέΑβs cluster IDs are
from performing kMeans on the whole dataset. The former way preserves the implicit hierarchy of
the superclasses in the cluster IDs: samples from superclass k cannot possibly share a cluster ID
with samples belonging to superclass k έΑ▓ ╠╕= k. Therefore, its label function is forced to align better
with that of the 11 superclasses than the purple curveέΑβs. We also assign random class IDs to samples.


                                                                          8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Network choice and training. We experiment with ResNet 34 and 50 on this dataset. For pretraining
      src
on Dtrain with fine-grained labels, we adopt a standard 90-epoch large-batch-size training procedure
commonly used on ImageNet He et al. (2016); Goyal et al. (2017). Then we finetune the network
                                                     tgt          tgt
for 90 epochs and test it on the 11-superclass Dtrain    and Dtest    , respectively, using the pretrained
backbone h(╬αsrc ; ┬╖): we found that finetuning at a lower batch size and learning rate improved
training stability. To ensure a fair comparison, we trained the baseline model using exactly the same
                                                              tgt
training pipeline, except that the pretraining stage uses Dtrain    . We observed that this έΑεretrainingέΑζ
baseline consistently outperformed the naive one-pass 90-epoch training baseline on this dataset.
Due to space limitations, we leave the results of ResNet50 to the appendix.
Interpretation of results. Figure 4 shows the validation errors of the resulting models on the 11-
superclass problem. We make the following observations.

    έΑλ (Random class ID). Random class ID pretraining (orange curve) performs the worst of all the
      alternatives. The label function of this type does not generate a meaningful hierarchy because
      it has no consistency in the features it considers discriminative when decomposing the super-
      classes. This is in stark contrast to the manual hierarchies, which decompose the superclasses
      based on the finer biological traits of the creatures in the image.

    έΑλ (Human labels). Even with high-quality (human) labels, the granularity of pretraining labels
      should not be too large or too small. As shown by the blue curve in Figure 4, models trained on
      the manual hierarchies outperform all other alternative as long as the pretraining label granular-
      ity is beyond the order of 102 . However, the error exhibits a U shape, meaning that as the label
      granularity becomes too large, the error starts to rise. This is intuitive. If the pretraining gran-
      ularity is too close to the target one, we should not expect improvement. On the other extreme,
      if we assign a unique label to every sample in the training data, it is highly likely that the only
      differences a model can find between each class would be frivolous details of the images, which
      would not be considered discriminative by the label function of the target coarse-label problem.
      In this case, the pretraining stage is almost meaningless and can be misleading, as evidenced by
      the very high label-per-sample error (red star in Figure 4).

    έΑλ (Cluster ID). For fine-grained pretraining to be effective, the features that the pretraining label
      function considers discriminative must align well with those valued by the label function of
      the 11-superclass hierarchy. To see this point, observe that for models trained on cluster IDs
      obtained by performing kMeans on the CLIP embedding samples in each superclass separately
      (green curve in Figure 4), their validation errors are much lower than those trained on cluster IDs
      obtained by performing kMeans on the whole dataset (purple curve in Figure 4). As expected,
      the manually defined fine-grained label functions align best with that of the 11 superclasses, and
      the results corroborate this view.



6      C ONCLUSION

In this paper, we studied the influence of pretraining label granularity on the generalization of DNNs
in downstream image classification tasks. Empirically, we confirmed that pretraining on the leaf la-
bels of ImageNet21k produces better transfer results on ImageNet1k than pretraining on coarser
granularity levels; we further showed the importance of meaningful label hierarchy and label func-
tion alignment between the source and target tasks for fine-grained training in practice. Theoreti-
cally, we explained why fine-grained pretraining can outperform the vanilla coarse-grained training
by establishing a correspondence between label granularity and solution complexity. In the future,
we plan to investigate the transfer scenario in which there is a nontrivial distribution shift between
the source and target datasets. We also plan to study more scalable ways of obtaining fine-grained
labels for training image classifiers. For example, we could first use large language models (LLMs)
Bahrini et al. (2023) to decompose the coarse-grained labels, then use visual question answering
(VQA) models Dai et al. (2023); Chen et al. (2023) to automatically classify the input samples in a
fine-grained manner.


                                                     9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


7   R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT
To ensure reproducibility and completeness of the experimental results of this paper, we discuss
in detail the experimental procedures, relevant hyperparameter choices and ablation studies in Ap-
pendix A. Appendix B to H are devoted to showing the complete theoretical results.

R EFERENCES
Zeyuan Allen-Zhu and Yuanzhi Li. Feature purification: How adversarial training performs robust
  deep learning. In FOCS, 2022.
Zeyuan Allen-Zhu and Yuanzhi Li. Towards understanding ensemble, knowledge distillation and
  self-distillation in deep learning. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Repre-
  sentations, 2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=Uuf2q9TfXGA.
Aram Bahrini, Mohammadsadra Khamoshifar, Hossein Abbasimehr, Robert J. Riggs, Maryam Es-
  maeili, Rastin Mastali Majdabadkohne, and Morteza Pasehvar. Chatgpt: Applications, opportuni-
  ties, and threats. In 2023 Systems and Information Engineering Design Symposium (SIEDS), pp.
  274έΑΥ279, 2023. doi: 10.1109/SIEDS58326.2023.10137850.
Alsallakh Bilal, Amin Jourabloo, Mao Ye, Xiaoming Liu, and Liu Ren. Do convolutional neural
  networks learn class hierarchy? IEEE transactions on visualization and computer graphics,
  2017.
Yuan Cao, Zixiang Chen, Misha Belkin, and Quanquan Gu. Benign overfitting in two-layer convo-
  lutional neural networks. In NeurIPS, 2022.
Xi Chen, Xiao Wang, Soravit Changpinyo, AJ Piergiovanni, Piotr Padlewski, Daniel Salz, Se-
  bastian Goodman, Adam Grycner, Basil Mustafa, Lucas Beyer, Alexander Kolesnikov, Joan
  Puigcerver, Nan Ding, Keran Rong, Hassan Akbari, Gaurav Mishra, Linting Xue, Ashish V
  Thapliyal, James Bradbury, Weicheng Kuo, Mojtaba Seyedhosseini, Chao Jia, Burcu Karagol
  Ayan, Carlos Riquelme Ruiz, Andreas Peter Steiner, Anelia Angelova, Xiaohua Zhai, Neil
  Houlsby, and Radu Soricut. PaLI: A jointly-scaled multilingual language-image model. In
  The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023. URL https:
  //openreview.net/forum?id=mWVoBz4W0u.
Zhuo Chen, Ruizhou Ding, Ting-Wu Chin, and Diana Marculescu. Understanding the impact of
  label granularity on cnn-based image classification. In ICDMW, 2018.
Yin Cui, Yang Song, Chen Sun, Andrew Howard, and Serge Belongie. Large scale fine-grained
  categorization and domain-specific transfer learning. In CVPR, 2018.
Yin Cui, Menglin Jia, Tsung-Yi Lin, Yang Song, and Serge Belongie. Class-balanced loss based on
  effective number of samples. In CVPR, 2019.
Wenliang Dai, Junnan Li, Dongxu Li, Anthony Meng Huat Tiong, Junqi Zhao, Weisheng Wang,
 Boyang Li, Pascale Fung, and Steven Hoi. Instructblip: Towards general-purpose vision-language
 models with instruction tuning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.06500, 2023.
Giacomo De Palma, Bobak Kiani, and Seth Lloyd. Random deep neural networks are biased towards
  simple functions. In NeurIPS, 2019.
Mostafa Dehghani, Alexey Gritsenko, Anurag Arnab, Matthias Minderer, and Yi Tay. Scenic: A jax
 library for computer vision research and beyond. In CVPR, 2022.
Jia Deng, Wei Dong, Richard Socher, Li-Jia Li, Kai Li, and Li Fei-Fei. Imagenet: A large-scale
   hierarchical image database. In CVPR, 2009.
Alexey Dosovitskiy, Lucas Beyer, Alexander Kolesnikov, Dirk Weissenborn, Xiaohua Zhai, Thomas
  Unterthiner, Mostafa Dehghani, Matthias Minderer, Georg Heigold, Sylvain Gelly, Jakob Uszko-
  reit, and Neil Houlsby. An image is worth 16x16 words: Transformers for image recognition at
  scale. In ICLR, 2021.


                                               10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Robert Geirhos, Jo╠Ιrn-Henrik Jacobsen, Claudio Michaelis, Richard Zemel, Wieland Brendel,
  Matthias Bethge, and Felix A. Wichmann. Shortcut learning in deep neural networks. In Na-
  ture Machine Intelligence, 2020.
Wonjoon Goo, Juyong Kim, Gunhee Kim, and Sung Ju Hwang. Taxonomy-regularized semantic
 deep convolutional neural networks. In ECCV, 2016.
Palash Goyal and Shalini Ghosh.      Hierarchical class-based curriculum loss.     arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2006.03629, 2020.
Priya Goyal, Piotr Dollar, Ross Girshick, Pieter Noordhuis, Lukasz Wesolowski, Aapo Kyrola, An-
  drew Tulloch, Yangqing Jia, and Kaiming He. Accurate, large minibatch sgd: Training imagenet
  in 1 hour. arXiv:1706.02677, 2017.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image recog-
  nition. In CVPR, 2016.
Grant Van Horn and macaodha. inat challenge 2021 - fgvc8, 2021. URL https://kaggle.
  com/competitions/inaturalist-2021.
Minyoung Huh, Hossein Mobahi, Richard Zhang, Brian Cheung, Pulkit Agrawal, and Phillip Isola.
 The low-rank simplicity bias in deep networks. arXiv:2103.10427, 2017.
Sergey Ioffe and Christian Szegedy. Batch normalization: Accelerating deep network training by
  reducing internal covariate shift. In ICML, 2015.
Ziwei Ji and Matus Telgarsky. Gradient descent aligns the layers of deep linear networks. In ICLR,
  2019.
Ralph P. Boas Jr. and Jr. John W. Wrench. Partial sums of the harmonic series. The American
  Mathematical Monthly, 1971.
Da-Cheng Juan, Chun-Ta Lu, Zhen Li, Futang Peng, Aleksei Timofeev, Yi-Ting Chen, Yaxi Gao,
  Tom Duerig, Andrew Tomkins, and Sujith Ravi. Ultra fine-grained image semantic embedding.
  In WSDM, 2020.
Dimitris Kalimeris, Gal Kaplun, Preetum Nakkiran, Benjamin Edelman, Tristan Yang, Boaz Barak,
  and Haofeng Zhang. Sgd on neural networks learns functions of increasing complexity. In
  NeurIPS, 2019.
Stefani Karp, Ezra Winston, Yuanzhi Li, and Aarti Singh. Local signal adaptivity: Provable feature
  learning in neural networks beyond kernels. In NeurIPS, 2021.
Asifullah Khan, Anabia Sohail, Umme Zahoora, and Aqsa Saeed Qureshi. A survey of the recent
  architectures of deep convolutional neural networks. Artificial Intelligence Review, 2020.
Diederik P. Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. In Yoshua Bengio
  and Yann LeCun (eds.), ICLR, 2015.
Alex Krizhevsky. Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images. 2009.
Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever, and Geoffrey E Hinton. Imagenet classification with deep convo-
  lutional neural networks. In NeurIPS, 2012.
Be╠Βatrice Laurent and Pascal Massart. Adaptive estimation of a quadratic functional by model se-
   lection. The Annals of Statistics, 28(5):1302 έΑΥ 1338, 2000. doi: 10.1214/aos/1015957395. URL
   https://doi.org/10.1214/aos/1015957395.
Yann LeCun and Yoshua Bengio. Convolutional Networks for Images, Speech, and Time Series.
  1998.
Kuang-Huei Lee, Anurag Arnab, Sergio Guadarrama, John Canny, and Ian Fischer. Compressive
  visual representations. In NeurIPS, 2021.


                                               11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Kaifeng Lyu, Zhiyuan Li, Runzhe Wang, and Sanjeev Arora. Gradient descent on two-layer nets:
  Margin maximization and simplicity bias. In M. Ranzato, A. Beygelzimer, Y. Dauphin, P.S. Liang,
  and J. Wortman Vaughan (eds.), NeurIPS. Curran Associates, Inc., 2021.
Dhruv Mahajan, Ross Girshick, Vignesh Ramanathan, Kaiming He, Manohar Paluri, Yixuan Li,
  Ashwin Bharambe, and Laurens Van Der Maaten. Exploring the limits of weakly supervised
  pretraining. In ECCV, 2018.
George A Miller. Wordnet: a lexical database for english. Communications of the ACM, 1995.
Jiquan Ngiam, Daiyi Peng, Vijay Vasudevan, Simon Kornblith, Quoc V Le, and Ruoming Pang. Do-
   main adaptive transfer learning with specialist models. arXiv preprint arXiv:1811.07056, 2018.
Mohammad Pezeshki, Oumar Kaba, Yoshua Bengio, Aaron C Courville, Doina Precup, and Guil-
 laume Lajoie. Gradient starvation: A learning proclivity in neural networks. In NeurIPS, 2021.
Samira Pouyanfar, Saad Sadiq, Yilin Yan, Haiman Tian, Yudong Tao, Maria Presa Reyes, Mei-Ling
  Shyu, Shu-Ching Chen, and S. S. Iyengar. A survey on deep learning: Algorithms, techniques,
  and applications. ACM Computing Surveys, 2018.
Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agar-
  wal, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, Gretchen Krueger, and Ilya
  Sutskever. Learning transferable visual models from natural language supervision. In ICML,
  2021.
Tal Ridnik, Emanuel Ben-Baruch, Asaf Noy, and Lihi Zelnik. Imagenet-21k pretraining for the
  masses. In NeurIPS Track on Datasets and Benchmarks, 2021.
Harshay Shah, Kaustav Tamuly, Aditi Raghunathan, Prateek Jain, and Praneeth Netrapalli. The
  pitfalls of simplicity bias in neural networks. In NeurIPS, 2020.
Ruoqi Shen, Sebastien Bubeck, and Suriya Gunasekar. Data augmentation as feature manipulation.
  In ICML, 2022a.
Ruoqi Shen, Sebastien Bubeck, and Suriya Gunasekar. Data augmentation as feature manipulation.
  In ICML, 2022b.
Sindi Shkodrani, Yu Wang, Marco Manfredi, and No╠Βra Baka. United we learn better: Harvesting
  learning improvements from class hierarchies across tasks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.13627,
  2021.
Eyal Shnarch, Ariel Gera, Alon Halfon, Lena Dankin, Leshem Choshen, Ranit Aharonov, and Noam
  Slonim. Cluster & tune: Boost cold start performance in text classification. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2203.10581, 2022.
Carlos N Silla and Alex A Freitas. A survey of hierarchical classification across different application
  domains. Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery, 2011.
Karen Simonyan and Andrew Zisserman. Very deep convolutional networks for large-scale image
  recognition. In Yoshua Bengio and Yann LeCun (eds.), ICLR, 2015.
Mannat Singh, Laura Gustafson, Aaron Adcock, Vinicius de Freitas Reis, Bugra Gedik, Raj Prateek
 Kosaraju, Dhruv Mahajan, Ross Girshick, Piotr Dolla╠Βr, and Laurens Van Der Maaten. Revisiting
 weakly supervised pre-training of visual perception models. In CVPR, 2022.
Donghyun Son, Byounggyu Lew, Kwanghee Choi, Yongsu Baek, Seungwoo Choi, Beomjun Shin,
  Sungjoo Ha, and Buru Chang. Reliable decision from multiple subtasks through threshold opti-
  mization: Content moderation in the wild. In WSDM, 2023.
Nitish Srivastava, Geoffrey Hinton, Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever, and Ruslan Salakhutdinov.
  Dropout: A simple way to prevent neural networks from overfitting. JMLR, 2014.
Andreas Peter Steiner, Alexander Kolesnikov, Xiaohua Zhai, Ross Wightman, Jakob Uszkoreit, and
  Lucas Beyer. How to train your vit? data, augmentation, and regularization in vision transformers.
  TMLR, 2022.


                                                  12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Chen Sun, Abhinav Shrivastava, Saurabh Singh, and Abhinav Gupta. Revisiting unreasonable ef-
  fectiveness of data in deep learning era. In ICCV, 2017.
Ilya Sutskever, James Martens, George Dahl, and Geoffrey Hinton. On the importance of initializa-
   tion and momentum in deep learning. In ICML, 2013.
Christian Szegedy, Wei Liu, Yangqing Jia, Pierre Sermanet, Scott Reed, Dragomir Anguelov, Du-
  mitru Erhan, Vincent Vanhoucke, and Andrew Rabinovich. Going deeper with convolutions. In
  CVPR, 2015.
Grant Van Horn, Oisin Mac Aodha, Yang Song, Yin Cui, Chen Sun, Alex Shepard, Hartwig Adam,
  Pietro Perona, and Serge Belongie. The inaturalist species classification and detection dataset. In
  CVPR, 2018.
Saining Xie, Ross Girshick, Piotr Dollar, Zhuowen Tu, and Kaiming He. Aggregated residual trans-
  formations for deep neural networks. In CVPR, 2017.
Xueting Yan, Ishan Misra, Abhinav Gupta, Deepti Ghadiyaram, and Dhruv Mahajan. Clusterfit:
  Improving generalization of visual representations. In CVPR, 2020.
Zhicheng Yan, Hao Zhang, Robinson Piramuthu, Vignesh Jagadeesh, Dennis DeCoste, Wei Di,
  and Yizhou Yu. Hd-cnn: hierarchical deep convolutional neural networks for large scale visual
  recognition. In ICCV, 2015.
Chuanguang Yang, Zhulin An, Linhang Cai, and Yongjun Xu. Hierarchical self-supervised aug-
  mented knowledge distillation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.13715, 2021.
Eric Zelikman, Jesse Mu, Noah D Goodman, and Yuhuai Tony Wu. Star: Self-taught reasoner
  bootstrapping reasoning with reasoning. In NeurIPS, 2022.
Linfeng Zhang, Jiebo Song, Anni Gao, Jingwei Chen, Chenglong Bao, and Kaisheng Ma. Be your
  own teacher: Improve the performance of convolutional neural networks via self distillation. In
  ICCV, 2019.
Pengchuan Zhang, Xiyang Dai, Jianwei Yang, Bin Xiao, Lu Yuan, Lei Zhang, and Jianfeng Gao.
  Multi-scale vision longformer: A new vision transformer for high-resolution image encoding. In
  ICCV, 2021.
Bolei Zhou, Agata Lapedriza, Aditya Khosla, Aude Oliva, and Antonio Torralba. TPAMI, 2018.
Xinqi Zhu and Michael Bain. B-cnn: branch convolutional neural network for hierarchical classifi-
  cation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1709.09890, 2017.


                                                 13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                         Appendix
C ONTENTS

A Additional Experimental Results                                                                    15
    A.1 In-dataset transfer results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    15
          A.1.1 iNaturalist 2021 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     15
          A.1.2 ImageNet21k . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      17
          A.1.3 ImageNet1k . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     18
    A.2 Cross-dataset transfer, ImageNet21kέΗΤImageNet1k . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .             19

B   Theory, Problem Setup                                                                            21
    B.1 Data Properties . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      21
    B.2 Learner Assumptions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        21
    B.3 Training Algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       22
    B.4 Parameter Choices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        23
    B.5 Plan of presentation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     23

C Coarse-grained training, Initialization Geometry                                                   24

D Coarse-grained SGD Phase I: (Almost) Constant Loss, Neurons Diversify                              27
    D.1 Main results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     27
    D.2 Lemmas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       34

E   Coarse-grained SGD Phase II: Loss Convergence, Large Neuron Movement                             35
    E.1   Main results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   35
    E.2   Lemmas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     35

F   Coarse-grained SGD, Poly-time properties                                                         51

G Fine-grained Learning                                                                              61
    G.1 Initialization geometry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      61
    G.2 Poly-time properties . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       62
    G.3 Training . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     68
    G.4 Model error after training . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     72

H Probability Lemmas                                                                                 76


                                                  14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A     A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS
In this section, we present the full details of our experiments and relevant ablation studies. All of
our experiments were performed using tools in the Scenic library Dehghani et al. (2022).

A.1     I N - DATASET TRANSFER RESULTS

To clarify, in this transfer setting, we are essentially transferring within a dataset. More specifically,
we set X src = X tgt and only the label spaces Y src and Y tgt may differ (in distribution). The baseline
                                      tgt                tgt
in this setting is clear: train on Dtrain and test on Dtest  . In contrast, after pretraining the backbone
                         src                                      tgt
network h(╬α; ┬╖) on Y , we finetune or linear probe it on Dtrain       using the backbone and then test on
  tgt
Dtest .

A.1.1    I NATURALIST 2021

On iNaturalist 2021, we use the mini training dataset with size 500,000 instead of the full training
dataset to show a greater gap between the results of different hierarchies and speed up training. We
use the architectures ResNet 34 and 50 He et al. (2016).
Training details. Our pretraining pipeline on iNaturalist is essentially the same as the standard large-
batch-size ImageNet-type training for ResNets He et al. (2016); Goyal et al. (2017). The following
pipeline applies to model pretraining on any hierarchy.

 έΑλ Optimization: SGD with 0.9 momentum coefficient, 0.00005 weight decay, 4096 batch size, 90
   epochs total training length. We perform 7 epochs of linear warmup in the beginning of training
   until the learning rate reaches 0.1 ├Ω 4096/256 = 1.6, and then apply the cosine annealing
   schedule.
 έΑλ Data augmentation: subtracting mean and dividing by standard deviation, image (original or its
   horizontal flip) resized such that its shorter side is 256 pixels, then a 224 ├Ω 224 random crop is
   taken.

For finetuning, we keep everything in the pipeline the same except setting the batch size to 4096/4 =
1024 and base learning rate 1.6/4 = 0.4. We found that finetuning at higher batch size and learning
rate resulted in training instabilities and severely affected the final finetuned modelέΑβs validation
accuracy, while finetuning at lower batch size and learning rate than the chosen one resulted in
lower validation accuracy at the end even though their training dynamics was stabler.
For the baseline accuracy, as mentioned in the main text, to ensure fairness of comparison, in addi-
tion to only training the network on the target 11-superclass problem for 90 epochs (using the same
pretraining pipeline), we also perform έΑεretrainingέΑζ: follow the exact training process of the models
                                               tgt
trained on the various hierarchies, but use Dtrain as the training dataset in both the pretrianing and
finetuning stage. We observed consistent increase in the final validation accuracy of the model, so
we report this as the baseline accuracy. Without retraining (so naive one-pass 90-epoch training on
11 superclasses), the average accuracy with standard deviation is 94.13, 0.025.
Clustering. To obtain the cluster-ID-based labels, we perform the following procedure.

1. For every sample Xn in the mini training dataset of iNaturalist 2021, obtain its ViT-L/14 CLIP
   embedding En .
2. Per-superclass kMeans clustering. Let C be the predefined number of clusters per class.
    (a) For every superclass k, for the set of embedding {(En , yn = k)} belonging to that super-
        class, perform kMeans clustering with cluster size set to C.
    (b) Given a sample with superclass ID k έΙΙ {1, 2, ..., 11} and cluster ID c έΙΙ {1, 2, ..., C}, define
        its fine-grained ID as C ├Ω k + c.
3. Whole-dataset kMeans clustering. Let C be the predefined number of clusters on the whole
   dataset.
    (a) Perform kMeans on the embedding of all the samples in the dataset, with the number of
        clusters set to C. Set the fine-grained class ID of a sample to its cluster ID.

                                                   15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 Manual Hierarchy       G(Y src )          11            13         51          273         1103          4884         6485
                    Validation error   5.25┬▒0.051   5.40┬▒0.075 5.10┬▒0.038   4.83┬▒0.041   4.79┬▒0.045   4.82┬▒0.056   4.84┬▒0.033
 Random class ID        G(Y src )          22            88        352         1,408        5,632        11,264      500,000
                    Validation error   6.61┬▒0.215   6.30┬▒0.070 6.12┬▒0.77    6.10┬▒0.053   6.12┬▒0.042   6.10┬▒0.057   6.54┬▒0.758
 CLIP+kMeans            G(Y src )          22            88        352         1408         2816          5632        22528
 per superclass     Validation error   5.14┬▒0.049   5.16┬▒0.033 5.17┬▒0.027   5.24┬▒0.029   5.30┬▒0.029   5.31┬▒0.077   5.37┬▒0.032
 C+k per supclass       G(Y src )          88           218        320          608         1040          1984
 Class rebalanced   Validation error   5.18┬▒0.054   5.17┬▒0.038 5.23┬▒0.052   5.28┬▒0.045   5.26┬▒0.035   5.21┬▒0.040
 CLIP+kMeans            G(Y src )          22            44         88          352         1408          2816        5632
 whole dataset      Validation error   5.52┬▒0.015   5.42┬▒0.047 5.45┬▒0.049   5.46┬▒0.019   5.60┬▒0.029   5.50┬▒0.029   5.47┬▒0.029


Table 2: In-dataset transfer, iNaturalist 2021. ResNet34 average finetuning validation error and
standard deviation on 11 superclasses in iNaturalist 2021, pretrained on various label hierarchies
with different label granularity. Baseline (11-superclass) and best performance are highlighted.

 90-Epoch ckpt     G(Y src )                13         51               273       1103       4884       6485
               Validation error         5.40┬▒0.075 5.10┬▒0.038       4.83┬▒0.041 4.79┬▒0.045 4.82┬▒0.056 4.84┬▒0.033
 70-Epoch ckpt     G(Y src )                13         51               273       1103       4884       6485
               Validation error         5.43┬▒0.055 5.08┬▒0.029       4.86┬▒0.037 4.82┬▒0.034 4.83┬▒0.064 4.85┬▒0.018
 50-Epoch ckpt     G(Y src )                13         51               273       1103       4884       6485
               Validation error         5.53┬▒0.036 5.2┬▒0.031        4.90┬▒0.038 4.9┬▒0.042 4.91┬▒0.020 4.95┬▒0.026

Table 3: In-dataset transfer, iNaturalist 2021. ResNet34 average finetuned validation error and
standard deviation on 11 superclasses in iNaturalist 2021, pretrained on the manual hierarchies, with
different backbone checkpoints.

 Manual Hierarchy       G(Y src )          11           13          51        273       1103        4884      6485
                    Validation error   4.43┬▒0.029   4.44┬▒0.063 4.36┬▒0.062 4.22┬▒0.021 4.20┬▒0.035 4.23┬▒0.054 4.33┬▒0.037
 Random class ID        G(Y src )          22           88         352       1,408      5,632      11,264    500,000
                    Validation error   5.36┬▒0.111   5.31┬▒0.079 5.24┬▒0.093 5.38┬▒0.052 5.37┬▒0.033 5.40┬▒0.033 5.13┬▒0.072


Table 4: In-dataset transfer, iNaturalist 2021. ResNet50 finetuned average validation error and
standard deviation on 11 superclasses in iNaturalist 2021, pretrained on label hierarchies with dif-
ferent label granularity.


Some might have the concern that having the same number of kMeans clusters per superclass could
cause certain classes to have too few samples, which could be a reason for why the cluster ID hier-
archies perform worse than the manual hierarchies. Indeed, the number of samples per superclass
on iNaturalist is different, so in addition to the above έΑεuniform-number-of-cluster-per-superclassέΑζ
hierarchy, we add an extra label hierarchy by performing the following procedure to balance the
sample size of each cluster:

1. Perform kMeans for each superclass with number of clusters set to 2, 8, 32, 64, 128, 256,
   512, 1024 and save the corresponding image-ID-to-cluster-ID dictionaries (so we are basically
   reusing the clustering results of the CLIP+kMeans per superclass experiment)
2. For each superclass, find the image-ID-to-cluster-ID dictionary with the highest granularity
   while still keeping the minimum number of samples for each cluster > predefined threshold
   (e.g. 1000 samples per subclass)
3. Now we have nonuniform granularity for each superclass while ensuring that the sample count
   per cluster is above some predefined threshold.

This simple procedure somewhat improves the balance of sample count per cluster, for example,
Figure 5 shows the sample count per cluster for the cases of total number of clusters = 608 and
1984. Unfortunately, we do not observe any meaningful improvement on the modelέΑβs validation
accuracy trained on this more refined hierarchy.
Experimental procedures. All the validation accuracies we report on ResNet34 are the averaged re-
sults of experiments performed on at least 6 random seeds: 2 random seeds for backbone pretraining
and 3 random seeds for finetuning. We report the average accuracies with their standard deviation
on various hierarchies in Table 2.
An additional experiment we performed with ResNet34 is a small grid search over what checkpoint
of a pretrained backbone we should use for finetuning on the 11-superclass method; we tried the


                                                              16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                          Sample count per cluster. Number of clusters = 1984                                    Sample count per cluster. Number of clusters = 608


               103
                                                                                                    103

    Sample Count


                                                                                         Sample Count
               102


                     0   250     500     750      1000       1250   1500   1750   2000                    0      100        200          300           400    500     600
                                           Subclass ID (sorted)                                                                   Subclass ID (sorted)


Figure 5: In-dataset transfer, iNaturalist 2021. Number of samples per cluster in the case of 608
and 1984 total clusters, after applying the sample size rebalancing procedure described in subsection
A.1.1. Observe that the sample sizes are reasonably balanced across almost all the subclasses.

                                                  Hierarchy level                 G(Y src )                   Validation error
                                                     Baseline                        2                             7.90
                                                      0 (leaf)                    21843                            6.56
                                                         1                         5995                            6.76
                                                         2                         2281                            6.70
                                                         4                          519                            6.97
                                                         6                          160                            7.31
                                                         9                           38                            7.55

Table 5: In-dataset transfer. ViT-B/16 validation error on the binary problem έΑεis this object a living
thing?έΑζ of ImageNet21k. Pretrained on various hierarchy levels of ImageNet21k, finetuned on the
binary problem. Observe that the maximal improvement appears at the leaf labels, and as G(Y src )
approaches 2, the percentage improvement approaches 0.


50-, 70- and 90-epoch checkpoints of the backbone on the manual hierarchies. We report these
results in Table 3. As we can see, 90-epoch checkpoints performs almost equally well as the 70-
epoch checkpoints and better than the 50-epoch ones by a nontrivial margin. With this observation,
we chose to use the end-of-pretraining 90-epoch checkpoints in all our other experiments without
further ablation studies on those hierarchies.
Our ResNet50 results are not as extensive as those on ResNet34. We present the average accuracies
and standard deviations in Table 4.

A.1.2                I MAGE N ET 21 K
The ImageNet21k dataset we experiment on contains a total of 12,743,321 training samples and
102,400 validation samples, with 21843 leaf labels. A small portion of samples have multiple labels.
Caution: due to the high demand on computational resources of training ViT models on Ima-
geNet21k, all of our experiments that require (pre-)training or finetuning/linear probing on this
dataset were performed with one random seed.
Hierarchy generation. To define fine-grained labels, we start by defining the leaf labels of the dataset
to be Hierarchy level 0. For every image, we trace from the leaf synset to the root synset relying
on the WordNet hierarchy, and set the k-th synset (or the root synset, whichever is higher in level)
as the level-k label of this image; this procedure also applies to the multi-label samples. This is the
way we generate the manual hierarchies shown in the main text.
Due to the lack of a predefined coarse-label problem, we manually define our target problem to be a
binary one: given an image, if the synset έΑεLiving ThingέΑζ is present on the path tracing from the leaf
label of the image to the root, assign label 1 to this image; otherwise, assign 0. This problem almost
evenly splits the training and validation sets of ImageNet21k: 5,448,549:7,294,772 for training,
43,745:58,655 for validation.
Network choice and pretraining pipeline. We experiment with the ViT-B/16 model Dosovitskiy et al.
(2021). The pretraining pipeline of this model follows the one in Dosovitskiy et al. (2021) exactly:


                                                                                     17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                      Eval strategy                 90-epoch finetune                    Linear probe            10-epoch finetune
                   (Batch size, base lr) (4096,1e-3) (1024,2.5e-4) (512,1.25e-4) (4096, 1e-3) (512, 1.25e-4) (4096,1e-3) (512,1.25e-4)
 Leaf-pretrained
                     Validation error      92.782       93.177        93.295        87.497         87.493      92.294        93.439
                   (Batch size, base lr) (4096,1e-3) (1024,2.5e-4) (512,1.25e-4) (4096, 1e-3) (512, 1.25e-4) (4096,1e-3) (512,1.25e-4)
 Baseline
                     Validation error      92.102       91.971        91.939        91.703         91.719      92.002        91.856


Table 6: In-dataset transfer, ImageNet21k. ViT-B/16 validation accuracy on the binary problem
έΑεIs the object a Living ThingέΑζ on ImageNet21k. Ablation study on the exact finetuning/linear prob-
ing strategy.


we train the model for 90 epochs using the Adam optimizer, with ╬▓1 = 0.9, ╬▓2 = 0.999, weight
decay coefficient equal to 0.03 and a batch size of 4096; we let the dropout rate be 0.1; the output
dense layerέΑβs bias is initialized to έΙΤ10.0 to prevent huge loss value coming from the off-diagonal
classes near the beginning of training Cui et al. (2019); for learning rate, we perform linear warmup
for 10,000 steps until the learning rate reaches 10έΙΤ3 , then it is linearly decayed to 10έΙΤ5 . The data
augmentations are the common ones in ImageNet-type training Dosovitskiy et al. (2021); He et al.
(2016): random cropping and horizontal flipping. Note that we use the sigmoid cross-entropy for
training since the dataset has multi-label samples.
Evaluation on the binary problem. After the 90-epoch pretraining on the manual hierarchies, we
evaluate the model on the binary problem. We report the best accuracies on each hierarchy level in
Table 5. To get a sense of how the relevant hyperparameters influence final accuracy of the model,
we try out the following finetuning/linear probing strategies on the backbone trained on the leaf
labels and the target binary problem of the dataset, and report the results in Table 6 (similar to our
experiments on iNaturalist, we include the backbone trained on the binary problem in these ablation
studies to ensure that our comparisons against the baseline are fair) :

1. 90-epochs finetuning in the same fashion as the pretraining stage, but with a small grid search
   over
        (batch size, base learning rate) ={(4096, 0.001), (4096/4 = 1024, 0.001/4 = 0.00025),
                                          (4096/8 = 512, 0.001/8 = 0.000125)}.
2. Linear probing with 20 epochs training length, using exactly the same training pipeline
   as in pretraining. We ran a small grid search over (batch size, base learning rate) =
   {(4096, 0.001), (4096/8 = 512, 0.001/8 = 0.000125)}.
3. 10-epochs finetuning, no linear warmup, 3 epochs of constant learning rate in the
   beginning followed by 7 epochs of linear decay, with a small grid search over
   (batch size, base learning rate) = {(4096, 0.001), (4096/8 = 512, 0.001/8 = 0.000125)}.

Table 6 helps us decide the best accuracies to report. First, as expected the linear probing results
are much worse than the finetuning ones. Second, the έΑεretrainingέΑζ accuracy of 92.102 is the best
baseline we can report (the same thing happened in the iNaturalist case) έΑΦ if we only train the model
for 90 epochs (the naive one-pass training) on the binary problem, then the modelέΑβs final validation
accuracy is 91.746%, which is lower than 92.102% by a nontrivial margin. In contrast, the short 10-
epoch finetuning strategy works best for the backbone trained on the leaf labels, therefore, we also
use this strategy to evaluate the backbones trained on all the other manual hierarchies. A peculiar
observation we made was that, finetuning the leaf-labels-pretrained backbone for extended period
of time on the binary problem caused it to overfit severely: for batch size and base learning rate in
the set {(4096, 0.001), (1024, 0.00025), (512, 0.000125)}, throughout the 90 epochs of finetuning,
although its training loss exhibits the normal behavior of staying mostly monotonically decreasing,
its validation accuracy actually reached its peak during the linear warmup period!

A.1.3       I MAGE N ET 1 K
Our ImageNet1k in-dataset transfer experiments are done in a very similar fashion to the iNaturalist
ones. In particular, the pretraining and finetuning pipeline for ResNet50 is exactly the same as the
one in the iNaturalist case, so we do not repeat it here.
Due to a lack of more fine-grained manual label on this dataset, we generate fine-grained labels by
performing kMeans on the ViT-L/14 CLIP embedding of the dataset separately for each class; the


                                                                  18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   ResNet50 CLIP+kMeans              G(Y src )               2000         4000             8000
   per-class                     Validation error         23.4┬▒0.13   23.48┬▒0.098      23.49┬▒0.204
   ViT-L/14 CLIP+kMeans              G(Y src )               2000         4000             8000
   per-class                     Validation error        23.4┬▒0.127   23.47┬▒0.074      23.78┬▒0.048
   Random ID                         G(Y src )               2000         4000             8000
   per-class                     Validation error        23.4┬▒0.068    23.4┬▒0.070      23.65┬▒0.071

Table 7: In-dataset transfer, ImageNet1k. ResNet50 finetuned average validation error and stan-
dard deviation on the vanilla 1000 classes, pretrained on label hierarchies with different label gran-
ularity.



exact procedure is also identical to the iNaturalist case. The CLIP backbones we use here are the
ResNet50 version and the ViT-L/14 version. We report the average accuracies and their standard
deviation in Table 7. All results are obtained from at least one random seed during pretraining and
3 random seeds during finetuning.
The best baseline we report is the one using retraining: if we adopt the pretrain-then-finetune proce-
                tgt
dure but with Dtrain (i.e. the vanilla 1000-class labels) set as the pretraining dataset, then we obtain
an average validation error of 23.28% with standard deviation of 0.103, averaged over results of 3
random seeds. In comparison, if we only perform the naive one-pass 90-epoch training, we obtain
average valiation error 24.04%, with standard deviation 0.057.
From Table 7, we see that there is virtually no difference between the baseline and the best errors
obtained by the models trained on the custom hierarchies: they are almost equally bad. Noting that
the sample size of each class in ImageNet1k is only around 103 , and the fact that ImageNet1k clas-
sification is a έΑεhard problemέΑζ έΑΦ it is a problem of high sample complexity έΑΦ further decomposing
the classes causes each fine-grained class to have too few samples, leading to the above negative re-
sults. This reflects the intuition that higher label granularity does not necessarily mean better model
generalization, since the sample size per class might become too small.


A.2   C ROSS - DATASET TRANSFER , I MAGE N ET 21 KέΗΤI MAGE N ET 1 K

In this subsection, we report the average validation accuracy and standard deviation of the cross-
dataset transfer experiment from ImageNet21k to ImageNet1k, as discussed in Figure 1 and Section
5.1 in the main text.
Network choice. We use the same architecture ViT-B/16 as the one in the in-dataset ImageNet21k
transfer experiment and follow the same training procedure, which we repeat here for the readerέΑβs
convenience. The pretraining pipeline of this model follows the one in Dosovitskiy et al. (2021):
we train the model for 90 epochs using the Adam optimizer, with ╬▓1 = 0.9, ╬▓2 = 0.999, weight
decay coefficient equal to 0.03 and a batch size of 4096; we let the dropout rate be 0.1; the output
dense layerέΑβs bias is initialized to έΙΤ10.0 to prevent huge loss value coming from the off-diagonal
classes near the beginning of training Cui et al. (2019); for learning rate, we perform linear warmup
for 10,000 steps until the learning rate reaches 10έΙΤ3 , then it is linearly decayed to 10έΙΤ5 . The data
augmentations are the common ones in ImageNet-type training Dosovitskiy et al. (2021); He et al.
(2016): random cropping and horizontal flipping. Note that we use the sigmoid cross-entropy for
training since the dataset has multi-label samples.
Finetuning. For finetuning on ImageNet1k, our procedure is very similar to the one in the original
ViT paper Dosovitskiy et al. (2021), described in its Appendix B.1.1. We optimize the network
for 8 epochs using SGD with momentum factor set to 0.9, zero weight decay, and batch size of
512. The dropout rate, unlike in pretraining, is set to 0. Gradient clipping at 1.0 is applied. Unlike
Dosovitskiy et al. (2021), we still finetune at the resolution of 224├Ω224. For learning rate, we apply
linear warmup for 500 epochs until it reaches the base learning rate, then cosine annealing is applied;
we perform a small grid search of base learning rate = {3 ├Ω 10έΙΤ3 , 3 ├Ω 10έΙΤ2 , 6 ├Ω 10έΙΤ2 , 3 ├Ω 10έΙΤ1 }.
Every one of these grid search is repeated over 3 random seeds. We report the ImageNet1k validation
accuracies and their standard deviations in Table 8. In the main text, we report the best accuracy for
each hierarchy level.


                                                    19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   Pretrained on / Base lr       3 ├Ω 10έΙΤ3           3 ├Ω 10έΙΤ2           6 ├Ω 10έΙΤ2        3 ├Ω 10έΙΤ1
   ImageNet21k, Hier. lv. 0     80.87┬▒0.012        82.48┬▒0.005       82.51┬▒0.042     81.40┬▒0.041
   ImageNet21k, Hier. lv. 1     77.38┬▒0.037        81.03┬▒0.054       81.28┬▒0.045     80.40┬▒0.087
   ImageNet21k, Hier. lv. 2     74.91┬▒0.012        79.76┬▒0.021        80.26┬▒0.05      79.7┬▒0.019
   ImageNet21k, Hier. lv. 4     63.65┬▒0.052        76.43┬▒0.033       77.32┬▒0.088     77.53┬▒0.078
   ImageNet21k, Hier. lv. 6     62.17┬▒0.012        73.65┬▒0.033       73.92┬▒0.073     75.53┬▒0.024
   ImageNet21k, Hier. lv. 9     53.68┬▒0.034        69.33┬▒0.045       71.08┬▒0.068     72.75┬▒0.071

Table 8: Cross-dataset transfer. ViT-B/16 average finetuning validation accuracy on ImageNet1k
along with standard deviation, pretrained on various hierarchy levels of ImageNet21k, and a small
grid search over the base learning rate.

                       Pretrained on    Hier. lv    G(Y src )   Validation acc.
                       IM21k            0 (leaf)    21843        81.45┬▒0.021
                                           1            5995     78.33┬▒0.018
                                           2            2281     75.66┬▒0.005
                                           4            519      68.95┬▒0.051
                                           6            160      63.65┬▒0.035
                                           9             38      57.35┬▒0.016

Table 9: Cross-dataset transfer. ViT-B/16 average linear-probing validation accuracy on Ima-
geNet1k along with standard deviation, pretrained on various hierarchy levels of ImageNet21k.


Linear probing. For linear probing, we use the following procedure. We optimize the linear classifier
for 40 epochs (similar to Lee et al. (2021)) using SGD with Nesterov momentum factor set to 0.9, a
small weight decay coefficient 10έΙΤ6 , and batch size 512. We start with a base learning rate of 0.9,
and multiply it by 0.97 per 0.5 epoch. In terms of data augmentation, we adopt the standard ones
like before: horizontal flipping and random cropping of size 224├Ω224. We repeat this linear probing
procedure over 3 random seeds given the pretrained backbone, and report the average validation
accuracy and standard deviation in Table 9.
Baseline. The baseline accuracy on ImageNet1k is directly taken from the ViT paper Dosovitskiy
et al. (2021) (see Table 5 in it), in which the ViT-B/16 model is trained for 300 epochs on Ima-
geNet1k.


                                                   20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B     T HEORY, P ROBLEM S ETUP

B.1   DATA P ROPERTIES
 1. Coarse classification: a binary task, +1 vs. έΙΤ1.
 2. An input sample X έΙΙ Rd├ΩP consists of P patches, each with dimension d. In this work, always
    assume d is sufficiently large7 ;
 3. Assume there exists k+ subclasses of the superclass έΑε+έΑζ, and kέΙΤ subclasses of the superclass
    έΑεέΙΤέΑζ. Let k+ = kέΙΤ .
 4. Assume orthonormal dictionary V = {v1 , ..., vd } έΛΓ Rd , which forms an orthonormal basis of
    Rd . Define v+ έΙΙ V to be the common feature of class έΑε+έΑζ. For each subclass (+, c) (where
    c έΙΙ [k+ ]), denote the subclass feature of it as v+,c έΙΙ V. Similar for the έΑεέΙΤέΑζ class.
 5. For an easy sample X belonging to the (+, c) class (for c έΙΙ [k+ ]), we sample its patches as
    follows:
    Definition: we define the function P : Rd├ΩP ├Ω V έΗΤ [P ] (so (X; v) 7έΗΤ I έΛΗ [P ]) to extract,
    from sample X, the indices of the patches on which the dictionary word v έΙΙ D dominates.
                                                             έΙΩ
    (a) (Common-feature patches) With probability sP , a patch xp in X is a common-feature patch,
                                                             έΙγ       έΙγ
        on which xp = ╬▒p v+ + ╬╢p for some (random) ╬▒p έΙΙ        1 έΙΤ ╬╣, 1 + ╬╣ ;
                                                                          έΙΩ
                                                              s
    (b) (Subclass-feature patches) With probability P έΙΤ|P(X;v      + )|
                                                                        , a patch with index p έΙΙ
        ([P ] έΙΤ έΙγ
                P(X; vέΙγ + )) is a
                                  subclass-feature patch, on which x  p  = ╬▒p v+,c + ╬╢p , for random
        ╬▒p έΙΙ      1 έΙΤ ╬╣, 1 + ╬╣ ;
    (c) (Noise patches) For the remaining P έΙΤ |P(X; v+ )| έΙΤ |P(X; v+,c )| patches, xp = ╬╢p .
 6. A hard sample Xhard for class (+, c) is exactly the same as an easy one except:
    (a) Its common-feature patches are replaced by noise patches;
                                                                      έΑι
                                                           s
    (b) (Feature noise patches) With probability P έΙΤ|P(X;v     +,c )|
                                                                      , a patch with index p έΙΙ
        ([P ] έΙΤ P(X; v+,c )) is a feature-noise patch, on which xp = ╬▒pέΑι vέΙΤ + ╬╢p for some (ran-
                   h               i
        dom) ╬▒p έΙΙ ╬╣έΑιlower , ╬╣έΑιupper ;
    (c) Set one of the noise patches to ╬╢ έΙΩ έΙ╝ N (0, ╧Δ╬╢2έΙΩ Id ).
 7. A sample X belongs to the έΑε+έΑζ superclass if |P(X; v+ )| > 0 or |P(X; v+,c )| > 0 for any c
    (excluding feature-noise patches).
 8. The above sample definitions also apply to the έΑεέΙΤέΑζ classes by switching the class signs.
 9. A training batch of samples contains exactly N/2k+ samples for each (+, c) and (έΙΤ, c) subclass.
    This also means that each training batch contains exactly N/2 samples belonging to the +1
    superclass, and N/2 samples for the έΙΤ1 superclass.
10. As discussed in the main text, for both coarse-grained (baseline) and fine-grained training, we
    only train on easy samples.

B.2   L EARNER A SSUMPTIONS

Assume the learner is a two-layer convolutional ReLU network:
                                        m
                                        X            P
                                                     X
                             Fc (X) =         ac,r         ╧Δ(έθρwc,r , xp έθσ + bc,r )                   (3)
                                        r=1          p=1

To simplify analysis and only focus on the learning of the feature extractor, we freeze ac,r = 1
throughout training. The nonlinear activation ╧Δ(┬╖) = max(0, ┬╖) is ReLU. Note that the convolution
kernels have dimension d and stride d.
    7
      Consider each d-dimensional patch of the input as an embedding of the input image generated by, for
instance, an intermediate layer of a DNN.


                                                      21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Remark. One difference between this architecture and a CNN used in practice is that we do not
allow feature sharing across classes: for each class c, we are assigning a disjoint group of neurons
wc,r to it. Separating neurons for each class is a somewhat common trick to lower the complexity
of analysis in DNN theory literature Allen-Zhu & Li (2023); Karp et al. (2021); Cao et al. (2022),
as it reduces complex coupling between neurons across classes which is not the central focus of our
study in this paper.

B.3     T RAINING A LGORITHM

Initialization.
            (0)                             (0)          p
Sample wc,r έΙ╝ N (0, ╧Δ02 Id ), and set bc,r = έΙΤ╧Δ0 cb          ln(d).
Training.
We adopt the standard cross-entropy training:
                             N                           N
                                                                                                 !
                             X                           X           exp(Fyn (Xn ))
                   L(F ) =         L(F ; Xn , yn ) = έΙΤ         ln   PC                                               (4)
                             n=1                         n=1         c=1 exp(Fc (Xn ))

This induces the stochastic gradient descent update for each hidden neuron (c έΙΙ [k], r έΙΙ [m]) per
minibatch of N iid samples:
                             N
                       1 X
                                    1{yn = c}[1 έΙΤ logit(t)
                                                                         X
  (t+1)
 wc,r      (t)
        = wc,r +╬╖                                          (t)
                                                       c (Xn )]                     ╧Δ έΑ▓ (έθρwc,r
                                                                                           (t)
                                                                                               , x(t)      (t)   (t)
                                                                                                  n,p έθσ + bc,r )xn,p +
                      N P n=1
                                                                        pέΙΙ[P ]
                                                                                                                 !
                                    1
                                                                      X
                                                                                έΑ▓
                                        {yn ╠╕= c}[έΙΤlogit(t) (t)
                                                        c (Xn )]
                                                                                    (t)
                                                                               ╧Δ (έθρwc,r , x(t)      (t)   (t)
                                                                                           n,p έθσ + bc,r )xn,p
                                                                      pέΙΙ[P ]
                                                                                                                     (5)
where
                                                   exp(Fc (X))
                                    logit(t)
                                         c (X) = PC                                                                  (6)
                                                  y=1 exp(Fy (X))

As for the bias,
                                                           (t+1)       (t)
                                                      έΙξwc,r       έΙΤ wc,r έΙξ2
                                    b(t+1)
                                     c,r   = b(t)
                                              c,r έΙΤ                                                                  (7)
                                                               ln5 (d)

Additionally, we train the models until the networkέΑβs output margins are sufficiently large (or the
network is sufficiently confident in its decision). More specifically, we train the models such that
                                                                             (t)
before Fyn (Xn ) έΙΤ maxy╠╕=yn Fy (Xn ) έΚξ έΕο(1) for all n (replace Xn by Xn if we are performing
stochastic gradient descent), we do not early stop the model. For analysis purposes, we allow the
models to train for longer in some of our theorems.
Remark. 1. The initialization strategy is similar to the one in Allen-Zhu & Li (2022).
2. Since the only difference between the training samples of coarse and fine-grained pretrain-
   ing is the label space, the form of SGD update is identical. The only difference is the
   number of output nodes of the network: for coarse training, the output nodes are just
   F+ and FέΙΤ (binary classification), while for fine-grained training, the output nodes are
   F+,1 , F+,2 , ..., F+,k+ , FέΙΤ,1 , FέΙΤ,2 , ..., FέΙΤ,kέΙΤ , a total of k+ + kέΙΤ nodes.

3. The bias is for thresholding out the neuronέΑβs noisy activations that grow slower than 1/ ln5 (d)
   times the activations on the main features which the neuron detects. This way, the bias
   does not really influence updates to the neuronέΑβs response to the core features which it ac-
   tivate strongly on, since 1 έΙΤ ln51(d) έΚΙ 1, while it removes useless low-magnitude noisy ac-
   tivations. This in fact creates a (generalization) gap between the nonlinear model that we
   are studying and linear models. Due to our parameter choices (as discussed below), if the
   model has no nonlinearityP (remove the ReLU activations), then even if the model can be
   written as F+ (X) =        pέΙΙ[P ] c+ έθρv+ , xp έθσ + c+,1 έθρv+,1 , xp έθσ + ... + c+,k+ έθρv+,k+ , xp έθσ and


                                                      22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                  P
      FέΙΤ (X) =      pέΙΙ[P ] cέΙΤ έθρvέΙΤ , xp έθσ + cέΙΤ,1 έθρvέΙΤ,1 , xp έθσ + ... + cέΙΤ,kέΙΤ έθρvέΙΤ,kέΙΤ , xp έθσ for any sequence
                                                    k+            kέΙΤ
      of nonnegative real numbers c+ , cέΙΤ , {c+,j }j=1   , {cέΙΤ,j }j=1 (which is the ideal situation since
      the true features are not corrupted by anything), it is impossible for the model to reach o(1)
      error on the input samples, because the number of noise patches will accumulate to a variance of
      (P έΙΤ O(sέΙΩ )) ╧Δ╬╢ έΚτ O(sέΙΩ ), which significantly overwhelms the signal from the true features. On
      the other hand, each noise patch is sufficiently small in magnitude with high probability (their
      strength is o(1/ ln5 (d))), so a slightly negative bias, as described above, can threshold out these
      noise-based signals and prevent them from accumulating across the patches.

B.4     PARAMETER C HOICES

The following are fixed choices of parameters for the sake of simplicity in our proofs.

 1. Always assume d is sufficiently large. All of our asymptotic results are presented with respect
    to d;
 2. poly(d) denotes the asymptotic order έΑεpolynomial in dέΑζ;
 3. polyln(d) aymptotic order έΑεpolylogarithmic in dέΑζ;
 4. polyln(d) έΚν k+ = kέΙΤ έΚν d0.4 and sέΙΩ ln5 (d) έΚν k+ (i.e. k+ lower bounded by polynomial of
    ln(d) of sufficiently high degree);
 5. Small positive constant c0 έΙΙ (0, 0.1);
                                                                      έΙγ
 6. For coarse-grained
         έΙγ             (baseline) training, set cb =                      4 + 2c0 , and for fine-grained training, set
    cb = 2 + 2c0 ;
                1
 7. 0 έΚν ╬╣ έΚν polyln(d) ;

 8. ╬╣έΑιlower έΚξ ln41(d) , and sέΑι ╬╣έΑιupper έΚν O         1
                                                 ln(d)       ;
 9. sέΑι έΚξ 1;
10. sέΙΩ έΙΙ polyln(d) with a degree > 15;
               1 έΙγ
11. ╧Δ╬╢ = ln10 (d)  d
                     ;
          h                               i
12. ╧Δ╬╢ έΙΩ έΙΙ ╧Κ polyln(d)
                  έΙγ
                     d
                         , O       1
                               polyln(d)   ;
13. P ╧Δ╬╢ έΚξ ╧Κ(polyln(d)), and P έΚν poly(d);

14. ╧Δ0 έΚν O d3 sέΙΩ1ln(d) , and set ╬╖ = ╬α(╧Δ0 ) for simplicity;

15. Batch of samples B (t) at every iteration has a deterministic size of N                                         έΙΙ
    (έΕο(polyln(d)k+ d), poly(d)).
16. Note: we sometimes abuse the notation x = a ┬▒ b as an abbreviation for x έΙΙ [a έΙΤ b, a + b].
Remark. We believe the range of parameter choice can be (asymptotically) wider than what is con-
sidered here, but for the purpose of illustrating the main messages of the paper, we do not consider a
more general set of parameter choice necessary because having a wider range of it can significantly
complicate and obscure the already lengthy proofs without adding to the core messages.
                                                                    ╬╢            ╧Δ έΙΤ1
                                                                               0.4
Additionally, the function f (╧Δ╬╢ ) in the main text is set to ln10 (d)d0.1 = d     in this appendix for
derivation convenience.

B.5     P LAN OF PRESENTATION

We shall devote the majority of our effort to proving results for the coarse-label learning dynamics,
starting with appendix section C and ending on E, and only devote section G to the fine-grained-
label learning dynamics, since the analysis of fine-grained training overlaps significantly with the
coarse-grained one.


                                                                 23
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C    C OARSE - GRAINED TRAINING , I NITIALIZATION G EOMETRY
For coarse-grained training, assume m = ╬α(d2+2c0 ).
Definition C.1. Define the following sets of interest of the hidden neurons:
     (0)                (0)         έΙγ          q
 1. U+,r = {v έΙΙ V : έθρw+,r , vέθσ έΚξ ╧Δ0 4 + 2c0 ln(d) έΙΤ ln51(d) }

                    έΙΩ(0)
2. Given v έΙΙ V, S+ (v) έΛΗ + ├Ω [m] satisfies:
          (0)            έΙγ       q
   (a) έθρw+,r , vέθσ έΚξ ╧Δ0 4 + 2c0 ln(d) + ln51(d)
                                (0)             έΙγ       q
   (b) έΙΑv έΑ▓ έΙΙ V s.t. v έΑ▓ έΛξ v, έθρw+,r , v έΑ▓ έθσ < ╧Δ0 4 + 2c0 ln(d) έΙΤ ln51(d)

                    (0)
3. Given v έΙΙ D, S+ (v) έΛΗ + ├Ω [m] satisfies:
         (0)          έΙγ       q
   (a) έθρw+,r , vέθσ έΚξ ╧Δ0 4 + 2c0 ln(d) έΙΤ ln51(d)

                          έΙΩ(0)
4. For any (+, r) έΙΙ S+,reg έΛΗ + ├Ω [m]:
          (0)         έΙγ p
   (a) έθρw+,r , vέθσ έΚν ╧Δ0 10 ln(d) έΙΑv έΙΙ V
           (0)
    (b) U+,r έΚν O(1)
Proposition 1. Assume m = ╬α(d2+2c0 ), i.e. the number of neurons assigned to the + and έΙΤ class
are equal and set to ╬α(d2+2c0 ).
At t = 0, for all v έΙΙ V, the following properties are true with probability at least 1 έΙΤ dέΙΤ2 over the
randomness of the initialized kernels:

      έΙΩ(0)         (0)              1
 1. |S+ (v)|, |S+ (v)| = ╬α        έΙγ       dc0
                                   ln(d)

                                           έΙΩ(0)                   έΙΩ(0)
                                        |S+       (v)|          |S+      (v)|
2. In particular, for any v, v έΑ▓ έΙΙ D,     έΙΩ(0)           έΙΤ1 ,     (0)           έΙΤ1 έΚνO         1
                                                                                            ln5 (d)
                                        |S+ (v έΑ▓ )|             |S+ (v έΑ▓ )|

     (0)
3. S+,reg = [m]

Proof. Recall the tail bound of g έΙ╝ N (0, 1) for every ╧╡ > 0:
                        1 1       ╧╡      2                   1 1 1 έΙΤ╧╡2 /2
                          έΙγ     2
                                     eέΙΤ╧╡ /2 έΚν P [g έΚξ ╧╡] έΚν έΙγ         e                                     (8)
                        2 2╧Α ╧╡ + 1                           2 2╧Α ╧╡
                                    (0)
First note that for any r έΙΙ [m], {έθρw+,r , vέθσ}vέΙΙV is a sequence of iid random variables with distribu-
tion N (0, ╧Δ02 ).
The proof of the first point proceeds in two steps.

1. The following properties hold at t = 0:
          "                           s                 #
              (0)          έΙγ                       1
   p1 :=P έθρw+,r , vέθσ έΚξ ╧Δ0 4 + 2c0 ln(d) +
                                                ln5 (d)
                                    Ύμχ r                                                             Ύμ╣
                                                                1
          1                    5    Ύμψ (4 + 2c0 ) ln(d) + ln5 (d)                   1
       έΙΙ έΙγ dέΙΤ2έΙΤc0 e(έΙΤ2έΙΤc0 )/ ln (d) Ύμψ
                                                                                                    Ύμ║
                                                                     ,r                             Ύμ║
          8╧Α                        Ύμ░                       1
                                      (4 + 2c0 ) ln(d) + ln5 (d) + 1

                                                                                             1
                                                                                                    Ύμ╗
                                                                       (4 + 2c0 ) ln(d) + ln5 (d)
                   !
              1
       =╬α p          dέΙΤ2έΙΤc0
             ln(d)
                                                                                          (9)


                                                         24
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    and
           "                                      s     #
                 (0)          έΙγ                    1
    p2 :=P     έθρw+,r , vέθσ έΚξ ╧Δ0 4 + 2c0 ln(d) έΙΤ 5
                                               ln (d)
                                      Ύμχ r                                                                                          Ύμ╣
                                                                     1
                                           (4 +  2c0 )   ln(d) έΙΤ    5
                                                                  ln (d)
           1                     5                                                       1
        έΙΙ έΙγ dέΙΤ2έΙΤc0 eέΙΤ(έΙΤ2έΙΤc0 )/ ln (d) Ύμψ
                                      Ύμψ                                                                                            Ύμ║
                                                                           ,r                                                      Ύμ║
           8╧Α                         Ύμ░                         1
                                        (4 + 2c0 ) ln(d) έΙΤ ln5 (d) + 1

                                                                                                                           1
                                                                                                                                   Ύμ╗
                                                                              (4 + 2c ) ln(d) έΙΤ           0             ln5 (d)
                            !
                    1
       =╬α       p               dέΙΤ2έΙΤc0
                    ln(d)
                                                                                                                      (10)
                                                                                 έΙΩ(0)
    Therefore, for any r έΙΙ [m], the random event described in S+                         holds with probability

                                              !                                      !            !dέΙΤ1                  !
                                      1               έΙΤ2έΙΤc0                  1            έΙΤ2έΙΤc0                   1
    p1 ├Ω(1έΙΤp2 )   dέΙΤ1
                        =╬α        p               d           ├Ω 1έΙΤ╬α     p                d               =╬α   p              dέΙΤ2έΙΤc0
                                      ln(d)                              ln(d)                                    ln(d)
                                                                                                                     (11)
    The last equality holds because defining f (d) = dέΙΤ2έΙΤc0 and d being sufficiently large,

               g(d) := |(d έΙΤ 1) ln(1 έΙΤ f (d))| έΚν (d έΙΤ 1) ├Ω (f (d) + O(f (d)2 )) έΚν O(dέΙΤ1 )                             (12)

    which means

                                    (1 έΙΤ f (d))dέΙΤ1 = eέΙΤg(d) έΙΙ (1 έΙΤ O(dέΙΤ1 ), 1)                                        (13)

                        έΙΩ(0)
2. Given v έΙΙ V, |S+ (v)| is a binomial random variable, with each Bernoulli
                                                                   h        triali (ranging over
                                                                                                  έΙΩ(0)
    r έΙΙ [m]) having success probability p1 (1 έΙΤ p2 )dέΙΤ1 . Therefore, E |S+ (v)| = mp1 (1 έΙΤ

                   1
    p2 ) dέΙΤ1
             =╬α έΙγ        dc0 .
                        ln(d)

    Now recall the Chernoff bound of binomial random variables.
                                                              PmLet {Xn }m
                                                                         n=1 be an iid sequence
    of Bernoulli random variable with success rate p, and Sn = n=1 Xn . Then for any ╬┤ έΙΙ (0, 1),

                                                                   ╬┤ 2 mp

                                         P[Sn έΚξ (1 + ╬┤)mp] έΚν exp έΙΤ
                                                                       3
                                                                  2                                                   (14)
                                                                   ╬┤ mp
                                         P[Sn έΚν (1 έΙΤ ╬┤)mp] έΚν exp έΙΤ
                                                                       2

                                                έΙΩ(0)
    It follows that, for each v          έΙΙ V, |S+ (v)| = ╬α              έΙγ1           dc0 with probability at least 1 έΙΤ
                                                                         ln(d)

    exp(έΙΤέΕο(lnέΙΤ1/2 (d))dc0 ). Taking union bound over all possible v έΙΙ D, the random event still
    holds with probability at least 1 έΙΤ exp(έΙΤέΕο(lnέΙΤ1/2 (d))dc0 + O(ln(d))) έΚξ 1 έΙΤ exp(έΙΤέΕο(d0.5c0 ))
    (in sufficiently high dimension).



                  (0)
The proof for S+ (v) proceeds in virtually the same way, so we omit the calculations here.
                                            έΙΩ(0)
                                         |S+ (v)|                 1
To show the second point, in particular     (0)  έΑ▓
                                                   έΙΤ 1  έΚν  O     5
                                                               ln (d)
                                                                        , we need to be a bit more
                                                        |S+ (v )|
careful in our bounds of the relevant sets. In particular, we need to directly use the CDF of gaussian


                                                               25
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


random variables:
    "                                       s          #
        (0)          έΙγ                            1
  P   έθρw+,r , vέθσ έΚξ ╧Δ0 4 + 2c0        ln(d) + 5           (1 ┬▒ O(dέΙΤ1 ))
                                               ln (d)
      "                             s                    #
          (0)   έΑ▓
                         έΙγ                          1
 έΙΤ P έθρw+,r , v έθσ έΚξ ╧Δ0 4 + c0 ln(d) έΙΤ 5
                                                 ln (d)
          έΙγ       q
        Z 4+2c0 ln(d)+ 51                                          !
    1                      ln (d)
                                    έΙΤ╧╡2 /2                   1
έΚν έΙγ                               e        d╧╡ + O
 2 2╧Α έΙγ4+2c0 ln(d)έΙΤ ln51(d)
                                                             p
                                                      d3+c0 ln(d)
                q

                                              s                    s              !                                                             !
    1    έΙΤ2έΙΤc0 (2+c0 )/ ln5 (d)
                                έΙγ                             1              1                                                    1
έΚν έΙγ d         e                   4 + 2c0        ln(d) + 5        έΙΤ ln(d) έΙΤ 5       +O                                            p
 2 2╧Α                                                      ln (d)          ln (d)                                            d3+c0 ln(d)
                                                                                 2
                                                                                                                                    !
   1                   5   έΙγ                                                  ln5 (d)                                        1
= έΙγ dέΙΤ2έΙΤc0 e(2+c0 )/ ln (d) 4 + 2c0 q                                              q                              +O         p
 2 2╧Α                                 ln(d) +                             1
                                                                               +        ln(d) έΙΤ ln51(d)                 d3+c0 ln(d)
                                                                       ln5 (d)
                                                                                                (15)
The expected difference in number between the two sets is just the above expression multiplied by
m = ╬α(d2+2c0 ), and with probability at least 1 έΙΤ exp(έΙΤέΕο(dέΙΤc0 /4 )), the difference term satisfies
                                                                                                   2
                                                                                                                                                        !
   1                                 5   έΙγ                        ln5 (d)                                                                    d2+2c0
  έΙγ (1 ┬▒ dέΙΤc0 /2 )╬α(dc0 )e(2+c0 )/ ln (d) 4 + 2c0 q                     q             ┬▒O                                                       p
 2 2╧Α                                               ln(d) + ln51(d) + ln(d) έΙΤ ln51(d)                                                     d3+c0 ln(d)
            !
       1             1
έΙΙ╬α p          dc0 ├Ω 5
      ln(d)        ln (d)
                                                                                                                                       (16)
                                                                                                       έΙΩ(0)
                                     (0)                                                          |S+         (v)|
By further noting from before that |S+ (v)|                     = ╬α           έΙγ1            c0
                                                                                            d ,        (0)           έΙΤ1 έΚν O            1
                                                                                                                                    ln5 (d)
                                                                               ln(d)              |S+ (v έΑ▓ )|
                                   έΙΩ(0)
                                |S+       (v)|                     1
follows. The proof of             έΙΩ(0)           έΙΤ1 έΚν O         ln5 (d)
                                                                          follows a very similar argument, so we omit
                                |S+ (v έΑ▓ )|
the calculations here.
                          (0)
Now, as for the set Sreg , we know for any r έΙΙ [m] and vi έΙΙ D,
                                                                                                   !
                              h
                                    (0)
                                                       έΙγ     p     i                         1
                          P       έθρw+,r , vi έθσ έΚξ ╧Δ0        10 ln(d) έΚν O                 p               dέΙΤ5 .                          (17)
                                                                                         ln(d)
Taking the union bound over r and i yields
                                                                                                              !
              h
                                 (0)
                                                       έΙγ        p        i                        1
          P       έΙΔr and i s.t.έθρw+,r , vi έθσ έΚξ ╧Δ0           10       ln(d) έΚν mdO               p                   dέΙΤ5 < dέΙΤ2 .          (18)
                                                                                                  ln(d)

                        (0)
Finally, to show U+,r έΚν O(1) holds for every (+, r), we just need to note that for any arbitrary
                                                 (0)
(+, r) neuron, the probability of U+,r > 4 is no greater than

                     4 d             1      έΙΤ8έΙΤ4c0               1
                    p2      έΚνO             d          4
                                                   ├Ωd έΚνO               dέΙΤ4έΙΤ4c0                                                         (19)
                        4          ln2 d                       ln2 d

Taking union bound over all m έΚν O d2+2c0 neurons yields the desired result.


                                                                  26
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D     C OARSE - GRAINED SGD P HASE I: (A LMOST ) C ONSTANT L OSS , N EURONS
      D IVERSIFY

Definition D.1. We define T0 to be the first time which there exists some sample n such that

                                                 Fc(T0 ) (Xn(T0 ) ) έΚξ dέΙΤ1                                             (20)
Without loss of generality assume c = +. Define phase I to be the time t έΙΙ [0, T0 ).

D.1   M AIN RESULTS

Theorem D.1  (Phase 1  SGD update2properties). The following properties hold with probability at
least 1 έΙΤ O mN   P k+ t
              poly(d)   έΙΤ O(eέΙΤέΕο(ln (d)) ) for every t έΙΙ [0, T0 ).

                                                                                                         έΙΩ(0)
1. (On-diagonal common-feature neuron growth) For every (+, r), (+, rέΑ▓ ) έΙΙ S+ (v+ ),
                                             (t)         (0)           (t)        (0)
                                          w+,r έΙΤ w+,r = w+,rέΑ▓ έΙΤ w+,rέΑ▓                                                 (21)

    Moreover,
                                                                      ! έΙΩ
                                      έΙγ

        (t)                  1
                                               έΙΩέΙΤ1/3
                                                               1       s         (t)
      έΙΗw+,r =╬╖                 ┬▒ ╧Ι1     1┬▒╬╣ 1┬▒s        ┬▒O                 v+ + έΙΗ╬╢+,r                                  (22)
                             2                              ln10 (d)   2P

                (t)                (t)2          (t)
                                                                                  έΙγ                       έΙγ
                                                                                                            έΙΩ
    where έΙΗ╬╢+,r έΙ╝ N (0, ╧ΔέΙΗ╬╢+,r I), ╧ΔέΙΗ╬╢+,r = ╬╖╧Δ╬╢                         1
                                                                                        1 ┬▒ sέΙΩέΙΤ1/3        έΙγs , and |╧Ι1 | έΚν
                                                                        2 ┬▒ ╧Ι1                           P 2N
    dέΙΤ1 .
                                          έΙΩ(0)
    Furthermore, every (+, r) έΙΙ S+ (v+ ) activates on v+ -dominated patches at time t.
2. (On-diagonal finegrained-feature neuron growth) For every possible choice of c and every
                       έΙΩ(0)
   (+, r), (+, rέΑ▓ ) έΙΙ S+ (v+,c ),
                                             (t)         (0)           (t)        (0)
                                          w+,r έΙΤ w+,r = w+,rέΑ▓ έΙΤ w+,rέΑ▓                                                 (23)

    Moreover,
                                                                      ! έΙΩ
                                      έΙγ

        (t)                  1
                                               έΙΩέΙΤ1/3
                                                               1         s            (t)
      έΙΗw+,r =╬╖                 ┬▒ ╧Ι1     1┬▒╬╣ 1┬▒s        ┬▒O                    v+,c + έΙΗ╬╢+,r
                             2                              ln10 (d)   2k+ P
                                                                                                                      (24)
           (t)          (t)2           (t)
                                                                                      έΙγ                         έΙγ
    where ╬╢+,r έΙ╝ N (0, ╧ΔέΙΗ╬╢+,r I), and ╧ΔέΙΗ╬╢+,r = ╬╖╧Δ╬╢                          1
                                                                            2 ┬▒ ╧Ι1        1 ┬▒ sέΙΩέΙΤ1/3        έΙγ sέΙΩ .
                                                                                                           P 2N k+

                                          έΙΩ(0)
    Furthermore, every (+, r) έΙΙ S+ (v+,c ) activates on v+ -dominated patches at time t.
3. The above results also hold with the έΑε+έΑζ and έΑεέΙΤέΑζ signs flipped.

Proof. The SGD update rule produces the following update:
        (t+1)         (t)         1
      w+,r      =w+,r + ╬╖           ├Ω                                                                                 (25)
                                 NP
                  N
                             1{yn = +}[1 έΙΤ logit(t)                                   (t)                (t)
                  X                                                    X
                                                    (t)
                                                + (Xn )]                      ╧Δ έΑ▓ (έθρw+,r , x(t)            (t)
                                                                                            n,p έθσ + b+,r )xn,p        (26)
                  n=1                                               pέΙΙ[P ]
                                                                                                               !
                  +1
                                           (t)                           (t)             (t)
                                                               X
                                                                        έΑ▓
                            {yn = έΙΤ}[έΙΤlogit+ (Xn(t) )]              ╧Δ (έθρw+,r , x(t)            (t)
                                                                                n,p έθσ + b+,r )xn,p                    (27)
                                                           pέΙΙ[P ]



                                                           27
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


In particular,

       N
                                 1
              1{yn = +}
       X
26 =                               ┬▒ ╧Ι1 ├Ω
       n=1
                                 2
       (                              "

         1{|P(Xn(t) ; v+ )| > 0}                                         (t)                       (t)
                                               X
                                                                  ╧Δ έΑ▓ (έθρw+,r , ╬▒n,p
                                                                                (t)       (t)
                                                                                    v+ + ╬╢n,p             (t)
                                                                                              έθσ + b+,r ) ╬▒n,p       (t)
                                                                                                              v+ + ╬╢n,p
                                                    (t)
                                          pέΙΙP(Xn ;v+ )
                                                                        #
                                 (t)             (t)
                 X
                             έΑ▓
         +                  ╧Δ (έθρw+,r , x(t)            (t)
                                        n,p έθσ + b+,r )xn,p
                   (t)
             pέΙΙP(X
              /   n ;v+ )
                                                                                       )
         +1
                                                        (t)             (t)
                                          X
                                                    έΑ▓
              {|P(Xn(t) ; v+ )| = 0}               ╧Δ (έθρw+,r , x(t)            (t)
                                                               n,p έθσ + b+,r )xn,p
                                          pέΙΙ[P ]
       N
                                 1
              1{yn = +}
       X
   =                               ┬▒ ╧Ι1 ├Ω
       n=1
                                 2
       (                              "
                                                                   n                                     o
         1{|P(Xn(t) ; v+ )| > 0}                                  1 έθρw+,r
                                                                      (t)                       (t)
                                               X
                                                                             (t)       (t)                  (t)       (t)
                                                                          , ╬▒n,p v+ + ╬╢n,p έθσ έΚξ b+,r        ╬▒n,p v+ + ╬╢n,p
                                                    (t)
                                          pέΙΙP(Xn ;v+ )
                                                                            #
                             n                      o
                            1 έθρw+,r
                                (t)             (t)
                 X
         +                          , x(t)            (t)
                                       n,p έθσ έΚξ b+,r xn,p
                   (t)
             pέΙΙP(X
              /   n ;v+ )
                                                                                           )
                                                    n                       o
         +1                                        1 έθρw+,r
                                                       (t)              (t)
                                          X
              {|P(Xn(t) ; v+ )| = 0}                       , x(t)
                                                              n,p έθσ έΚξ b       (t)
                                                                        +,r xn,p
                                          pέΙΙ[P ]
                                                                                                                      (28)
The rest of the proof proceeds by induction (in Phase 1).
                           (0)    έΙγ       p               (t)  έΙξέΙΗw(t) έΙξ2
First, recall that we set bc,r = έΙΤ 4 + 2c0 ln(d), and έΙΗbc,r = έΙΤ ln5c,r
                                                                   (d)
                                                                         for all t in phase 1, and
                                           (t)       (t)   έΙγ
for any +-class sample Xn with p έΙΙ P(Xn ; v+ ), ╬▒n,p έΙΙ 1 ┬▒ ╬╣ by our data assumption.
Base case t = 0.
1. (On-diagonal common-feature neuron growth)
The base case for the neuron expression of point 1. is trivially true.
                                                   έΙΩ(0)
We show that the neurons (+, r) έΙΙ S+ (v+ ) only activate on v+ -dominated patches at time t = 0.

                                 mN P
With probability at least 1 έΙΤ O poly(d)   , by Lemma H.3, we have for all possible choices of r, n, p:


                                    (0)   (0)
                                                                       p                     ╧Δ0
                                 έθρw+,r , ╬╢n,p έθσ έΚν O(╧Δ0 ╧Δ╬╢               d ln(d)) έΚν O                                  (29)
                                                                                           ln9 (d)


It follows that

                                          έΙγ                   έΙγ               έΙγ p

                                                                                             1
                                                         q
   (0)   (0)
έθρw+,r , ╬▒n,p       (0)
             v+ + ╬╢n,p έθσ =╧Δ0                  1┬▒╬╣├Ω         ln(d) + 1/ ln5 (d), 10 ln(d) ┬▒ 9
                                                                  4 + 2c0
                                                                                           ln (d)
                                        έΙγ      έΙγ                           έΙγ     έΙγ

                                                                                                  1
                                                       q                            p
                                 =╧Δ0      1 έΙΤ ╬╣ 4 + 2c0 ln(d) + 1/ ln5 (d), 1 + ╬╣ 10 ln(d) ┬▒ 9
                                                                                               ln (d)
                                                                                              (30)


                                                                     28
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                                                 2       2
                                         έΙΤb
Employing the basic identity a έΙΤ b = aa+b    , we have the lower bound

         έΙΤ1      (0)   (0)         (0)      (0)
        ╧Δ0 έθρw+,r , ╬▒n,p    v+ + ╬╢n,p   έθσ + b+,r

                                                                               1
           q                                            p
                                                5
        έΚξ (1 έΙΤ ╬╣)(4 + 2c0 )(ln(d) + 1/ ln (d)) έΙΤ (4 + 2c0 ) ln(d) έΙΤ O
                                                                            ln9 (d)
                                              5
               (1 έΙΤ ╬╣)(4 + 2c0 )(ln(d) + 1/ ln (d)) έΙΤ (4 + 2c0 ) ln(d)          1
             =q                                                        έΙΤ O                            (31)
               (1 έΙΤ ╬╣)(4 + 2c )(ln(d) + 1/ ln5 (d)) + (4 + 2c ) ln(d)
                                                      p                      ln9 (d)
                                    0                                0

                       (4 + 2c0 )(έΙΤ╬╣ ln(d) + (1 έΙΤ ╬╣)/ ln5 (d))

                                                                                           1
             =q                                                         έΙΤO
               (1 έΙΤ ╬╣)(4 + 2c0 )(ln(d) + 1/ ln5 (d)) + (4 + 2c0 ) ln(d)
                                                      p                                 ln9 (d)

             >0
                                        1
The last inequality holds since ╬╣ έΚν polyln(d) and d is sufficiently large such that ln91(d) does not drive
the positive term down past 0.
                                 έΙΩ(0)
Therefore, the neurons in S+ (v+ ) indeed activate on the v+ -dominated patches at t = 0.
                             (0)
The rest of the patches xn,p is either a feature patch (not dominated by v+ ) or a noise patch. By
                       έΙΩ(0)                       (0)
                     S+ (v+ )  =έΘΤ (+, r) έΙΙ S+ (v+ ). Therefore, by Theorem F.1, with proba-
definition, (+, r) έΙΙ
                                                                  έΙΩ(0)
bility at least 1 έΙΤ O mk +N P
                       poly(d)  , at time t = 0, the (+, r) έΙΙ S+ (v+ ) neurons we are considering
cannot activate on any feature patch dominated by v έΛξ v+ , nor on any noise patches.
It follows that the expression 26 at time t = 0 is as follows:
         N
                           1
            1{yn = +}
        X
  26 =                       ┬▒ ╧Ι1 ├Ω
        n=1
                           2
        (                        "                                                          #
                                                  έΙγ
         1{|P(Xn ; v+ )| > 0}
                                        X                                       X
                   (0)                                           (0)
                                                      1 ┬▒ ╬╣v+ + ╬╢n,p   +                   0
                                             (0)                                 (0)
                                        pέΙΙP(Xn ;v+ )                       pέΙΙP(X
                                                                            /   n ;v+ )
                                                     )
         +1
                                        X
              {|P(Xn(0) ; v+ )| = 0}             0
                                        pέΙΙ[P ]
                    N                                                  έΙγ                      (32)
                 X
         1
                        1{yn = +, |P(Xn(0) ; v+ )| > 0}
                                                              X
                                                                                      (0)
     =     ┬▒ ╧Ι1                                                           1 ┬▒ ╬╣v+ + ╬╢n,p
         2         n=1                                          (0)
                                                         pέΙΙP(Xn ;v+ )

         1
     =     ┬▒ ╧Ι1 ├Ω
         2
       n                                                                        o έΙγ
         (n, p) έΙΙ [N ] ├Ω [P ] : yn = +, |P(Xn(0) ; v+ )| > 0, p έΙΙ P(Xn(0) ; v+ )

                                                                                    1 ┬▒ ╬╣v+
           N
         X        X                     1           (0)
       +                   {yn = +}       ┬▒ ╧Ι1 ╬╢n,p
         n=1        (0)
                                        2
                  pέΙΙP(Xn ;v+ )

On average,
                  hn                                                                       oi
              E     (n, p) έΙΙ [N ] ├Ω [P ] : yn = +, |P(Xn(0) ; v+ )| > 0, p έΙΙ P(Xn(0) ; v+ )
                                                                                              (33)
             sέΙΩ         N      sέΙΩ N
             =   ├ΩP ├Ω       =
             P           2      2
Furthermore, with our parameter choices, and by concentration of binomial random variables, with
probability at least 1 έΙΤ eέΙΤέΕο(polyln(d)) ,
  n                                                                        o  sέΙΩ N
    (n, p) έΙΙ [N ] ├Ω [P ] : yn = +, |P(Xn(0) ; v+ )| > 0, p έΙΙ P(Xn(0) ; v+ ) =        1 ┬▒ sέΙΩέΙΤ1/3
                                                                               2
                                                                                              (34)


                                                             29
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


must be true.
It follows that
                                                                  sέΙΩ N                  έΙγ

                                                1
                                                                         1 ┬▒ sέΙΩέΙΤ1/2 ├Ω

                                26 =              ┬▒ ╧Ι1         ├Ω                          1 ┬▒ ╬╣v+
                                                2                   2
                                                N                                                                                            (35)
                                                X              X                   1         (0)
                                            +                          {yn = +}      ┬▒ ╧Ι1 ╬╢n,p
                                                n=1 pέΙΙP(X       (0)
                                                                                   2
                                                                n      ;v+ )


                                                                                                                    mk+ N P
The other component expression 27 is zero with probability at least 1 έΙΤ O                                            poly(d)       by Theorem
F.1.
By noting that
                                                  Ύμτ                                                                   Ύμ╢
                                                                   N

                             (0)
                                                   ╬╖ X                         X                          1       (0) Ύμ╕
                 Var έΙΗ╬╢+,r                 =Var Ύμφ                                        {yn = +}           ┬▒ ╧Ι1 ╬╢n,p
                                                  N P n=1                    (0)
                                                                                                          2
                                                                        pέΙΙP(Xn ;v+ )                                                         (36)
                                                                    2          έΙΩ
                                                      1                     s
                                           =╬╖ 2         ┬▒ ╧Ι1                      1 ┬▒ sέΙΩέΙΤ1/3 ╧Δ╬╢2 ,
                                                      2                    2N P 2
and                                         Ύμχ                                                                         Ύμ╣
                                               N
                  h
                          (0)
                                i          ╬╖ X                             X                       1       (0) Ύμ╗
              E έΙΗ╬╢+,r                = EΎμ░                                           {yn = +}         ┬▒ ╧Ι1 ╬╢n,p   = 0,                        (37)
                                          N P n=1                   (0)
                                                                                                   2
                                                               pέΙΙP(Xn ;v+ )

we finish the proof of the base case for point 1.
2. (On-diagonal finegrained-feature neuron growth)
The proof of the base case of point 2. is virtually identical to point 1, so we omit the computations
here.
Inductive step: We condition on the high probability events of the induction hypothesis for t έΙΙ
[0, T ] (with T < T0 of course), and prove the statements for t = T + 1.
1. (On-diagonal common-feature neuron growth)

                                                                                                                          mk+ N P T
By the induction hypothesis, up to time t = T , with probability at least 1 έΙΤ O                                            poly(d)        , for all
          έΙΩ(T )
(+, r) έΙΙ S+ (v+ ),
                                                                          !
                                                          έΙγ                sέΙΩ

                    (t)                          1
                                                                   έΙΩέΙΤ1/3              (t)
                  έΙΗw+,r =╬╖                         ┬▒ ╧Ι1     1┬▒╬╣ 1┬▒s            v+ + έΙΗ╬╢+,r                                                    (38)
                                                 2                          2P

           (t)                       (t)2         (t)
                                                                                     έΙγ                     έΙγ
                                                                                                             έΙΩ
where έΙΗ╬╢+,r έΙ╝ N (0, ╧ΔέΙΗ╬╢ I), ╧ΔέΙΗ╬╢ = ╬╖╧Δ╬╢                                      1
                                                                                         1 ┬▒ sέΙΩέΙΤ1/3        έΙγs .
                                                                           2 ┬▒ ╧Ι1                         P 2N

                      (T +1)
Expression of w+,r               .
Conditioning on the high-probability event of the induction hypothesis, at time t = T + 1,
                                                        T
                          (T +1)            (0)                        (╧Ε )
                                                        X
                      w+,r            =w+,r +                  έΙΗw+,r
                                                        ╧Ε =0
                                                                               !                                                             (39)
                                                               έΙγ                sέΙΩ

                                                      1
                                                                        έΙΩέΙΤ1/3             (t)
                                      =╬╖T               ┬▒ ╧Ι1     1┬▒╬╣ 1┬▒s            v+ + ╬╢+,r
                                                      2                          2P

        (t)                     (t)2        (t)    έΙγ           έΙγ             έΙγ
                                                                                 έΙΩ
where ╬╢+,r έΙ╝ N (0, ╧Δ╬╢                  I), ╧Δ╬╢ = ╬╖╧Δ╬╢ T 12 ┬▒ ╧Ι1    1 ┬▒ sέΙΩέΙΤ1/3 P έΙγs2N .
                           (T +1)
Let us compute έΙΗw+,r                   .


                                                                               30
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                      (T +1)                                          (T +1)       έΙγ
We first want to show that w+,r                activates on v+ -dominated patches xn,p         =       1 ┬▒ ╬╣v+ +
 (T +1)
╬╢n,p      . We need to show that the following expression is above 0:

       (T +1)                (T +1)
  έθρw+,r  , x(T
            n,p
               +1)
                   έθσ + b+,r
   (0) έΙγ                (T +1)      (0)
=έθρw+,r , 1 ┬▒ ╬╣v+ + ╬╢n,p        έθσ + b+,r
   *                                                           ! έΙΩ                               +
                        έΙγ                                                (T +1) έΙγ

             1
                                        έΙΩέΙΤ1/3
                                                        1       s                         (T +1)
  + ╬╖T          ┬▒ ╧Ι1       1┬▒╬╣ 1┬▒s              ┬▒O                 v+ + ╬╢+,r , 1 ┬▒ ╬╣v+ + ╬╢n,p
             2                                       ln10 (d)   2P
       T
                (╧Ε )
       X
  +           έΙΗb+,r
       ╧Ε =0
                                                                                                            (40)
Let us treat the three terms (on three lines) separately.
First, following virtually the same
                                  argument
                                             as in the base case, the following lower bound holds
                                  mN P                             έΙΩ(T )
with probability at least 1 έΙΤ O poly(d) for all n, p and (+, r) έΙΙ S+ (v+ ):

           (0) έΙγ             (T +1)      (0)
        έθρw+,r , 1 ┬▒ ╬╣v+ + ╬╢n,p      έθσ + b+,r
            q
                                                      p                                     1
       έΚξ╧Δ0     (1 έΙΤ ╬╣)(4 + 2c0 )(ln(d) + 1/ ln5 (d)) έΙΤ (4 + 2c0 ) ln(d) έΙΤ O                                 (41)
                                                                                         ln9 (d)
       >0


Now consider the second term.
We know, with probability at least 1 έΙΤ eέΙΤέΕο(d) , for all n and p,

                                           (T +1)                     1
                                         έθρ╬╢n,p    , v+ έθσ έΚν O                      ,                         (42)
                                                                   ln10 (d)

therefore,
                                                                  ! έΙΩ
                                  έΙγ

                       1
                                           έΙΩέΙΤ1/3
                                                           1       s        (T +1)
                έθρ╬╖T       ┬▒ ╧Ι1      1┬▒╬╣ 1┬▒s        ┬▒O                 v+ , ╬╢n,p    έθσ
                       2                                ln10 (d)   2P
                                                                                                            (43)
                  sέΙΩ

                            1
              έΚν╬╖T    O              .
                  2P     ln10 (d)


Moreover, with probability at least 1 έΙΤ eέΙΤέΕο(d) ,
                                                       έΙγ
                                                     έΙγ   sέΙΩ

                                 (T +1)                             1
                               έθρ╬╢+,r , v+ έθσ       έΚν╬╖ T έΙγ    ├ΩO                                              (44)
                                                      P 2N       ln10 (d)

and with probability at least 1 έΙΤ eέΙΤέΕο(d) ,
                                        έΙγ                       έΙγ
                                     έΙγ    sέΙΩ               έΙγ      sέΙΩ

    (T )   (T +1)

                            (T )
                                                1                      1
  έθρ╬╢+,r , ╬╢n,p    έθσ έΚν O ╧Δ╬╢ ╧Δ╬╢ d έΚν O ╬╖ T έΙγ     20    d  έΚν ╬╖   T  έΙγ            (45)
                                       P 2N ln (d)d            P 2N ln19 (d)

therefore
                                                                      έΙγ
                            (T +1) έΙγ
                                                               έΙγ        sέΙΩ

                                             (T +1)                               1
                       έθρ╬╖T ╬╢+,r , 1 ┬▒ ╬╣v+ + ╬╢n,p    έθσέΚν╬╖             T έΙγ    O              .                 (46)
                                                                     P 2N      ln10 (d)

                                                         31
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


It follows that with probability at least 1 έΙΤ O(eέΙΤέΕο(d) ),

      *                                            !                                           +
                          έΙγ                        sέΙΩ
                                                                (T +1) έΙγ

               1
                                           έΙΩέΙΤ1/3                                        (T +1)
       ╬╖T        ┬▒ ╧Ι1       1┬▒╬╣ 1┬▒s                     v+ + ╬╢+,r , 1 ┬▒ ╬╣v+ + ╬╢n,p
               2                                     2P
                                                  !
                         έΙγ                       sέΙΩ        έΙγ

              1
                                         έΙΩέΙΤ1/3
    =έθρ╬╖T        ┬▒ ╧Ι1       1┬▒╬╣ 1┬▒s                     v+ , 1 ┬▒ ╬╣v+ έθσ
              2                                     2P
                                                     !

                 1

                            έΙγ                        sέΙΩ                                                 (47)
                                             έΙΩέΙΤ1/3              (T +1)
      + έθρ╬╖T         ┬▒ ╧Ι1      1┬▒╬╣ 1┬▒s                     v+ , ╬╢n,p    έθσ
                 2                                     2P
            (T +1) έΙγ                (T +1)
      + έθρ╬╖╬╢+,r , 1 ┬▒ ╬╣v+ + ╬╢n,p            έθσ
                                                                 έΙγ
                                                   sέΙΩ      έΙγ        sέΙΩ

           1      (T +1)

                                           έΙΩέΙΤ1/3                                1
    έΚξ╬╖T      έΙΤ ╧Ι1          (1 έΙΤ ╬╣) 1 έΙΤ s               έΙΤ╬╖ T έΙγ            O              .
           2                                       2P           P 2N         ln10 (d)


Now we compute the third term. By the induction hypothesis,



         T
                 (t)
         X
               έΙΗb+,r
         t=0
         T    (t)
         X έΙξέΙΗw+,r έΙξ2
     =
         t=0
                 ln5 (d)
         T
                                     έΙγ                      sέΙΩ

         X      1          1
                                                    έΙΩέΙΤ1/3                 (t)
     =         5       ╬╖     ┬▒ ╧Ι 1     1 ┬▒ ╬╣   1 ┬▒ s           v+ + έΙΗ╬╢+,r                               (48)
       t=0
            ln (d)         2                                2P                  2
        T                                                                 T
                                   έΙγ                     sέΙΩ
       X 1
                         1                                              X 1                (t)
     έΚν         5     ╬╖     + ╧Ι1      1 + ╬╣ 1 + sέΙΩέΙΤ1/3         έΙξv+ έΙξ2 +           5       έΙΗ╬╢+,r
       t=0
            ln   (d)     2                                2P            t=0
                                                                              ln   (d)         2

                                                               T
                                έΙγ                      sέΙΩ

          1            1                                      X      1           (t)
     = 5 ╬╖T              + ╧Ι1      1 + ╬╣ 1 + sέΙΩέΙΤ1/3        +        5       έΙΗ╬╢+,r
       ln (d)          2                               2P     t=0
                                                                  ln  (d)              2


                                           mT
With probability at least 1 έΙΤ O           poly(d)       , for all t έΙΙ [0, T ] and r in consideration,


                                                         έΙγ
                                                           sέΙΩ

                                         (t)                         1
                                       έΙΗ╬╢+,r          έΚν╬╖ έΙγ    O                                         (49)
                                                    2   P 2N      ln10 (d)


Therefore,


         T
                  (t)
         X
                έΙΗb+,r
          t=0                                                                                           (50)
                                                                  έΙγ
                                         έΙγ                sέΙΩ        sέΙΩ

         1                      1
                                                  έΙΩέΙΤ1/3                       1
      έΚν 5              ╬╖T         + ╧Ι1     1+╬╣ 1+s           + ╬╖T έΙγ    O
       ln (d)                   2                         2P     P 2N      ln10 (d)

                                                                32
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Combining our calculations of the three terms from above, we find the following estimate:
           (T +1)                 (T +1)
        έθρw+,r       , x(T
                       n,p
                          +1)
                              έθσ + b+,r
      >0
                                                          έΙγ
                                             sέΙΩ     έΙγ       sέΙΩ

               1
                                     έΙΩέΙΤ1/3                             1
       + ╬╖T      έΙΤ ╧Ι1 (1 έΙΤ ╬╣) 1 έΙΤ s             έΙΤ╬╖ T έΙγ          O
               2                             2P         P 2N        ln10 (d)
                                                                 έΙγ                                                       (51)
                                έΙγ                     sέΙΩ           sέΙΩ

            1          1                                                       1
       έΙΤ 5        ╬╖T     + ╧Ι1     1 + ╬╣ 1 + sέΙΩέΙΤ1/3        + ╬╖T έΙγ       O
          ln (d)       2                              2P        P 2N        ln10 (d)
                                                             sέΙΩ

              1                                      1
      >╬╖T       έΙΤ ╧Ι1 (1 έΙΤ ╬╣) 1 έΙΤ sέΙΩέΙΤ1/3 έΙΤ O         4
              2                                   ln (d)     2P
      >0

                                                                                  mk+ N P T
On the other hand, by Theorem F.1, with probability at least 1έΙΤO                   poly(d)        , none of the (+, r) έΙΙ
 έΙΩ(T )                    (T +1)
S+ (v+ ) can activate on xn,p that are feature-patches dominated by v έΛξ v+ or noise patches.

Combining the above observations, with probability at least 1 έΙΤ O mk+poly(d)   N P (T +1)
                                                                                           , the update
expressions up to time t = T + 1 can be written as follows:

      (t)      1
  έΙΗw+,r =        ┬▒ ╧Ι1
               2
     (
         n                                                                       o έΙγ
          (n, p) έΙΙ [N ] ├Ω [P ] : yn = +, |P(Xn(t) ; v+ )| > 0, p έΙΙ P(Xn(t) ; v+ )

  ├Ω                                                                                    1 ┬▒ ╬╣v+
                                                                                                   (52)
      N                                            )
     X        X                      1        (t)
  +                   {yn = +}         ┬▒ ╧Ι1 ╬╢n,p
     n=1        (0)
                                     2
           pέΙΙP(Xn ;v+ )


The rest of the derivations proceeds virtually the same as in the base case; we just need to rely on
the concentration of binomial random variables to calculate
  n                                                                        o  sέΙΩ N
    (n, p) έΙΙ [N ] ├Ω [P ] : yn = +, |P(Xn(0) ; v+ )| > 0, p έΙΙ P(Xn(0) ; v+ ) =         1 ┬▒ sέΙΩέΙΤ1/3
                                                                                2
                                                                                                (53)
                                                      (t)
which completes the proof of the expression of έΙΗw+,r .
Additionally, to show
                                         (T +1)      (0)        (T +1)      (0)
                                     w+,r         έΙΤ w+,r = w+,rέΑ▓         έΙΤ w+,rέΑ▓                                         (54)
                                                                                     έΙΩ(0)
we just need to note that, by the above sequence of derivations, for every (+, r) έΙΙ S+ (v+ ), these
neurons receive exactly the same update at time t = T + 1
N
      1{yn = +}1{|P(Xn(T +1) ; v+ )| > 0}[1έΙΤlogit(T +1)
X                                                                                       X
                                                 +      (Xn(T +1) )]                                            (T +1)
                                                                                                               ╬▒n,p          (T +1)
                                                                                                                       v+ + ╬╢n,p      .
n=1                                                                                pέΙΙP(Xn
                                                                                         (T +1)
                                                                                                   ;v+ )
                                                                                                                         (55)
2. (On-diagonal finegrained-feature neuron growth)
For point 2, the proof strategy is almost identical, the only difference is that at every iteration, the
expected number of patches in which subclass features appear in is
   n                                                                                                     o
     (n, p) έΙΙ [N ] ├Ω ([P ] έΙΤ P(Xn(T ) ); v+,c ) : yn = +, |P(Xn(T ) ; v+,c )| > 0, p έΙΙ P(Xn(T ) ; v+,c )
  sέΙΩ N
=        1 ┬▒ sέΙΩέΙΤ1/3
  2k+
                                                                                                     (56)
                                                    2
which holds with probability at least 1 έΙΤ eέΙΤέΕο(ln (d)) for the relevant neurons.


                                                           33
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                                           έΙΤ1
                                     έΙΩ
Corollary D.1.1. T0 < O          ╬╖ sP                 έΙΙ poly(d).


Proof. Follows from Theorem D.1.

D.2   L EMMAS
                                                                    (t)
Lemma D.2. During the time t έΙΙ [0, T0 ), for any Xn ,
                                                      (t)                1
                                     1 έΙΤ logit+ (Xn(t) ) =                 ┬▒ O(dέΙΤ1 )                             (57)
                                                                         2
                              (t)         (t)
The same holds for 1 έΙΤ logitέΙΤ (Xn ).
Therefore, |╧Ι1 | έΚν O(dέΙΤ1 ) for t έΙΙ [0, T0 ).

                                                                                   (t)    (t)
Proof. By definition of T0 , for any t έΙΙ [0, T0 ], we have Fc (Xn ) < dέΙΤ1 + O (╬╖) for all n,
therefore, using Taylor approximation,
                                                      (t)   (t)
            (t)                           exp(FέΙΤ (Xn ))                                  exp(dέΙΤ1 )  1
   1 έΙΤ logit+ (Xn(t) ) =            (t)         (t)                (t)       (t)
                                                                                    <              έΚν + O(dέΙΤ1 )   (58)
                           exp(F+ (Xn )) + exp(FέΙΤ (Xn ))                                   1+1      2

The lower bound can be proven due to convexity of the exponential:
                                         (t)      (t)
                            exp(FέΙΤ (Xn ))                                    1             1  1
                       (t) (t)         (t) (t)
                                                                         >     exp(έΙΤdέΙΤ1 ) έΚξ έΙΤ                    (59)
                  exp(F+ (Xn )) + exp(FέΙΤ (Xn ))                              2             2 2d


                                                             34
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E       C OARSE - GRAINED SGD P HASE II: L OSS C ONVERGENCE , L ARGE
        N EURON M OVEMENT
Recall that the desired probability events in Phase I happens with probability at least 1 έΙΤ o(1).
In phase II, common-feature neurons start gaining large movement and drive the training loss down
to o(1). We show that the desired probability events occur with probability at least 1 έΙΤ o(1).
We study the case of T1 έΚν poly(d), where T1 denotes the time step at the end of training.

E.1      M AIN RESULTS

                                                                 mk+ N P T1
Theorem E.1. With probability at least 1 έΙΤ O                      poly(d)         , the following events take place:

1. There exists time T έΙΩ έΙΙ poly(d) such that for any t έΙΙ [T έΙΩ , poly(d)], for any n έΙΙ [N ], the training
                 (t)
   loss L(F ; Xn , yn ) έΙΙ o(1).
2. (Easy sample test accuracy is nearly perfect) Given an easy test sample (Xeasy , y), for y έΑ▓ έΙΙ
   {+1, έΙΤ1} έΙΤ {y}, for t έΙΙ [T έΙΩ , poly(d)],
                                 h                          i
                                                 (t)
                             P Fy(t) (Xeasy ) έΚν FyέΑ▓ (Xeasy ) έΚν o(1).                         (60)

3. (Hard sample test accuracy is bad) However, for all t έΙΙ [0, poly(d)], given a hard test sample
   (Xhard , y),                h                           i
                                                                   (t)
                                         P Fy(t) (Xhard ) έΚν FyέΑ▓ (Xhard ) έΚξ έΕο(1).                                       (61)

Proof. The training loss property follows from Lemma E.3 and Lemma E.4. We can set T έΙΩ = T1,1
or any time beyond it (and upper bounded by poly(d)).
The test accuracy properties follow from Lemma E.8 and Lemma E.9.



E.2      L EMMAS

Lemma
        E.2  (Phase II, Update Expressions). For any T1 έΙΙ poly(d), with probability at least 1 έΙΤ
    mN P k+ t                                        έΙΩ(0)
O poly(d) , during t έΙΙ [T0 , T1 ], for any (+, r) έΙΙ S+ (v+ ),

                 (t)
          έΙΗw+,r
               N                      n                  o
                     1{yn = +} exp έΙΤF+(t) (Xn(t) )
               X
        =╬╖
               n=1                                                                                                     (62)
                                (t)  (t)
                         exp(FέΙΤ (Xn ))                       sέΙΩ  έΙγ
              ├Ω                                (1 ┬▒ sέΙΩέΙΤ1/3 )                  (t)
                                                                   1 ┬▒ ╬╣v+ + ╬╢n,p   ,
                     (t)    (t)     (t)  (t)
                exp FέΙΤ (Xn ) έΙΤ F+ (Xn ) + 1                  NP

                                                                  (t)                              έΙΩ(0)
(where ctn denotes the subclass index of sample Xn ) and for any (+, r) έΙΙ S+ (v+,c ),
        (t)
    έΙΗw+,r
       (                                                                                                                          )
                                   έΙγ

                          έΙΩέΙΤ1/3                         1                έΙΩ

                                                                                  έΙΩ(t)    έΙΩ(0)         έΙΩ(t)      έΙΩ(0)

=╬╖ exp         έΙΤ (1 ┬▒ s           ) 1┬▒╬╣ 1┬▒O            5                 s       A+,rέΙΩ   S+ (v+ )   + A+,c,rέΙΩ   S+ (v+,c )
                                                     ln (d)
        N                                          (t)       (t)
                                             exp(FέΙΤ (Xn ))                  sέΙΩ  έΙγ
              1{yn = (+, c)}
        X
    ├Ω                                                         (1 ┬▒ sέΙΩέΙΤ1/3 )                     (t)
                                                                                  1 ┬▒ ╬╣v+,c + ╬╢n,p    ,
        n=1
                                       (t) (t)    (t) (t)
                                  exp FέΙΤ (Xn ) έΙΤ F+ (Xn ) + 1               NP
                                                                                            (63)


                                                             35
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                     +              k                                      έΙΩ(0)
In fact, for any v έΙΙ {v+ } έΙς {v+,c }c=1 , every neuron in S+ (v) remain activated (on v-dominated
patches) and receive exactly the same updates at every iteration as shown above.
                                                                  έΙΩ(0)                                έΙΩ(t)      (t)
For simpler exposition, for any (+, rέΙΩ ) έΙΙ S+ (v+ ), we write A+,rέΙΩ := έθρw+,rέΙΩ , v+ έθσ; similarly for
 έΙΩ(t)                                              έΙΩ(0)
A+,c,rέΙΩ := έθρw+,rέΙΩ , v+,c έθσ for neurons (+, rέΙΩ ) έΙΙ S+ (v+,c ).
Moreover, on έΑε+έΑζ-class samples, the neural network response satisfies the estimate for every
            έΙΩ(0)
(+, rέΙΩ ) έΙΙ S+ (v+ ):
                                       έΙγ

                 (t) (t)       έΙΩέΙΤ1/3                     1
               F+ (Xn ) =(1 ┬▒ s       ) 1┬▒╬╣ 1┬▒O
                                                      ln5 (d)                           (64)

                             έΙΩ    έΙΩ(t)   έΙΩ(0)        έΙΩ(t)      έΙΩ(0)
                          ├Ω s A+,rέΙΩ S+ (v+ ) + A+,ct ,rέΙΩ S+ (v+,ctn ) ,
                                                                                                  n



The same claims hold for the έΑεέΙΤέΑζ class neurons (with the class signs flipped).

                                                                            έΙΩ(0)
Proof. In this proof we focus on the neurons in S+ (v+ ); the proof for the update expressions for
          έΙΩ(0)
those in S+ (v+,c ) are proven in virtually the same way.
Base case, t = T0 .
                      έΙΩ(t)                                                 έΙΩ(0)                                έΙΩ(t)
First define A+,rέΙΩ := έθρw+,rέΙΩ , v+ έθσ, (+, rέΙΩ ) έΙΙ S+ (v+ ); similarly for A+,c,rέΙΩ := έθρw+,rέΙΩ , v+,c έθσ.
Note that the choice of rέΙΩ does not really matter, since we know from phase I that every neu-
         έΙΩ(0)                                                                   (T )   (T )
ron in S+ (v+ ) evolve at exactly the same rate, so by the end of phase I, έΙξw+,r0 έΙΤ w+,r0 έΑ▓ έΙξ2 έΚν
                              (T )                                                έΙΩ(0)
O(╧Δ0 ln(d)) έΚς έΙξw+,r0 έΙξ2 for any (+, r), (+, rέΑ▓ ) έΙΙ S+ (v+ ).
                      έΙΩ(0)
Let (+, r) έΙΙ S+ (v+ ). Similar to phase I, consider the update equation
              (t+1)          (t)         1
         w+,r         =w+,r + ╬╖            ├Ω                                                                                         (65)
                                        NP
                         N
                                    1{yn = +}[1 έΙΤ logit(t)                                             (t)              (t)
                         X                                                             X
                                                           (t)
                                                       + (Xn )]                                ╧Δ έΑ▓ (έθρw+,r , x(t)            (t)
                                                                                                             n,p έθσ + b+,r )xn,p      (66)
                         n=1                                                          pέΙΙ[P ]
                                                                                                                              !
                         +1
                                                  (t)                                      (t)             (t)
                                                                           X
                                                                                       έΑ▓
                                   {yn = έΙΤ}[έΙΤlogit+ (Xn(t) )]                         ╧Δ (έθρw+,r , x(t)            (t)
                                                                                                  n,p έθσ + b+,r )xn,p                 (67)
                                                                           pέΙΙ[P ]


For the on-diagonal update expression, we have
     N
              1{yn = +}[1 έΙΤ logit(t)                                            (t)                    (t)
     X                                                        X
                                     (t)
                                 + (Xn )]                              ╧Δ έΑ▓ (έθρw+,r , x(t)            (t)
                                                                                     n,p έθσ + b+,r )xn,p
     n=1                                                      pέΙΙ[P ]
     N
              1{yn = +}[1 έΙΤ logit(t)
     X
                                     (t)
 =                               + (Xn )]
     n=1
     (                                    "
                                                                       n                                              o
         1                                                        1 έθρw+,r
                                                                      (t)                       (t)
                                                  X
             {|P(Xn(t) ; v+ )| > 0}                                          (t)
                                                                          , ╬▒n,p       (t)
                                                                                 v+ + ╬╢n,p έθσ έΚξ b+,r                      (t)
                                                                                                                        ╬▒n,p       (t)
                                                                                                                             v+ + ╬╢n,p
                                                        (t)
                                              pέΙΙP(Xn ;v+ )
                                                                             #
                               n                      o
                              1 έθρw+,r
                                  (t)             (t)
                 X
     +                                , x(t)            (t)
                                         n,p έθσ έΚξ b+,r xn,p
                   (t)
         pέΙΙP(X
          /    n ;v+ )
                                                                                                       )
                                                     n                      o
     +1                                             1 έθρw+,r
                                                        (t)             (t)
                                              X
              {|P(Xn(t) ; v+ )| = 0}                        , x(t)            (t)
                                                               n,p έθσ έΚξ b+,r xn,p
                                           pέΙΙ[P ]
                                                                                                 (68)
Invoking Theorem F.1 and Corollary ??, the neuronsέΑβ non-activation on the patches that do   not  con-

tain v+ , and activation on the v+ -dominated patches hold with probability at least 1 έΙΤ O mN  P k+
                                                                                            poly(d)



                                                                           36
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


at time T0 . Therefore, the above update expression reduces to
  N
         1{yn = +, |P(Xn(t) ; v+ )| > 0}[1 έΙΤ logit(t)
  X                                                                                                    X
                                                      (t)                                                                (t)       (t)
                                                  + (Xn )]                                                              ╬▒n,p v+ + ╬╢n,p        (69)
  n=1                                                                                                   (t)
                                                                                             pέΙΙP(Xn ;v+ )

                                     (t)
Note that for samples Xn with yn = +,

                                                                                             (t)       (t)
                                           (t)                                     exp(FέΙΤ (Xn ))
                           [1 έΙΤ logit+ (Xn(t) )] =                           (t)     (t)                      (t)        (t)
                                                                                                                                              (70)
                                                              exp(FέΙΤ (Xn )) + exp(F+ (Xn ))
                                                                                     (t)         (t)
Now we need to estimate the network response F+ (Xn ). With probability at least 1 έΙΤ
                                                                                          (t)
exp(έΙΤέΕο(sέΙΩ1/3 )), we have the upper bound (let (+, ctn ) denote the subclass which sample Xn
belongs to):
        (t)
       F+ (Xn(t) )
                                                     (t)                              (t)
           X                         X
                                                               (t)
   έΚν                                             έθρw+,r , v+ + ╬╢n,p έθσ + b+,r
       pέΙΙP(X (t) ;v+ ) (+,r)έΙΙS (0) (v+ )
                                      +

                                                                  (t)                                   (t)
                  X                         X
                                                                              (t)
       +                                                    έθρw+,r , v+,ctn + ╬╢n,p έθσ + b+,r
           pέΙΙP(X (t) ;v+,ct ) (+,r)έΙΙS (0) (v              )
                                n            +       +,ct
                                                        n

                 έΙγ

          έΙΩέΙΤ1/3         έΙΩ                                     1                    έΙΩ(t)       (0)                    έΙΩ(t)        (0)

   έΚν(1 + s      ) 1 + ╬╣s 1 + O                               9                    A+,rέΙΩ S+ (v+ ) + A+,ct ,rέΙΩ S+ (v+,ctn )
                                                           ln (d)                                                          n

                                                                                                                                              (71)
                                                                   (t)                      έΙΩ(t)
The second inequality is true since maxr έθρw+,r , v+ έθσ έΚν A+,rέΙΩ + O(╧Δ0 ln(d)), and for any (+, r) έΙΙ
 (0)               (t)         (t)                                έΙΩ(t)
S+ (v+ ), |έθρw+,r , ╬╢n,p έθσ| έΚν O(1/ ln9 (d))A+,rέΙΩ . The bias value is negative (and so less than 0).
                                                                   έΙΩ(0)                   έΙΩ(0)                έΙΩ(0)             (0)
To further refine the bound, we recall S+ (v) / S+ (v έΑ▓ ) , S+ (v) / S+ (v έΑ▓ )                                                               = 1┬▒
           5
O(1/ ln (d)).
Therefore, we obtain the bound
                                         έΙγ


                (t)                                                                   1        1
               F+ (Xn(t) ) έΚν(1 + sέΙΩέΙΤ1/3 ) 1 + ╬╣sέΙΩ      1+O                1+O                 5
                                                                                   ln5 (d)  ln (d)                                            (72)

                                        έΙΩ(t)  έΙΩ(0)       έΙΩ(t)      έΙΩ(0)
                                     ├Ω A+,rέΙΩ S+ (v+ ) + A+,ct ,rέΙΩ S+ (v+,ctn )
                                                                                     n



Following a similar argument, we also have the lower bound
                         (t)
                      F+ (Xn(t) )

                                                                       (t)                  (t)
                          X                          X
                                                                                   (t)
                  έΚξ                                                ╧Δ έθρw+,r , v+ + ╬╢n,p έθσ + b+,r
                      pέΙΙP(X (t) ;v+ ) (+,r)έΙΙS έΙΩ(0) (v+ )
                                                      +

                                                                                       (t)                      (t)
                                     X                        X
                                                                                                       (t)
                      +                                                            ╧Δ έθρw+,r , v+,ctn + ╬╢n,p έθσ + b+,r
                                                                                                                                              (73)
                          pέΙΙP(X (t) ;v+,ct ) (+,r)έΙΙS έΙΩ(0) (v                  )
                                                 n            +          +,ct
                                                                            n

                                έΙγ

                                                      1                   1
                  έΚξ(1 έΙΤ sέΙΩέΙΤ1/3 ) 1 έΙΤ ╬╣sέΙΩ 1 έΙΤ O                 1 έΙΤ O
                                                   ln5 (d)             ln5 (d)

                         έΙΩ(t)   έΙΩ(0)        έΙΩ(t)        έΙΩ(0)
                    ├Ω A+,rέΙΩ S+ (v+ ) + A+,ct ,rέΙΩ S+ (v+,ctn )
                                                                         n



                         έΙΩ(0)
The neurons in S+ (v+ ) have to activate, therefore they serve a key role in the lower bound, the
                                έΙΩ(t)                                (0)
bias bound for them is simply έΙΤA+,rέΙΩ ╬α(1/ ln5 (d)); the neurons in S+ (v+,c ) contribute at least 0


                                                                             37
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


due to the ReLU activation; the rest of the neurons do not activate. The same reasoning holds for
     έΙΩ(0)
the S+ (v+,c ).
                                         έΙΩ(0)
Knowing that neurons in S+ (v+ ) cannot activate on the patches in samples belonging to the έΑεέΙΤέΑζ
                                                                   έΙΩ(t)
class, now we may write the update expression for every (+, r) έΙΙ S+ (v+ ) as (their updates are
identical, same as in phase I):
                       (t)
                έΙΗw+,r
                         N
               ╬╖ X
                      1{yn = +}[1 έΙΤ logit(t)               (t)             (t)
                                                  X
            =                                (t)
                                         + (Xn )]   ╧Δ έΑ▓ (έθρw+,r , x(t)            (t)
                                                                  n,p έθσ + b+,r )xn,p
              N P n=1
                                                                                           pέΙΙ[P ]
                        N
                 ╬╖
                        1{yn = +, |P(Xn(t) ; v+ )| > 0} exp(έΙΤF+(t) (Xn(t) ))
                        X
            =
                N P n=1
                                                        (t)         (t)
                                         exp(FέΙΤ (Xn ))                                                     X
                                                                                                                             (t)       (t)

                ├Ω                                                                                                           ╬▒n,p v+ + ╬╢n,p
                                 (t)        (t)                      (t)         (t)
               exp FέΙΤ (Xn ) έΙΤ exp(F+ (Xn )) + 1 pέΙΙP(X (t) ;v )                                                                                   (74)
                                                        n   +

               N
                              (
                                              έΙγ

                                                                                                                               1
                 1{yn = +} exp έΙΤ (1 + sέΙΩέΙΤ1/3 ) 1 + ╬╣sέΙΩ 1 + O
               X
            =╬╖
                   n=1
                                                                                                                            ln5 (d)
                                                                                                               )

                         έΙΩ(t)      έΙΩ(0)                    έΙΩ(t)                       έΙΩ(0)
                ├Ω       A+,rέΙΩ     S+ (v+ )              + A+,ct ,rέΙΩ                  S+ (v+,ctn )
                                                               n


                                                  (t)         (t)
                                       exp(FέΙΤ (Xn ))                                                               sέΙΩ  έΙγ
                ├Ω                                                                          (1 ┬▒ sέΙΩέΙΤ1/3 )                            (t)
                                                                                                                         1 ┬▒ ╬╣v+ + ╬╢n,p
                                 (t)        (t)
                    exp FέΙΤ (Xn ) έΙΤ F+ (Xn ) + 1
                                                              (t)         (t)                                      NP

This concludes the proof of the base case.
Induction step. Assume the statements hold for time period [T0 , t], prove for time t + 1.
At step t +  1, based on the induction hypothesis, we know that with probability at least 1 έΙΤ
                                                             έΙΩ(0)
O mN    P k+ t
     poly(d)   , during time ╧Ε έΙΙ [T0 , t], for any (+, r) έΙΙ S+ (v+ ),
            (╧Ε )
     έΙΗw+,r
        N
                                            (
                                                                                 έΙγ

                                                                                                                       1
                1{yn = +} exp έΙΤ (1 + s
        X
                                                                    έΙΩέΙΤ1/3                      έΙΩ
   =╬╖                                                                           ) 1 + ╬╣s               1+O            5
        n=1
                                                                                                                    ln (d)
                                                                                                       )

              έΙΩ(╧Ε )       έΙΩ(0)                  έΙΩ(╧Ε )                  έΙΩ(0)
                                                                                                                                                 (75)
     ├Ω       A+,rέΙΩ       S+ (v+ )            + A+,ct ,rέΙΩ              S+ (v+,ctn )
                                                    n


                                            (╧Ε )         (╧Ε )
                                 exp(FέΙΤ (Xn ))                                                                      sέΙΩ  έΙγ
     ├Ω                                                                                         (1 ┬▒ sέΙΩέΙΤ1/3 )                         (╧Ε )
                                                                                                                          1 ┬▒ ╬╣v+ + ╬╢n,p
                        (╧Ε )     (╧Ε )
         exp FέΙΤ (Xn ) έΙΤ exp(F+ (Xn )) + 1
                                                          (╧Ε )            (╧Ε )                                      NP

and for the bias,
        (╧Ε )
    έΙΗb+,r
                         N
                                                              (
                                                                                                έΙγ

       1 X                                                                                                                        1
  έΚνέΙΤ╬╖ 5         1{yn = +} exp                                       έΙΤ (1 + s          έΙΩέΙΤ1/3
                                                                                               ) 1 + ╬╣s 1 + O  έΙΩ
                                                                                                                                 5
     ln (d) n=1                                                                                                                ln (d)
                                                                                                    )

             έΙΩ(╧Ε )       έΙΩ(0)                  έΙΩ(╧Ε )                  έΙΩ(0)
                                                                                                                                                 (76)
    ├Ω       A+,rέΙΩ       S+ (v+ )            + A+,ct ,rέΙΩ              S+ (v+,ctn )
                                                   n


                                                                                                                     (╧Ε )     (╧Ε )
                                 sέΙΩ         έΙγ

                    έΙΩέΙΤ1/3                                1                                                 exp(FέΙΤ (Xn ))
    ├Ω (1 έΙΤ s                   )                1 έΙΤ ╬╣ έΙΤ 10
                                 NP                    ln (d)                              (╧Ε ) (╧Ε )      (╧Ε ) (╧Ε )
                                                                                      exp FέΙΤ (Xn ) έΙΤ exp(F+ (Xn )) + 1


                                                                                      38
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Conditioning on the high-probability events of the induction hypothesis,



       (t+1)
     w+,r
       (T )
   =w+,r0
             t X
               N
                                                     (
                                                                                       έΙγ

                                                                                                                     1
                             1{yn = +} exp έΙΤ (1 + sέΙΩέΙΤ1/3 ) 1 + ╬╣sέΙΩ 1 + O
             X
     +╬╖
             ╧Ε =T0 n=1
                                                                                                                  ln5 (d)
                                                                                            )                                            (77)

              έΙΩ(╧Ε )     έΙΩ(0)             έΙΩ(╧Ε )                     έΙΩ(0)
     ├Ω       A+,rέΙΩ     S+ (v+ )       + A+,ct ,rέΙΩ                 S+ (v+,ctn )
                                             n


                                      (╧Ε )          (╧Ε )
                               exp(FέΙΤ (Xn ))                                                            sέΙΩ  έΙγ
     ├Ω                                                                             (1 ┬▒ sέΙΩέΙΤ1/3 )                         (╧Ε )
                                                                                                              1 ┬▒ ╬╣v+ + ╬╢n,p
                      (╧Ε )     (╧Ε )
         exp FέΙΤ (Xn ) έΙΤ exp(F+ (Xn )) + 1
                                                     (╧Ε )         (╧Ε )                                  NP



                                                                             mN P                                                (t+1)
It follows that, with probability at least 1 έΙΤ O                             poly(d)       , for all v+ -dominated patch xn,p ,



                  (t+1)                      (t+1)
          έθρw+,r , x(t+1)
                    n,p έθσ + b+,r
            (T0 ) έΙγ            (t+1)      (T )
         =έθρw+,r , 1 ┬▒ ╬╣v+ + ╬╢n,p     έθσ + b+,r0
                 t XN
                                        (
                                                      έΙγ

                                                                                                                            1
                       1{yn = +} exp έΙΤ (1 + s
              X
                                               έΙΩέΙΤ1/3         έΙΩ
           +╬╖                                        ) 1 + ╬╣s 1 + O                                                        5
                      ╧Ε =T0 n=1
                                                                                                                         ln (d)
                                                                                                    )

                       έΙΩ(╧Ε )    έΙΩ(0)                   έΙΩ(╧Ε )              έΙΩ(0)
              ├Ω       A+,rέΙΩ    S+ (v+ )             + A+,ct ,rέΙΩ          S+ (v+,ctn )
                                                           n


                                             (╧Ε )          (╧Ε )
                                  exp(FέΙΤ (Xn ))                                                         sέΙΩ
              ├Ω                                                                    (1 ┬▒ sέΙΩέΙΤ1/3 )
                exp
                              (╧Ε ) (╧Ε )  (╧Ε ) (╧Ε )
                             FέΙΤ (Xn ) έΙΤ F+ (Xn )+1                                                      NP
                 έΙγ           (╧Ε )
                                   έΙγ           (t+1)       (╧Ε )
              ├Ω έθρ 1 ┬▒ ╬╣v+ + ╬╢n,p  , 1 ┬▒ ╬╣v+ + ╬╢n,p   έθσ + έΙΗb+,r
                                                                                                                                         (78)
         έΚξ0
                      t X
                        N
                                                                  (
                                                                                                έΙγ

                                                                                                                            1
                                  1{yn = +} exp έΙΤ (1 + sέΙΩέΙΤ1/3 ) 1 + ╬╣sέΙΩ 1 + O
                      X
              +╬╖
                      ╧Ε =T0 n=1
                                                                                                                         ln5 (d)
                                                                                                    )

                       έΙΩ(╧Ε )    έΙΩ(0)                   έΙΩ(╧Ε )              έΙΩ(0)
              ├Ω       A+,rέΙΩ    S+ (v+ )             + A+,ct ,rέΙΩ          S+ (v+,ctn )
                                                           n


                                             (╧Ε )          (╧Ε )
                                  exp(FέΙΤ (Xn ))            sέΙΩ
              ├Ω                              (1 ┬▒ sέΙΩέΙΤ1/3 )
                 (╧Ε )   (╧Ε )     (╧Ε ) (╧Ε )
            exp FέΙΤ (Xn ) έΙΤ F+ (Xn ) + 1                    NP

                             1
          ├Ω 1έΙΤ╬╣έΙΤO
                        ln5 (d)
         >0


                                                    έΙΩ(0)                                                                     (t+1)
Therefore the neurons (+, r) έΙΙ S+ (v+ ) activate on the v+ -dominated patches xn,p . We also
know that they cannot activate on patches that are not dominated by v+ by Theorem F.1. Following
a similar derivation to the base case, we arrive at the result that, conditioning on the events of the


                                                                             39
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                              mN P k+                                  έΙΩ(0)
induction hypothesis, with probability at least 1 έΙΤ O                          poly(d)           , for all (+, r) έΙΙ S+ (v+ ),
           (t+1)
    έΙΗw+,r
       N
                                  (
                                                           έΙγ

                                                                                                        1
               1{yn = +} exp έΙΤ (1 + sέΙΩέΙΤ1/3 ) 1 + ╬╣sέΙΩ 1 + O
       X
  =╬╖
       n=1
                                                                                                     ln5 (d)
                                                                                         )

              έΙΩ(t+1)      έΙΩ(0)           έΙΩ(t+1)          έΙΩ(0)
     ├Ω       A+,rέΙΩ       S+ (v+ )     + A+,ct ,rέΙΩ       S+ (v+,ctn )
                                            n


                                                           (t+1)             (t+1)
                                                                                  έΙγ
                             sέΙΩ              exp(FέΙΤ      (Xn       ))
     ├Ω (1 ┬▒ sέΙΩέΙΤ1/3 )                                                                           (t+1)
                                                                                    1 ┬▒ ╬╣v+ + ╬╢n,p
                             N P exp F (t+1) (Xn(t+1) ) έΙΤ F (t+1) (Xn(t+1) ) + 1
                                         έΙΤ                               +
                                                                                                                                         (79)

                                                                   mN P
Consequently, with probability at least 1 έΙΤ O                      poly(d)       ,
               (t+1)
         έΙΗb+,r
                         N
                                                    (
                                                                                         έΙγ

         1 X                                                                                                           1
     έΚνέΙΤ 5         1{yn = +}╬╖ exp                        έΙΤ (1 + s        έΙΩέΙΤ1/3
                                                                                     ) 1 + ╬╣s 1 + O   έΙΩ
                                                                                                                      5
       ln (d) n=1                                                                                                   ln (d)
                                                                                             )

                    έΙΩ(t+1)    έΙΩ(0)          έΙΩ(t+1)              έΙΩ(0)
           ├Ω       A+,rέΙΩ     S+ (v+ )    + A+,ct ,rέΙΩ           S+ (v+,ctn )
                                               n                                                                                         (80)
                                      (t+1)     (t+1)
                               exp(FέΙΤ         (Xn        ))           sέΙΩ
           ├Ω                                            (1 έΙΤ sέΙΩέΙΤ1/3 )
                 (t+1)
            exp FέΙΤ     (Xn
                          (t+1)      (t+1)
                                ) έΙΤ F+
                                             (t+1)
                                           (Xn     ) +1               NP

                           1
           ├Ω 1έΙΤ╬╣έΙΤO        9
                        ln (d)

                                                                                                                                  (╧Ε )
Utilizing the definition of conditional probability, we conclude that the expressions for έΙΗw+,r and
   (t+1)
έΙΗb    are indeed as described in the theorem during time ╧Ε έΙΙ [T0 , t + 1] with probability at least
  +,r
 1 έΙΤ O mN   P k+ t
         poly(d)     ├Ω  1 έΙΤ O   mN P k+
                                 poly(d)    έΚξ 1 έΙΤ O    mN P k+ (t+1)
                                                         poly(d)       .
                                                        (╧Ε )                 (t+1)
Moreover, based on the expression of έΙΗw+,r and έΙΗb+,r , following virtually the same argument
                                                                                                      (t+1)
as in the base case, we can estimate the network output for any (Xn        , yn = +):
                                                έΙγ

                 (t+1)                                                1
               F+      (Xn(t+1) ) =(1 ┬▒ sέΙΩέΙΤ1/3 ) 1 ┬▒ ╬╣ 1 ┬▒ O         5         sέΙΩ
                                                                   ln (d)                                                                (81)

                                         έΙΩ(t)   έΙΩ(0)          έΙΩ(t)        έΙΩ(0)
                                    ├Ω A+,rέΙΩ S+ (v+ ) + A+,ct ,rέΙΩ S+ (v+,ctn )
                                                                                                 n


Lemma E.3. Define time T1,1 to be the first point in time which the following identity holds on all
  (t)
Xn belonging to the έΑε+έΑζ class:
                                   (t)    (t)
                            exp(FέΙΤ (Xn ))                               1
                                                         έΚξ 1 έΙΤ  O                             (82)
                        (t)    (t)       (t)
                   exp(FέΙΤ (Xn ) έΙΤ F+ (Xn )) + 1
                                               (t)
                                                                     ln5 (d)
Then T1,1 έΚν poly(d), and for all t έΙΙ [T1,1 , T1 ], the above holds. The following also holds for this
time period:
                                        (t)                     1
                              [1 έΙΤ logit+ (Xn(t) )] έΚν O                                         (83)
                                                             ln5 (d)
The same results also hold with the class signs flipped.


                                                                   40
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                               (t)    (t)
Proof. We first note that, the training loss [1 έΙΤ logit+ (Xn )] on samples belonging to
the έΑε+έΑζ class at any time during t έΙΙ [T0 , T1 ] is, asymptotically speaking, monotoni-
                       1         έΙΤ1
     decreasing from 2 έΙΤ O(d ).
cally                                   This  can be easily proven by observing the way
      έΙΩ(t)    έΙΩ(0)                  έΙΩ(t)        έΙΩ(0)
sέΙΩ A+,rέΙΩ S+ (v+ ) + A+,c,rέΙΩ S+ (v+,c )                          monotonically increases from the proof of Lemma
             (t) (t)                      (t)
E.2: before F+ (Xn ) έΚξ ln ln5 (d) on all Xn belonging to the έΑε+έΑζ class, there must be some sam-
       (t)
ples Xn on which
                                                                              (t)    (t)
                                     (t)                              exp(FέΙΤ (Xn ))
                       [1 έΙΤ logit+ (Xn(t) )] =                  (t)     (t)                 (t)    (t)
                                                         exp(FέΙΤ (Xn )) + exp(F+ (Xn ))
                                                              1 έΙΤ O(╧Δ0 ln(d)sέΙΩ dc0 )                         (84)
                                                       έΚξ
                                                         1 + O(╧Δ0 ln(d)sέΙΩ dc0 ) + ln5 (d)

                                                                1
                                                       έΚξέΕο              .
                                                             ln5 (d)
                                                                                           (t)    (t)
Therefore, by the
                 update expressions
                                    in the proof of Lemma E.2, F+ (Xn ) can reach ln ln5 (d) in
                     N P ln5 (d)
time at most O          ╬╖sέΙΩ          έΙΙ poly(d) (in the worst case scenario). At time T1,1 and beyond,
                                      (t)       (t)
                             exp(FέΙΤ (Xn ))            exp(1 έΙΤ O(╧Δ0 dc0 sέΙΩ ))
         1έΙΤ                                                       έΚν1 έΙΤ
                   (t) (t)    (t) (t)
              exp(FέΙΤ (Xn ) έΙΤ F+ (Xn )) + 1      exp(1 + O(╧Δ0 dc0 sέΙΩ )) ln51(d) + 1
                                                                                                             (85)
                                                   1
                                           έΚνO             .
                                                ln5 (d)

                                           έΙΩ
Lemma E.4. Denote C = ╬╖ 2ks+ P , and write (for any c έΙΙ [k+ ])

                                 έΙΩ(t)   έΙΩ(0)           έΙΩ(t)    έΙΩ(0)
                Ac (t) = sέΙΩ A+,rέΙΩ S+ (v+ ) + A+,c,rέΙΩ S+ (v+,c )                                              (86)
                                               έΙΩ(t)
(see Lemma E.2 for definition of A┬╖                   ). Define tc,0 = exp(Ac (T1,1 )). We write A(t) and t0 below
for cleaner notations.
Then with probability at least 1 έΙΤ o(1), during t έΙΙ [T1,1 , T1 ],
                                        A(t) = ln(C(t έΙΤ T1,1 ) + t0 ) + E(t)                                 (87)
                                       tέΙΤT1,1 +C έΙΤ1 t0 1      ln(t)έΙΤln(C έΙΤ1 t0 )
                                     P
                             1
where |E(t)| έΚν O          ln4 (d)      ╧Ε =C έΙΤ1 t0      ╧Ε έΚνO        ln4 (d)
                                                                                   .

The same results also hold with the class signs flipped.

Proof. Sidenote: To make the writing a bit cleaner, we assume in the proof below that C έΙΤ1 t0 is an
                                                                         1                   1
integer. The general case is easy to extend to by observing that tέΙΤT1,1 +έΝΙC έΙΤ1 t έΝΚ έΙΤ tέΙΤT        έΙΤ1 t  έΚν
                                                                                0        1,1 +C     0
                  1
(tέΙΤT1,1 +έΝΙC έΙΤ1 t0 έΝΚ)(tέΙΤT1,1 +C έΙΤ1 t0 ) , which can be absorbed into the error term at every iteration since
        1                1
tέΙΤT1,1 +έΝΙC έΙΤ1 t0 έΝΚ έΚς ln4 (d) due to C
                                          έΙΤ1
                                             t0 έΚξ έΕο(╧Δ0έΙΤ1 /(polyln(d)dc0 )) έΚτ d έΚτ ln4 (d).
Based on result from Lemmas E.2 and E.3, as long as A(t) έΚν O (ln(d)), we know during time
t έΙΙ [T1,1 , T1 ] the update rule for A(t) is as follows:
                                                          έΙγ

                                                                                1
           A(t + 1) έΙΤ A(t) =C exp έΙΤ(1 ┬▒ sέΙΩέΙΤ1/3 ) 1 ┬▒ ╬╣ 1 ┬▒ O                            A(t)
                                                                             ln5 (d)
                                                                            έΙγ

                                                  1              έΙΩέΙΤ1/3                    1
                                 ├Ω 1┬▒O                     (1 ┬▒ s       )     1 ┬▒ ╬╣ ┬▒
                                               ln5 (d)                                ln10 (d)
                                                                                                 (88)
                                                                  1                      1
                              =C exp {έΙΤA(t)} exp ┬▒O                          1 ┬▒  O
                                                               ln4 (d)                ln5 (d)

                                                           C1
                              =C exp {έΙΤA(t)} 1 ┬▒ 4
                                                         ln (d)

                                                               41
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


where we write C1 in place of O(┬╖) for a more concrete update expression.
The base case t = T1,1 is trivially true.
We proceed with the induction step. Assume the hypothesis true for t έΙΙ [T1,1 , T ], prove for t + 1 =
T + 1.
Note that by Lemma E.10,


  A(t + 1) = ln(C(t έΙΤ T1,1 ) + t0 ) + E(t)

                                                                      C1
               + C exp {έΙΤ ln(C(t έΙΤ T1,1 ) + t0 ) έΙΤ E(t))} 1 ┬▒
                                                                    ln4 (d)
             = ln(C) + ln(t έΙΤ T1,1 + C έΙΤ1 t0 ) + E(t)

                          1                                         C1
                                     1 έΙΤ E(t) ┬▒ O(E(t)2 ) 1 ┬▒ 4

               +C
                   C(t έΙΤ T1,1 ) + t0                              ln (d)
                                 έΙΤ1
                       tέΙΤT1,1 +C t0 έΙΤ1
                              X        1 1           1                1           1
             = ln(C) +                   +                      +  0,
                              ╧Ε =1
                                       ╧Ε   2 t έΙΤ T1,1 + C έΙΤ1 t0       8 (t έΙΤ T1,1 + C έΙΤ1 t0 )2
                           1             C1           1
               +                      ┬▒ 4
                   t έΙΤ T1,1 + C έΙΤ1 t0  ln (d) t έΙΤ T1,1 + C
                                                           έΙΤ1 t
                                                                0

                                  1                             2
                                                                            C1
               + E(t) +                       έΙΤE(t) ┬▒ O(E(t) ) 1 ┬▒ 4
                         t έΙΤ T1,1 + C έΙΤ1 t0                               ln (d)
                       tέΙΤT1,1 +C έΙΤ1 t0
                            X          1 1           1                1           1
             = ln(C) +                   +                      + 0,
                            ╧Ε =1
                                       ╧Ε   2 t έΙΤ T1,1 + C έΙΤ1 t0       8 (t έΙΤ T1,1 + C έΙΤ1 t0 )2
                   C1            1
               ┬▒
                 ln4 (d) t έΙΤ T1,1 + C έΙΤ1 t0

                                  1                         2
                                                                         C1
               + E(t) +                      έΙΤE(t) ┬▒ O(E(t)   )    1 ┬▒
                          t έΙΤ T1,1 + C έΙΤ1 t0                           ln4 (d)
                                                                                                   (89)
Invoking Lemma E.10 again,


 A(t + 1) = ln(C) + ln(t + 1 έΙΤ T1,1 + C έΙΤ1 t0 )
               1            1               1         1
            έΙΤ                            +
               2 t + 1 έΙΤ T1,1 + C έΙΤ1 t0     2 t έΙΤ T1,1 + C έΙΤ1 t0

                   1             1                       1           1
            + έΙΤ                                 , 0 + 0,
                   8 (t + 1 έΙΤ T1,1 + C έΙΤ1 t0 )2          8 (t έΙΤ T1,1 + C έΙΤ1 t0 )2
                 C1            1
            ┬▒ 4
               ln (d) t έΙΤ T1,1 + C έΙΤ1 t0

                                1                            2
                                                                         C1
            + E(t) +                       έΙΤE(t) ┬▒ O(E(t) ) 1 ┬▒ 4
                        t έΙΤ T1,1 + C έΙΤ1 t0                             ln (d)
            = ln(C(t + 1 έΙΤ T1,1 ) + t0 )

                1                      1                                            1
              +                                                  ┬▒  O
                2 (t + 1 έΙΤ T1,1 + C έΙΤ1 t0 )(t έΙΤ T1,1 + C έΙΤ1 t0 )        (t + 1 έΙΤ T1,1 + C έΙΤ1 t0 )2
                  C1           1
              ┬▒ 4
                ln (d) t έΙΤ T1,1 + C έΙΤ1 t0

                                1                              2
                                                                            C1
              + E(t) +                       έΙΤE(t)  ┬▒ O(E(t)     )   1 ┬▒
                        t έΙΤ T1,1 + C έΙΤ1 t0                                ln4 (d)
                                                                                                  (90)


                                                 42
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


To further refine the expression, first note that the error passed down from the previous step t does
not grow in this step (in fact it slightly decreases):

                                  1                        2
                                                                   C1
                   E(t) +                    έΙΤE(t) ┬▒ O(E(t) ) 1 ┬▒ 4
                          t έΙΤ T1,1 + C έΙΤ1 t0                     ln (d)
                <|E(t)|
                                                                                                                          (91)
                                     +C έΙΤ1 t0
                               tέΙΤT1,1X
                        1                     1
                έΚνO                              .
                     ln4 (d)          έΙΤ1
                                 ╧Ε =C t
                                              ╧Ε
                                                 0


Moreover, notice that at step t + 1, since t+1έΙΤT1,11 +C έΙΤ1 t0 έΚς ln41(d) , the error term |E(t + 1)| =
                                                      t+1έΙΤT1,1 +C έΙΤ1 t0 1
                                                P
|A(t+1)έΙΤln(C(t+1έΙΤT1,1 )+t0 )| έΚν O ln41(d)             ╧Ε =C έΙΤ1 t0        ╧Ε , which finishes the inductive
step.


                                                                mN P k+ T1
Lemma E.5. With probability at least 1 έΙΤ O                       poly(d)         , for all t έΙΙ [0, T1 ], all c έΙΙ [k+ ],

                                                     έΙΩ(t)
                                              έΙΗA+,c,rέΙΩ

                                                                           1
                                                     έΙΩ(t)
                                                                 =╬α                ,
                                               έΙΗA+,rέΙΩ                     k+
                                                     έΙΩ(t)
                                                                                                                          (92)
                                                A+,c,rέΙΩ

                                                                           1
                                                     έΙΩ(t)
                                                                 =╬α                .
                                                 A+,rέΙΩ                    k+


The same identity holds for the έΑεέΙΤέΑζ-classes.



Proof. The statements in the lemma follow trivially from Theorem D.1 for time period [0, T0 ]. Let
us focus on the phase [T0 , T1 ].
In this proof, we condition on the high-probability events of Lemma E.4 and Lemma E.2.
                                                                      έΙΩ(t)         έΙΩ(0)
First of all, based on Lemma E.4, we know that sέΙΩ A+,rέΙΩ S+ (v+ ) έΚν O(ln(d)). We will make
use of this fact later.
Base case, t = T0 .
The base case directly follows from our Theorem D.1.
Induction step, assume statement holds for ╧Ε έΙΙ [T0 , t], prove statement for t + 1.
By Lemma E.2, we know that

                            έΙΩ(t)
                       έΙΗA+,rέΙΩ
                           k+
                                       (
                                                          έΙγ

                           X                                                                      1
                      =╬╖         exp       έΙΤ (1 ┬▒ sέΙΩέΙΤ1/3 ) 1 ┬▒ ╬╣sέΙΩ 1 ┬▒ O
                           c=1
                                                                                               ln5 (d)

                                                                                                )                         (93)
                          έΙΩ(t)  έΙΩ(0)       έΙΩ(t)    έΙΩ(0)
                       ├Ω A+,rέΙΩ S+ (v+ ) + A+,c,rέΙΩ S+ (v+,c )

                                                           sέΙΩ         έΙγ

                                              έΙΩέΙΤ1/3                                              1
                       ├Ω [1/3, 1](1 ┬▒ s                )                  1┬▒╬╣┬▒O                 9           ,
                                                         2k+ P                                ln (d)

                                                                43
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


and for any c έΙΙ [k+ ],
                                έΙΩ(t)
                          έΙΗA+,c,rέΙΩ
                              (
                                                          έΙγ


                                                 έΙΩέΙΤ1/3         1 έΙΩ
                        =╬╖ exp έΙΤ (1 ┬▒ s                  ) 1 ┬▒ ╬╣s 1 ┬▒ O
                                                           ln5 (d)
                                                                                                                              (94)
                                                                 )

                              έΙΩ(t)  έΙΩ(0)     έΙΩ(t)    έΙΩ(0)
                         ├Ω A+,rέΙΩ S+ (v+ ) + A+,c,rέΙΩ S+ (v+,c )

                                                             sέΙΩ          έΙγ

                                                 έΙΩέΙΤ1/3                                        1
                          ├Ω [1/3, 1](1 ┬▒ s               )                   1┬▒╬╣┬▒O           9           ,
                                                           2k+ P                           ln (d)
Relying on the induction hypothesis, we can reduce the above expressions to
      έΙΩ(t)
  έΙΗA+,rέΙΩ
   k+
              (                                                                         )
                                        έΙγ

   X
                               έΙΩέΙΤ1/3            1               1     έΙΩ έΙΩ(t)     έΙΩ(0)
=╬╖     exp έΙΤ (1 ┬▒ s                    ) 1┬▒╬╣ 1┬▒O         1┬▒O         s A+,rέΙΩ S+ (v+ )
   c=1
                                             ln5 (d)           k+
                           sέΙΩ    έΙγ

                 έΙΩέΙΤ1/3                           1
 ├Ω [1/3, 1](1 ┬▒ s      )           1┬▒╬╣┬▒O
                         2k+ P                ln9 (d)
       (                                                                              )
                         έΙγ

                  έΙΩέΙΤ1/3                    1                 1     έΙΩ έΙΩ(t)   έΙΩ(0)
=╬╖ exp έΙΤ (1 ┬▒ s         ) 1┬▒╬╣ 1┬▒O                      1┬▒O        s A+,rέΙΩ S+ (v+ )
                                        ln5 (d)             k+
                 sέΙΩ
  ├Ω ╬α(1) ├Ω          ,
                 2P
                                                                                                                              (95)
and for any c έΙΙ [k+ ],
       έΙΩ(t)
   έΙΗA+,c,rέΙΩ
       (                                                                                           )
                                  έΙγ

                         έΙΩέΙΤ1/3                                1                1   έΙΩ έΙΩ(t)  έΙΩ(0)
 =╬╖ exp       έΙΤ (1 ┬▒ s           ) 1┬▒╬╣ 1┬▒O                   5           1┬▒O      s A+,rέΙΩ S+ (v+ )
                                                           ln (d)             k+
                    sέΙΩ
   ├Ω ╬α(1) ├Ω             .
                  2k+ P
                                                                                                                              (96)
                                          έΙΩ(t)      έΙΩ(0)
By invoking the property that sέΙΩ A+,rέΙΩ S+ (v+ ) έΚν O(ln(d)), we find that for all c έΙΙ [k+ ],
                 έΙΩ(t)
                               (                                    )
             έΙΗA+,c,rέΙΩ

                                             1      έΙΩ έΙΩ(t)  έΙΩ(0)              1
                  έΙΩ(t)
                        = exp ┬▒ O           5      s A+,rέΙΩ S+ (v+ )   ├Ω╬α
              έΙΗA+,rέΙΩ                      ln (d)                             k +

                                         1               1                                  (97)
                        = 1┬▒O           4         ├Ω╬α
                                      ln (d)            k +

                                1
                        =╬α          .
                               k+
Therefore, we can finish our induction step:
        έΙΩ(t+1)          έΙΩ(t)            έΙΩ(t)                     έΙΩ(t)           έΙΩ(t)
     A+,c,rέΙΩ          A+,c,rέΙΩ + έΙΗA+,c,rέΙΩ                 A+,c,rέΙΩ + έΙΗA+,c,rέΙΩ

                                                                                                                  1
        έΙΩ(t+1)
                  =      έΙΩ(t)           έΙΩ(t)
                                                 =                                =╬α                                      .   (98)
     A+,rέΙΩ              A+,rέΙΩ + έΙΗA+,rέΙΩ                          έΙΩ(t)       έΙΩ(t)
                                                   ╬α (k+ ) ├Ω A+,c,rέΙΩ + έΙΗA+,c,rέΙΩ                                  k+


                                                                                            έΙΩ(t)     έΙΩ(0)
Lemma E.6. Let TέΕο(1) be the first point in time such that either sέΙΩ A+,rέΙΩ S+ (v+ ) έΚξ έΕο(1) or
    έΙΩ(t)      έΙΩ(0)
sέΙΩ AέΙΤ,rέΙΩ SέΙΤ (vέΙΤ ) έΚξ έΕο(1). Then for any t < TέΕο(1) ,
                                                         έΙΩ(t)
                                                     AέΙΤ,rέΙΩ
                                                         έΙΩ(t)
                                                                = ╬α(1)                                                        (99)
                                                     A+,rέΙΩ

                                                                44
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


and for any t έΙΙ [TέΕο(1) , T1 ],

                                              έΙΩ(t)         έΙΩ(t)
                                             AέΙΤ,rέΙΩ A+,rέΙΩ

                                                                                   1
                                              έΙΩ(t)
                                                   , έΙΩ(t) έΚξ έΕο                                   .                                    (100)
                                             A+,rέΙΩ AέΙΤ,rέΙΩ                         ln(d)


Proof. This lemma is a consequence of Theorem D.1, LemmaE.2 and Lemma E.4.
                                                             έΙΩ(t)
                                                            AέΙΤ,rέΙΩ
Due to Theorem D.1, we already know that                     έΙΩ(t)      = ╬α(1) up to time T0 . In addition, with Lemma
                                                            A+,rέΙΩ
                                      έΙΩ(t)     έΙΩ(0)
E.2 we know that before sέΙΩ A+,rέΙΩ S+ (v+ ) έΚξ έΕο(1), the loss term (on a +-class sample) 1 έΙΤ
     (t)      (t)
logit+ (Xn ) = ╬α(1) (the same holds with the class signs flipped), in which case it is also easy to
            έΙΩ(t)
           AέΙΤ,rέΙΩ                                                                                έΙΩ(t)         έΙΩ(t)
derive      έΙΩ(t)    = ╬α(1) by noting that the update expressions έΙΗAέΙΤ,rέΙΩ /έΙΗA+,rέΙΩ = ╬α(1).
           A+,rέΙΩ

                                                                                 έΙΩ(t)           έΙΩ(0)                   έΙΩ(t)   έΙΩ(0)
Beyond time TέΕο(1) , by Lemma E.4, we know that sέΙΩ A+,rέΙΩ S+ (v+ ) , sέΙΩ AέΙΤ,rέΙΩ SέΙΤ (vέΙΤ ) έΚν
                                                           έΙΩ(t)       έΙΩ(0)                          έΙΩ(t)     έΙΩ(0)
O(ln(d)). With the understanding that sέΙΩ A+,rέΙΩ S+ (v+ ) , sέΙΩ AέΙΤ,rέΙΩ SέΙΤ (vέΙΤ ) έΚξ έΕο(1) beyond
                                                                      έΙΩ(0)
                                                                   |S      (vέΙΤ )|
TέΕο(1) due to the monotonicity of these functions, and the property έΙΤέΙΩ(0)          έΙΤ 1 έΚν O ln51(d)
                                                                                                       |S+    (v+ )|
from Proposition 1, the rest of the lemma follows.



                                                                      mN P k+ t
Lemma E.7. With probability at least 1 έΙΤ O                             poly(d)        , for all t έΙΙ [0, T1 ] and all (+, r) έΙΙ
 έΙΩ(0)
S+ (v+ ),

                                                     (t)
                                              έΙΗb+,r

                                                                              1
                                                            = έΙΤ╬α                            .                                        (101)
                                              έΙΗA+,r
                                                     (t)
                                                                           ln5 (d)


The same holds with the +-class sign replaced by the έΙΤ-class sign.



                                      έΙΩ(0)
Proof. Choose any (+, r) έΙΙ S+ (v+ ).
The statement in this lemma for time period t έΙΙ [0, T0 ] follows easily from Theorem D.1 and its
proof. Let us examine the period t έΙΙ [T0 , T1 ].

              E.2 and  its proof and Lemma E.5, we know that for t έΙΙ [T0 , T1 ], with probability
Based on Lemma
                      mN P k+ t
at least 1 έΙΤ O         poly(d)    ,

      (t)
  έΙΗA+,r
      (                                                                                )
                                   έΙγ


                         έΙΩέΙΤ1/3         1                 1      έΙΩ έΙΩ(t)      έΙΩ(0)
=╬╖ exp έΙΤ (1 ┬▒ s                   ) 1┬▒╬╣ 1┬▒O      1┬▒O           s A+,rέΙΩ S+ (v+ )
                                    ln5 (d)             k+
                                            N                              (t)    (t)
                 έΙΩ   έΙγ
                                          X
         έΙΩέΙΤ1/3 s                  1                                 exp(FέΙΤ (Xn ))
 ├Ω (1 ┬▒ s     )        1┬▒╬╣┬▒O                   1 {yn = +}
                               ln9 (d)

                NP                         n=1
                                                                (t)    (t)       (t)
                                                          exp FέΙΤ (Xn ) έΙΤ F+ (Xn ) + 1
                                                                                       (t)

                                                                                      (102)


                                                                  45
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Furthermore,
     (t)
  έΙΗb+,r
              (t)
     έΙξέΙΗw+,r έΙξ2
=έΙΤ
           ln5 (d)
                        (                                                                                       )
                                                  έΙγ

     1                                   έΙΩέΙΤ1/3                              1               1   έΙΩ έΙΩ(t)  έΙΩ(0)
=έΙΤ╬╖ 5     exp               έΙΤ (1 ┬▒ s             ) 1┬▒╬╣ 1┬▒O                 5          1┬▒O      s A+,rέΙΩ S+ (v+ )
   ln (d)                                                                ln (d)            k+
                                                         N                                     (t)   (t)
                         sέΙΩ
                                                         X
                                          1                                             exp(FέΙΤ (Xn ))
  ├Ω (1 ┬▒ s     έΙΩέΙΤ1/3
                       )            1┬▒╬╣┬▒ 9                      1{yn = +}
                         NP             ln (d)            n=1
                                                                                  (t) (t)    (t) (t)
                                                                             exp FέΙΤ (Xn ) έΙΤ F+ (Xn ) + 1
                                                                                                       (103)
                                              έΙΩ(t)      έΙΩ(0)
With the understanding that sέΙΩ A+,rέΙΩ S+ (v+ ) έΚν O(ln(d)) from Lemma E.4 and the fact that
                (t)
                 (t)
       exp(FέΙΤ (Xn    ))

     (t)   (t)  (t)     (t)
                              = ╬α(1), we have
exp FέΙΤ (Xn )έΙΤF+ (Xn ) +1

                         (t)
                      έΙΗb+,r
                         (t)
                     έΙΗA+,r
                                                   (                                                    )
                                   1                                 1                έΙΩ(t)    έΙΩ(0)
                    =έΙΤ╬α           5          exp       έΙΤ 1┬▒O        5             sέΙΩ A+,rέΙΩ   S+ (v+ )
                                ln (d)                            ln (d)                                    (104)

                             1                   1
                    =έΙΤ╬α               1 ┬▒ O
                          ln5 (d)             ln4 (d)

                             1
                    =έΙΤ╬α             .
                          ln5 (d)


Lemma E.8 (Probability of mistake on hard samples is high). For all t έΙΙ [0, T1 ], given a hard test
sample (Xhard , y),        h                             i
                                                                  (T )
                                       P Fy(T ) (Xhard ) έΚν FyέΑ▓ (Xhard ) έΚξ έΕο(1).                             (105)

Proof. We first show that at time t = 0, the probability of the network making a mistake on hard
test samples is έΕο(1), then prove that for the rest of the time, i.e. t έΙΙ (0, T1 ], the model still makes
mistake on hard test samples with probability έΕο(1).
At time t = 0, by Lemma H.3, we know that for any r έΙΙ [m], with probability έΕο(1),
                   (0)
                                         έΙγ                          p
                έθρw+,r , ╬╢ έΙΩ έθσ έΚξ έΕο(╧Δ0 ╧Δ╬╢ έΙΩ d) έΚξ έΕο(╧Δ0 polyln(d)) έΚτ έΕο ╧Δ0 ln(d) .                               (106)

Relying on concentration of the binomial random variable, with probability at least 1έΙΤeέΙΤέΕο(polyln(d)) ,
                          m                                        έΙγ
                                    (0)          (0)
                          X
                              ╧Δ έθρw+,r , ╬╢ έΙΩ έθσ + b+,r έΚξ έΕο(m╧Δ0 ╧Δ╬╢ έΙΩ d),                         (107)
                                    r=1
which is asymptotically larger
                               than the activation  from the features, which, following from Proposi-
                                   p
tion 1, is upper bounded by O ╧Δ0 ln(d)sέΙΩ dc0 . The same can be said for the έΑεέΙΤέΑζ class. In other
words,
                       (0)                (0)
                      FέΙΤ (Xhard ) έΙΤ F+ (Xhard ) > 0
                      ( m
                            1{έθρwέΙΤ,r
                                  (0)             (0)        (0)
                        X
                 έΘΡέΘΤ                    , ╬╢ έΙΩ έθσ + bέΙΤ,r > 0}έθρwέΙΤ,r , ╬╢ έΙΩ έθσ
                        r=1                                                                     (108)
                          m
                                                                        )
                            1{έθρw+,r(0)             (0)        (0)
                         X
                      έΙΤ                 , ╬╢ έΙΩ έθσ + b+,r > 0}έθρw+,r , ╬╢ έΙΩ έθσ (1 ┬▒ o(1)) > 0
                                 r=1


                                                                 46
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


which clearly holds with probability έΕο(1).
Now consider t έΙΙ (0, T1 ].

                                                                     for anyqc έΙΙ [k
During this period of time, by Theorem D.1 and Lemma E.2, we note that                 +]
                έΙΩ(0)          (t)          (t)2           (t)          (t)      2k+
and (+, r) έΙΙ S+ (v+,c ), έΙΗ╬╢+,r έΙ╝ N (0, ╧ΔέΙΗ╬╢+,r Id ), with ╧ΔέΙΗ╬╢+,r = ╬α έΙΗA+,c,r sέΙΩ N ╧Δ╬╢ .
                                                                       q
                                      έΙΩ(0)                         (t)
The same can be said for (+, r) έΙΙ S+ (v+ ), although with the έΙΗA+,c,r s2k    +
                                                                           έΙΩ N factor re-
                  q
              (t)
placed by έΙΗA+,r sέΙΩ2N . Also from the proofs of Theorem D.1 and Lemma E.2, and using
                  (0)
the property |U+,r | έΚν O(1) from Proposition 1, we know that for all neurons, the updates
                                                                                                      (t)
to the neurons also take the feature-plus-Gaussian-noise form of vέΑ▓ έΙΙU (0) c(t) (v έΑ▓ )v έΑ▓ + έΙΗ╬╢+,r ,
                                                                          P
                                                                                 +,r
                                              (t)
with c(t) (v έΑ▓ ) έΚν 1 + O ln51(d) έΙΗA+,c,r if v έΑ▓ = v+,c for some c έΙΙ [k+ ], or c(t) (v έΑ▓ ) έΚν

                           (t)
  1 + O ln51(d) έΙΗA+,r if v έΑ▓ = v+ (because the v έΑ▓ component of a v έΑ▓ -singleton neuronέΑβs update
                                                                                            q
                                                             (0)        (t)             (t)
is already the maximum possible). Moreover, if v+ έΙΙ U+,r , then ╧ΔέΙΗ╬╢+,r έΚν O έΙΗA+,r sέΙΩ2N ╧Δ╬╢ +
                q                            q
         (t)                             (t)                           (0)
O έΙΗA+,c,r s2k      έΙΩN
                     +
                       ╧Δ ╬╢    έΚν O   έΙΗA   +,r
                                                2
                                               sέΙΩ N ╬╢ , otherwise, if U+,r only contains the fine-grained
                                                   ╧Δ
                                           q
                  (t)                (t)
features, then ╧ΔέΙΗ╬╢+,r έΚν O έΙΗA+,c,r s2k         έΙΩN
                                                +
                                                  ╧Δ ╬╢ .

                                                                    (0)            (0)
With the understanding that only neurons in Sy (vy ) and Sy (vy,c ) can possibly activate on the
feature patches of a sample when t έΚν T1 (coming from Theorem F.1), we have

                                                                                tέΙΤ1
                                                                                                                              !
 (t)                                                                    (0)              (╧Ε ) έΙγ                    (t)
                        X                           X                           X
F+ (Xhard ) έΚν                                                   ╧Δ     έθρw+,r +          έΙΗw+,r , 1 ┬▒ ╬╣v+,c + ╬╢p έθσ + b+,r
                        (0)
                 (+,r)έΙΙS+ (v+,c ) pέΙΙP(Xhard ;v+,c )                             ╧Ε =0

                                                     tέΙΤ1
                                                                                   !
                                         (0)                  (╧Ε )           (t)
                     X                               X
                 +           ╧Δ         έθρw+,r +              έΙΗw+,r , ╬╢ έΙΩ έθσ + b+,r
                     rέΙΙ[m]                           ╧Ε =0
                                                                                tέΙΤ1
                                                                                                                        !
                                                                        (0)              (╧Ε )                   (t)
                          X                          X                          X
                 +                                              ╧Δ     έθρw+,r +          έΙΗw+,r , ╬▒pέΑι vέΙΤ + ╬╢p έθσ + b+,r
                                 (0)
                     (+,r)έΙΙS+ (vέΙΤ ) pέΙΙP(Xhard ;vέΙΤ )                             ╧Ε =0

                                                                                                  (109)

To further refine this upper bound, we first note that with probability at least 1 έΙΤ O mN  P k+ t
                                                                                        poly(d)    , the
                                                                          (0)
following holds with arbitrary choice of (+, rέΙΩ ) έΙΙ S+ (v+,c ):

                                             tέΙΤ1                                                                tέΙΤ1
                                                                                                                                  !
                                                      (╧Ε ) έΙγ                                        (0)                  (╧Ε )
      X                 X                    X                                                                  X
                                                                                               έΙΩ
                                         έθρ          έΙΗw+,r , 1 ┬▒ ╬╣v+,c + ╬╢p έθσ έΚν O             s     S+ (v+,c )          έΙΗA+,c,rέΙΩ
       (0)
(+,r)έΙΙS+ (v+,c ) pέΙΙP(Xhard ;v+,c )           ╧Ε =0                                                               ╧Ε =0

                                                                                                                            (110)
                                                         (0)
Invoking Lemma E.5, we obtain (for arbitrary (+, rέΙΩ ) έΙΙ S+ (v+ )):

                                             tέΙΤ1                                                              tέΙΤ1
                                                                                                                                      !
                                                      (╧Ε ) έΙγ                                   1 έΙΩ (0)               (╧Ε )
      X                 X                    X                                                                X
                                         έθρ          έΙΗw+,r , 1 ┬▒ ╬╣v+,c + ╬╢p έθσ έΚν O                 s S+ (v+,c )      έΙΗA+,rέΙΩ
       (0)                                   ╧Ε =0
                                                                                              k+              ╧Ε =0
(+,r)έΙΙS+ (v+,c ) pέΙΙP(Xhard ;v+,c )
                                                                                                                            (111)

                                 P     (0)               (╧Ε )        (t)
                                                                  PtέΙΤ1
                                                                  έΙΩ
Let us examine the term  rέΙΙ[m] ╧Δ έθρw+,r +         ╧Ε =0 έΙΗw+,r , ╬╢ έθσ + b+,r more carefully. First of
               (0)  k+   (0)            kέΙΤ    (0)             (0)        (0)
all, denoting S+ = έΙςc=1 S+ (v+,c ) έΙς έΙςc=1   S+ (vέΙΤ,c ) έΙς S+ (v+ ) έΙς S+ (vέΙΤ ), neurons (+, r) έΙΙ  /
  (0)
S+ cannot receive any update at all during training due to Theorem F.1. Therefore we can rewrite


                                                                     47
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


the term
                                          tέΙΤ1
                                                                                    !
                           (0)                     (╧Ε )           (t)
       X                                  X
               ╧Δ         έθρw+,r +                 έΙΗw+,r , ╬╢ έΙΩ έθσ + b+,r
       rέΙΙ[m]                              ╧Ε =0
                                                     tέΙΤ1
                                                                                            !
                                                                                                                                                             (112)
                                 (0)                           (╧Ε )           (t)                                                   (0)            (0)
            X                                        X                                                         X
   =                     ╧Δ     έθρw+,r +                       έΙΗw+,r , ╬╢ έΙΩ έθσ + b+,r                   +                     ╧Δ       έθρw+,r , ╬╢ έΙΩ έθσ + b+,r
       (+,r)έΙΙS+
                   (0)                               ╧Ε =0                                               (+,r)έΙΙS
                                                                                                             / +
                                                                                                                    (0)


Relying on Corollary F.1.1, we know
                                         tέΙΤ1                       tέΙΤ1
                                         X               (╧Ε )
                                                                   X                polyln(d)                        (╧Ε )
                                                έΙΗb+,r <                   έΙΤέΕο                                   έθρέΙΗw+,r , ╬╢ έΙΩ έθσ .                              (113)
                                         ╧Ε =0                      ╧Ε =0
                                                                                     ln5 (d)

Therefore, we know that for r έΙΙ [m],
                                                                tέΙΤ1
                                                                            (╧Ε )                        (╧Ε )
                                                                X
                                                                      έθρέΙΗw+,r , ╬╢ έΙΩ έθσ + έΙΗb+,r έΚν 0                                                             (114)
                                                                ╧Ε =0
As a consequence, we can write the naive upper bound
                                                                tέΙΤ1
                                                                                                           !
                                                 (0)                     (╧Ε )           (t)
                          X                                     X
                                    ╧Δ          έθρw+,r +                 έΙΗw+,r , ╬╢ έΙΩ έθσ + b+,r
                         rέΙΙ[m]                                  ╧Ε =0

                                                   (0)            (0)                                                 (0)            (0)
                               X                                                                     X
                    έΚν                          ╧Δ έθρw+,r , ╬╢ έΙΩ έθσ + b+,r +                                           ╧Δ έθρw+,r , ╬╢ έΙΩ έθσ + b+,r                     (115)
                                         (0)                                                                (0)
                         (+,r)έΙΙS+                                                           (+,r)έΙΙS
                                                                                                 / +

                                        (0)            (0)
                          X
                    =               ╧Δ έθρw+,r , ╬╢ έΙΩ έθσ + b+,r
                         rέΙΙ[m]


Additionally, due to Theorem F.1 (and its proof), we know that
                                                                                                    tέΙΤ1
                                                                                                                                                   !
                                                                                  (0)                        (╧Ε )                   (t)
                              X                            X                                        X
                                                                        ╧Δ       έθρw+,r +                    έΙΗw+,r , ╬▒pέΑι vέΙΤ + ╬╢p έθσ + b+,r
                                   (0)
                   (+,r)έΙΙS+ (vέΙΤ ) pέΙΙP(Xhard ;vέΙΤ )                                                   ╧Ε =0
                                                                                                                                                             (116)
                                                                                    (0)                                   (0)
                              X                            X
               έΚν                                                        ╧Δ έθρw+,r , ╬▒pέΑι vέΙΤ + ╬╢p έθσ + b+,r
                                   (0)
                   (+,r)έΙΙS+ (vέΙΤ ) pέΙΙP(Xhard ;vέΙΤ )


It follows that
     (t)
  F+ (Xhard )
                           tέΙΤ1
                                                                   !
            1 έΙΩ (0)               (╧Ε )                                                                                                  (0) έΙγ
                           X                                                         X                             X
έΚνO            s S+ (v+,c )      έΙΗA+,rέΙΩ                                  +                                                             έθρw+,r , 1 ┬▒ ╬╣v+,c + ╬╢p έθσ
           k+              ╧Ε =0                                                           (0)
                                                                            (+,r)έΙΙS+ (v+,c ) pέΙΙP(Xhard ;v+,c )

                             (0)                     (0)                                                                (0)                    (0)
       X                                                                  X                          X
  +           ╧Δ έθρw+,r , ╬╢ έΙΩ έθσ + b+,r +                                                                              ╧Δ έθρw+,r , ╬▒pέΑι vέΙΤ + ╬╢p έθσ + b+,r
      rέΙΙ[m]                                                                  (0)
                                                                  (+,r)έΙΙS+ (vέΙΤ ) pέΙΙP(Xhard ;vέΙΤ )
                                                                                                                                                             (117)
                                                  (0)                                                           k+   (0)          kέΙΤ   (0)
On the other hand, for the έΑεέΙΤέΑζ neurons, denoting SέΙΤ                                                        =   έΙςc=1 SέΙΤ (v+,c ) έΙς έΙςc=1 SέΙΤ (vέΙΤ,c ) έΙς
 (0)         (0)
SέΙΤ (v+ ) έΙς SέΙΤ (vέΙΤ ),
                                                                                                           tέΙΤ1
                                                                                                                                                         !
  (t)                                                                                  (0)                          (╧Ε )                   (t)
                                    X                             X                                        X
 FέΙΤ (Xhard ) έΚξ                                                                  ╧Δ    έθρwέΙΤ,r +                      έΙΗwέΙΤ,r , ╬▒pέΑι vέΙΤ + ╬╢p έθσ + b+,r
                                 έΙΩ(0)
                          (+,r)έΙΙSέΙΤ (vέΙΤ ) pέΙΙP(Xhard ;vέΙΤ )                                                   ╧Ε =0
                                                                                                                                                             (118)
                                                               (0)            (0)
                                    X
                          +                          ╧Δ       έθρwέΙΤ,r , ╬╢ έΙΩ έθσ + b+,r               ,
                                               (0)
                               (+,r)έΙΙS
                                    / έΙΤ



                                                                                     48
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                                (0)
note that the last line is true because neurons
                                                       the set SέΙΤ cannot receive any update during
                                                outside
                                                                    mN P k+ t
training with probability at least 1 έΙΤ O                             poly(d)      due to Theorem F.1. Estimating the activation
                               έΙΩ(0)
value of the neurons from SέΙΤ (vέΙΤ ) on the feature noise patches requires some care. We define
                                                                 έΙΩ(0)              Pt       (╧Ε )
time tέΙΤ to be the first point in time such that any (έΙΤ, rέΙΩ ) έΙΙ SέΙΤ (vέΙΤ ) satisfies ╧ΕέΙΤ=0 έΙΗAέΙΤ,rέΙΩ έΚξ
                                                                                    έΙΩ(0)
╧Δ0 ln5 (d), and beyond this point in time, i.e. for t έΙΙ [tέΙΤ , T1 ], the neurons in SέΙΤ (vέΙΤ ) have to
activate with high probability, since
           tέΙΤ1
   (0)
           X        (╧Ε )                   (t)                                           1                                         p
έθρwέΙΤ,r +           έΙΗwέΙΤ,r , ╬▒pέΑι vέΙΤ + ╬╢p έθσ + b+,r έΚξ 1 έΙΤ O                                                ╧Δ0 ln5 (d)/ ln4 (d) έΙΤ O(╧Δ0         ln(d))
           ╧Ε =0
                                                                                      ln5 (d)
                                                                    >0.
                                                                                                                                     (119)
Now we can proceed to prove the lemma for t έΙΙ (0, T1 ] by combining the above estimates for
 (t)             (t)
F+ (Xhard ) and FέΙΤ (Xhard ).
                                                                                                                                    (0)
For t έΙΙ (0, tέΙΤ ], relying argument similar to the situation of t = 0 and the fact that m έΙΤ |SέΙΤ | =
(1 έΙΤ o(1))m,
                       (
                                  1{έθρwέΙΤ,r
                                        (0)            (0)       (0)
                            X
                                            , ╬╢ έΙΩ έθσ + bέΙΤ,r > 0}έθρwέΙΤ,r , ╬╢ έΙΩ έθσ
                                                (0)
                                   (+,r)έΙΙS
                                        / έΙΤ

                                                                                                                                     (120)
                                       m
                                                                                                      )
                                           1      (0)            (0)       (0)
                                       X
                                   έΙΤ           {έθρw+,r , ╬╢ έΙΩ έθσ + b+,r > 0}έθρw+,r , ╬╢ έΙΩ έθσ                    (1 ┬▒ o(1)) > 0
                             r=1
                            (t)           (t)
                        =έΘΤ FέΙΤ (Xhard ) έΙΤ F+ (Xhard ) > 0
which has to be true with probability έΕο(1).
On the other hand, with t έΙΙ (tέΙΤ , T1 ], we have
    (t)                      (t)
  FέΙΤ (Xhard ) έΙΤ F+ (Xhard )
  ( tέΙΤ1
    X                1            έΙΩ(0)        (╧Ε )
                                                       p
έΚξ         1έΙΤO       5        sέΑι |SέΙΤ (vέΙΤ )|έΙΗAέΙΤ,rέΙΩ έΙΤ O(╧Δ0 ln(d))
    ╧Ε =0
                  ln (d)
                           tέΙΤ1
                                           !)
          1 έΙΩ (0)          X         (╧Ε )
  έΙΤO        s S+ (v+,c )         έΙΗA+,rέΙΩ
         k+                ╧Ε =0
     (
                                                                                                                   (0) έΙγ

                       (0)          (0)
          X                                     X        X
  +             ╧Δ έθρwέΙΤ,r , ╬╢ έΙΩ έθσ + b+,r έΙΤ                                                                         έθρw+,r , 1 ┬▒ ╬╣v+,c + ╬╢p έθσ
                      (0)                                                       (0)
          (+,r)έΙΙS
               / έΙΤ                                                    (+,r)έΙΙS+ (v+,c ) pέΙΙP(Xhard ;v+,c )
                                                                                                                                             )

                        (0)            (0)                                                                  (0)                    (0)
         X                                                          X                 X
  έΙΤ           ╧Δ       έθρw+,r , ╬╢ έΙΩ έθσ + b+,r            έΙΤ                                           ╧Δ       έθρw+,r , ╬▒pέΑι vέΙΤ + ╬╢p έθσ + b+,r
      rέΙΙ[m]                                                      (0)
                                                          (+,r)έΙΙS+ (vέΙΤ ) pέΙΙP(Xhard ;vέΙΤ )
                                                                                                                                     (121)
Let us begin analyzing the first {┬╖} bracket.
                                                      έΙΩ(0)                                                (0)
By Proposition 1 we know that SέΙΤ (vέΙΤ ) = (1 ┬▒ O(1/ ln5 (d))) S+ (v+,c ) , and by Lemma E.5,
                            (╧Ε )                             (╧Ε )
we know that έΙΗA+,rέΙΩ έΚν O(ln(d)έΙΗAέΙΤ,rέΙΩ ), therefore,
                    tέΙΤ1
                                !                           tέΙΤ1
                                                                         !
     1 έΙΩ (0)        X      (╧Ε )          ln(d) έΙΩ έΙΩ(0)      X        (╧Ε )
O      s S+ (v+,c )      έΙΗA+,rέΙΩ έΚνO            s SέΙΤ (vέΙΤ )        έΙΗAέΙΤ,rέΙΩ
    k+              ╧Ε =0
                                          k+               ╧Ε =0
                                    tέΙΤ1
                                    X                1           έΙΩ(0)      (╧Ε )
                                                                                      p
                                  έΚς        1έΙΤO      5       sέΑι |SέΙΤ (vέΙΤ )|έΙΗAέΙΤ,rέΙΩ έΙΤ O(╧Δ0 ln(d))
                                    ╧Ε =0
                                                  ln (d)
                                                                                   (122)


                                                                           49
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Therefore, we obtained the simpler lower bound
    (t)                   (t)
  FέΙΤ (Xhard ) έΙΤ F+ (Xhard )
  (
                                                                                                      (0) έΙγ

                   (0)           (0)
      X                                                            X                 X
έΚξ             ╧Δ έθρwέΙΤ,r , ╬╢ έΙΩ έθσ + b+,r έΙΤ                                                              έθρw+,r , 1 ┬▒ ╬╣v+,c + ╬╢p έθσ
              (0)                                                    (0)
    (+,r)έΙΙS
         / έΙΤ                                                (+,r)έΙΙS+ (v+,c ) pέΙΙP(Xhard ;v+,c )
                                                                                                                                   )

                  (0)            (0)                                                              (0)                    (0)
      X                                                       X                 X
  έΙΤ           ╧Δ έθρw+,r , ╬╢ έΙΩ έθσ + b+,r έΙΤ                                                  ╧Δ       έθρw+,r , ╬▒pέΑι vέΙΤ + ╬╢p έθσ + b+,r
      rέΙΙ[m]                                                   (0)
                                                       (+,r)έΙΙS+ (vέΙΤ ) pέΙΙP(Xhard ;vέΙΤ )
                                                                                           (123)
which is greater than 0 with probability έΕο(1) (by relying on an argument almost identical to the
                                        (0)
t = 0 case again, and noting that m έΙΤ |SέΙΤ | = (1 έΙΤ o(1))m). This concludes the proof.


Lemma E.9 (Probability of mistake on easy samples is low after training). For t έΙΙ [T1,1 , T1 ], given
an easy test sample (Xeasy , y),
                                 h                            i
                                                   (T )
                              P Fy(T ) (Xeasy ) έΚν FyέΑ▓ (Xeasy ) έΚν o(1).                          (124)

Proof. Without loss of generality, assume the true label of Xeasy is +1. Assume t έΚξ T1,1 .
                                                                                                               (t)
Firstly, conditioning on the events
                                  of Theorem
                                             F.1, the following upper bound on FέΙΤ (Xeasy ) holds
                                                    m
with probability at least 1 έΙΤ O                   poly(d) :
                                                                       (t) έΙγ

      (t)                                                                                      (t)
                          X                              X
    FέΙΤ (Xeasy ) =                                                  ╧Δ έθρwέΙΤ,r , 1 ┬▒ ╬╣v+ + ╬╢p έθσ + bέΙΤ,r
                                     (0)
                          (έΙΤ,r)έΙΙSέΙΤ (v+ ) pέΙΙP(Xeasy ;v+ )

                                                                               (t) έΙγ

                                                                                                         (t)
                                      X                       X
                          +                                                ╧Δ έθρwέΙΤ,r , 1 ┬▒ ╬╣v+,c + ╬╢p έθσ + bέΙΤ,r
                                           (0)
                                (έΙΤ,r)έΙΙSέΙΤ (v+,c ) pέΙΙP(Xeasy ;v+,c )

                                                                       (0) έΙγ

                                                                                               (0)
                                  X                      X
                      έΚν                                            ╧Δ έθρwέΙΤ,r , 1 ┬▒ ╬╣v+ + ╬╢p έθσ + bέΙΤ,r                        (125)
                                     (0)
                          (έΙΤ,r)έΙΙSέΙΤ (v+ ) pέΙΙP(Xeasy ;v+ )

                                                                               (0) έΙγ

                                                                                                         (0)
                                      X                       X
                          +                                                ╧Δ έθρwέΙΤ,r , 1 ┬▒ ╬╣v+,c + ╬╢p έθσ + bέΙΤ,r
                                           (0)
                                (έΙΤ,r)έΙΙSέΙΤ (v+,c ) pέΙΙP(Xeasy ;v+,c )

                      <O (sέΙΩ dc0 ╧Δ0 )
                      έΚνo(1),

and on the other hand,
                                                                       (t) έΙγ

      (t)                                                                                      (t)
                                  X                      X
   F+ (Xeasy ) έΚξ                                                   ╧Δ έθρw+,r , 1 ┬▒ ╬╣v+ + ╬╢p έθσ + b+,r
                                    έΙΩ(0)
                        (+,r)έΙΙS+           (v+ ) pέΙΙP(Xeasy ;v+ )

                                                                                 (t) έΙγ

                                                                                                           (t)            (126)
                                      X                       X
                          +                                                  ╧Δ έθρw+,r , 1 ┬▒ ╬╣v+,c + ╬╢p έθσ + b+,r
                                       έΙΩ(0)
                              (+,r)έΙΙS+           (v+,c ) pέΙΙP(Xeasy ;v+,c )

                      >έΕο(1).
                (t)                        (t)
Therefore, F+ (Xeasy ) έΚτ FέΙΤ (Xeasy ), which completes the proof.
Lemma E.10 (Jr. & John W. Wrench (1971)). The partial sum of harmonic series satisfies the
following identity:
                           nέΙΤ1
                           X1                    1
                                 = ln(n) + E έΙΤ      έΙΤ ╧╡n                             (127)
                               k                2n
                                                   k=1
where E is the EulerέΑΥMascheroni constant (approximately 0.58), and ╧╡n έΙΙ [0, 1/8n2 ].


                                                                     50
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


F       C OARSE - GRAINED SGD, P OLY- TIME PROPERTIES
In this section, set Te έΙΙ poly(d).
Please note that we are performing stochastic gradient descent on easy samples only.
Theorem F.1. Fix any t έΙΙ [0, Te ].

                                                                                                     mk+ N P t
1. (Non-activation invariance) For any ╧Ε έΚξ t, with probability at least 1 έΙΤ O                         poly(d)         , any
                          k+           kέΙΤ                                       (0)
       feature v έΙΙ {v+,c }c=1 έΙς {vέΙΤ,c }c=1  έΙς {v+ , vέΙΤ }, any tέΑ▓ έΚν t, (+, r) έΙΙ
                                                                             / S+ (v) and v-dominated
                     (╧Ε )     (╧Ε )     (╧Ε )
       patch sample xn,p = ╬▒n,p v + ╬╢n,p , the following holds:
                                            (tέΑ▓ )            (tέΑ▓ )

                                        ╧Δ έθρw+,r , x(╧Ε
                                                   n,p
                                                      )
                                                        έθσ + b+,r = 0                                                 (128)


                                                                                                           mN P t
2. (Non-activation on noise patches) For any ╧Ε έΚξ t, with probability at least 1 έΙΤ O                        poly(d)       , for
                                              (╧Ε )   (╧Ε )
       every tέΑ▓ έΚν t, r έΙΙ [m] and noise patch xn,p = ╬╢n,p , the following holds:
                                            (tέΑ▓ )            (tέΑ▓ )

                                        ╧Δ έθρw+,r , x(╧Ε
                                                   n,p
                                                      )
                                                        έθσ + b+,r = 0                                                 (129)


                                                                                                            mk+ N P t
3. (Off-diagonal nonpositive growth) For any ╧Ε έΚξ t, with probability at least 1 έΙΤ O                          poly(d)           ,
                                                 kέΙΤ                             (0)
       for any tέΑ▓ έΚν t, any feature  v έΙΙ {vέΙΤ,c }c=1  έΙς{vέΙΤ     }, any (+, r) έΙΙ S+ (v) and v-dominated patch
                                      (tέΑ▓ )          (tέΑ▓ )

         (╧Ε )     (╧Ε )     (╧Ε )             (╧Ε )                      (0)    (╧Ε )   (0)
       xn,p = ╬▒n,p v + ╬╢n,p , ╧Δ έθρw+,r , xn,p έθσ + b+,r έΚν ╧Δ έθρw+,r , xn,p έθσ + b+,r .

Proof. Base case t = 0.
1. (Nonactivation invariance)
                                              k              k
Choose any ╧Ε έΚξ 0, v έΙΩ from the set {v+,c }c=1+             έΙΤ
                                                έΙς {vέΙΤ,c }c=1  έΙς {v+ , vέΙΤ }. We will work with neuron
sets in the έΑε+έΑζ class in this proof; the έΑεέΙΤέΑζ-class case can be handled in the same way.
                                                                  (╧Ε )                                     (╧Ε )
First, we need to show that, for every n such that |P(Xn ; v έΙΩ )| > 0 and p έΙΙ P(Xn ; v έΙΩ ), for
every (+, r) neuron index,
                                 s
         (0)    έΙΩ
                       έΙγ                      1
                                                              (0)            (0)

       έθρw+,r , v έθσ < ╧Δ0 4 + 2c0 ln(d) έΙΤ 5           =έΘΤ ╧Δ έθρw+,r , x(╧Ε  )
                                                                    n,p έθσ + b+,r = 0     (130)
                                           ln (d)

                                                                                       mN P
This is indeed true. The following holds with probability at least 1 έΙΤ O               poly(d)       for all (+, r) έΙΙ
                                                                                                                    /
 (0)                 (╧Ε )
S+ (v) and all such xn,p :
                             έΙγ                                                                   έΙγ

                                                                                     ╧Δ0
                                      q
  (0)               (0)                                              5
                                                                                                           p
έθρw+,r , x(╧Ε
         n,p
            )
              έθσ + b +,r έΚν╧Δ 0   1 +  ╬╣   (4  +  2c 0 )(ln(d) έΙΤ 1/   ln  (d))  + O     9        έΙΤ 4 + 2c0 ln(d)╧Δ0
                                                                                   ln (d)
                             Ύμτ                                                                                    Ύμ╢
                                                                      5
                                (4 +  2c 0 )(1 +   ╬╣)(ln(d) έΙΤ 1/   ln   (d)) έΙΤ (4 + 2c 0 ) ln(d)            1
                        =╧Δ0 Ύμφ q                                             έΙγ                    +O        9
                                                                                                                  Ύμ╕
                                                                 5
                                    (4 + 2c0 )(ln(d) έΙΤ 1/ ln (d)) + 4 + 2c0 ln(d)
                                                                                     p                  ln   (d)
                             Ύμτ                                                                                  Ύμ╢
                                                                               5
                                           (4 + 2c0 )╬╣ ln(d) έΙΤ (1 + ╬╣)/ ln (d)                          1
                        =╧Δ0 Ύμφ q                                           έΙγ                    +O      9
                                                                                                                Ύμ╕
                                                               5
                                   (4 + 2c )(ln(d) έΙΤ 1/ ln (d)) + 4 + 2c ln(d)
                                                                                    p                ln  (d)
                                          0                                    0

                        <0,
                                                                                                                     (131)
                                                              2      2                                     (0)    (╧Ε )
                                                             έΙΤb
The first equality holds by utilizing the identity a έΙΤ b = aa+b . As a consequence, ╧Δ(έθρw+,r , xn,p έθσ +
 (0)
b+,r ) = 0.


                                                     51
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                on noise patches) Invoking Lemma H.3, for any ╧Ε έΚξ 0, with probability at least
2. (Non-activation

        mN P                                                                       (╧Ε )   (╧Ε )
1 έΙΤ O poly(d) , we have for all possible choices of r έΙΙ [m] and the noise patches xn,p = ╬╢n,p :

                     (0)    (╧Ε )
                                            p                   ╧Δ0          (0)
                   έθρw+,r , ╬╢n,p έθσ έΚν O(╧Δ0 ╧Δ╬╢ d ln(d)) έΚν O                έΚς b+,r .            (132)
                                                              ln9 (d)

Therefore, no neuron can activate on the noise patches at time t = 0.
3. (Off-diagonal nonpositive growth) This point is trivially true at t = 0.


Inductive step: we assume the induction hypothesis for t έΙΙ [0, T ] (with T < Te of course), and
prove the statements for t = T + 1.
1. (Nonactivation invariance)
                                                   k            k
Choose any v έΙΩ from the set {v+,c }c=1
                                     +             έΙΤ
                                        έΙς {vέΙΤ,c }c=1  έΙς {v+ , vέΙΤ }. We will work with neuron sets in
the έΑε+έΑζ class in this proof; the έΑεέΙΤέΑζ-class case can be handled in the same way.

We need to prove that given ╧Ε έΚξ T + 1, with probability at least 1 έΙΤ O mNpoly(d)P (T +1)
                                                                                           , for every
                                                                               (╧Ε )
tέΑ▓ έΚν T + 1, (+, r) neuron index and v έΙΩ -dominated patch xn,p ,
                                                    (tέΑ▓ )          (tέΑ▓ )

                                (0)
                            / S+ (v έΙΩ ) =έΘΤ ╧Δ έθρw+,r , x(╧Ε
                     (+, r) έΙΙ                               )
                                                          n,p έθσ + b+,r = 0.                                                         (133)

Conditioning on the (high-probability) event of the induction hypothesis of point 1., the following
is already true on all the v έΙΩ -dominated patches at time tέΑ▓ έΚν T :
                                                        (tέΑ▓ )           (tέΑ▓ )

                                    (0)
                        (+, r) έΙΙ / S+ (v έΙΩ ) =έΘΤ ╧Δ έθρw+,r , x(T   )
                                                              n,p έθσ + b +,r = 0.               (134)

                     (T )   (T )      (T )
In particular, ╧Δ έθρw+,r , xn,p έθσ + b+,r = 0.
                                         (0)
                          / S+ (v έΙΩ ) can be updated on the v έΙΩ -dominated patches at time t = T .
In other words, no (+, r) έΙΙ
Furthermore, the induction hypothesis of point 2. also states
                                                          that the network cannot activate on any
             (T )    (T )
noise patch xn,p = ╬╢n,p with probability at least 1 έΙΤ O mN     PT
                                                           poly(d) . Therefore, the neuron update for
                   (0)
             / S+ (v έΙΩ ) takes the form
those (+, r) έΙΙ
                                  N
                    ╬╖
           (T )
                                                 1{|P(Xn(T ) ; v)| > 0}[1{yn = +} έΙΤ logit(T )
                                X X
                                                                                              (T )
      έΙΗw+,r =                                                                            + (Xn )]
                   NP
                           vέΙΙC(v έΙΩ ) n=1
                                                                                                                                    (135)
                                             1      (T )
                                X
                                                           (T )      (T )
                   ├Ω                             {έθρw+,r , ╬▒n,p  v + ╬╢n,p  έθσ + b(T )
                                                                               c,r > 0}
                                                                                                      (T )
                                                                                                     ╬▒n,p       (T )
                                                                                                           v + ╬╢n,p
                                (T )
                         pέΙΙP(Xn        ;v)


                                                                                                                   mN P
Now we can invoke Lemma F.2 and obtain that, with probability at least 1 έΙΤ O                                       poly(d)       , the fol-
lowing holds for all relevant neurons and v έΙΩ -dominated patches:
                                                         (T )           (T )
                                                  έθρέΙΗw+,r , x(╧Ε )
                                                            n,p έθσ + έΙΗb+,r < 0.                                                      (136)

                                                                                                                                  (0)
In conclusion, with ╧Ε έΚξ T + 1, with probability at least 1 έΙΤ O                        mN P
                                                                                      poly(d)                          / S+ (v έΙΩ )
                                                                                                    , for every (+, r) έΙΙ
and relevant (n, p)έΑβs,
                  (T )          (T )                     (T )    (T )          (T +1)                    (T +1)
             έθρw+,r + έΙΗw+,r , x(╧Ε )
                              n,p έθσ + b+,r + έΙΗb+,r = έθρw+,r                              , x(╧Ε )
                                                                                           n,p έθσ + b+,r           < 0,              (137)
                           έΑ▓                        έΑ▓
                         (t )   (╧Ε )              (t )
which leads to έθρw+,r , xn,p έθσ + b+,r < 0 for all tέΑ▓ έΚν T + 1 with probability at least 1 έΙΤ

O mk+poly(d)
        N P (T +1)
                     (also taking union bound over all the possible choices of v έΙΩ ). This finishes
the inductive step for point 1.


                                                                52
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


2. (Non-activation on noise patches)
Relying on the event of the induction hypothesis, for any ╧Ε έΚξ T , the following holds for every
                         (╧Ε )   (╧Ε )
r έΙΙ [m] and noise patch xn,p = ╬╢n,p ,
                                                    (T )            (T )
                                                 έθρw+,r , x(╧Ε )
                                                          n,p έθσ + b+,r < 0.                                      (138)

                                                                                         (T )
Conditioning on this high-probability event, this means no neuron w+,r can be updated on the noise
                                                   k+           kέΙΤ
patches. Denoting the set of features M = {v+,c }c=1   έΙς {vέΙΤ,c }c=1 έΙς {v+ , vέΙΤ }, for every r έΙΙ [m],
its update is reduced to
                                       N
                        ╬╖ X X
            (T )
        έΙΗw+,r =                   1{|P(Xn(T ) ; v)| > 0}[1{yn = +} έΙΤ logit(T    )   (T )
                                                                             + (Xn )]
                       NP
                          vέΙΙM n=1
                                                                                                                 (139)
                                  1{έθρw+,r
                                       (T )
                            X
                                               (T )      (T )
                       ├Ω                    , ╬▒n,p  v + ╬╢n,p  έθσ + b(T )      (T )      (T )
                                                                   c,r > 0} ╬▒n,p v + ╬╢n,p ,
                                   (T )
                              pέΙΙP(Xn      ;v)


Invoking Lemma          have that, for any ╧Ε έΚξ T +1, the following inequality holds with probability
                F.3, we
               mN P
at least 1 έΙΤ O poly(d) for every r έΙΙ [m] and noise patches,

                                                    (T )              (T )
                                                έθρέΙΗw+,r , x(╧Ε )
                                                          n,p έθσ + έΙΗb+,r < 0.                                     (140)


           for any ╧Ε έΚξ T + 1, the following inequality holds with probability at least 1 έΙΤ
Consequently,

    mN P                                       (╧Ε )   (╧Ε )
O poly(d) for every r έΙΙ [m] and noise patches xn,p = ╬╢n,p :

                       (T )        (T )              (T )    (T )            (T +1)              (T +1)
               έθρw+,r + έΙΗw+,r , x(╧Ε )
                                n,p έθσ + b+,r + έΙΗb+,r = έθρw+,r                          , x(╧Ε )
                                                                                         n,p έθσ + b+,r     < 0.   (141)

This finishes the inductive step for point 2.
                                                                                            k
3. (Off-diagonal nonpositive growth) Choose any v έΙΩ έΙΙ {vέΙΤ } έΙς {vέΙΤ,c }c=1
                                                                      έΙΤ
                                                                         .
Choose any neuron with index (+, r). Similar to our proof for point 2., we know that its update,
                                                      (╧Ε ) έΙγ             (╧Ε )
when taken inner product with a v έΙΩ -dominated patch xn,p = 1 ┬▒ ╬╣v έΙΩ + ╬╢n,p , has to take the form
       (T ) έΙγ
    έθρέΙΗw+,r , 1 ┬▒ ╬╣v έΙΩ + ╬╢n,p
                         (╧Ε )
                              έθσ
                   N
   ╬╖ X X
=            1{|P(Xn(T ) ; v)| > 0}[1{yn = +} έΙΤ logit(T      )
                                                         + (Xn )]
                                                                 (T )
  NP
     vέΙΙM n=1
                                                                         έΙγ
             1{έθρw+,r
                  (T )                        (T )
       X
  ├Ω                       (T )
                       , ╬▒n,p       (T )
                               v + ╬╢n,p                 (T )
                                         έθσ + b+,r > 0}έθρ╬▒n,p        (T )
                                                             v + ╬╢n,p   , 1 ┬▒ ╬╣v έΙΩ + ╬╢n,p
                                                                                      (╧Ε )
                                                                                           έθσ
             (T )
        pέΙΙP(Xn      ;v)
                           N
     ╬╖
                                1{|P(Xn(T ) ; v)| > 0}[1{yn = +} έΙΤ logit(T )
            X              X
                                                                             (T )
=                                                                       + (Xn )]
    NP
         vέΙΙMέΙΤ{v έΙΩ } n=1
                                                                                  έΙγ
                          1{έθρw+,r
                              (T )                        (T )
           X
    ├Ω                                 (T )
                                   , ╬▒n,p       (T )
                                           v + ╬╢n,p                  (T )
                                                     έθσ + b+,r > 0} έθρ╬╢n,p  , 1 ┬▒ ╬╣v έΙΩ έθσ + έθρ╬▒n,p
                                                                                           (T )      (T )
                                                                                                v + ╬╢n,p     (╧Ε )
                                                                                                          , ╬╢n,p  έθσ
             (T )
        pέΙΙP(Xn      ;v)
            N
       ╬╖
              1{|P(Xn(T ) ; v έΙΩ )| > 0}[logit(T  )
            X
                                                        (T )
    έΙΤ                                          + (Xn )]
      N P n=1
                                                                            έΙγ
                1{έθρw+,r
                     (T )                          (T )
         X
                                                             (T ) έΙΩ
    ├Ω                         (T )
                          , ╬▒n,p        (T )
                                   v + ╬╢n,p  έθσ + b+,r > 0}έθρ╬▒n,p       (T )
                                                                 v + ╬╢n,p  , 1 ┬▒ ╬╣v έΙΩ + ╬╢n,p
                                                                                         (╧Ε )
                                                                                              έθσ
             (T )
        pέΙΙP(Xn      ;v)
                                                                                                                 (142)


                                                            53
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                               (T ) έΙγ

                                                    (T )                         (╧Ε )
With probability at least 1 έΙΤ O poly(d) NP
                                                , έθρ╬▒n,p v έΙΩ + ╬╢n,p , 1 ┬▒ ╬╣v έΙΩ + ╬╢n,p έθσ > 0, and
  (T ) έΙγ               (T )     (T )   (╧Ε )
έθρ╬╢n,p , 1 ┬▒ ╬╣v έΙΩ έθσ + έθρ╬▒n,p v + ╬╢n,p , ╬╢n,p έθσ < O(1/ ln9 (d)). Therefore,
                                                       N
                        ╬╖
       (T )
                                                           1{|P(Xn(T ) ; v)| > 0}[1{yn = +} έΙΤ logit(T )
                                        X              X
 έθρέΙΗw+,r , v έΙΩ έθσ <                                                                                       (T )
                                                                                                   + (Xn )]
                       NP
                                     vέΙΙMέΙΤ{v έΙΩ } n=1
                                                                                                                     (143)
                                                                                                          1
                                                      1{έθρw+,r
                                                          (T )                        (T )
                                       X
                                                                  (T )      (T )
                           ├Ω                                   , ╬▒n,p  v + ╬╢n,p  έθσ + b+,r > 0}O
                                         (T )
                                                                                                       ln9 (d)
                               pέΙΙP(Xn           ;v)

Invoking Lemma F.3, we know that
                            (T )
                     έΙΗb+,r
                                                  έΙγ

                               1     ╬╖                              1
                  έΚνέΙΤ                                    1έΙΤ╬╣έΙΤ
                            ln5 (d) N P                          ln9 (d)
                                   N
                                                1{|P(Xn(T ) ; v)| > 0} 1{yn = +} έΙΤ logit(T )                         (144)
                                 X X
                                                                                             (T )
                     ├Ω                                                                  + (Xn )
                                 vέΙΙM n=1
                                                                                           !
                                                 1       (T )                       (T )
                                     X
                                                                (T )      (T )
                     ├Ω                                {έθρw+,r , ╬▒n,p  v + ╬╢n,p  έθσ + b+,r > 0}   .
                                (T )
                           pέΙΙP(Xn ;v)


It follows that
         (T ) έΙγ                       (T )
    έθρέΙΗw+,r , 1 ┬▒ ╬╣v έΙΩ + ╬╢n,p
                          (╧Ε )
                               έθσ + έΙΗb+,r
                                     N
           1     ╬╖
                                         1{|P(Xn(T ) ; v)| > 0}[1{yn = +} έΙΤ logit(T )
                           X         X
                                                                                      (T )
   <O                                                                            + (Xn )]
        ln9 (d) N P vέΙΙMέΙΤ{vέΙΩ } n=1
                                                           !
                 1{έθρw+,r , ╬▒n,p v + ╬╢n,p έθσ + bc,r > 0}
                       (T )
           X
                                (T )     (T )  (T )
     ├Ω
                    (T )
          pέΙΙP(Xn           ;v)
                                              N
                     1              ╬╖
                                                            1{|P(Xn(T ) ; v)| > 0} 1{yn = +} έΙΤ logit(T )
                                            X X
                                                                                                         (T )
      έΙΤέΕο                                                                                            + (Xn )
                  ln5 (d)          NP
                                           vέΙΙM n=1
                                                                                 !
                                 1      (T )
                  X
                                               (T )      (T )
      ├Ω                              {έθρw+,r , ╬▒n,p  v + ╬╢n,p  έθσ + b(T )
                                                                   c,r > 0}
               (T )
          pέΙΙP(Xn ;v)

   <0.
                                                                                                                     (145)
Consequently,
              (T +1) έΙγ

                                            (T +1)
       ╧Δ έθρw+,r , 1 ┬▒ ╬╣v έΙΩ + ╬╢n,p (╧Ε )
                                      έθσ + b+,r
              (T ) έΙγ                                 (T ) έΙγ

                                         (T )                                (T )
      =╧Δ έθρw+,r , 1 ┬▒ ╬╣v έΙΩ + ╬╢n,p
                             (╧Ε )
                                  έθσ + b+,r + έθρέΙΗw+,r , 1 ┬▒ ╬╣v έΙΩ + ╬╢n,p
                                                                  (╧Ε )
                                                                       έθσ + έΙΗb+,r
                                                                                                                     (146)
              (T ) έΙγ

                                         (T )
      έΚν╧Δ έθρw+,r , 1 ┬▒ ╬╣v έΙΩ + ╬╢n,p
                             (╧Ε )
                                  έθσ + b+,r
              (0) έΙγ

                                         (0)
      έΚν╧Δ έθρw+,r , 1 ┬▒ ╬╣v έΙΩ + ╬╢n,p
                             (╧Ε )
                                  έθσ + b+,r .


Corollary           update upper bound). Choose any Te έΚν poly(d). With probability at least
        F.1.1 (Bias
       mk+ N P Te                                                           (0)
1έΙΤO       poly(d)  , for all t έΙΙ [0, Te ], any neuron w+,r , and any v έΙΙ U+,r ,

                                (t)            polyln(d)        (t)
                            έΙΗb+,r < έΙΤέΕο            5        έθρέΙΗw+,r , ╬╢ έΙΩ έθσ .          (147)
                                                ln (d)

                                                                      54
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Proof. Conditioning on the high-probability events of Theorem F.1 above, we know that for any
neuron indexed (+, r), at any time t έΚν Te , its update takes the form
                                 N
                       ╬╖
         (t)
                                                  1{|P(Xn(t) ; v)| > 0}[1{yn = +} έΙΤ logit(t)
                               X X
                                                                                             (t)
       έΙΗw+,r =                                                                           + (Xn )]
                      NP
                              vέΙΙU+,r n=1
                                 (0)

                                                                                                                                      (148)
                                              1      (t)
                               X
                                                            (t)      (t)
                      ├Ω                           {έθρw+,r , ╬▒n,p v + ╬╢n,p έθσ + b(t)
                                                                              c,r > 0}
                                                                                                          (t)
                                                                                                         ╬▒n,p      (t)
                                                                                                              v + ╬╢n,p       ,
                               (t)
                          pέΙΙP(Xn ;v)


                                                                          1
It follows that, with probability at least 1 έΙΤ O                       poly(d)       ,

                                     N
                           ╬╖
           (t)
                                                       1{|P(Xn(t) ; v)| > 0}[1{yn = +} έΙΤ logit(t)
                                   X X
   έθρέΙΗw+,r , ╬╢ έΙΩ έθσ =                                                                               (t)
                                                                                              + (Xn )]
                          NP
                                 vέΙΙU+,r n=1
                                         (0)


                                                   1{έθρw+,r
                                                       (t)
                                  X
                                                              (t)      (t)                                έΙΩ
                          ├Ω                                , ╬▒n,p v + ╬╢n,p έθσ + b(t)       (t)      (t)
                                                                                c,r > 0}έθρ╬▒n,p v + ╬╢n,p , ╬╢ έθσ
                                        (t)
                              pέΙΙP(Xn ;v)
                                                                                                                                      (149)
                                   N
                         ╬╖
                                                       1                                 1                   (t)
                                 X X
                      έΚν                                    {|P(Xn(t) ; v)| > 0}              {yn = +} έΙΤ logit+ (Xn(t) )
                        NP
                                vέΙΙU+,r n=1
                                   (0)


                                                                                                                    1
                                                   1      (t)
                                  X
                                                                 (t)      (t)
                          ├Ω                            {έθρw+,r , ╬▒n,p v + ╬╢n,p έθσ + b(t)
                                                                                   c,r > 0}O
                                        (t)
                                                                                                                polyln(d)
                              pέΙΙP(Xn ;v)


On the other hand,
                                  N
                      ╬╖
      (t)
                                                     1{|P(Xn(t) ; v)| > 0}[1{yn = +} έΙΤ logit(t)
                                X X
                                                                                                (t)
    έΙΗw+,r          έΚξ                                                                        + (Xn )]
                 2   NP
                               vέΙΙU+,r n=1
                                   (0)


                                              1{έθρw+,r
                                                  (t)
                               X
                                                         (t)      (t)
                      ├Ω                               , ╬▒n,p v + ╬╢n,p έθσ + b(t)      (t)
                                                                           c,r > 0}╬▒n,p v
                                  (t)                                                                           2
                          pέΙΙP(Xn ;v)
                                                  N
                            ╬╖
                                                           1{|P(Xn(t) ; v)| > 0}[1{yn = +} έΙΤ logit(t)
                                    X             X
                                                                                                      (t)
                      έΙΤ                                                                           + (Xn )]
                           NP
                                 vέΙΙU+,r n=1
                                          (0)


                                              1{έθρw+,r
                                                  (t)
                               X
                                                         (t)      (t)
                      ├Ω                               , ╬▒n,p v + ╬╢n,p έθσ + b(t)      (t)
                                                                           c,r > 0}╬╢n,p
                                  (t)                                                                       2
                          pέΙΙP(Xn ;v)
                                        N
                       ╬╖
                                                  1{|P(Xn(t) ; v)| > 0} 1{yn = +} έΙΤ logit(t)
                               X        X
                                                                                             (t)
                  έΚξ                                                                      + (Xn )
                      NP
                           vέΙΙU+,r n=1
                                 (0)


                                                                                                      έΙγ

                                                                                                                                1
                                              1      (t)
                               X
                                                            (t)      (t)
                      ├Ω                           {έθρw+,r , ╬▒n,p v + ╬╢n,p έθσ + b(t)
                                                                              c,r > 0}                     1έΙΤ╬╣έΙΤO               9
                                  (t)
                                                                                                                             ln (d)
                          pέΙΙP(Xn ;v)
                                                                                                                                      (150)
Clearly,
                                               (t)                           (t)
                                    έΙΗw+,r                   έΚξ έΕο polyln(d) έθρέΙΗw+,r , ╬╢ έΙΩ έθσ .                                            (151)
                                                       2

The conclusion follows.

Lemma F.2 (Nonactivation invariance). Let the assumptions in Theorem D.1 hold.


                                                                       55
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                          k           k
Denote the set of features C(v έΙΩ ) = {v+,c }c=1
                                             +            έΙΤ
                                                έΙς {vέΙΤ,c }c=1 έΙς {v+ , vέΙΤ } έΙΤ {v έΙΩ }. If the update term
             (t)
for neuron w+,r can be written as follows


                                     N
                         ╬╖
                (t)
                                               1{|P(Xn(t) ; v)| > 0}[1{yn = +} έΙΤ logit(t)
                                   X X
                                                                                          (t)
            έΙΗw+,r =                                                                   + (Xn )]
                        NP
                               vέΙΙC(v έΙΩ ) n=1
                                                                                                                 (152)
                                             1{έθρw+,r
                                                 (t)
                                   X
                                                        (t)      (t)
                        ├Ω                            , ╬▒n,p v + ╬╢n,p έθσ + b(t)       (t)      (t)
                                                                          c,r > 0} ╬▒n,p v + ╬╢n,p ,
                                       (t)
                            pέΙΙP(Xn ;v)


                                                                                                    NP
then given any ╧Ε > t, the following inequality holds with probability at least 1 έΙΤ O               poly(d)       for all
    έΙΩ                     (╧Ε )
v       -dominated patch xn,p :


                                                        (t)           (t)
                                                έθρέΙΗw+,r , x(╧Ε )
                                                          n,p έθσ + έΙΗb+,r < 0                                      (153)


Proof. Let us fix a neuron w+,r satisfying the update expression in the Lemma statement, and fix
some ╧Ε > t.
Firstly, the bias update for this neuron can be upper bounded via the reverse triangle inequality:



                            (t)
                       έΙΗw+,r
      (t)                          2
    έΙΗb+,r = έΙΤ
                        ln5 (d)
                                               N
                         1   ╬╖
                                                        1{|P(Xn(t) ; v)| > 0}[1{yn = +} έΙΤ logit(t)
                                             X X
                                                                                                   (t)
              έΚνέΙΤ        5                                                                      + (Xn )]
                      ln (d) P
                            N
                                        vέΙΙC(v έΙΩ ) n=1


                                       1{έθρw+,r
                                           (t)
                         X
                                                  (t)      (t)
                ├Ω                              , ╬▒n,p v + ╬╢n,p έθσ + b(t)      (t)
                                                                    c,r > 0}╬▒n,p v                               (154)
                             (t)                                                       2
                      pέΙΙP(Xn ;v)
                                               N
                         1   ╬╖
                                                        1{|P(Xn(t) ; v)| > 0}[1{yn = +} έΙΤ logit(t)
                                             X X
                                                                                                   (t)
                +       5                                                                      + (Xn )]
                      ln (d) P
                            N
                                        vέΙΙC(v έΙΩ ) n=1


                                       1{έθρw+,r
                                           (t)
                         X
                                                  (t)      (t)
                ├Ω                              , ╬▒n,p v + ╬╢n,p έθσ + b(t)      (t)
                                                                    c,r > 0}╬╢n,p
                             (t)                                                   2
                      pέΙΙP(Xn ;v)


                                                               56
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Let us further upper bound the two έΙξ ┬╖ έΙξ2 terms separately. Firstly,



                          N
                                       1{|P(Xn(t) ; v)| > 0}[1{yn = +} έΙΤ logit(t)
                        X X
                                                                                  (t)
                                                                              + (Xn )]
                     vέΙΙC(v έΙΩ ) n=1


                                        1{έθρw+,r
                                            (t)
                            X
                                                   (t)      (t)
                    ├Ω                           , ╬▒n,p v + ╬╢n,p έθσ + b(t)      (t)
                                                                     c,r > 0}╬▒n,p v
                                (t)                                                         2
                        pέΙΙP(Xn ;v)
                                N
                                       1{|P(Xn(t) ; v)| > 0}[1{yn = +} έΙΤ logit(t)
                      X         X
                                                                                  (t)
                =                                                             + (Xn )]
                    vέΙΙC(v έΙΩ )   n=1


                                        1{έθρw+,r
                                            (t)
                            X
                                                   (t)      (t)
                    ├Ω                           , ╬▒n,p v + ╬╢n,p έθσ + b(t)      (t)
                                                                     c,r > 0}╬▒n,p v
                                (t)
                        pέΙΙP(Xn ;v)                                                          2   (155)
                                N
                                      1{|P(Xn(t) ; v)| > 0} 1{yn = +} έΙΤ logit(t)
                      X         X
                                                                                 (t)
                =                                                            + (Xn )
                    vέΙΙC(v έΙΩ ) n=1

                                        1{έθρw+,r
                                            (t)
                            X
                                                   (t)      (t)
                    ├Ω                           , ╬▒n,p v + ╬╢n,p έθσ + b(t)      (t)
                                                                     c,r > 0}╬▒n,p έΙξvέΙξ2
                                (t)
                        pέΙΙP(Xn ;v)
                        N
                                      1{|P(Xn(t) ; v)| > 0} 1{yn = +} έΙΤ logit(t)
                      X X
                                                                                 (t)
                έΚξ                                                            + (Xn )
                    vέΙΙC(v έΙΩ ) n=1
                                                                               έΙγ
                                        1{έθρw+,r
                                            (t)
                            X
                                                   (t)      (t)
                    ├Ω                           , ╬▒n,p v + ╬╢n,p έθσ + b(t)
                                                                     c,r > 0} 1 έΙΤ ╬╣
                                (t)
                        pέΙΙP(Xn ;v)


                                                        NP
Secondly, with probability at least 1 έΙΤ O              poly(d)    ,


                          N
                                       1{|P(Xn(t) ; v)| > 0}[1{yn = +} έΙΤ logit(t)
                        X X
                                                                                  (t)
                                                                              + (Xn )]
                     vέΙΙC(v έΙΩ ) n=1


                                        1{έθρw+,r
                                            (t)
                            X
                                                   (t)      (t)
                    ├Ω                           , ╬▒n,p v + ╬╢n,p έθσ + b(t)      (t)
                                                                     c,r > 0}╬╢n,p
                                (t)                                                     2
                        pέΙΙP(Xn ;v)
                                N
                                      1{|P(Xn(t) ; v)| > 0} 1{yn = +} έΙΤ logit(t)
                        X       X
                                                                                 (t)
                έΚν                                                            + (Xn )
                    vέΙΙC(v έΙΩ ) n=1                                                               (156)
                                        1      (t)
                            X
                                                      (t)      (t)
                    ├Ω                       {έθρw+,r , ╬▒n,p v + ╬╢n,p έθσ + b(t)
                                                                        c,r > 0}
                                                                                     (t)
                                                                                    ╬╢n,p
                                                                                            2
                             (t)
                        pέΙΙP(Xn ;v)
                          N
                                      1{|P(Xn(t) ; v)| > 0} 1{yn = +} έΙΤ logit(t)
                        X X
                                                                                 (t)
                έΚν                                                            + (Xn )
                    vέΙΙC(v έΙΩ ) n=1
                                                                                     1
                                        1{έθρw+,r
                                            (t)
                            X
                                                   (t)      (t)
                    ├Ω                           , ╬▒n,p v + ╬╢n,p έθσ + b(t)
                                                                     c,r > 0}       9
                                (0)
                                                                                   ln (d)
                        pέΙΙP(Xn ;v)


                                                             57
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                          NP
Therefore, with probability at least 1 έΙΤ O               poly(d)       , we can bound the update to the bias as follows:
                          (t)
                      έΙΗb+,r
                                            έΙγ

                             1     ╬╖                        1
                   έΚνέΙΤ                           1έΙΤ╬╣έΙΤ
                          ln5 (d) N P                    ln9 (d)
                                  N
                                             1{|P(Xn(t) ; v)| > 0} 1{yn = +} έΙΤ logit(t)                           (157)
                                X X
                                                                                        (t)
                      ├Ω                                                             + (Xn )
                            vέΙΙC(v έΙΩ ) n=1
                                                                                        !
                                        1      (t)
                                X
                                                      (t)      (t)
                      ├Ω                     {έθρw+,r , ╬▒n,p v + ╬╢n,p έθσ + b(t)
                                                                        c,r > 0}
                                  (t)
                          pέΙΙP(Xn ;v)


Furthermore, with probability at least 1 έΙΤ eέΙΤέΕο(d)+O(ln(d)) > 1 έΙΤ O poly(d)  NP
                                                                                    , the following holds
for all n, p:
                     (t)    (╧Ε )     (t)    (╧Ε ) έΙΩ     (t)    (╧Ε )           1
                  έθρ╬▒n,p v, ╬╢n,p έθσ, έθρ╬╢n,p , ╬▒n,p v έθσ, έθρ╬╢n,p , ╬╢n,p έθσ < O              .                (158)
                                                                          ln9 (d)

                                                                                           NP
Combining the above derivations, they imply that with probability at least 1 έΙΤ O poly(d)          , for any
 (╧Ε )
xn,p dominated by v έΙΩ ,
         (t)                    (t)
    έθρέΙΗw+,r , x(╧Ε )
              n,p έθσ + έΙΗb+,r
         (t)
           (╧Ε ) έΙΩ   (╧Ε )                     (t)
=έθρέΙΗw+,r , ╬▒n,p v + ╬╢n,p  έθσ + έΙΗb+,r
             N
     ╬╖
                          1{|P(Xn(t) ; v)| > 0}[1{yn = +} έΙΤ logit(t)
           X X
                                                                     (t)
=                                                                + (Xn )]
    NP
         vέΙΙC(v έΙΩ ) n=1

                      1{έθρw+,r
                          (t)                                                                   (t)
           X
                                 (t)      (t)                                (╧Ε ) έΙΩ
    ├Ω                         , ╬▒n,p v + ╬╢n,p έθσ + b(t)       (t)      (t)             (╧Ε )
                                                   c,r > 0}έθρ╬▒n,p v + ╬╢n,p , ╬▒n,p v + ╬╢n,p έθσ + έΙΗb+,r
                (t)
        pέΙΙP(Xn ;v)
             N
     ╬╖
                          1{|P(Xn(t) ; v)| > 0}[1{yn = +} έΙΤ logit(t)
           X X
                                                                     (t)
=                                                                + (Xn )]
    NP
         vέΙΙC(v έΙΩ ) n=1

                      1{έθρw+,r
                          (t)
           X
                                 (t)      (t)                                          (╧Ε ) έΙΩ
    ├Ω                         , ╬▒n,p v + ╬╢n,p έθσ + b(t)        (t)     (╧Ε )      (t)                (t)    (╧Ε )
                                                   c,r > 0} έθρ╬▒n,p v, ╬╢n,p έθσ + έθρ╬╢n,p , ╬▒n,p v έθσ + έθρ╬╢n,p , ╬╢n,p έθσ
                (t)
        pέΙΙP(Xn ;v)
          (t)
    + έΙΗb+,r
             N
     ╬╖
                          1{|P(Xn(t) ; v)| > 0} 1{yn = +} έΙΤ logit(t)
           X X
                                                                     (t)
έΚν                                                                + (Xn )
    NP
         vέΙΙC(v έΙΩ ) n=1

                                                                                      1
                      1      (t)                                                                    (t)
           X
                                    (t)      (t)
    ├Ω                     {έθρw+,r , ╬▒n,p v + ╬╢n,p έθσ + b(t)
                                                      c,r > 0} ├Ω O                   9          + έΙΗb+,r
                (t)
                                                                                   ln (d)
        pέΙΙP(Xn ;v)
                            έΙγ

   ╬╖        1         1             1
έΚν     O            έΙΤ 5        1έΙΤ╬╣έΙΤ 9
  NP     ln9 (d)    ln (d)        ln (d)
                      N
                           1{|P(Xn(t) ; v)| > 0} 1{yn = +} έΙΤ logit(t)
               X      X
                                                                      (t)
    ├Ω                                                             + (Xn )
          vέΙΙC(v+ ) n=1
                                                                         !
                      1      (t)
           X
                                    (t)      (t)
    ├Ω                     {έθρw+,r , ╬▒n,p v + ╬╢n,p έθσ + b(t)
                                                      c,r > 0}
             (t)
        pέΙΙP(Xn ;v)

<0.
                                                                                                                  (159)


                                                              58
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


This completes the proof.


Lemma F.3 (Nonactivation on noise patches). Let the assumptions in Theorem D.1 hold.
                                       +      k     έΙΤ          k
Denote the set of features M = {v+,c }c=1 έΙς {vέΙΤ,c }c=1 έΙς {v+ , vέΙΤ }. If the update term for neuron
 (t)
w+,r can be written as follows


                                N
                   ╬╖ X X
           (t)
       έΙΗw+,r =               1{|P(Xn(t) ; v)| > 0}[1{yn = +} έΙΤ logit(t)     (t)
                                                                      + (Xn )]
                  NP
                     vέΙΙM n=1
                                                                                                    (160)
                             1{έθρw+,r
                                  (t)
                      X
                                         (t)      (t)
                  ├Ω                   , ╬▒n,p v + ╬╢n,p έθσ + b(t)       (t)       (t)
                                                           c,r > 0} ╬▒n,p v + ╬╢n,p ,
                             (t)
                      pέΙΙP(Xn ;v)



then

                      (t)
                 έΙΗb+,r
                                        έΙγ

                         1     ╬╖                        1
                 έΚνέΙΤ                         1έΙΤ╬╣έΙΤ
                      ln5 (d) N P                    ln9 (d)
                              N
                                    1{|P(Xn(t) ; v)| > 0} 1{yn = +} έΙΤ logit(t)                      (161)
                            X X
                                                                               (t)
                  ├Ω                                                        + (Xn )
                        vέΙΙM n=1
                                                                               !
                                    1      (t)
                            X
                                                  (t)      (t)
                  ├Ω                     {έθρw+,r , ╬▒n,p v + ╬╢n,p έθσ + b(t)
                                                                    c,r > 0}       .
                           (t)
                      pέΙΙP(Xn ;v)



                                                                                               NP
Moreover, for any ╧Ε > t, the following inequality holds with probability at least 1 έΙΤ O       poly(d)       for
                   (╧Ε )   (╧Ε )
all noise patches xn,p = ╬╢n,p :

                                               (t)                 (t)
                                         έθρέΙΗw+,r , x(╧Ε )
                                                   n,p έθσ + έΙΗb+,r < 0                                (162)


Proof. Similar to the proof of Lemma F.2, we can estimate the update to the bias term

                      (t)
                 έΙΗb+,r
                                        έΙγ

                         1    ╬╖                         1
                 έΚνέΙΤ     5                   1έΙΤ╬╣έΙΤ       9
                      ln (d) N P                     ln (d)
                              N
                                    1{|P(Xn(t) ; v)| > 0} 1{yn = +} έΙΤ logit(t)                      (163)
                            X X
                                                                               (t)
                  ├Ω                                                        + (Xn )
                        vέΙΙM n=1
                                                                               !
                                    1      (t)
                            X
                                                  (t)      (t)
                  ├Ω                     {έθρw+,r , ╬▒n,p v + ╬╢n,p έθσ + b(t)
                                                                    c,r > 0}
                           (t)
                      pέΙΙP(Xn ;v)


                                                        59
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                  (╧Ε )         (╧Ε )                                            mN P
Then for any xn,p = ╬╢n,p with ╧Ε > t, with probability at least 1 έΙΤ O           poly(d)    ,
           (t)                    (t)
    έθρέΙΗw+,r , x(╧Ε )
              n,p έθσ + έΙΗb+,r
           (t)
             (╧Ε )                 (t)
  =έθρέΙΗw+,r , ╬╢n,p  έθσ + έΙΗb+,r
                   N
       ╬╖ X X
  =              1{|P(Xn(t) ; v)| > 0}[1{yn = +} έΙΤ logit(t)      (t)
                                                           + (Xn )]
      NP
         vέΙΙM n=1

                 1{έθρw+,r
                      (t)                                                          (t)
          X
                             (t)      (t)
      ├Ω                   , ╬▒n,p v + ╬╢n,p έθσ + b(t)       (t)      (t)    (╧Ε )
                                               c,r > 0}έθρ╬▒n,p v + ╬╢n,p , ╬╢n,p έθσ + έΙΗb+,r
                 (t)
          pέΙΙP(Xn ;v)
                   N
       ╬╖ X X
  =              1{|P(Xn(t) ; v)| > 0}[1{yn = +} έΙΤ logit(t) + (Xn )]
                                                                    (t)
      NP
         vέΙΙM n=1

                 1{έθρw+,r
                      (t)                                                                             (t)
          X
                             (t)      (t)
      ├Ω                   , ╬▒n,p v + ╬╢n,p έθσ + b(t)
                                               c,r > 0}   έθρ╬▒ (t)
                                                            n,p  v, ╬╢ (╧Ε )
                                                                      n,p  έθσ + έθρ╬╢ (t)
                                                                                      , ╬╢
                                                                                  n,p n,p
                                                                                          (╧Ε )
                                                                                               έθσ  + έΙΗb+,r
                 (t)
          pέΙΙP(Xn ;v)
                   N
     ╬╖ X X
  έΚν               1{|P(Xn(t) ; v)| > 0} 1{yn = +} έΙΤ logit(t)       (t)
                                                             + (Xn )
    NP
         vέΙΙM n=1

                                                                  1
                   1{έθρw+,r , ╬▒n,p v + ╬╢n,p έθσ + bc,r > 0} ├Ω O
                         (t)                                                 (t)
          X
                                (t)      (t)     (t)
    ├Ω                                                            9       + έΙΗb+,r
            (t)
                                                               ln  (d)
       pέΙΙP(Xn ;v)
                                      έΙγ

     ╬╖            1            1                    1
  έΚν       O              έΙΤ 5            1έΙΤ╬╣έΙΤ 9
    NP         ln9 (d)       ln (d)             ln (d)
              N
                         1{|P(Xn(t) ; v)| > 0} 1{yn = +} έΙΤ logit(t)
            X X
                                                                    (t)
      ├Ω                                                         + (Xn )
            vέΙΙM n=1
                                                                    !
                         1      (t)
             X
                                       (t)      (t)
      ├Ω                      {έθρw+,r , ╬▒n,p v + ╬╢n,p έθσ + b(t)
                                                         c,r > 0}
                 (t)
          pέΙΙP(Xn ;v)

  <0.
                                                                                                     (164)


                                                         60
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


G     F INE - GRAINED L EARNING

This section treats the learning dynamics of using fine-grained labels to train the NN; the analysis
will be much simpler since the technical analysis overlaps significantly with that in the previous
sections.
The training procedure is exactly the same as in the coarse-grained training setting. We explicitly
write them out here to avoid any possible confusion.
The learner for fine-grained classification is written as follows for c έΙΙ [k+ ]:
                                  m+,c            P
                                  X               X
                   F+,c (X) =            a+,c,r         ╧Δ(έθρw+,c,r , xp έθσ + b+,c,r ), c έΙΙ [k+ ]                  (165)
                                  r=1             p=1

with frozen linear classifier weights a+,c,r = 1. Same definition applies to the έΙΤ classes.
The SGD dynamics induced by the training loss is now
                             N
                        1 X
  (t+1)      (t)
                                    1{yn = (+, c)}[1 έΙΤ logit(t)                                    (t)
                                                                                  X
w+,c,r = w+,c,r + ╬╖                                               (t)
                                                            +,c (Xn )]                      ╧Δ έΑ▓ (έθρw+,c,r , x(t)      (t)   (t)
                                                                                                            n,p έθσ + bc,r )xn,p +
                       N P n=1
                                                                                 pέΙΙ[P ]
                                                                                                                           !
                                    1                        (t)                            (t)
                                                                               X
                                                                                        έΑ▓
                                        {yn ╠╕= (+, c)}[έΙΤlogit+,c (Xn(t) )]             ╧Δ (έθρw+,c,r , x(t)      (t)   (t)
                                                                                                     n,p έθσ + bc,r )xn,p
                                                                              pέΙΙ[P ]
                                                                                                                (166)
The bias is manually tuned according to the update rule
                                                          (t)
                                      (t+1)    (t)     έΙξέΙΗw+,c,r έΙξ2
                                     b+,c,r = b+,c,r έΙΤ    5                                                     (167)
                                                                  ln (d)

We assign m+,c = ╬α(d1+2c0 ) neurons to each subclass (+, c). For convenience, we write m =
dm+,c .
The initialization scheme is identical to the coarse-training case, except we choose a slightly less
          (0)        έΙγ         p
negative bc,r = έΙΤ╧Δ0 2 + 2c0 ln(d).
The parameter choices remain the same as before.

G.1    I NITIALIZATION GEOMETRY

Definition G.1. Define the following sets of interest of the hidden neurons:
     (0)                 (0)           έΙγ          q
1. U+,c,r = {v έΙΙ V : έθρw+,c,r , vέθσ έΚξ ╧Δ0 2 + 2c0 ln(d) έΙΤ ln51(d) }

                    έΙΩ(0)
2. Given v έΙΙ V, S+,c (v) έΛΗ (+, c) ├Ω [m+,c ] satisfies:
          (0)             έΙγ         q
   (a) έθρw+,c,r , vέθσ έΚξ ╧Δ0 2 + 2c0 ln(d) + ln51(d)
                                (0)               έΙγ       q
   (b) έΙΑv έΑ▓ έΙΙ V s.t. v έΑ▓ έΛξ v, έθρw+,c,r , v έΑ▓ έθσ < ╧Δ0 2 + 2c0 ln(d) έΙΤ ln51(d)

                    (0)
3. Given v έΙΙ V, S+,c (v) έΛΗ (+, c) ├Ω [m+,c ] satisfies:
         (0)            έΙγ       q
   (a) έθρw+,c,r , vέθσ έΚξ ╧Δ0 2 + 2c0 ln(d) έΙΤ ln51(d)

                           έΙΩ(0)
4. For any (+, c, r) έΙΙ S+,c,reg έΛΗ (+, c) ├Ω [m+,c ]:
          (0)            έΙγ p
    (a) έθρw+,c,r , vέθσ έΚν ╧Δ0 10 ln(d) έΙΑv έΙΙ V


                                                          61
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


            (0)
   (b) U+,c,r έΚν O(1)

The same definitions apply to the έΙΤ-class neurons.
Proposition 2. At t = 0, for all v έΙΙ D, the following properties are true with probability at least
1 έΙΤ dέΙΤ2 over the randomness of the initialized kernels:

      έΙΩ(0)        (0)              1
 1. |S+,c (v)|, |S+,c (v)| = ╬α έΙγ         dc0
                                         ln(d)


                    |SyέΙΩ(0) (v)|                                         |SyέΙΩ(0) (v)|

2. In particular,     (0)          έΙΤ1 = O              1
                                                     ln5 (d)
                                                                   and      έΙΩ(0)        έΙΤ1 = O          1
                                                                                                     ln5 (d)
                                                                                                                   for any y, y έΑ▓ έΙΙ
                 |SyέΑ▓ (v έΑ▓ )|                     |SyέΑ▓ (v έΑ▓ )|
           k+                kέΙΤ
   {(+, c)}c=1 έΙς {(έΙΤ, c)}c=1 and common or fine-grained features v, v έΑ▓ .
      (0)
3. S+,c,reg = [m+,c ]

The same properties apply to the έΙΤ-class neurons.

Proof. This proof proceeds in virtually the same way as in the proof of Proposition 1, so we omit it
here.

G.2    P OLY- TIME PROPERTIES

Theorem G.1. Fix any t έΙΙ [0, Te ], assuming Te έΙΙ poly(d).

                                                                              mk+ N P t
1. (Non-activation invariance) For any ╧Ε έΚξ t, with probability at least 1 έΙΤ O  poly(d)     , for any
                      k+           kέΙΤ                                                  (0)
   feature v έΙΙ {v+,c }c=1 έΙς {vέΙΤ,c }c=1 έΙς {v+ , vέΙΤ }, for every tέΑ▓ έΚν t, (+, c, r) έΙΙ
                                                                                 / S+,c (v) and
                              (╧Ε )    (╧Ε )    (╧Ε )
   v-dominated patch sample xn,p = ╬▒n,p v + ╬╢n,p , the following holds:
                                             (tέΑ▓ )             (tέΑ▓ )

                                         ╧Δ έθρw+,c,r , x(╧Ε )
                                                      n,p έθσ + b+,c,r = 0                                                             (168)

                                                                                                                           mN P t
2. (Non-activation on noise patches) For any ╧Ε έΚξ t, with probability at least 1 έΙΤ O                                        poly(d)       , for
                                                               (╧Ε )      (╧Ε )
   every c έΙΙ [k+ ], r έΙΙ [m] and noise patch xn,p = ╬╢n,p , the following holds:

                                         (t)             (t)
                                  ╧Δ έθρw+,c,r , x(╧Ε )
                                                n,p έθσ + b+,c,r = 0                                                                   (169)


                           growth)  Given fine-grained class (+, c) and any ╧Ε έΚξ t, with prob-
3. (Off-diagonal nonpositive
                                   mk+ N P t                                                                       k
   ability at least 1 έΙΤ O           poly(d)      , for any tέΑ▓ έΚν t, any feature v έΙΙ {vέΙΤ,c }c=1
                                                                                           έΙΤ
                                                                                              έΙς {vέΙΤ } έΙς
                                                     (0)                                                (╧Ε )           (╧Ε )              (╧Ε )
   {v+,cέΑ▓ }cέΑ▓ ╠╕=c , any neuron w+,c,r έΙΙ S+,c (v) and any v-dominated patch xn,p = ╬▒n,p v + ╬╢n,p ,
          (tέΑ▓ )             (tέΑ▓ )

                     (╧Ε )                 (0)     (╧Ε )   (0)
   ╧Δ έθρw+,c,r , xn,p έθσ + b+,c,r έΚν ╧Δ έθρw+,c,r , xn,p έθσ + b+,c,r .

Proof. The proof of this theorem is similar to that of Theorem F.1, but with some subtle differences.
Base case t = 0.
1. (Nonactivation invariance)
                                         k                         k
Choose any v έΙΩ from the set {v+,c }c=1
                                     +             έΙΤ
                                        έΙς {vέΙΤ,c }c=1  έΙς {v+ , vέΙΤ }. We will work with neuron sets in
the έΑε+έΑζ class in this proof; the έΑεέΙΤέΑζ-class case can be handled in the same way.
                                                                                                 (╧Ε )
First, given ╧Ε έΚξ 0, we need to show that, for every n such that |P(Xn ; v έΙΩ )| > 0 and p έΙΙ
      (╧Ε )
P(Xn ; v έΙΩ ), for every (+, c, r) neuron index,
                                 s
        (0)    έΙΩ
                      έΙγ                       1
                                                          (0)                (0)

    έθρw+,c,r , v έθσ < ╧Δ0 2 + 2c0 ln(d) έΙΤ 5           =έΘΤ ╧Δ έθρw+,c,r , x(╧Ε
                                                                   n,p
                                                                      )
                                                                        έθσ + b+,c,r = 0 (170)
                                            ln (d)

                                                                   62
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                               mN P
This is indeed true. The following holds with probability at least 1 έΙΤ O                       poly(d)       for all (+, r) έΙΙ
                                                                                                                            /
 (0)                 (╧Ε )
S+ (v) and all such xn,p :

                                έΙγ                                                                   έΙγ

                                                                                        ╧Δ0
                                         q
  (0)                (0)                                                5
                                                                                                              p
έθρw+,c,r , x(╧Ε
           n,p
              )
                έθσ + b+,c,r έΚν╧Δ 0   1 +  ╬╣   (2  +  2c 0 )(ln(d) έΙΤ 1/   ln  (d))  + O     9        έΙΤ 2 + 2c0 ln(d)╧Δ0
                                                                                      ln (d)
                                Ύμτ                                                                                   Ύμ╢
                                                                         5
                                   (2 +  2c 0 )(1 +   ╬╣)(ln(d) έΙΤ 1/   ln   (d)) έΙΤ (2 + 2c 0 ) ln(d)           1
                           =╧Δ0 Ύμφ q                                             έΙγ                    +O              Ύμ╕
                                                                    5
                                       (2 + 2c0 )(ln(d) έΙΤ 1/ ln (d)) + 4 + 2c0 ln(d)
                                                                                        p                  ln9 (d)
                                Ύμτ                                                                                 Ύμ╢
                                                                                  5
                                            (2 + 2c0 )(╬╣ ln(d) έΙΤ (1 + ╬╣)/ ln (d))                          1
                           =╧Δ0 Ύμφ q                                           έΙγ                    +O      9
                                                                                                                  Ύμ╕
                                                                  5
                                      (2 + 2c )(ln(d) έΙΤ 1/ ln (d)) + 2 + 2c ln(d)
                                                                                       p                ln  (d)
                                              0                                                0

                          <0,
                                                                                                                             (171)
                                                                2   2                                             (0)       (╧Ε )
                                                           έΙΤb
The first equality holds by utilizing the identity aέΙΤb = aa+b . As a consequence, ╧Δ(έθρw+,c,r , xn,p έθσ+
 (0)
b+,r ) = 0.

                on noise patches) Invoking Lemma H.3, for any ╧Ε έΚξ 0, with probability at least
2. (Non-activation

        mN P                                                                       (╧Ε )   (╧Ε )
1 έΙΤ O poly(d) , we have for all possible choices of r έΙΙ [m] and the noise patches xn,p = ╬╢n,p :


                      (0)      (╧Ε )
                                                     p                        ╧Δ0                   (0)
                    έθρw+,c,r , ╬╢n,p  έθσ    έΚν O(╧Δ0 ╧Δ╬╢       d ln(d)) έΚν O                     έΚς b+,r .                           (172)
                                                                            ln9 (d)

Therefore, no neuron can activate on the noise patches at time t = 0.
3. (Off-diagonal nonpositive growth) This point is trivially true at t = 0.


Inductive step: we assume the induction hypothesis for t έΙΙ [0, T ] (with T < Te of course), and
prove the statements for t = T + 1.
1. (Nonactivation invariance)
                                               k               k
Again, choose any v έΙΩ from the set {v+,c }c=1
                                           +            έΙΤ
                                              έΙς {vέΙΤ,c }c=1 έΙς {v+ , vέΙΤ }.

                                                                                              mk+ N P (T +1)
We need to prove that given ╧Ε έΚξ T + 1, with probability at least 1 έΙΤ O                           poly(d)                , for every
                                                             (╧Ε )
tέΑ▓ έΚν T + 1, (+, c, r) neuron index and v έΙΩ -dominated patch xn,p ,

                                                   (tέΑ▓ )             (tέΑ▓ )

                                 (0)
                              / S+,c (v έΙΩ ) =έΘΤ ╧Δ έθρw+,c,r , x(╧Ε
                    (+, c, r) έΙΙ                                )
                                                            n,p έθσ + b+,c,r = 0.                                              (173)


                                                                                          mk+ N P T
By the induction hypothesis of point 1., with probability at least 1 έΙΤ O                   poly(d)               , the following
                            έΙΩ                                   έΑ▓
is already true on all the v -dominated patches at time t έΚν T :

                                                   (tέΑ▓ )              (tέΑ▓ )

                                 (0)
                              / S+,c (v έΙΩ ) =έΘΤ ╧Δ έθρw+,c,r , x(T
                    (+, c, r) έΙΙ                             n,p
                                                               )
                                                                 έθσ + b+,c,r = 0.                                             (174)


                   (T )     (T )     (T )
In particular, ╧Δ έθρw+,c,r , xn,p έθσ + b+,c,r = 0.
                                   (0)
                             / S+,c (v έΙΩ ) can be updated on the v έΙΩ -dominated patches at time t = T .
In other words, no (+, c, r) έΙΙ
Furthermore, the induction hypothesis of point 2. also states
                                                            that the network cannot activate on any
             (T )    (T )
noise patch xn,p = ╬╢n,p with probability at least 1 έΙΤ O mN      PT
                                                            poly(d) . Therefore, the neuron update for



                                                         63
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                      (0)
                / S+,c (v έΙΩ ) takes the form
those (+, c, r) έΙΙ
                              N
                  ╬╖
     (T )
                                                   1{|P(Xn(T ) ; v)| > 0}[1{yn = (+, c)} έΙΤ logit(T )
                            X X
                                                                                                      (T )
   έΙΗw+,c,r =                                                                                    +,c (Xn )]
                 NP
                       vέΙΙC(v έΙΩ ) n=1
                                                                                                                 (175)
                                               1{έθρw+,c,r
                                                   (T )                         (T )
                            X
                                                            (T )      (T )                  (T )      (T )
                  ├Ω                                      , ╬▒n,p  v + ╬╢n,p  έθσ + b+,c,r > 0} ╬▒n,p  v + ╬╢n,p
                                  (T )
                      pέΙΙP(Xn             ;v)


Conditioning on this high-probability event, we have
                        (t)
                   έΙΗw+,c,r
   (t)                                  2
 έΙΗb+,c,r = έΙΤ
                      ln5 (d)
                                                 N
                     1    ╬╖
                                                            1{|P(Xn(t) ; v)| > 0}[1{yn = (+, c)} έΙΤ logit(t)
                                               X X
                                                                                                              (t)
          έΚνέΙΤ        5                                                                                   +,c (Xn )]
                  ln (d) N P                vέΙΙC(v έΙΩ ) n=1


                                     1{έθρw+,c,r
                                         (t)                        (t)
                      X
                                                  (t)      (t)                 (t)
             ├Ω                                 , ╬▒n,p v + ╬╢n,p έθσ + b+,c,r > 0}╬▒n,p v
                            (t)                                                                   2
                 pέΙΙP(Xn ;v)
                                                 N
                     1    ╬╖
                                                            1{|P(Xn(t) ; v)| > 0}[1{yn = (+, c)} έΙΤ logit(t)
                                               X X
                                                                                                              (t)
             +      5                                                                                   +,c (Xn )]
                  ln (d) N P                vέΙΙC(v έΙΩ ) n=1


                                     1{έθρw+,c,r
                                         (t)                        (t)
                      X
                                                  (t)      (t)                 (t)
             ├Ω                                 , ╬▒n,p v + ╬╢n,p έθσ + b+,c,r > 0}╬╢n,p
                            (t)                                                               2
                 pέΙΙP(Xn ;v)
                                                                                                                 (176)
Let us further upper bound the two έΙξ ┬╖ έΙξ2 terms separately. Firstly,
                        N
                                            1{|P(Xn(t) ; v)| > 0}[1{yn = (+, c)} έΙΤ logit(t)
                      X X
                                                                                              (t)
                                                                                        +,c (Xn )]
                   vέΙΙC(v έΙΩ ) n=1


                                               1{έθρw+,c,r
                                                   (t)                        (t)
                            X
                                                            (t)      (t)                 (t)
                  ├Ω                                      , ╬▒n,p v + ╬╢n,p έθσ + b+,c,r > 0}╬▒n,p v
                                  (t)                                                                 2
                      pέΙΙP(Xn ;v)
                        N
                                         1{|P(Xn(t) ; v)| > 0} 1{yn = (+, c)} έΙΤ logit(t)
                      X X
                                                                                           (t)
              =                                                                      +,c (Xn )
                  vέΙΙC(v έΙΩ ) n=1                                                                                  (177)
                                               1      (t)                        (t)
                            X
                                                               (t)      (t)                 (t)
                  ├Ω                                {έθρw+,c,r , ╬▒n,p v + ╬╢n,p έθσ + b+,c,r > 0}╬▒n,p έΙξvέΙξ2
                                  (t)
                      pέΙΙP(Xn ;v)
                        N
                                         1{|P(Xn(t) ; v)| > 0} 1{yn = (+, c)} έΙΤ logit(t)
                      X X
                                                                                           (t)
              έΚξ                                                                      +,c (Xn )
                  vέΙΙC(v έΙΩ ) n=1
                                                                                          έΙγ
                                               1{έθρw+,c,r
                                                   (t)                        (t)
                            X
                                                            (t)      (t)
                  ├Ω                                      , ╬▒n,p v + ╬╢n,p έθσ + b+,c,r > 0} 1 έΙΤ ╬╣
                                  (t)
                      pέΙΙP(Xn ;v)

                                                                                                      (t)
For the second έΙξ ┬╖ έΙξ2 term consisting purely of noise, note that since all the ╬╢n,p έΑβs are independent
Gaussian random vectors, the standard deviation of the sum is in fact
  (          N
                             1{|P(Xn(t) ; v)| > 0}1{έθρw+,c,r
                                                         (t)                        (t)
       X X           X
                                                                 (t)       (t)
                                                              , ╬▒n,p v + ╬╢n,p  έθσ + b+,c,r > 0}
     vέΙΙC(v έΙΩ ) n=1 pέΙΙP(Xn
                        (t)
                            ;v)
                                                             )1/2                                                (178)

   ├Ω [1{yn = (+, c)} έΙΤ logit+,c (Xn(t) )]2
                                             (t)
                                                                    ╧Δ╬╢ .


                                                                     64
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                             qP
                                     2
                                          P
With the basic property that      j cj έΚν    j |cj | for any sequence of real numbers c1 , c2 , ..., we
know this standard deviation can be upper bounded by


        N
                                    1{|P(Xn(t) ; v)| > 0}1{έθρw+,c,r
                                                             (t)                        (t)
      X X               X
                                                                      (t)      (t)
                                                                   , ╬▒n,p v + ╬╢n,p έθσ + b+,c,r > 0}
    vέΙΙC(v έΙΩ ) n=1 pέΙΙP(Xn
                       (t)
                           ;v)                                                                                 (179)
    ├Ω 1
                               (t)
          {yn = (+, c)} έΙΤ logit+,c (Xn(t) )          ╧Δ╬╢


                                                                 1
It follows that with probability at least 1 έΙΤ O               poly(d)       ,



                          N
                                     1{|P(Xn(t) ; v)| > 0}[1{yn = (+, c)} έΙΤ logit(t)
                        X X
                                                                                       (t)
                                                                                 +,c (Xn )]
                   vέΙΙC(v έΙΩ ) n=1


                                        1{έθρw+,c,r
                                            (t)                        (t)
                           X
                                                     (t)      (t)                 (t)
                  ├Ω                               , ╬▒n,p v + ╬╢n,p έθσ + b+,c,r > 0}╬╢n,p
                              (t)                                                                2
                      pέΙΙP(Xn ;v)
                                                                                                               (180)
                            N
                                    1{|P(Xn(t) ; v)| > 0} 1{yn = (+, c)} έΙΤ logit(t)
                    X       X
                                                                                      (t)
              έΚν                                                                 +,c (Xn )
                  vέΙΙC(v έΙΩ ) n=1
                                                                                               1
                                        1{έθρw+,c,r
                                            (t)                        (t)
                           X
                                                     (t)      (t)
                  ├Ω                               , ╬▒n,p v + ╬╢n,p έθσ + b+,c,r > 0}
                              (t)
                                                                                            ln9 (d)
                      pέΙΙP(Xn ;v)


Therefore, we can upper bound the bias update as follows:


                  (t)
              έΙΗb+,c,r
                                        έΙγ

                1     ╬╖                           1
            έΚνέΙΤ 5                            1έΙΤ╬╣έΙΤ 9
              ln (d) N P                        ln (d)
                           N
                                         1{|P(Xn(t) ; v)| > 0} 1{yn = (+, c)} έΙΤ logit(t)                       (181)
                         X X
                                                                                           (t)
              ├Ω                                                                      +,c (Xn )
                      vέΙΙC(v έΙΩ ) n=1
                                                                                        !
                                    1      (t)                        (t)
                        X
                                                    (t)      (t)
              ├Ω                         {έθρw+,c,r , ╬▒n,p v + ╬╢n,p έθσ + b+,c,r > 0}
                       (t)
                  pέΙΙP(Xn ;v)


                                                            NP
Furthermore, with probability at least 1 έΙΤ O               poly(d)       , the following holds for all n, p:



                          (t)     (╧Ε )      (t)    (╧Ε ) έΙΩ     (t)    (╧Ε )                      1
                        έθρ╬▒n,p v, ╬╢n,p  έθσ, έθρ╬╢n,p , ╬▒n,p v έθσ, έθρ╬╢n,p , ╬╢n,p  έθσ<O                 9          .     (182)
                                                                                            ln (d)

                                                               65
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                                                    NP
Combining the above derivations, they imply that with probability at least 1 έΙΤ O                                   poly(d)       , for any
 (╧Ε )
xn,p dominated by v έΙΩ ,
         (t)                        (t)
    έθρέΙΗw+,c,r , x(╧Ε )
                n,p έθσ + έΙΗb+,c,r
         (t) (╧Ε ) έΙΩ   (╧Ε )                       (t)
=έθρέΙΗw+,c,r , ╬▒n,p v + ╬╢n,p  έθσ + έΙΗb+,c,r
             N
     ╬╖
                           1{|P(Xn(t) ; v)| > 0}[1{yn = (+, c)} έΙΤ logit(t)
           X X
                                                                             (t)
=                                                                      +,c (Xn )]
    NP
         vέΙΙC(v έΙΩ ) n=1

                       1{έθρw+,c,r
                           (t)                        (t)                                             (t)
           X
                                    (t)      (t)                  (t)      (t)    (╧Ε ) έΙΩ   (╧Ε )
    ├Ω                            , ╬▒n,p v + ╬╢n,p έθσ + b+,c,r > 0}έθρ╬▒n,p v + ╬╢n,p , ╬▒n,p v + ╬╢n,p  έθσ + έΙΗb+,c,r
                 (t)
        pέΙΙP(Xn ;v)
             N
     ╬╖
                           1{|P(Xn(t) ; v)| > 0}[1{yn = (+, c)} έΙΤ logit(t)
           X X
                                                                             (t)
=                                                                      +,c (Xn )]
    NP
         vέΙΙC(v έΙΩ ) n=1

                       1{έθρw+,c,r
                           (t)                        (t)
           X
                                    (t)      (t)                   (t)     (╧Ε )       (t)    (╧Ε ) έΙΩ      (t)    (╧Ε )
    ├Ω                            , ╬▒n,p v + ╬╢n,p έθσ + b+,c,r > 0} έθρ╬▒n,p v, ╬╢n,p  έθσ + έθρ╬╢n,p , ╬▒n,p v έθσ + έθρ╬╢n,p , ╬╢n,p  έθσ
                 (t)
        pέΙΙP(Xn ;v)
          (t)
    + έΙΗb+,c,r
             N
     ╬╖
                           1{|P(Xn(t) ; v)| > 0} 1{yn = (+, c)} έΙΤ logit(t)
           X X
                                                                             (t)
έΚν                                                                      +,c (Xn )
    NP
         vέΙΙC(v έΙΩ ) n=1

                                                                                         1
                       1      (t)                        (t)                                                 (t)
           X
                                       (t)      (t)
    ├Ω                      {έθρw+,c,r , ╬▒n,p v + ╬╢n,p έθσ + b+,c,r > 0} ├Ω O                             + έΙΗb+,c,r
                 (t)
                                                                                      ln9 (d)
        pέΙΙP(Xn ;v)
                              έΙγ

   ╬╖        1           1                  1
έΚν     O            έΙΤ            1 έΙΤ ╬╣ έΙΤ
  NP     ln9 (d)     ln5 (d)            ln9 (d)
              N
                            1{|P(Xn(t) ; v)| > 0} 1{yn = (+, c)} έΙΤ logit(t)
            X X
                                                                              (t)
    ├Ω                                                                   +,c (Xn )
          vέΙΙC(v έΙΩ ) n=1
                                                                         !
                       1      (t)                        (t)
           X
                                       (t)      (t)
    ├Ω                      {έθρw+,c,r , ╬▒n,p v + ╬╢n,p έθσ + b+,c,r > 0}
                 (t)
        pέΙΙP(Xn ;v)

<0.
                                                                                                                                    (183)

                                             mN P
Therefore, with probability at least 1 έΙΤ O poly(d)   , the following holds for the relevant neurons and
 έΙΩ
v -dominated patches:
                                        (T )                (T )
                                  έθρέΙΗw+,c,r , x(╧Ε )
                                               n,p έθσ + έΙΗb+,c,r < 0.                               (184)

                                                                                            mN P
In conclusion, with ╧Ε έΚξ T + 1, with probability at least 1 έΙΤ O                              poly(d)       , for every (+, c, r) έΙΙ
                                                                                                                                /
 (0)
S+,c (v έΙΩ ) and relevant (n, p)έΑβs,
               (T )           (T )                     (T )       (T )       (T +1)                   (T +1)
         έθρw+,c,r + έΙΗw+,c,r , x(╧Ε )                                  (╧Ε )
                              n,p έθσ + b+,c,r + έΙΗb+,c,r = έθρw+,c,r , xn,p έθσ + b+,c,r < 0,                                             (185)
                            (tέΑ▓ )         (╧Ε )     (tέΑ▓ )
which leads to έθρw+,c,r , xn,p έθσ + b+,c,r < 0 for all tέΑ▓ έΚν T + 1 with probability at least

1 έΙΤ O mk+poly(d)
             N P (T +1)
                          (also by taking union bound over all the possible choices of v έΙΩ at time
T + 1). This finishes the inductive step for point 1.
2. (Non-activation on noise patches)
The inductive step for this part is very similar to (and even simpler than) the inductive step of point
1, so we omit the calculations here.


                                                                  66
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


3. (Off-diagonal nonpositive growth) By the induction hypothesisέΑβs high-probability event,
we already have that, given any fine-grained class (+, c), ╧Ε έΚξ
                                                               T + 1, for any feature
                    k                                                                                          (T )    (╧Ε )       (T )
v έΙΩ έΙΙ {vέΙΤ,c }c=1έΙΤ
                    έΙς {vέΙΤ } έΙς {v+,cέΑ▓ }cέΑ▓ ╠╕=c and any neuron w+,c,r , ╧Δ έθρw+,c,r , xn,p έθσ + b+,c,r έΚν

       (0)     (╧Ε )    (0)                                      (t)     (╧Ε )       (T )
╧Δ έθρw+,c,r , xn,p έθσ + b+,c,r . We just need to show that έθρέΙΗw+,c,r , xn,p έθσ + έΙΗb+,r έΚν 0 to finish the
proof; the rest proceeds in a similar fashion to the induction step of point 3 in the proof of Theorem
F.1.
Similar to the induction step of point 1, denoting M to be the set of all common and fine-grained
features, the update expression of any neuron (+, c, r) has to be
                                             N
                         ╬╖ X X
          (T )
    έΙΗw+,c,r =                      1{|P(Xn(T ) ; v)| > 0}[1{yn = (+, c)} έΙΤ logit(T     )   (T )
                                                                                   +,c (Xn )]
                        NP
                           vέΙΙM n=1
                                                                                                                                         (186)
                                   1{έθρw+,c,r
                                        (T )                          (T )
                             X
                                                  (T )      (T )                  (T )      (T )
                        ├Ω                    , ╬▒n,p    v + ╬╢n,p  έθσ + b+,c,r > 0} ╬▒n,p  v + ╬╢n,p
                                          (T )
                           pέΙΙP(Xn                ;v)


Written more explicitly,
                                                   N
                    ╬╖
     (T )
                                                        1{|P(Xn(T ) ; v)| > 0}1{yn = (+, c)}[1 έΙΤ logit(T )
                                  X                X
                                                                                                            (T )
 έΙΗw+,c,r =                                                                                            +,c (Xn )]
                   NP
                          vέΙΙMέΙΤ{v έΙΩ } n=1

                                                 1{έθρw+,c,r
                                                     (T )                         (T )
                             X
                                                              (T )      (T )                  (T )      (T )
                   ├Ω                                       , ╬▒n,p  v + ╬╢n,p  έθσ + b+,c,r > 0} ╬▒n,p  v + ╬╢n,p
                                   (T )
                        pέΙΙP(Xn            ;v)
                                                                                                                                         (187)
                                 N
                      ╬╖
                             1{yn ╠╕= (+, c)}1{|P(Xn(T ) ; v έΙΩ )| > 0}[logit(T )
                                 X
                                                                                  (T )
                   έΙΤ                                                       +,c (Xn )]
                     N P n=1

                                1{έθρw+,c,r
                                      (T )                        (T )
                        X
                                              (T ) έΙΩ   (T )                     (T ) έΙΩ   (T )
                   ├Ω                       , ╬▒n,p v + ╬╢n,p  έθσ + b+,c,r > 0} ╬▒n,p    v + ╬╢n,p
                                   (T )
                        pέΙΙP(Xn            ;v έΙΩ )


                                                                           mN P
It follows that with probability at least 1 έΙΤ O                            poly(d)       , for relevant n, p, r, we have

                   (T )
                      (╧Ε ) έΙΩ   (╧Ε )
          έθρέΙΗw+,c,r , ╬▒n,p v + ╬╢n,p  έθσ
                                        N
           ╬╖
                                                 1{|P(Xn(T ) ; v)| > 0}1{yn = (+, c)}[1 έΙΤ logit(T )
                          X             X
                                                                                                     (T )
      <                                                                                        +,c (Xn )]
          NP                                                                                                                             (188)
                   vέΙΙMέΙΤ{v έΙΩ } n=1

                                                                                                            1
                                       1{έθρw+,c,r
                                           (T )                         (T )
                        X
                                                    (T )      (T )
            ├Ω                                    , ╬▒n,p  v + ╬╢n,p  έθσ + b+,c,r > 0}O                        9
                          (T )
                                                                                                          ln (d)
                  pέΙΙP(Xn         ;v)


Furthermore, similar to the induction step of point 1, we can estimate the bias update as follows:
            (t)
    έΙΗb+,c,r
                                                     N
              1     ╬╖
                                                                 1{|P(Xn(t) ; v)| > 0} 1{yn = (+, c)} έΙΤ logit(t)
                                                   X X
                                                                                                                   (t)
   έΚνέΙΤέΕο                                                                                                       +,c (Xn )
           ln5 (d) N P                             vέΙΙM n=1
                                                                                               !
                             1       (t)                        (t)
                   X
                                              (t)      (t)
      ├Ω                           {έθρw+,c,r , ╬▒n,p v + ╬╢n,p έθσ + b+,c,r > 0}
               (t)
          pέΙΙP(Xn ;v)
                                                                                                                                         (189)
                                                 (T )     (╧Ε )         (T )
It follows that, indeed, έθρέΙΗw+,c,r , xn,p έθσ + έΙΗb+,c,r έΚν 0, which completes the induction step of point
3.


                                                                              67
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


G.3   T RAINING

Choose an arbitrary constant B έΙΙ [έΕο(1), ln(3/2)].
                                                                                           (t)
Definition G.2. Let T0 (B) > 0 be the first time that there exists some Xn and c such that
 (T (B))   (T (B))                                        k+            kέΙΤ
Fy 0     (Xn 0     ) έΚξ B for any n έΙΙ [N ] and y έΙΙ {(+, c)}c=1 έΙς {(έΙΤ, c)}c=1 .
We write T0 (B) as T0 for simplicity of notation when the context is clear.

Lemma G.2. With probability at least 1 έΙΤ O mkpoly(d)
                                                  + N P T0
                                                             , the following holds for all t έΙΙ [0, T0 ):

1. (On-diagonal common-feature neuron growth) For every c έΙΙ [k+ ], every (+, c, r), (+, c, rέΑ▓ ) έΙΙ
    έΙΩ(0)
   S+,c (v+ ),
                                        (t)          (0)         (t)           (0)
                                   w+,c,r έΙΤ w+,c,r = w+,c,rέΑ▓ έΙΤ w+,c,rέΑ▓                                  (190)
    Moreover,
                      (t)            έΙγ                     sέΙΩ         (t)
                    έΙΗw+,r =[1/4, 2/3] 1 ┬▒ ╬╣ 1 ┬▒ sέΙΩέΙΤ1/3 ╬╖       v+ + έΙΗ╬╢+,r                               (191)
                                                         2k+ P
                                                              έΙγ
            (t)            (t)2         (t)                       έΙΩ
    where έΙΗ╬╢+,c,r έΙ╝ N (0, ╧ΔέΙΗ╬╢+,c,r I), ╧ΔέΙΗ╬╢+,c,r = ╬α(1) ├Ω ╬╖╧Δ╬╢ P έΙγs2N .
    The bias updates satisfy
                                                                    ╬╖sέΙΩ

                                              (t)
                                        έΙΗb+,c,r = έΙΤ╬α                               .                    (192)
                                                                k+ P ln5 (d)
                                        έΙΩ(0)
    Furthermore, every (+, r) έΙΙ S+ (v+ ) activates on all the v+ -dominated patches at time t.
2. (On-diagonal finegrained-feature neuron growth) For every c                         έΙΙ     [k+ ] and every
                             έΙΩ(0)
   (+, c, r), (+, c, rέΑ▓ ) έΙΙ S+,c (v+,c ),
                                        (t)          (0)         (t)           (0)
                                   w+,c,r έΙΤ w+,c,r = w+,c,rέΑ▓ έΙΤ w+,c,rέΑ▓                                  (193)
    Moreover,
                                                 έΙγ             sέΙΩ

               (t)                      1
                                                                              (t)
             έΙΗw+,c,r =       1┬▒O          1 ┬▒ ╬╣ 1 ┬▒ sέΙΩέΙΤ1/3 ╬╖       v+,c + έΙΗ╬╢+,r       (194)
                                       k+                    2k+ P
                                                                                  έΙγ
           (t)            (t)2             (t)                                      έΙΩ
    where ╬╢+,c,r έΙ╝ N (0, ╧ΔέΙΗ╬╢+,cr I), and ╧ΔέΙΗ╬╢+,r = 1 ┬▒ O k1+       1 ┬▒ sέΙΩέΙΤ1/3 ╬╖╧Δ╬╢ έΙγ s

                                                                                        .
                                                                                                 P   2N k+

    The bias updates satisfy
                                                                    ╬╖sέΙΩ

                                          (t)
                                        έΙΗb+,c,r = έΙΤ╬α                               .                    (195)
                                                                k+ P ln5 (d)
                                            έΙΩ(0)
    Furthermore, every (+, c, r) έΙΙ S+,c (v+,c ) activates on all the v+ -dominated patches at time t.
3. The above results also hold with the έΑε+έΑζ and έΑεέΙΤέΑζ class signs flipped.

Proof. The proof of this theorem proceeds in a similar fashion to Theorem D.1, with some variations
for the common-feature neurons.
We shall prove the statements in this theorem via induction. We focus on the +-class neurons;
έΙΤ-class neuronsέΑβ proofs are done in the same fashion.
First of all, relying on the (high-probability) event of Theorem G.1, we know that we can simplify
                                              έΙΩ(0)
the update expressions for the neurons in S+,c (v+,c ) to the form
                     N
                 ╬╖ X
       (t)
  έΙΗw+,c,r =             1{yn = (+, c)}[1 έΙΤ logit(t)    (t)
                                                 +,c (Xn )]
                N P n=1

                              1{έθρw+,c,r
                                    (t)                           (t)
                      X
                                            (t)          (t)                  (t)         (t)
                ├Ω                        , ╬▒n,p v+,c + ╬╢n,p  έθσ + b+,c,r > 0} ╬▒n,p v+,c + ╬╢n,p   ,
                         (t)
                  pέΙΙP(Xn ;v+,c )
                                                                                                        (196)


                                                           68
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                            έΙΩ(0)
and for the neurons in S+,c (v+ ), the updates take the form


      (t)
  έΙΗw+,c,r
          Ύμ▒                                                                                                  Ύμ╝
       N
   ╬╖ XΎμ▓                                                                                                      Ύμ╜
            1{yn = (+, c)}[1 έΙΤ logit(t)                              1                          (t)
                                                            X
                                             (t)                                    έΑ▓                  (t)
=                                   +,c (X   n   )] +                  {y n = (+,  c  )}[έΙΤlogit +,c (Xn    )]
  N P n=1 Ύμ│                                                                                                  Ύμ╛
                                                       cέΑ▓ έΙΙ[k+ ]έΙΤ{c}

               1{έθρw+,c,r
                    (t)                            (t)
        X
                            (t)         (t)                         (t)        (t)
  ├Ω                      , ╬▒n,p v+ + ╬╢n,p   έθσ + b+,c,r > 0} ╬▒n,p        v+ + ╬╢n,p     .
            (t)
     pέΙΙP(Xn ;v+ )
                                                                                                                    (197)
By definition of T0 and the fact that B έΚν ln(3/2), for any n έΙΙ [N ] and t < T0 , we can write down
                              (t)    (t)
a simple upper bound of logit+,c (Xn ):


                                                                                  (t)
                      (t)                                       exp(F+,c (Xn ))
                  logit+,c (Xn(t) ) = Pk                          (t)     PkέΙΤ                (t)
                                                +
                                               cέΑ▓ =1 exp(F+,cέΑ▓ (Xn )) +    cέΑ▓ =1 exp(FέΙΤ,cέΑ▓ (Xn ))                   (198)
                                           3
                                           23
                                   έΚν     =     ,
                                     2k+   4k+


and we can lower bound it as follows


                                                (t)                 1       1
                                       logit+,c (Xn(t) ) έΚξ             3 = 3k ,                                     (199)
                                                                 2k+ ├Ω 2     +


                                                                    έΙΩ(0)
The inductive proof for the fine-grained neurons S+,c (v+,c ) is almost identical to that in the proof
                                                                                         (t)    (t)
of Theorem D.1. The only notable difference here is that [1 έΙΤ logit+,c (Xn )] has the estimate

  1 ┬▒ O k1+ .
                                                                           έΙΩ(0)
The inductive proof of the common-feature neurons S+,c (v+ ) requires more care as its update
expression 201 is qualitatively different from the coarse-grained training case in Theorem D.1, so
we present the full proof here.
Base case, t = 0.

                                           mN P                                                        έΙΩ(0)
With probability at least 1 έΙΤ O            poly(d)        , for every c έΙΙ [k+ ] and every (+, c, r) έΙΙ S+,c (v+ ),


      (0)     (0)        (0)            (0)
   έθρw+,c,r , ╬▒n,p v+ + ╬╢n,p  έθσ + b+,c,r
          q
                                                           p                          1
    έΚξ ╧Δ0      (1 έΙΤ ╬╣)(2 + 2c0 )(ln(d) + 1/ ln5 (d)) έΙΤ (2 + 2c0 ) ln(d) έΙΤ O
                                                                                   ln9 (d)
         Ύμτ                                                                                    Ύμ╢
                                                   5
               (1 έΙΤ ╬╣)(2 +   2c 0 )(ln(d)  + 1/ ln   (d)) έΙΤ (2 +  2c 0 ) ln(d)         1
    = ╧Δ0 Ύμφ q                                                                   έΙΤO     9
                                                                                              Ύμ╕
                                                   5
                                                            p                       ln  (d)                         (200)
               (1 έΙΤ ╬╣)(2 + 2c0 )(ln(d) + 1/ ln (d)) + (2 + 2c0 ) ln(d)
         Ύμτ                                                                                    Ύμ╢
                                                              5
                       (2  +  2c  0 )(έΙΤ╬╣ ln(d) +  (1  έΙΤ ╬╣)/ ln  (d))                   1
    = ╧Δ0 Ύμφ q                                                                   έΙΤO             Ύμ╕
               (1 έΙΤ ╬╣)(2 + 2c )(ln(d) + 1/ ln5 (d)) + (2 + 2c ) ln(d)
                                                            p                       ln9 (d)
                                   0                                               0

    > 0.

                                                                  69
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


This means all the v+ -singleton neurons will be updated on all the v+ -dominated patches at time
t = 0. Therefore, we can write update expression 201 as follows
      (0)
  έΙΗw+,c,r
          Ύμ▒                                                                                             Ύμ╝
       N Ύμ▓
   ╬╖                                                                                                    Ύμ╜
            1{yn = (+, c)}[1 έΙΤ logit(0)                            1                       (0)
      X                                                   X
                                            (0)                                 έΑ▓                 (0)
=                                    +,c (X n   )] +                 {yn = (+, c  )}[έΙΤlogit+,c (X n   )]
  N P n=1 Ύμ│                                                                                             Ύμ╛
                                                     cέΑ▓ έΙΙ[k+ ]έΙΤ{c}
        X
                   (0)       (0)
  ├Ω               ╬▒n,p v+ + ╬╢n,p   .
              (0)
     pέΙΙP(Xn ;v+ )
                                                                                                 (201)
By concentration of the binomial random variable, we know that with probability at least 1 έΙΤ
      2
eέΙΤέΕο(ln (d)) , for all n,
                              P(Xn(0) ; v+ ) = 1 ┬▒ sέΙΩέΙΤ1/3 sέΙΩ .                          (202)

                                                     (t)        (t)
Now, with the estimates we derived for logit+,c (Xn ) at the beginning of the proof and the inde-
                                      (0)
pendence of all the noise vectors ╬╢n,p έΑβs, we arrive at
                     (0)             έΙγ                      sέΙΩ         (0)
                 έΙΗw+,r =[1/4, 2/3] 1 ┬▒ ╬╣ 1 ┬▒ sέΙΩέΙΤ1/3 ╬╖           v+ + έΙΗ╬╢+,r                       (203)
                                                          2k+ P
                                  έΙγ
        (0)                           έΙΩ
where ╧ΔέΙΗ╬╢+,c,r = ╬α(1) ├Ω ╬╖╧Δ╬╢ P έΙγs2N .
                                                                                 έΙΩ(0)
Additionally, a byproduct of the above proof steps is that all the S+,c (v+ ) neurons indeed activate
on all the v+ -dominated patches at t = 0 with high probability.
                                                                           (0)
Now we examine the bias update. We first estimate έΙΗw+,c,r . With probability at least 1 έΙΤ
                                                                 2
    m                                                           έΙΩ(0)
O poly(d)   the following upper bound holds for all neurons in S+,c (v+ ):

                                             sέΙΩ

                             (0)                                  (0)
                         έΙΗw+,c,r έΚνO ╬╖               έΙξv+ έΙξ2 + έΙΗ╬╢+,r
                                  2        k+ P                       2
                                                                έΙγ
                                              έΙΩ
                                                                  s έΙγ
                                                                   έΙΩ

                                             s
                                    έΚνO ╬╖            + O ╬╖╧Δ╬╢ έΙγ          d            (204)
                                           k+ P                P N
                                             sέΙΩ

                                    έΚνO ╬╖            ,
                                           k+ P
and the following lower bound holds (via the reverse triangle inequality):
                                              sέΙΩ

                            (0)                                    (0)
                         έΙΗw+,c,r έΚξέΕο ╬╖               έΙξv+ έΙξ2 έΙΤ έΙΗ╬╢+,r
                                  2         k+ P                        2
                                                                 έΙγ
                                              sέΙΩ                   sέΙΩ έΙγ

                                    έΚξέΕο ╬╖            έΙΤ O ╬╖╧Δ╬╢ έΙγ            d                       (205)
                                            k+ P                P N
                                              sέΙΩ

                                    έΚξέΕο ╬╖            ,
                                            k+ P
                                    έΙΩ
                    (0)
It follows that έΙΗw+,c,r        = ╬α ╬╖ ks+ P , which means
                           2

                                               (0)
                                            έΙΗw+,c,r
                                                                              ╬╖sέΙΩ

                         (0)
                       έΙΗb+,c,r = έΙΤ                         2
                                                               = έΙΤ╬α                          .   (206)
                                             ln5 (d)                      k+ P ln5 (d)

This completes the proof of the base case.
Induction step. Assume statements for time [0, t], prove for t + 1.


                                                           70
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                        έΙΩ(0)
First, by the induction hypothesis, we know that neurons in S+,c (v+ ) must activate on all the v+ -
dominated patches at time t. Therefore, we can write the update expression 201 as follows:
        (t)
  έΙΗw+,c,r
          Ύμ▒                                                                                              Ύμ╝
       N
   ╬╖ XΎμ▓                                                                                                  Ύμ╜
            1{yn = (+, c)}[1 έΙΤ logit(t)                           1                         (t)
                                                         X
                                           (t)                                  έΑ▓                  (t)
=                                   +,c (X n   )] +                 {y n = (+, c  )}[έΙΤlogit +,c (Xn    )]
  N P n=1 Ύμ│                                                                                              Ύμ╛
                                                    cέΑ▓ έΙΙ[k+ ]έΙΤ{c}
        X
                  (t)       (t)
  ├Ω              ╬▒n,p v+ + ╬╢n,p   .
               (t)
       pέΙΙP(Xn ;v+ )
                                                                                                                        (207)
Following
           the same argument as in the base case, we have that with probability at least 1 έΙΤ
    mN P
O poly(d) ,

                  (t)             έΙγ                      sέΙΩ           (t)
               έΙΗw+,c,r =[1/4, 2/3] 1 ┬▒ ╬╣ 1 ┬▒ sέΙΩέΙΤ1/3 ╬╖        v+ + έΙΗ╬╢+,c,r ,             (208)
                                                       2k+ P
                                        έΙγ
       (t)                                  έΙΩ
and ╧ΔέΙΗ╬╢+,c,r = ╬α(1) ├Ω ╬╖╧Δ╬╢ P έΙγs2N .
                                         (t+1)
Now we need to show that w+,c,r indeed activate on all the v+ -dominated patches at time t + 1
with high probability.
So far, we know that for ╧Ε έΙΙ [0, t + 1],
                  (╧Ε )               έΙγ                 sέΙΩ         (╧Ε )
              έΙΗw+,c,r =[1/4, 2/3] 1 ┬▒ ╬╣ 1 ┬▒ sέΙΩέΙΤ1/3 ╬╖       v+ + έΙΗ╬╢+,c,r ,                                               (209)
                                                     2k+ P
                           έΙγ
     (╧Ε )                      έΙΩ
and ╧ΔέΙΗ╬╢+,c,r = ╬α(1) ├Ω ╬╖╧Δ╬╢ P έΙγs2N . It follows that
         (t+1)  (0)                      έΙγ                        sέΙΩ           (t+1)
       w+,r   =w+,c,r + (t + 1)[1/4, 2/3] 1 ┬▒ ╬╣ 1 ┬▒ sέΙΩέΙΤ1/3 ╬╖           v+ + ╬╢+,c,r ,       (210)
                                                                2k+ P
        (t+1)           έΙγ           έΙγ
                                       έΙΩ
where ╧Δ╬╢+,c,r = ╬α(1) ├Ω t + 1╬╖╧Δ╬╢ P έΙγs2N .

                                                     mN P
The following holds with probability at least 1 έΙΤ O poly(d)   over all the v+ -dominated patches
 (t+1)         (t+1)          (t+1)                                                  (t+1)
xn,p     = ╬▒n,p v+ + ╬╢n,p               (which are independent of w+,r ) and the v+ -singleton neurons:
       (t+1) (t+1)       (t+1)
  έθρw+,c,r , ╬▒n,p   v+ + ╬╢n,p   έθσ
                                                                                                                              sέΙΩ

   (0)
                                                                                                            1
          (t+1)
=έθρw+,c,r ╬▒n,p         (t+1)
                v+ + ╬╢n,p   έθσ + (t + 1)[1/4, 2/3](1 ┬▒ ╬╣) 1 ┬▒ sέΙΩέΙΤ1/3    1┬▒O                                              ╬╖
                                                                                                         ln9 (d)            2k+ P
         (t+1) (t+1)       (t+1)
  + έθρ╬╢+,c,r , ╬▒n,p   v+ + ╬╢n,p   έθσ
                                                                                                                        (211)

                                                              1
Note that with probability at least 1 έΙΤ O                  poly(d)       ,
                                                                                       έΙγ
                              (t+1)   (t+1)
                                                                             έΙγ           sέΙΩ p
                           έθρ╬╢+,c,r , ╬▒n,p   v+ έθσ έΚν O(1) ├Ω                        T ╬╖╧Δ╬╢ έΙγ      d ln(d),                  (212)
                                                                                      P 2N
               έΙγ                    έΙγ      p
and since          t + 1 έΚν t + 1,       sέΙΩ < sέΙΩ , ╧Δ╬╢
                                             d ln(d) < ln91(d) , and N > dk+ , we know that
                                                                         sέΙΩ

                            (t+1)    (t+1)             1
                          έθρ╬╢+,c,r , ╬▒n,p v+ έθσ έΚν O          ├Ω (t + 1)╬╖        .                 (213)
                                                       d               2k+ P

                                                1
Similarly, with probability at least 1 έΙΤ O poly(d)   ,
                                                       έΙγ
                                           έΙγ             sέΙΩ p                                 sέΙΩ

   (t+1)    (t+1)        (t+1)                    2                            1
 έθρ╬╢+,c,r , ╬▒n,p v+ + ╬╢n,p έθσ έΚν O(1) ├Ω T ╬╖╧Δ╬╢ έΙγ                    d ln(d) έΚν O      ├Ω (t + 1)╬╖       .
                                                    P 2N                       d            2k+ P
                                                                                               (214)


                                                                     71
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                         mN P
It follows that with probability at least 1 έΙΤ O          poly(d)       ,

       (t+1)   (t+1)       (t+1)
    έθρw+,c,r , ╬▒n,p   v+ + ╬╢n,p   έθσ
                                                                                     sέΙΩ

     (0)                           1                                      1
              (t+1)
  έΚξέθρw+,c,r , ╬▒n,p         (t+1)
                    v+ + ╬╢n,p   έθσ + (t + 1)(1 έΙΤ ╬╣) 1 έΙΤ sέΙΩέΙΤ1/3    1έΙΤO     9       ╬╖        .
                                   4                                   ln (d)      2k+ P
                                                                                       (215)
Next, let us estimate the bias updates for ╧Ε έΙΙ [0, t + 1].
                 (t)
Estimating έΙΗb+,c,r follows an almost identical argument as in the base case (with the only main
difference being relying on Theorem G.1 for non-activation on non-v+ -dominated patches), so we
skip its calculations.
                                   έΙΩ
             (t+1)     (0)
Therefore, b+,c,r = b+,c,r + έΙΤ╬α k╬╖s   (t+1)
                                         5
                                   + P ln (d)
                                                . This means

         (t+1)   (t+1)       (t+1)           (t+1)
      έθρw+,c,r , ╬▒n,p   v+ + ╬╢n,p   έθσ + b+,c,r
         (0)   (t+1)       (t+1)             (0)
   έΚξέθρw+,c,r , ╬▒n,p   v+ + ╬╢n,p   έθσ + b+,c,r
      1
                                                  1

                                                              sέΙΩ
                                                                       έΙΩ
                                                                      ╬╖s (t + 1)
                                                                                                 (216)
                               έΙΩέΙΤ1/3
     + (t + 1)(1 έΙΤ ╬╣) 1 έΙΤ s              1έΙΤO              ╬╖       έΙΤO
      4                                        ln9 (d)      2k+ P     k+ P ln5 (d)
   >0.

This completes the inductive step.

                                         έΙΩ               έΙΩ(0)              έΙΩ         έΙΩ(0)
Corollary G.2.1. At time t = T0 , k╬╖s
                                    +P
                                       ├Ω sέΙΩ S+,c (v+ ) , k╬╖s
                                                           +P
                                                              ├Ω sέΙΩ S+,c (v+,c ) = ╬α(1).


Proof. Directly follows from Lemma G.2 and Theorem G.1.

G.4    M ODEL ERROR AFTER TRAINING

In this subsection, we show the modelέΑβs error after fine-grained training. We also discuss that fine-
tuning the model further increases its feature extractorέΑβs response to the true features, so it is even
more robust/generalizing in downstream classification tasks.
Theorem G.3. Define Fb+ (X) = maxcέΙΙ[k+ ] F+,c (X), FbέΙΤ (X) = maxcέΙΙ[kέΙΤ ] FέΙΤ,c (X).
                                  2
                                 mk+ N P T0
With probability at least 1 έΙΤ O   poly(d)     , the following events take place:

1. (Fine-grained easy & hard sample test accuracies are nearly perfect) Given an easy
                                                                   k+             kέΙΤ
   orh hard fine-grained test samplei (X, y) where y έΙΙ {(+, c)}c=1      έΙς {(έΙΤ, c)}c=1 ,
         (T )                    (T )
    P Fy 0 (X) έΚν maxyέΑ▓ ╠╕=y FyέΑ▓ 0 (X) έΚν o(1).

2. (Coarse-grained easy & hard sample test accuracy are nearly
                                                          h perfect) Given an easy
                                                                                i or hard
                                                              (T0 )      (T0 )
   coarse-grained test sample (X, y) where y έΙΙ {+1, έΙΤ1}, P Fy (X) έΚν FyέΑ▓ (X) έΚν o(1).
                                                            b          b



Proof. Probability of mistake on easy samples.
Without loss of generality, assume X is a (+, c)-class easy sample.
Conditioning on the events of Theorem G.1 and Lemma G.2, we know that for all cέΑ▓ έΙΙ [kέΙΤ ],
                                  (T )
                                                                p
                                FέΙΤ,c0έΑ▓ έΚν O(m+,cέΑ▓ ╧Δ0                 ln(d)) έΚν o(1),               (217)


                                                          72
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


and for all cέΑ▓ έΙΙ [k+ ] έΙΤ {c},


   (T )                                              (T )                       (T )
                 X              X                                                                     p
 F+,c0έΑ▓ έΚν                                        ╧Δ έθρw+,r0 , ╬▒n,p v+ + ╬╢n,p έθσ + b+,c0 έΑ▓ ,r + O(m+,cέΑ▓ ╧Δ0 ln(d))
            pέΙΙP(X;v+ ) (+,r)έΙΙS (0) (v+ )
                                  +,cέΑ▓
                                                                           sέΙΩ

                   (0)         2                              1
          έΚνsέΙΩ S+,cέΑ▓ (v+ )        (1 + ╬╣) 1 + sέΙΩέΙΤ1/3   1+     9       ╬╖T0
                               3                           ln (d)        2k+ P
                                                                                                                       (218)
moreover,


  (T )                                              (T0 )                       (T0 )
                X               X
F+,c0 έΚξ                                         ╧Δ έθρw+,c,r , ╬▒n,p v+ + ╬╢n,p έθσ + b+,c,r
           pέΙΙP(X;v+ ) (+,r)έΙΙS έΙΩ(0) (v+ )
                                  +,c

                                                             (T0 )                         (T0 )
                    X                   X
           +                                             ╧Δ έθρw+,c,r , ╬▒n,p v+,c + ╬╢n,p έθσ + b+,c,r
                pέΙΙP(X;v+,c ) (+,r)έΙΙS έΙΩ(0) (v+,c )
                                         +,c
                                                                       sέΙΩ

            έΙΩ    έΙΩ(0)1
                                      έΙΩέΙΤ1/3             1
       έΚξs              (1 έΙΤ ╬╣) 1 έΙΤ s
                S+,c (v+ )                      1έΙΤ     5         ╬╖T0
                     4                               ln (d)          2k+ P
                                                                                             sέΙΩ

            έΙΩ έΙΩ(0)                   1
                                                          έΙΩέΙΤ1/3
                                                                             1
        + s S+,c (v+,c ) 1 έΙΤ O              (1 έΙΤ ╬╣) 1 έΙΤ s           1έΙΤ                 ╬╖T0
                                    k+                                    ln5 (d)          2k+ P
                                                                                            (219)

                                            (0)                                   έΙΩ(0)
Relying on Proposition 2, we know S+,cέΑ▓ (v+ )            =      1 ┬▒ ln51(d)     S+,c (v+ ) and

  έΙΩ(0)                           έΙΩ(0)                    (T )                     (T )
S+,c (v+,c ) = 1 ┬▒ ln51(d)      S+,c (v+ ) , therefore F+,c0 (X) > maxcέΑ▓ ╠╕=c F+,c0έΑ▓ (X) has to
                                                                (T )                                            (T )
be true. With Corollary G.2.1, we also have F+,c0 (X) έΚξ έΕο(1) > o(1) έΚξ maxcέΑ▓ έΙΙ[kέΙΤ ] FέΙΤ,c0έΑ▓ (X). It
follows that the probability of mistake on an easy test sample is indeed at most o(1).
Probability of mistake on hard samples. Without loss of generality, assume X is a (+, c)-class
hard sample.
By Theorem G.1 (and its proof) and Lemma G.2, we know that for any cέΑ▓ έΙΙ [k+ ], the neurons w+,cέΑ▓ ,r
                                                                              (0)
can only possibly receive update on v-dominated patches for v έΙΙ U+,cέΑ▓ ,r , and the updates to the
                                                                                      (t)
neurons take the feature-plus-Gaussian-noise form of vέΑ▓ έΙΙU (0) c(v έΑ▓ )v έΑ▓ + έΙΗ╬╢+,cέΑ▓ ,r , with c(v έΑ▓ ) έΚν
                                                            P
                                                                  +,cέΑ▓ ,r
έΙγ                          έΙΩ                                                   έΙγ                     έΙΩ
   1 + ╬╣ 1 + sέΙΩέΙΤ1/3 ╬╖ 2ks+ P if v έΑ▓ is a fine-grained feature, or c(v έΑ▓ ) έΚν 23 1 + ╬╣ 1 + sέΙΩέΙΤ1/3 ╬╖ 2ks+ P


if v έΑ▓ = v+ (because the v έΑ▓ component   of έΙγ  a v έΑ▓ -singleton
                                                                neuronέΑβs update is already the maximum
                       (t)                      sέΙΩ
possible). Moreover, ╧ΔέΙΗ╬╢+,cέΑ▓ ,r έΚν O ╬╖╧Δ╬╢ P έΙγ2N .

Relying on Theorem G.1, Lemma G.2, Corollary G.2.1 and previous observations, we have


  (T )                                                            (T0 )                         (T0 )
                         X                X
F+,c0 (X) έΚξ                                                   ╧Δ έθρw+,c,r , ╬▒n,p v+,c + ╬╢n,p έθσ + b+,c,r
                 pέΙΙP(X;v+,c ) (+,c,r)έΙΙS έΙΩ(0) (v+,c )
                                               +,c

                                                                                                                             sέΙΩ

                  έΙΩ(0)                                    1                                               1
             έΚξsέΙΩ S+,c (v+,c )           1έΙΤO                        (1 έΙΤ ╬╣) 1 έΙΤ sέΙΩέΙΤ1/3
                                                                                             1έΙΤO         5           ╬╖T0
                                                         k+                                            ln (d)              2k+ P
             έΚξέΕο(1),
                                                                                                                       (220)


                                                                   73
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


and for cέΑ▓ ╠╕= c,
                   m+,cέΑ▓
   (T )                        (T )                 (T )
                     X
  F+,c0έΑ▓ (X) έΚν             ╧Δ έθρw+,c0 έΑ▓ ,r , ╬╢ έΙΩ έθσ + b+,c0 έΑ▓ ,r
                     r=1

                                                                        (T )                              (T )
                            X                   X
                   +                                                ╧Δ έθρw+,c0 έΑ▓ ,r , ╬▒n,p v+,c + ╬╢n,p έθσ + b+,c0 έΑ▓ ,r
                       pέΙΙP(X;v+,c ) (+,cέΑ▓ ,r)έΙΙS (0) (v+,c )
                                                      +,cέΑ▓

                                                                     (T )                            (T )
                           X                    X
                                                                                  έΑι
                   +                                             ╧Δ έθρw+,c0 έΑ▓ ,r , ╬▒n,p vέΙΤ + ╬╢n,p έθσ + b+,c0 έΑ▓ ,r
                       pέΙΙP(X;vέΙΤ ) (+,cέΑ▓ ,r)έΙΙS (0) (vέΙΤ )
                                                 +,cέΑ▓
                             Ύμτ                                                                                     Ύμ╢
                                                        0 έΙΤ1
                                                       TX
                                                                     (╧Ε )                             (0)
                                       X                                                  X
              έΚνO(1) ├Ω Ύμφ
                      Ύμυ
                                                      έθρ          έΙΗw+,c,έΑ▓ r , ╬╢ έΙΩ έθσ +                έθρw+,c,έΑ▓ r , ╬╢ έΙΩ έθσΎμ╕
                                                                                                                     Ύμ╖   (221)
                                            (0)
                                 (+,cέΑ▓ ,r)έΙΙU+,cέΑ▓ ,r       ╧Ε =0                         rέΙΙ[m+,cέΑ▓ ]

                                                                        (0)                             (0)
                            X                   X
                   +                                                ╧Δ έθρw+,cέΑ▓ ,r , ╬▒n,p v+,c + ╬╢n,p έθσ + b+,cέΑ▓ ,r
                       pέΙΙP(X;v+,c ) (+,cέΑ▓ ,r)έΙΙS (0) (v+,c )
                                                      +,cέΑ▓

                                                                     (0)                           (0)
                           X                    X
                                                                                έΑι
                   +                                             ╧Δ έθρw+,cέΑ▓ ,r , ╬▒n,p vέΙΤ + ╬╢n,p έθσ + b+,cέΑ▓ ,r
                       pέΙΙP(X;vέΙΤ ) (+,cέΑ▓ ,r)έΙΙS (0) (vέΙΤ )
                                                 +,cέΑ▓

                             1
              έΚνO                          .
                         polyln(d)

Moreover, for any cέΑ▓ έΙΙ [kέΙΤ ], similar to before,
                   mέΙΤ,cέΑ▓
   (T )                        (T )                 (T )
                     X
  FέΙΤ,c0έΑ▓ (X) έΚν             ╧Δ έθρwέΙΤ,c0 έΑ▓ ,r , ╬╢ έΙΩ έθσ + bέΙΤ,c0 έΑ▓ ,r
                     r=1

                                                                        (T )                              (T )
                            X                   X
                   +                                                ╧Δ έθρwέΙΤ,c0 έΑ▓ ,r , ╬▒n,p v+,c + ╬╢n,p έθσ + bέΙΤ,c0 έΑ▓ ,r
                       pέΙΙP(X;v+,c ) (έΙΤ,cέΑ▓ ,r)έΙΙS (0) (v+,c )
                                               έΙΤ,cέΑ▓

                                                                     (T )                            (T )
                           X                    X
                                                                                  έΑι
                   +                                             ╧Δ έθρwέΙΤ,c0 έΑ▓ ,r , ╬▒n,p vέΙΤ + ╬╢n,p έθσ + bέΙΤ,c0 έΑ▓ ,r
                       pέΙΙP(X;vέΙΤ ) (έΙΤ,cέΑ▓ ,r)έΙΙS (0) (vέΙΤ )
                                             έΙΤ,cέΑ▓
                             Ύμτ                                                                             Ύμ╢
                                                           (T )                            (0)
                                       X                                       X
                                                                   έΙΩ
              έΚνO(1) ├Ω Ύμφ                                   0
                                                      έθρwέΙΤ,c, έΑ▓r , ╬╢ έθσ +                  έθρwέΙΤ,c,έΑ▓ r , ╬╢ έΙΩ έθσΎμ╕              (222)
                      Ύμυ                                                                                   Ύμ╖
                                            (0)                             rέΙΙ[mέΙΤ,cέΑ▓ ]
                                 (έΙΤ,cέΑ▓ ,r)έΙΙUέΙΤ,cέΑ▓ ,r

                                                                        (0)                             (0)
                            X                   X
                   +                                                ╧Δ έθρwέΙΤ,cέΑ▓ ,r , ╬▒n,p v+,c + ╬╢n,p έθσ + bέΙΤ,cέΑ▓ ,r
                       pέΙΙP(X;v+,c ) (έΙΤ,cέΑ▓ ,r)έΙΙS (0) (v+,c )
                                               έΙΤ,cέΑ▓

                                          (0)
               + O(1) ├Ω sέΑι SέΙΤ,cέΑ▓ (vέΙΤ ) ├Ω ╬╣έΑιupper + O(╧Δ0 ln(d))


                       1            p                   1
              έΚνO               + O ╧Δ0 ln(d) + O
                   polyln(d)                          ln(d)
              έΚνo(1).

              (T )                               (T )                                  (T )               (T )
Therefore, F+,c0 (X) > maxy╠╕=(+,c) Fy 0 (X), which means Fb+ 0 (X) > FbέΙΤ 0 (X) indeed.

Remark. First of all, note that the feature extractor, after fine-grained training, is already well-
performing, as it responds strongly (έΕο(1) strength) to the true features, and very weakly to any
off-diagonal features and noise. This can already help us explain the linear-probing result we saw
on ImageNet21k in Appendix A.2, since linear probing does not alter the the feature extractor after
fine-grained pretraining (on ImageNet21k), it only retrains a new linear classifier on top of the
feature extractor for classifying on the target ImageNet1k dataset.


                                                                   74
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


At a high level, finetuning Fb can only further enhance the feature extractorέΑβs response to the features,
therefore making the model even more robust for challenging downstream classification problems;
it will not degrade the feature extractorέΑβs response to any true feature. A rigorous proof of this
statement is almost a repetition of the proofs for fine-grained training, so we do not repeat them here.
Intuitively speaking, we just need to note that the properties stated in Theorem G.1 will continue to
hold during finetuning (as long as we stay in polynomial time), and with similar argument to those
in the proof of Lemma G.2, we note that the neurons responsible for detecting fine-grained features,
          έΙΩ(0)
i.e. the S+,c (v+,c ), will continue to only receive (positive) updates on the v+,c -dominated patches
of the following form:
                       N
                 ╬╖ X
       (t)
  έΙΗw+,c,r =             1{yn = (+, c)}[1 έΙΤ logit(t)   (t)
                                                 + (Xn )]
                N P n=1

                              1{έθρw+,c,r
                                    (t)                          (t)
                      X
                                            (t)         (t)                  (t)         (t)
                ├Ω                        , ╬▒n,p v+,c + ╬╢n,p έθσ + b+,c,r > 0} ╬▒n,p v+,c + ╬╢n,p   ,
                           (t)
                    pέΙΙP(Xn ;v+,c )
                                                                                                   (223)
                                                     έΙΩ(0)
and similar update expression can be stated for the S+,c (v+ ) neurons:
              (t)
           έΙΗw+,c,r
                N
            ╬╖ X
       =           1{yn = (+, c)}[1 έΙΤ logit(t)   (t)
                                            + (Xn )]
           N P n=1                                                                                 (224)

                        1{έθρw+,c,r
                              (t)                        (t)
                 X
                                      (t)       (t)                  (t)       (t)
           ├Ω                       , ╬▒n,p v+ + ╬╢n,p έθσ + b+,c,r > 0} ╬▒n,p v+ + ╬╢n,p   .
                     (t)
             pέΙΙP(Xn ;v+ )

Indeed, these feature-detector neurons will continue growing in the direction of the features they are
responsible for detecting instead of degrade in strength.


                                                   75
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


H    P ROBABILITY L EMMAS
Lemma H.1 (Laurent-Massart ╧Θ2 Concentration (Laurent & Massart (2000) Lemma 1)). Let g έΙ╝
N (0, Id ). For any vector a έΙΙ RdέΚξ0 , any t > 0, the following concentration inequality holds:
                          " d                                        #
                           X                            έΙγ
                        P      ai gi2 έΚξ έΙξaέΙξ1 + 2έΙξaέΙξ2 t + 2έΙξaέΙξέΙη t έΚν eέΙΤt                         (225)
                           i=1

Lemma H.2. Let g έΙ╝ N (0, ╧Δ 2 Id ). Then,
                                    P έΙξgέΙξ22 έΚξ 5╧Δ 2 d έΚν eέΙΤd

                                                                                              (226)

Proof. By Lemma H.1, setting ai = 1 for all i and t = d yields
                           P έΙξgέΙξ22 έΚξ ╧Δ 2 d + 2╧Δ 2 d + 2╧Δ 2 d έΚν eέΙΤd

                                                                                              (227)


Lemma H.3 (Shen et al. (2022a)). Let g1 έΙ╝ N (0, ╧Δ12 Id ) and g2 έΙ╝ N (0, ╧Δ22 Id ) be independent.
Then, for any ╬┤ έΙΙ (0, 1) and sufficiently large d, there exist constants c1 , c2 such that
                             h                       p           i
                           P |έθρg1 , g2 έθσ| έΚν c1 ╧Δ1 ╧Δ2 d ln(1/╬┤) έΚξ 1 έΙΤ ╬┤                     (228)
                             h                     έΙγ i 1
                           P έθρg1 , g2 έθσ έΚξ c2 ╧Δ1 ╧Δ2 d έΚξ                                     (229)
                                                            4


                                                76
