Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


CONFIDE: CON TEXTUAL FI NITE D IFFERENC E MOD -
ELLING OF PDE S

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT

         We introduce a method for inferring an explicit PDE from a data sample gener-
         ated by previously unseen dynamics, based on a learned context. The training
         phase integrates knowledge of the form of the equation with a differential scheme,
         while the inference phase yields a PDE that fits the data sample and enables both
         signal prediction and data explanation. We include results of extensive experi-
         mentation, comparing our method to SOTA approaches, together with ablation
         studies that examine different flavors of our solution in terms of prediction error
         and explainability.



1   I NTRODUCTION

Many scientific fields use the language of Partial Differential Equations (PDEs; Evans, 2010) to
describe the physical laws governing observed natural phenomena with spatio-temporal dynamics.
Typically, a PDE system is derived from first principles and a mechanistic understanding of the
problem after experimentation and data collection by domain experts of the field. Well-known
examples for such systems include Navier-Stokes and Burgers’ equations in fluid dynamics, Maxwell’s
equations for electromagnetic theory, and Schrödinger’s equations for quantum mechanics. Solving
a PDE model could provide users with crucial information on how a signal evolves over time and
space, and could be used for both prediction and control tasks.
Creating PDE-based models holds great value, but it is a difficult task in many cases. For some
complex real-world phenomena, only some part of the systems dynamics is known, such as its
structure, or functional form. For example, an expert might tell us that a signal obeys the dynamics of
a heat equation, without specifying the diffusion and drift coefficient functions. We focus mainly on
this case, as explained in detail below.
The current process of solving PDEs over space and time is by using numerical differentiation and
integration schemes. However, numerical methods may require significant computational resources,
making the PDE solving task feasible only for low-complexity problems, e.g., a small number of
equations. An alternative common approach is finding simplified models that are based on certain
assumptions and can roughly describe the problem’s dynamics. A known example for such a model
are the Reynolds-averaged Navier-Stokes equations Reynolds (1895). Building simplified models is
considered a highly non-trivial task that requires special expertise, and might still not represent the
phenomenon to a satisfactory accuracy.
In recent years, with the rise of Deep Learning (DL; LeCun et al., 2015), novel methods for solving
numerically-challenging PDEs were devised. These methods have become especially useful thanks to
the rapid development of sensors and computational power, enabling the collection of large amounts
of multidimensional data related to a specific phenomenon. In general, DL based approaches consume
the observed data and learn a black-box model of the given problem that can then be used to provide
predictions for the dynamics. While this set of solutions has been shown to perform successfully on
many tasks, it still suffers from two crucial drawbacks: (1) It offers no explainability as to why the
predictions were made, and (2) it usually performs very poorly when extrapolating to unseen data.
In this paper, we offer a new hybrid modelling (Kurz et al., 2022) approach that can benefit from
both worlds: it can use the vast amount of data collected on one hand, and utilize the partially known
PDEs describing the observed natural phenomenon on the other hand. In addition, it can learn several


                                                  1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


contexts, thus employing the generalization capabilities of DL models and enabling zero-shot learning
(Palatucci et al., 2009).
Specifically, our model is given a general functional form of the PDE (i.e., which derivatives are
used), consumes the observed data, and outputs the estimated coefficient functions. Then, we can
then use off-the-shelf PDE solvers (e.g., PyPDE1 ) to solve and create predictions of the given task
forward in time for any horizon.
Another key feature of our approach is that it consumes the spatio-temporal input signals required
for training in an unsupervised manner, namely the coefficient functions that created the signals in
the train set are unknown. This is achieved by combining an autoencoder architecture (AE; Kramer,
1991; Hinton & Salakhutdinov, 2006) with a loss defined using the functional form of the PDE. As
a result, large amounts of training data for our algorithm can be easily acquired. Moreover, our
ability to generalize to data corresponding to a PDE whose coefficients did not appear in the train set,
enables the use of synthetic data for training. Although our approach is intended to work when the
PDE functional form is known, it is not limited to that scenario only. In cases where we are given a
misspecified model (when experts provide a surrogate model for instance), our model can eliminate
some of the discrepancies using the extra function that is not a coefficient of one of the derivatives
(the p0 (x, t, u) function in equation 1).
On the technical side, we chose to apply a finite difference approach in order to integrate the
knowledge regarding the structure of the PDE family. This approach enables us to consume training
data without requiring the corresponding boundary conditions.
A natural question for this setup is whether we are able to extract the “correct” coefficients for the PDE.
The answer depends on the identifiability of the system, a trait that does not hold for many practical
scenarios. We therefore focus on finding the coefficients that best explain the data, making prediction
of the signal forward in time possible. Practitioners will find the estimated coefficients useful even if
they are not exact, since they may convey the shape, or dynamics, of unknown phenomena.
Our motivation comes from the world of electric vehicle batteries, where PDEs are used to model
battery charging, discharging and aging. The data describing these phenomena is gathered by battery
management systems in the vehicle, and also in the lab. Traditional techniques for model calibration
suffer from two drawbacks: (1) they are extremely time consuming, (2) they do not leverage data
from one battery in the dataset to another. Our approach solves both issues: model calibration
is achieved by inference rather than optimization, and the learned context facilitates transfer of
knowledge between batteries.
We summarize our contribution as follows:

         1. Harnessing the information contained in large datasets belonging to a phenomenon which is
            related to a PDE functional family in an unsupervised manner. Specifically, we propose a
            regression based method, combined with a finite difference approach.
         2. Proposing a DL encoding scheme for the context conveyed in such datasets, enabling
            generalization for prediction of unseen samples based on minimal input, similarly to zero-
            shot learning.
         3. Extensive experimentation with the proposed scheme, examining the effect of context and
            train set size, along with a comparison to different previous methods.

The paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 we review related work. In Section 3 we present
the proposed method and in Section 4 we provide experiments to support our method. Section 5
completes the paper with conclusions and future directions.

2       R ELATED W ORK
Creating a neural-network based model for approximating the solution of a PDE has been studied
extensively over the years, and dates back more than two decades (Lagaris et al., 1998). We divide
deep learning based approaches by their ability to incorporate mechanistic knowledge in their models,
and by the type of information that can be extracted from using them. Another distinction between
    1
        https://pypde.readthedocs.io/en/latest/


                                                    2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


different approaches is their ability to handle datasets originating from different contexts. From
a PDE perspective, a different context could refer to having data signals generated with different
coefficients functions (pl in equation 1). In many real-world applications, obtaining observed datasets
originating from a single context is impractical. For example, in cardiac electrophysiology (Neic
et al., 2017), patients differ in cardiac parameters like resistance and capacitance, thus representing
different contexts. In fluid dynamics, the topography of the underwater terrain (bathymetry) differs
from one sample to another (Hajduk et al., 2020).
The first line of work is purely data-driven methods. These models come in handy when we observe
a spatio-temporal phenomenon, but either don’t have enough knowledge of the underlying PDE
dynamics, or the known equations are too complicated to solve numerically (as explained thoroughly
by Wang & Yu (2021)). Recent advances demonstrate successful prediction results that are fast to
compute (compared to numerically solving a PDE), and also provide decent predictions even for
PDEs with very high dimensions (Brandstetter et al., 2022; Li et al., 2020; Han et al., 2018; Lu et al.,
2019; Pfaff et al., 2020). However, the downside of these approaches is not being able to infer the
PDE coefficients, which may hold valuable information and explanations as to why the model formed
its predictions.
The second type of data-driven methods are approaches that utilize PDE forms known beforehand to
some extent. Works that adopt this approach can usually utilize the given mechanistic knowledge
and provide reliable predictions, ability to generalize to unseen data, and in some cases even reveal
part of the underlying PDE coefficient functions. However, their main limitation is that they assume
the entire training dataset is generated by a single coefficient function and only differ in the initial
conditions (or possibly boundary conditions). PDE-NET (Long et al., 2018), its followup PDE-NET2
(Long et al., 2019), DISCOVER (Du et al., 2022), PINO (Li et al., 2021) and sparse-optimization
methods (Schaeffer, 2017; Rudy et al., 2017) (expanding the idea originally presented on ODEs
Brunton et al. (2016); Champion et al. (2019)), are not given the PDE system, but instead aim to
learn some representation of the underlying PDE as a linear combination of base functions and
derivatives of the PDE state. PINN (Raissi et al., 2019) and NeuralPDE (Zubov et al., 2021) assume
full knowledge of the underlying PDE including the its coefficients, and aim to replace the numerical
PDE solver by a fast and reliable model. They also provide a scheme for finding the PDE parameters
as scalars, but assume the entire dataset is generated by a single coefficient value, while we assume
each sample is generated with different coefficient values which could be functions of time, space
and state (as described in equation 1). In Négiar et al. (2022), the authors incorporate knowledge of
the PDE structure as a hard constraint while learning to predict the solution to the PDE. Similarly,
Learning-informed PDEs (Dong et al., 2022; Aarset et al., 2022) suggest a method that assumes
full knowledge of the PDE derivatives and their coefficient functions, and infers the free coefficient
function (namely p0 (x, t, u) in equation 1). In (Lim et al., 2022), the authors apply a finite difference
approach to PINNs. Another approach for learning the solution to PDEs, that also uses a neural
representation, is introduced in (Chen et al., 2022). Recently, in (Subramanian et al., 2023), the
authors have suggested a Foundation Model framework for predicting solutions of PDEs.
The last line of work, and closer in spirit to ours, includes context-aware methods that assume some
mechanistic knowledge, with each sample in the train set generated by different PDE coefficients
(we also refer to this concept as having different context) and initial conditions. CoDA (Kirchmeyer
et al., 2022) provides the ability to form predictions of signals with unseen contexts, but does not
directly identify the PDE parameters. GOKU (Linial et al., 2021) and ALPS (Yang et al., 2022)
provide context-aware inference of signals with ODE dynamics, when the observed signals are not
the ODE variables directly. Another important paper introduces the APHYNITY algorithm (Yin
et al., 2021), which also presents an approach to inferring PDE parameters from data. This work
handles the scenario of fixed coefficients, as opposed to our ability to handle coefficients that are
functions. Also, the case of coefficients that differ between samples is addressed only briefly, with a
fixed, rather high, context ratio.


3    M ETHOD

The data we handle is a set of spatio-temporal signals generated by an underlying PDE, only the
form of which is known. The coefficient functions determining the exact PDE are unknown and
may be different for each collection of data. Our goal is to estimate these coefficient functions and


                                                    3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                         (a)                                                   (b)

       Figure 1: (a) Inference process. Dashed line is initial condition. (b) Training process.


provide reliable predictions of the future time steps of the observed phenomenon. The proposed
method comprises three subsequent parts: (1) Creating a compact representation of the given signal,
(2) estimating the PDE coefficients, and (3) solving the PDE using the acquired knowledge. For ease
of exposition we focus on parabolic PDEs in this section.

3.1   P ROBLEM F ORMULATION

We now define the problem formally. Let u(x, t) denote a signal with spatial support x ∈ [0, L] and
temporal support t ∈ [0, T ]. We refer to this as the complete signal. Next, we define uc (x, t) to be a
partial input signal, a patch, where its support is x ∈ [0, L], t ∈ [0, t0 ], 0 < t0 < T . The superscript c
stands for context. We assume the signal u(x, t) is the solution of a k-order PDE of the general form
                                         k
                                 ∂u X             ∂ul
                                    = pl (x, t, u) l + p0 (x, t, u),                                     (1)
                                 ∂t               ∂x
                                        l=1

with a vector of coefficient functions p = (p0 , . . . , pk ). We adopt the notation of Wang & Yu (2021)
and refer to a family of PDEs characterized by a vector p as an operator F (p, u), where solving
F (p, u) = 0 yields solutions of the PDE.
The problem we solve is as follows: given a patch uc (x, t), that solves a PDE of a known operator F
with an unknown coefficient vector p, we would like to (a) estimate the coefficient vector p̂ and (b)
predict the complete signal û(x, t) for 0 ≤ t ≤ T .
Our solution is a concatenation of two neural networks, which we call CONFIDE. Its input is a patch,
and its output is a vector p̂. We feed this vector into an off-the-shelf PDE solver together with the
operator F (p, u) to obtain the predicted signal û(x, t). An explanation of our numerical scheme
appears in Section A.

3.2   CONFIDE I NFERENCE

We begin by outlining our inference process, presented in Fig. 1a. The input to this process is a patch
uc (x, t), where x ∈ [0, L], t ∈ [0, t0 ] and an operator F (e.g., the one introduced in equation 1 for
k = 2). The patch is fed into the CONFIDE component, which generates the estimated coefficients p̂,
in the example, p̂ = (â, b̂, ĉ). The PDE solver then uses this estimate to predict the complete signal,
û(x, t), x ∈ [0, L], t ∈ [t0 , T ]. An important feature of our approach is the explicit prediction of the
coefficient functions, which contributes to the explainability of the solution.
The patch uc (x, t) is a partial signal that serves as an initial condition for the prediction and also
represents the dynamics of the signal for estimating the PDE coefficients. In the sequel we refer to it


                                                     4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


as “context”. The ratio of the context is denoted by ρ, such that t0 = ρT , and is a hyper-parameter of
our algorithm. We discuss the effect of context size in Section D.2.

Algorithm 1 CONFIDE inference scheme
  Input: patch uc (x, t), operator F , trained networks: decoder gϕ , coefficient estimator hω
  p̂ ← hω (gϕ (uc ))
  û ← PDE_solve(F, p̂, uc (x, t = t0 ))
  return û, p̂


Algorithm 2 Algorithm for training CONFIDE
  Input: dataset U , operator F , context ratio ρ, loss weight α, number of epochs Ne
  Init: random weights in encoder gϕ , decoder fθ , coefficient estimator hω
  for epoch in Ne do
    L←0
       c
    UN     ← N random patches, one from each ui ∈ U
    for uci in UNc
                   do
        p̂i ← hω (gϕ (uci ))
        LAE ← (uci − fθ (gϕ (uci ), ui (t = 0)))2
                                2
        Lcoef ← ∥F (p̂i , uci )∥
        L ← L + α · LAE + (1 − α) · Lcoef
    end for
    ϕ, θ, ω ← arg min L
  end for


3.3   CONFIDE T RAINING

The training process is presented in Fig. 1b. Its input is a dataset U that consists of N complete
signals {ui (x, t)}N
                   i=1 , which are solutions of N PDEs that share an operator F but have unique
coefficient vectors {pi }N
                         i=1 . We stress that the vectors pi are unknown even at train time. The support
of the signals is x ∈ [0, L], t ∈ [0, T ]. The loss we minimize is a weighted sum of two components:
(i) the autoencoder reconstruction loss , which is defined in equation 2, and (ii) the functional loss as
defined in equation 3.
CONFIDE comprises two parts: (1) an encoder and (2) a coefficient estimator. The encoder’s goal
is to capture the dynamics driving the signal ui , thus creating a compact representation for the
coefficient estimator. The encoder is trained on patches uci randomly taken from signals ui belonging
to the train set. Each patch is of size t0 × L.
The encoder loss is the standard AE reconstruction loss, namely the objective is
                                                 N
                                                 X
                             min LAE = min             loss(uci − fθ (gϕ (uci ))),                       (2)
                              θ,ϕ          θ,ϕ
                                                 i=1

where fθ is the decoder, gϕ is the encoder and loss(·, ·) is a standard loss function (e.g., L2 loss).
The second component is the coefficient estimator, whose input is the encoded context. The estimated
coefficients output by this component, together with the operator F , form the functional objective:
                                                       N
                                                       X                    2
                                    min Lcoef = min          ∥F (p̂ω , uci )∥ ,                          (3)
                                     ω            ω
                                                       i=1
where ω represents the parameters of the coefficient estimator network, and p̂ is the estimator of p,
acquired by applying the network hω to the output of the encoder.
The two components are trained simultaneously, and the total loss is a weighted sum of the losses in
equation 2 and equation 3: L = α · LAE + (1 − α) · Lcoef , where α ∈ (0, 1) is a hyper-parameter.
Initial-conditions aware autoencoder. To further aid our model in learning the underlying dynamics
of the observed phenomenon, we include the observed initial conditions of the signal (i.e., ui (t = 0))


                                                       5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


along with the latent context vector (i.e., gϕ (uci )) as input to the decoder network. This modification
enables the model to learn a context vector that better represents the dynamics of the phenomenon,
rather than other information such as the actual values of the signal.
We experimented with removing the decoder and training the networks using the functional loss
alone, and without including the initial conditions as an input to the decoder. In both cases, results
proved to be inferior, suggesting that the autoencoder loss helps the model to focus on the underlying
dynamics of the observed signal.
To summarize this section, we present the inference scheme in Algorithm 1, and the full training
algorithm in Algorithm 2.

4     E XPERIMENTS
We devote this section to analyse and compare our approach to other solutions, on three different
systems of PDEs: (1) constant coefficients, (2) Burgers’ equations, and (3) 2D-FitzHugh-Nagumo.
For each PDE task, we created a dataset of signals generated from a PDE with different coefficients.
We could not use off-the-shelf datasets, such as those appearing in PDEBench (Takamoto et al.,
2022), since each of the datasets there is generated from a single constant function (i.e., all data
samples have the same context). We used well-known equations, therefore our datasets can serve as a
benchmark for the emerging field of contextual PDE modelling. We stress the fact that the test set
contains signals generated by PDEs with coefficient vectors that do not appear in the training data,
resulting in a zero-shot prediction problem. More information about dataset creation can be found in
the appendix.
We benchmark the performance of CONFIDE against several state of the art approaches:
      1. Neural ODE, based on the algorithm suggested by Chen et al. (2018), Section 5.1 (namely,
         Latent ODE).
      2. Fourier Neural Operator (FNO), introduced by Li et al. (2020).
      3. U-Net, as presented by Gupta & Brandstetter (2022).
      4. DINO, as presented by Yin et al. (2022).
Additional details regarding the implementation of baselines can be found in Section B.2.

4.1   S ECOND O RDER PDE WITH C ONSTANT C OEFFICIENTS

The first family of PDEs used for our experiments is:
                                      ∂u      ∂2u       ∂u
                                          =a 2 +b          + c,                                   (4)
                                      ∂t      ∂x        ∂x
where p = (a, b, c) are constants but differ between signals. Figure 2a demonstrates the clear
advantage of our approach, which increases with the prediction horizon (note the logarithmic scale of
the vertical axis, representing the MSE of prediction). Since CONFIDE harnesses both mechanistic
knowledge and training data, it is able to predict the signal û(x, t) several timesteps ahead, while
keeping the error to a minimum.
Another result for this set of experiments appears in Figure 2b. Here, we plot the estimated value of
parameter a of equation 4, against its true value. The plot and the high value of R2 demonstrate the
low variance of our prediction, with a strong concentration of values along the y = x line.
Section D presents the results of an ablation study on the hyper-parameters of CONFIDE for this
equation.

4.2   B URGERS ’ EQUATION

Another family of PDEs we experiment with is the quasi-linear Burgers’ equation, whose general
form is
                                 ∂u      ∂2u          ∂u
                                     = a 2 + b(u) ,                                        (5)
                                  ∂t     ∂x           ∂x


                                                   6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                          2.0

      10 1
                                                                                          1.5


                                                                             Estimation
MSE


                                                                                          1.0
      10 3
                                                               CONFIDE                    0.5
                                                               NeuralODE
                                                               FNO
                                                               Unet
                                                               DINO                       0.0
      10 5
             20                       40         60   80             100                        0.0     0.5       1.0            1.5   2.0
                                                 t                                                            Ground truth
                                                (a)                                                              (b)

Figure 2: Constant coefficients (Section 4.1). (a) Prediction error vs. prediction horizon, for different
algorithms. CONFIDE, in red, is our approach. (b) Estimated value of the ∂ 2 u/∂x2 coefficient vs.
ground truth, for test set (R2 = 0.93).



                                       t = 20         t = 50               t = 75                     t = 100           Zoomed
                  NeuralODE CONFIDE
                  FNO
                  Unet
                  DINO


                                           x               x                    x                        x                   x


Figure 3: A solution of the Burgers’ equation. The black plot in each figure displays the ground truth.
Rows correspond with the predicted solution by the respective algorithm (top row for CONFIDE
displayed in red). Each column shows the solution at a different time point. The rightmost column
shows the solution at t = 100 zoomed to demonstrate the differences.


where b(x, t, u) = −u, as presented in Bateman (1915). We note that this equation is quasi-linear
since its drift coefficient b(x, t, u) depends on the solution u itself. The dataset for our experiments
consists of 10000 signals with different values of a and the same b(u) = −u, both unknown to the
algorithm a priori. We begin with a demonstration of a signal u(x, t) and its prediction û(x, t) in
Figure 3. As can be seen both visually and from the value of the MSE (in each panel’s title), our
approach yields a prediction that stays closest to the ground truth (GT), even as the prediction horizon
(vertical axis) increases.


                                                                            7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                          t = 30            t = 60            t = 90
                   CONFIDE                                                                                                      GT
                   NeuralODE                                                                                                    CONFIDE
                   FNO
                   Unet
      10 1         DINO


                                                                   u/ x coefficient
MSE


      10 3


      10 5
              20               40     60      80      100                             0            20   0            20   0            20
                                      t                                                     x                 x                 x

                                     (a)                                                                    (b)

Figure 4: Burgers’ PDE: (a) Prediction error as prediction horizon increases, for different approaches
with context ratio ρ = 0.2. (b) Estimation of the coefficient function b(x, t, u) of the Burgers’
equation from equation 5. CONFIDE manages to accurately estimate the spatio-temporal dynamics
of the coefficient, based on a context ratio of ρ = 0.2.


Figure 4a displays a comparison between the different approaches to our problem. As before, the
vertical axis of the plot is logarithmic, and the advantage of CONFIDE over other approaches increases
with the prediction horizon. In Figure 4b we focus on the ability to accurately predict coefficient
functions with spatio-temporal dynamics, in this case: the coefficient b(x, t, u) of equation 5. The
panels correspond to different points in time, showing that the coefficient estimator tracks the temporal
evolution successfully.



4.3          F ITZ H UGH -NAGUMO EQUATIONS

The last family of PDEs we examine is the FitzHugh-Nagumo PDE (Klaasen & Troy, 1984) consisting
of two equations:


                                    ∂u                                       ∂v
                                       = a∆u + Ru (u, k, v),                    = b∆v + Rv (u, v),                                          (6)
                                    ∂t                                       ∂t


where a and b represent the diffusion coefficients of u and v, and ∆ is the Laplace operator. For
the local reaction terms, we follow Yin et al. (2021) and set Ru (u, k, v) = u − u3 − k − v, and
Rv (u, v) = u − v. The PDE state is (u, v), defined on the 2-D rectangular domain (x, y) with
periodic Neumann boundary conditions.
The dataset created for this task consists of 1000 signals, each with a different value of k. We compare
the prediction generated by CONFIDE to those yielded by other approaches, and present a typical
result in Fig. 5. In Figure 7 we present the prediction error as a function of the prediction horizon,
once again comparing CONFIDE to the baselines.
We summarize the results of experiments for signal prediction across all setups and approaches in
Table 2. The table includes results for CONFIDE, all baselines, and also a variant of CONFIDE
which we refer to as CONFIDE-0. This zero-knowledge variant is applicable when we know that
the signal obeys some differential operator F , but have no details regarding the actual structure of F .
Thus, CONFIDE-0 does not estimate the equation parameters, and only yields a prediction for the
signal, utilizing our context-based architecture. We elaborate further in Section B.2.


                                                               8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                     t = 80               t = 110           t = 140        t = 170        t = 200



                   GT
                   CONFIDE
                   Neural-ODE
                   FNO
                   Unet


Figure 5: Figures in the top row show the ground truth of Rv for different time points, and the rows
below show the estimation of it by the different approaches. CONFIDE near-perfectly recovers the
unknown part of the PDE even as the prediction horizon increases.


                       CONFIDE
                       NeuralODE                                                                              Coefficient
                       FNO                                                                   Setup          estimation error
                       Unet
       10 1                                                                             Constant coeff.    0.0095 ± 0.0131
                                                                                          Burgers’         0.0454 ± 0.0333
                                                                                           FN2D            0.0075 ± 0.0123
 MSE


       10 3
                                                                                      Table 1: Coefficient estimation error for
       10 5                                                                           different experimental setups: constant
                                                                                      coefficients, Burgers’ equation and two-
                                                                                      dimensional FitzHugh-Nagumo. The
              50                70    90      110   130     150     170   190         variance is calculated over the entire test
                                                    t                                 set, namely 1000 signals for the first two
                                                                                      setups and 100 signals for FN.
    Figure 6: 2D-FitzHugh-Nagumo PDE: prediction
    error as horizon increases, for different approaches.


5     C ONCLUSION
In this work we introduce a new hybrid modelling approach, combining mechanistic knowledge with
data. The knowledge we assume is in the form of a PDE family, without specific parameter values,
typically supplied by field experts. The dataset we rely on is readily available in physical modelling


                                                                                9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 2: Result summary for the signal prediction task, on all three PDE systems. The numbers
represent signal prediction error at the end of the prediction horizon, averaged over the entire test set.

                                    Constant                                FitzHugh-
                 Method            coefficients          Burgers’            Nagumo
                 CONFIDE        0.0023 ± 0.0036     0.0008 ± 0.0011      0.0083 ± 0.0177
                 CONFIDE-0      0.0079 ± 0.0218     0.0009 ± 0.0016      0.0845 ± 0.0978
                 Neural-ODE     0.0680 ± 0.0905     0.0272 ± 0.0627      0.2944 ± 0.2293
                 FNO            0.0538 ± 0.0680     0.9351 ± 0.3091      2.5727 ± 17.732
                 Unet           0.0160 ± 0.0199     0.0016 ± 0.0023      0.1293 ± 0.1748
                 DINO           0.0850 ± 0.0994     0.0142 ± 0.0206            N/A



problems, as it is simply a collection of spatio-temporal signals belonging to the same PDE family,
with different parameters. Unlike other schemes, we do not require knowledge of the parameters of
the PDE generating our train data. We conduct extensive experiments, comparing our scheme to other
solutions and testing its performance in different regimes. It achieves good results in the zero-shot
learning problem, and is robust to different values of hyper-parameters.
Future directions we would like to pursue include a straightforward extension to handle signals
with missing datapoints, handling “out of distribution” signals, generated by parameters beyond the
support of the dataset, and examining the robustness of predicting such signals. Another question
that comes to mind is whether including multiple signals generated by the same parameters has an
effect on quality of results, similar to or different from that of the context ratio. Finally, we are eager
to apply CONFIDE to a real world problem like the ones mentioned in Section 2.


                                                    10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Christian Aarset, Martin Holler, and Tram Thi Ngoc Nguyen. Learning-informed parameter identifi-
  cation in nonlinear time-dependent pdes. arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.10915, 2022.
Harry Bateman. Some recent researches on the motion of fluids. Monthly Weather Review, 43(4):
 163–170, 1915.
Johannes Brandstetter, Daniel Worrall, and Max Welling. Message passing neural pde solvers. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2202.03376, 2022.
Steven L Brunton, Joshua L Proctor, and J Nathan Kutz. Discovering governing equations from data
  by sparse identification of nonlinear dynamical systems. Proceedings of the national academy of
  sciences, 113(15):3932–3937, 2016.
Kathleen Champion, Bethany Lusch, J Nathan Kutz, and Steven L Brunton. Data-driven discovery of
  coordinates and governing equations. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 116(45):
  22445–22451, 2019.
Peter Yichen Chen, Jinxu Xiang, Dong Heon Cho, Yue Chang, GA Pershing, Henrique Teles Maia,
  Maurizio M Chiaramonte, Kevin Carlberg, and Eitan Grinspun. Crom: Continuous reduced-order
  modeling of pdes using implicit neural representations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.02607, 2022.
Ricky TQ Chen, Yulia Rubanova, Jesse Bettencourt, and David K Duvenaud. Neural ordinary
  differential equations. Advances in neural information processing systems, 31, 2018.
Guozhi Dong, Michael Hintermüller, and Kostas Papafitsoros. Optimization with learning-informed
  differential equation constraints and its applications. ESAIM: Control, Optimisation and Calculus
  of Variations, 28:3, 2022.
Mengge Du, Yuntian Chen, and Dongxiao Zhang. Discover: Deep identification of symbolic
 open-form pdes via enhanced reinforcement-learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.02181, 2022.
Lawrence C Evans. Partial differential equations, volume 19. American Mathematical Soc., 2010.
Jayesh K Gupta and Johannes Brandstetter. Towards multi-spatiotemporal-scale generalized pde
  modeling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.15616, 2022.
Hennes Hajduk, Dmitri Kuzmin, and Vadym Aizinger. Bathymetry Reconstruction Using Inverse
  ShallowWater Models: Finite Element Discretization and Regularization. Springer, 2020.
Jiequn Han, Arnulf Jentzen, and Weinan E. Solving high-dimensional partial differential equations
   using deep learning. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 115(34):8505–8510, 2018.
Geoffrey E Hinton and Ruslan R Salakhutdinov. Reducing the dimensionality of data with neural
  networks. science, 313(5786):504–507, 2006.
Matthieu Kirchmeyer, Yuan Yin, Jérémie Donà, Nicolas Baskiotis, Alain Rakotomamonjy, and
 Patrick Gallinari. Generalizing to new physical systems via context-informed dynamics model.
 arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.01889, 2022.
Gene A Klaasen and William C Troy. Stationary wave solutions of a system of reaction-diffusion
  equations derived from the fitzhugh–nagumo equations. SIAM Journal on Applied Mathematics,
  44(1):96–110, 1984.
Mark A Kramer. Nonlinear principal component analysis using autoassociative neural networks.
 AIChE journal, 37(2):233–243, 1991.
Stefan Kurz, Herbert De Gersem, Armin Galetzka, Andreas Klaedtke, Melvin Liebsch, Dimitrios
  Loukrezis, Stephan Russenschuck, and Manuel Schmidt. Hybrid modeling: towards the next level
  of scientific computing in engineering. Journal of Mathematics in Industry, 12(1):1–12, 2022.
Isaac E Lagaris, Aristidis Likas, and Dimitrios I Fotiadis. Artificial neural networks for solving
   ordinary and partial differential equations. IEEE transactions on neural networks, 9(5):987–1000,
  1998.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Yann LeCun, Yoshua Bengio, and Geoffrey Hinton. Deep learning. nature, 2015.
Zongyi Li, Nikola Kovachki, Kamyar Azizzadenesheli, Burigede Liu, Kaushik Bhattacharya, Andrew
  Stuart, and Anima Anandkumar. Fourier neural operator for parametric partial differential equations.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.08895, 2020.
Zongyi Li, Hongkai Zheng, Nikola Kovachki, David Jin, Haoxuan Chen, Burigede Liu, Kamyar
  Azizzadenesheli, and Anima Anandkumar. Physics-informed neural operator for learning partial
  differential equations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.03794, 2021.
Kart Leong Lim, Rahul Dutta, and Mihai Rotaru. Physics informed neural network using finite
  difference method. In 2022 IEEE International Conference on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics
 (SMC), pp. 1828–1833. IEEE, 2022.
Ori Linial, Neta Ravid, Danny Eytan, and Uri Shalit. Generative ode modeling with known unknowns.
  In Proceedings of the Conference on Health, Inference, and Learning, pp. 79–94, 2021.
Zichao Long, Yiping Lu, Xianzhong Ma, and Bin Dong. Pde-net: Learning pdes from data. In
  International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 3208–3216. PMLR, 2018.
Zichao Long, Yiping Lu, and Bin Dong. Pde-net 2.0: Learning pdes from data with a numeric-
  symbolic hybrid deep network. Journal of Computational Physics, 399:108925, 2019.
Lu Lu, Pengzhan Jin, and George Em Karniadakis. Deeponet: Learning nonlinear operators for
  identifying differential equations based on the universal approximation theorem of operators. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1910.03193, 2019.
Geoffrey Négiar, Michael W Mahoney, and Aditi S Krishnapriyan. Learning differentiable solvers
  for systems with hard constraints. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.08675, 2022.
Aurel Neic, Fernando O Campos, Anton J Prassl, Steven A Niederer, Martin J Bishop, Edward J
 Vigmond, and Gernot Plank. Efficient computation of electrograms and ecgs in human whole heart
  simulations using a reaction-eikonal model. Journal of computational physics, 346:191–211, 2017.
Mark Palatucci, Dean Pomerleau, Geoffrey E Hinton, and Tom M Mitchell. Zero-shot learning with
 semantic output codes. Advances in neural information processing systems, 22, 2009.
Tobias Pfaff, Meire Fortunato, Alvaro Sanchez-Gonzalez, and Peter W Battaglia. Learning mesh-
  based simulation with graph networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.03409, 2020.
Maziar Raissi, Paris Perdikaris, and George E Karniadakis. Physics-informed neural networks: A
 deep learning framework for solving forward and inverse problems involving nonlinear partial
 differential equations. Journal of Computational physics, 378:686–707, 2019.
O Reynolds. On the dynamical theory of incompressible viscous fluids and the determination of the
  criterion. In Proceedings of the Royal Society-Mathematical and Physical Sciences, 1895.
Samuel H Rudy, Steven L Brunton, Joshua L Proctor, and J Nathan Kutz. Data-driven discovery of
  partial differential equations. Science advances, 3(4):e1602614, 2017.
Hayden Schaeffer. Learning partial differential equations via data discovery and sparse optimization.
  Proceedings of the Royal Society A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences, 473(2197):
  20160446, 2017.
John C Strikwerda. Finite difference schemes and partial differential equations. SIAM, 2004.
Shashank Subramanian, Peter Harrington, Kurt Keutzer, Wahid Bhimji, Dmitriy Morozov, Michael
  Mahoney, and Amir Gholami. Towards foundation models for scientific machine learning: Charac-
  terizing scaling and transfer behavior. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.00258, 2023.
Makoto Takamoto, Timothy Praditia, Raphael Leiteritz, Dan MacKinlay, Francesco Alesiani, Dirk
 Pflüger, and Mathias Niepert. Pdebench: An extensive benchmark for scientific machine learning.
 arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.07182, 2022.


                                                 12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Rui Wang and Rose Yu. Physics-guided deep learning for dynamical systems: A survey. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2107.01272, 2021.
Tsung-Yen Yang, Justinian P Rosca, Karthik R Narasimhan, and Peter Ramadge. Learning physics
  constrained dynamics using autoencoders. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  2022.
Yuan Yin, Vincent Le Guen, Jérémie Dona, Emmanuel de Bézenac, Ibrahim Ayed, Nicolas Thome,
  and Patrick Gallinari. Augmenting physical models with deep networks for complex dynamics
  forecasting. Journal of Statistical Mechanics: Theory and Experiment, 2021(12):124012, 2021.
Yuan Yin, Matthieu Kirchmeyer, Jean-Yves Franceschi, Alain Rakotomamonjy, and Patrick Galli-
  nari. Continuous pde dynamics forecasting with implicit neural representations. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2209.14855, 2022.
Kirill Zubov, Zoe McCarthy, Yingbo Ma, Francesco Calisto, Valerio Pagliarino, Simone Azeglio,
  Luca Bottero, Emmanuel Luján, Valentin Sulzer, Ashutosh Bharambe, et al. Neuralpde: Au-
  tomating physics-informed neural networks (pinns) with error approximations. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2107.09443, 2021.


                                              13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A     N UMERICAL SCHEME

The partial derivatives are estimated using standard numerical schemes for each point in the patch.
We choose discretization parameters ∆x for the spatial axis and ∆t for the temporal axis where we
solve the PDE numerically on the grid points {(i∆x, j∆t)}N     x ,Nt
                                                             i=0,j=0 with L = Nx ∆x and T = Nt ∆t.
Let us denote the numerical solution with ûi,j . We use the forward-time central-space scheme, so a
second order scheme from equation 1 would be
                       ûi,j+1 − ûi,j                     ûi+1,j − 2ûi,j + ûi−1,j
                                       =p2 (i, j, u(i, j))
                             ∆t                                        ∆x2
                                                               ûi+1,j − ûi−1,j                    (7)
                                        + p1 (i, j, u(i, j))
                                                                     2∆x
                                        + p0 (i, j, u(i, j))

We refer the reader to Strikwerda (2004) for a complete explanation.


B     E XPERIMENTAL AND IMPLEMENTATION DETAILS

We provide further information regarding the experiments described in Section 4. We ran all of the
experiments on a single GPU (NVIDIA GeForce RTX 2080), and all training algorithms took < 10
minutes to train. All algorithms used 5-10M parameters (more parameters on the FitzHugh-Nagumo
experiment). Full code implementation for creating the datasets and implementing CONFIDE and its
baselines will be made available upon acceptance.

B.1   DATASET DETAILS

To create the dataset, we generated signals using the PyPDE package, where each signal was generated
with different initial conditions. In addition, as discussed in Section 2, we made an important change
that makes our setting much more realistic than the one used by other known methods: the PDE
parametric functions (e.g., (a, b, c)) are sampled for each signal, instead of being fixed across the
dataset, making the task much harder. To evaluate different models on the different datasets, we
divided the datasets into 80% train set, 10% validation set and 10% test set.
Second Order PDE with Constant Coefficients. For this task, we generated 10,000 signals on
the spatial grid x ∈ [0, 20] with ∆x = 0.5, resulting in a spatial dimension consisting of 40 points.
Each signal was generated with different initial conditions sampled from a Gaussian process posterior
that obeys the Dirichlet boundary conditions u(x = 0) = u(x = L) = 0. The hyper-parameters we
used for the GP were l = 3.0, σ = 0.5, which yielded a rich family of signals, as demonstrated in
Fig. 7a. The parameter vector was sampled uniformly: a ∼ U [0, 2], b and c ∼ U [−1, 1] for each
signal, resulting in various dynamical systems in a single dataset. To create the signal we solved the
PDE numerically, using the explicit method for times t ∈ [0, 5.0] and ∆t = 0.05. Signals that were
numerically unstable were omitted and regenerated, so that the resulting dataset contains only signals
that are physically feasible.
Burgers’ PDE. To create the Burgers’ PDE dataset we followed the exact same process as with the
constant coefficients PDE, except for the parameter sampling method. Parameter a was still drawn
uniformly: a ∼ U [1, 2], but b here behaves as a function of u: b(u) = −u, commonly referred to as
the viscous Burgers’ equation.
FitzHugh-Nagumo equations. For the purpose of creating a more challenging dataset with two
spatial dimensions we followed Yin et al. (2021), and used the 2-D FitzHugh-Nagumo PDE (described
in Eq. 6). To make this task even more challenging and realistic, we created a small dataset comprising
only 1000 signals defined on a 2D rectangular domain, discretized to the grid [−0.16, 0.16] ×
[−0.16, 0.16]. The initial conditions for each signal were generated similarly to the other experiments,
by sampling a Gaussian process prior with l = 0.1, which generated a rich family of initial conditions,
as can be seen in Fig. 7b. To create the coefficient function we sample k ∼ U [0, 1] per signal, and
set (a, b) = (1e − 3, 5e − 3). To create the signal we solved the PDE numerically, using the explicit
method for times t ∈ [0, 1.0] and ∆t = 0.01.


                                                    14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                             U(t = 0)                 V(t = 0)
             0.4                           0.5
u(t = 0)     0.2                                                                                            1
                                           0.0                                                                                       0
             0.0                                                                                            0                        1
                                           0.5
             0.2
                                           1.0
                   0   10   20   30   40         0   10       20    30   40                             y                        y
             2.0                                                                         x                        x
                                           0.0
             1.5                                                                                            1
                                           0.2                                                              0                        1
  u(t = 0)


             1.0                                                                                                                     0
                                                                                                            1                         1
             0.5                           0.4
             0.0                           0.6
                   0   10   20   30   40         0   10       20    30   40
                            x                                 x
                                       (a)                                                                  (b)

Figure 7: Demonstration of the rich family of initial conditions generated. (a) Four examples for
different initial conditions generated for the Second order PDE with constant coefficients dataset.
The Dirichlet boundary conditions are u(x = 0) = u(x = L) = 0, and the initial conditions are
drawn from a GP posterior obeying the boundary conditions. (b) Two examples of initial conditions
for the 2D FitzHugh-Nagumo datasets. The left column describes the first state variable u, and the
right column is the state variable v. Top row is the first example, and the bottom row is the second.
All initial conditions are drawn from a GP prior not constrained to boundary conditions.


B.2                I MPLEMENTATION DETAILS

CONFIDE. The CONFIDE algorithm consists of two main parts: an auto-encoder part that is used
for extracting the context, and a coefficient-estimation network.
The autoencoder architecture consists of an encoder-decoder network, both implemented as MLPs
with 6 layers and 256 neurons in each layer, and a ReLU activation. For the FitzHugh-Nagumo
dataset, we wrap the MLP autoencoder with convolution and deconvolution layers for the encoder
and decoder respectively, in order to decrease the dimensions of the observed signal more effectively.
We note that the encoder-decoder architecture itself is not the focus of the paper. We found that
making the autoencoder initial-conditions-aware by concatenating the latent vector in the output of
the encoder to the initial conditions of the signal u(t = 0), greatly improved results and convergence
time. The reason is that it encourages the encoder to focus on the dynamics of the observed signal,
rather than the initial conditions of it. We demonstrate this effect in Section D.
The second part, which is the coefficient estimator part, is implemented as an MLP with 5 hidden
layers, each with 1024 neurons, and a ReLU activation. The output of this coefficient-estimator
network is set to be the parameters for the specific task that is being solved. In the constant-parameters
PDE, the output is a 3-dim vector (â, b̂, ĉ). In the Burgers’ PDE, the output is composed of a scalar â,
                              2
which is the coefficient of ∂∂xu2 and the coefficient function b(u), which is a vector approximating the
coefficient of ∂u
               ∂x on the given grid of x. In the FitzHugh-Nagumo PDE, the output is a scalar k used
for inferring Ru (u, v, k), and the function Rv on the 2D grid (x, y).
The next step in the CONFIDE algorithm is to evaluate the loss which is comprised of two losses: an
autoencoder reconstruction loss LAE , and a PDE functional loss Lcoef . The autoencoder loss is a
straightforward L2 evaluation on the observed signal uc and the reconstructed signal. The functional
loss is evaluated by first numerically computing all the derivatives of the given equation on the
observed signal. Second, evaluating both sides of the differential equations using the derivatives and
the model’s coefficient outputs, and lastly, minimizing the difference between the sides. For example,
                                                  ∂2u
in the Burgers’ equation, we first evaluate ∂u              ∂u
                                             ∂t , ∂x2 , and ∂x , we then compute the coefficients â and
b̂(u), and finally minimize:

                                                                   ∂u        ∂2u           ∂u
                                                     min              − â ·     − b̂(u) ·    .
                                                          ω        ∂t        ∂x2           ∂x


                                                                              15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Since this algorithm evaluates numerical derivatives of the observed signals, it could be used for
equations with higher derivatives, such as the wave equation, for instance.

CONFIDE-0. Similarly to the standard CONFIDE algorithm, we consider a zero-knowledge
version, where we only know that the signal obeys some differential operator F , but have no details
regarding the actual structure of F . Thus, the input for the coefficient-estimator network is the
current PDE state (u in the 1D experiment and (u, v) in the 2D experiment), and the latent vector
extracted from the auto-encoder. The model then outputs an approximation for time derivative of
the PDE states, i.e., the model’s inputs are (ut , gϕ (uc )) and the output is an approximation for ∂u
                                                                                                    ∂t .
The optimization function for this algorithm therefore tries to minimize the difference between the
numerically computed time derivative and the output of the model:
                                                        N                           2
                                                       X   ∂u
                 LCONFIDE-0 = α · LAE + (1 − α) ·             − mθ (uci , gϕ (uci )) ,
                                                       i=1
                                                           ∂t

where LAE is defined in Eq. 2, ∂u  ∂t is evaluated numerically, mθ is the network estimating the
temporal derivative, gϕ is the encoder network, and uci is the observed patch.

Hyper-parameters For both versions of CONFIDE we used the standard Adam optimizer, with
learning rate of 1e−3 , and no weight decay. For all the networks we used only linear and convolution
layers, and only used the ReLU activation functions. For the α parameter we used α = 0.5 for all
experiments, and all algorithms, after testing only two different values: 0 and 0.5 and observing that
using the autoencoder loss helps scoring better and faster results.

Neural-ODE We implement the Neural-ODE algorithm as suggested by Chen et al. (2018), section
5.1 (namely, Latent-ODE). We first transform the observed signal through a recognition network
which is a 6-layer MLP. We then pass the signal through an RNN network backwards in time. The
output of the RNN is then divided into a mean function, and an std function, which are used to
sample a latent vector. The latent vector is used as initial conditions to an underlying ODE in latent
space which is parameterized by a 3-layer MLP with 200 hidden units, and solved with a DOPRI-5
ODE-solver. The output signal is then transformed through a 5-layer MLP with 1024 hidden units,
and generates the result signal. The loss function is built of two terms, a reconstruction term and a KL
divergence term, which is multiplied by a λKL . After testing several optimization schemes, including
setting λKL to the constant values {1, 0.1, 0.01, 0.001, 0}, and testing a KL-annealing scheme where
λKL changes over time, we chose λKL = 1e−2 as it produced the lowest reconstruction score on the
validation set. We used an Adam optimizer with 1e−3 learning rate and no weight decay.
Our implementation is based on the code in https://github.com/rtqichen/
torchdiffeq.

FNO and Unet For the Fourier-Neural-Operator we used the standard Neural-Operator package
in https://github.com/neuraloperator/neuraloperator. For the Unet implemen-
tation we used the implementation in https://github.com/microsoft/pdearena. The
input we used for both of these algorithms is the entire context uc from time t = 0 to t = T − 2, and
the output is a prediction of the solution at the next time point u(t = T − 1). The loss is therefore an
MSE reconstruction loss on u(t = T − 1).



C    O UT-O F -D ISTRIBUTION DATA

In this section, we provide additional experiments conducted on out-of-distribution (OOD) data.
These experiments where selected to demonstrate how CONFIDE can handle observations that are
significantly different than the data in the train set. We divide the OOD experiments into two parts:
(1) the initial conditions observed are not smooth and have some discontinuity, and (2) the parameters
used to generate the signals in the test set are sampled from a different distribution than the one used
in the train set.


                                                  16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   u(t = 0)


                                                                              u(t = 0)
              0.0   2.5   5.0   7.5   10.0   12.5   15.0   17.5   20.0                   0.0   2.5   5.0   7.5   10.0   12.5   15.0   17.5   20.0
                                       x                                                                          x
                                      (a)                                                                        (b)

Figure 8: Demonstration of two initial conditions of shock-wave signals from the test set. Both
signals have a discontinuity in x = L/2 (for L = 20).


C.1           N ON - SMOOTH INITIAL CONDITIONS

In this first benchmark, we demonstrate how CONFIDE handles the case where the observed data
has a non smooth point, which resembles a shock-wave in the observations. Testing CONFIDE on
non-smooth signals is important mainly because in this method we evaluate the spatio-temporal
derivatives of the signal numerically using a finite-differences approach. This computation might
result in very high derivatives in these non-smooth locations and interfere with the optimization task.
Although CONFIDE was not designed specifically for this task, a straight-forward solution would
be to evaluate if the observed signal has non-smooth locations, and to not include the derivatives
evaluated in these locations in the optimization task. For example, if u(t = 0, x = L/2) is non-
smooth, then the optimization task defined in equation 3 will be performed on the smooth parts
separately and summed together. We note that in this test we did not use the above solution since the
goal is to test CONFIDE’s capabilities in its vanilla form.
For this benchmark, we generated a new test set based on the Burgers’ equation experiment, where
the initial conditions are not sampled from a single Gaussian process (as described in section B.2),
but from two distinct Gaussian processes. The first Gaussian process sampled serves as the left part
of the initial condition (x = 0, .., L/2) and obeys u(t = 0, x = 0) = u(t = 0, x = L/2) = 0, and
the second Gaussian process sampled serves as the right part of the initial condition (x = L/2, ..., L)
and obeys u(t = 0, x = L/2) = 1, u(t = 0, x = L) = 0. This formulation creates a discontinuity in
the initial conditions at x = L/2. We generated 1000 test-signals, all sharing the same characteristics
as the Burgers’ equations experiment, except all of them have a discontinuity at u(t = 0, x = L/2).
In figure 8 we demonstrate two initial conditions of shock-wave signals from the test set. We stress
that the train-set is still the original one, since our goal is to test whether CONFIDE is able to handle
OOD data, which, in this case, comes in the form of OOD initial conditions.
As shown in figure 9a and in table 3, CONFIDE successfully predicts the given observations and
outperforms other baselines, even when it never observed shock-wave signals in the train set. The
reason is that CONFIDE evaluates the derivatives at different patches of the observed context uc at
each iteration, and most of them are smooth.

C.2           OOD COEFFICIENTS

In the second benchmark, we demonstrate how CONFIDE handles the case where the observed signal
in the test set is generated from a PDE with coefficients that come from different distribution than the
ones in the train set.
For this benchmark, we generated a new test set based on the Burgers’ equation experiment, where the
coefficient a is sampled from u ∼ U [2, 4] instead of u ∼ U [1, 2] as in the train set. This modification
in the coefficients distribution, results in generated signals that might be significantly different than
the ones observed in the train set.


                                                                         17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                   CONFIDE                                                       CONFIDE
                   NeuralODE                                                     NeuralODE
                   FNO                                                           FNO
      10 1         Unet                                                          Unet
                                                                    10 1
MSE


                                                              MSE
      10 3                                                          10 3


      10 5                                                          10 5
              20               40    60         80     100                 20                40    60   80   100
                                     t                                                             t
                                    (a)                                                           (b)

Figure 9: Prediction error as horizon increases on the two OOD benchmarks for different approaches.
In (a) we show prediction results of all approaches on test set that includes a discontinuity in the
initial conditions (shock-wave), and in (b) we show prediction results on OOD coefficients (I.e., test
set generated from coefficients from different distribution than the ones used in the train set).


As shown in figure 9b and in table 3, CONFIDE successfully predicts the observed signal, and
outperforms other baselines. We note that since CONFIDE learns to output coefficients only in the
range of the coefficients in the train set, it projects the observed signal to the range of coefficients in
the train set so that it best describes the observed signal.


                                                     Prediction MSE             Prediction MSE
                                    Algorithm          shock-wave               OOD coefficients
                                    CONFIDE          0.0010 ± 0.0012            0.0074 ± 0.0100
                                    Neural-ODE       0.0133 ± 0.0208            0.0423 ± 0.0649
                                    FNO              0.9367 ± 0.2322            0.9646 ± 0.3304
                                    Unet             0.0015 ± 0.0024            0.0096 ± 0.0121

               Table 3: Results summary on the two OOD benchmarks for different approaches.


D        A BLATION STUDIES

In this section, we provide additional ablation studies to demonstrate how different modifications
to the algorithm affect results, both in terms of signal prediction and in coefficient estimation. We
start by analyzing the two parameters that characterize the CONFIDE algorithm: train set size and
context ratio, using the second order PDE from Section 4.1, and we continue by demonstrating
how removing the decoder, or simply removing the initial conditions from the decoder, affect the
algorithm’s performance.


D.1          T RAIN SET SIZE

The train set size corresponds to N , the number of samples in dataset U of Algorithm 1. Figure 10
presents the decrease in the prediction (panel a) and parameter error (panel b) as we increase the
train set size. This attests to the generalization achieved by the CONFIDE architecture: as the train
set grows and includes more samples with different values of coefficients, the ability to accurately
estimate a new sample’s parameters and predict its rollout improves. In this set of experiments, 3, 000
samples are generally enough to achieve a minimal error rate.


                                                             18
 Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 D.2          C ONTEXT R ATIO

 Another hyper-parameter of our system is the context ratio. Figure 11 presents the results of an
 experiment in which we vary its value as defined in Section 3.3. Simply put, as the context size
 increases, CONFIDE encodes more information regarding the input signal’s dynamics, thus the
 improvement in signal and parameter value prediction. The error decreases rather quickly, and a
 context ratio of 0.15 − 0.2 suffices for reaching a very low error, as is evident from the plots.


                                                                        0.20

      0.009                                                             0.15


      0.006                                                             0.10
MSE


                                                                  MSE
      0.003                                                             0.05


      0.000                                                             0.00
              1000         3000             5000     7000                      1000         3000         5000        7000    9000
                                  Train set size                                                    Train set size
                                      (a)                                                                (b)

 Figure 10: Constant coefficients PDE: (a) Prediction error of signal vs. train set size and (b) estimation
 error of parameter values vs. train set size. The error is calculated on a test set of 1000 samples.



       0.03
                                                                         0.3


       0.02                                                              0.2
MSE


                                                                   MSE


       0.01                                                              0.1



                                                                         0.0
       0.00
                     0.1      0.2           0.3    0.4      0.5                       0.1          0.2         0.3     0.4    0.5
                             Ratio of context                                                  Ratio of context
                                      (a)                                                                (b)

 Figure 11: Constant coefficients PDE: (a) Prediction error vs. ρ and (b) estimation error of parameter
 value vs. ρ. The error is calculated on a test set of 1000 samples.


 D.3          AUTOENCODER

 In this section, we demonstrate the effect that adding a decoder network has on CONFIDE. To this
 end, we evaluate three different scenarios:
              • CONFIDE. Using a decoder followed by a reconstruction loss, and feeding the initial
                conditions in addition to the latent vector (demonstrated in the text as initial conditions
                aware autoencoder)
              • AE-IC. Similarly, using a decoder followed by a reconstruction loss, but the autoencoder is
                not initial-conditions aware.
              • No-AE. The network trains solely on the PDE loss, without the decoder part (i.e., by setting
                α = 0).


                                                                  19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Results of the three approaches on the constant PDE dataset are shown in Fig. 12. When comparing a
setup with no decoder part (i.e., No-AE) with a setup that has a decoder, but does not use the initial
conditions as a decoder input (i.e., AE/IC), we observe that merely adding a decoder network might
have a negative effect on the results, especially when analyzing the parameter estimation results.
One reason for this may be that the neural network needs to compress the observed signal in a way
that should both solve the PDE and reconstruct the signal. This modification of latent space has
a negative effect in this case. When also adding the initial conditions as an input to the decoder
(i.e., the standard CONFIDE), we observe significant MSE improvement in both signal prediction
and parameter estimation (∼35% improvement in both). This result suggests that adding the initial
conditions aware autoencoder enables the networks to learn a good representation of the dynamics of
the observed signal in its latent space.



                                                                     Prediction
                                       120%                          Parameters
              MSE Percent Difference


                                       100%

                                       80%

                                       60%

                                       40%

                                       20%

                                        0%
                                              CONFIDE   AE/IC       No-AE

Figure 12: Ablation study on the constant coefficients PDE dataset. The Y axis shows the percentage
difference between the different approaches and the standard CONFIDE one (thus it scores 0%). We
demonstrate the effects on both signal prediction (blue), and parameter estimation (red).


E    D IFFERENTIATION VS I NTEGRATION APPROACHES

A key part in the CONFIDE algorithm is its use of numerical evaluation of spatio-temporal derivatives
through the finite-differences approach. As shown throughout this paper, using finite differences
combined with the a-priori known mechanistic form of the PDE provides both coefficients estimation
and reliable predictions. However, there’s another important advantage that a finite-differences
approach has on other integral approaches (such as the adjoint method used in Neural-ODE (Chen
et al., 2018) and other relevant works), the amount of time necessary for training the model.
To demonstrate this effect we create a toy example based on an ODE of a single pendulum without
friction:
                                                g
                                          θ̈ = − sin(θ),
                                                l
where g is the gravitational parameter, θ is the angle of the pendulum, and l is the length of the
pendulum. We created a train set of 10,000 signals that obey the pendulum ODE, with the length
parameter l sampled for each signal l ∼ U [1, 2], the initial conditions of θ(t = 0) sampled from
θ ∼ U [−0.4, 0.4] and the initial conditions of the angular velocity θ̇ = ω ∼ U [−0.1, 0.1].
The two algorithms that are tested are CONFIDE and a physics-informed (PINN) version of Neural-
ODE. We used the PINN version of Neural-ODE so that both algorithms are presented with the same


                                                        20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


information and have the same goals: to estimate the length of the pendulum on a given signal l, and
provide the observed signal future prediction θ(t > T ), where the observation is up to time T .
Both algorithms use a single neural-network that consumes an observed signal, and generates an
estimation ˆl. The next step of both algorithms is to enforce that ˆl can generate the observed signal.
CONFIDE uses a differentiation approach by numerically evaluating the time derivative of the
observed signal, and comparing this derivative to the function of the ODE. I.e., minimizing the
objective:
                                                d2 θ g
                                          min       − sin(θ) ,
                                                dt2  ˆl
where d2 θ/dt2 is evaluated through finite differences. At inference time, the observation is consumed
by the neural-network, which outputs ˆl. We then feed ˆl and the initial conditions to an ODE solver
to obtain the prediction. Neural-ODE uses the initial value (θ(t = 0)) and ˆl to generate the signal
θ̂(t = 0, .., T ), and compare the generated signal to the observed one using an MSE loss.
We trained both algorithms in exactly the same setting, over 5 epochs, and observed that CONFIDE
train significantly faster. Specifically, CONFIDE’s training time took 3.6 seconds, and neural-ODE’s
training time took 159.2 seconds. I.e., CONFIDE trained ∼ 44 times faster than Neural-ODE.
In figure 13 and in table 4, we see that not only did CONFIDE train much faster, it also was able to
provide very reliable results, both in terms of prediction and in terms of parameter estimation.



                                                                          CONFIDE
                                                                          NeuralODE
                         0.003



                         0.002
                   MSE


                         0.001



                         0.000
                                 0        1       2            3      4          5
                                                        t
    Figure 13: Pendulum ODE: prediction error as horizon increases, for different approaches.


               Algorithm             Prediction MSE         Coefficient MSE     Training time
               CONFIDE               0.0002 ± 0.0003    0.1598 ± 0.1891                3.6s
               Neural-ODE            0.0010 ± 0.0003    0.1702 ± 0.2021               159.2s

Table 4: Results summary on the pendulum ODE in terms of future time prediction error, pendulum
length estimation error and training time between two different approaches: a differentiation approach
(CONFIDE) and an integral approach (Neural-ODE)


                                                       21
