Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


U NDERSTANDING YOUR AGENT:
L EVERAGING L ARGE L ANGUAGE M ODELS FOR
B EHAVIOR E XPLANATION
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT

         Intelligent agents such as robots are increasingly deployed in real-world, safety-
         critical settings. It is vital that these agents are able to explain the reasoning be-
         hind their decisions to human counterparts; however, their behavior is often pro-
         duced by uninterpretable models such as deep neural networks. We propose an
         approach to generate natural language explanations for an agent’s behavior based
         only on observations of states and actions, thus making our method independent
         from the underlying model’s representation. For such models, we first learn a be-
         havior representation and subsequently use it to produce plausible explanations
         with minimal hallucination while affording user interaction with a pre-trained
         large language model. We evaluate our method in a multi-agent search-and-rescue
         environment and demonstrate the effectiveness of our explanations for agents ex-
         ecuting various behaviors. Through user studies and empirical experiments, we
         show that our approach generates explanations as helpful as those produced by a
         human domain expert while enabling beneficial interactions such as clarification
         and counterfactual queries.


1   I NTRODUCTION

Rapid advances in artificial intelligence and machine learning have led to an increase in the deploy-
ment of robots and other embodied agents in real-world, safety-critical settings (Sun et al., 2020;
Fatima & Pasha, 2017; Li et al., 2023). As such, it is vital that practitioners – who may be laypeo-
ple that lack domain expertise or knowledge of machine learning – are able to query such agents
for explanations regarding why a particular prediction has been made – broadly referred to as ex-
plainable AI (Amir et al., 2019; Wells & Bednarz; Gunning et al., 2019). While progress has been
made in this area, prior works tend to focus on explaining agent behavior in terms of rules (Johnson,
1994), vision-based cues (Cruz & Igarashi, 2021; Mishra et al., 2022), semantic concepts (Zabouni-
dis et al., 2023), or trajectories (Guo et al., 2021). However, it has been shown that laypeople benefit
from natural language explanations (Mariotti et al., 2020; Alonso et al., 2017) since they do not
require specialized knowledge to understand (Wang et al., 2019), leverage human affinity for verbal
communication, and increase trust under uncertainty (Gkatzia et al., 2016).
In this work, we seek to develop a framework to generate natural language explanations of an
agent’s behavior given only observations of states and actions. By assuming access to only be-
havioral observations, we are able to explain behavior produced by any agent policy, including deep
neural networks (DNNs). Unlike prior methods, which exhibit limited expressivity due to utilizing
language templates (Hayes & Shah, 2017; Kasenberg et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2019) or assume
access to a large dataset of human-generated explanations (Ehsan et al., 2019; Liu et al., 2023), we
propose an approach in which large language models (LLMs) can be used to generate free-form nat-
ural language explanations in a few-shot manner. While LLMs have shown considerable zero-shot
task performance and are well-suited to generating natural language explanations (Wiegreffe et al.,
2021; Marasović et al., 2021; Li et al., 2022), they are typically applied to commonsense reasoning
as opposed to explaining model behavior and are prone to hallucination – a well-known phenomenon
in which false information is presented as fact (McKenna et al., 2023). It is an open question as to
how LLMs can be conditioned on an agent’s behavior in order to generate plausible explanations


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


        Policy Distillation    Generate Behavior Representation             Interactive Explanations

                                               Observation                     Prompt and Examples
             Generate
           Decision Tree                                                 Decision               Further
                                             Decision                     Path                  Prompts
                                              Path                                     LLM



                                                      Action:              Explanation of Agent Behavior
                                              medic rescues the victim


Figure 1: Overview of our three-step pipeline to explain policy actions: left: A black-box policy
is distilled into a decision tree; middle: a decision path is extracted from the tree for a given state
which contains a set of decision rules used to derive the associated action; right: we utilize an LLM
to generate an easily understandable natural language explanation given the decision path. Lastly, a
user can ask further clarification questions in an interactive manner.


while avoiding such hallucinations. We find this is a particularly important aspect as laypeople tend
to struggle to identify hallucinated facts, as we observe in our participant studies in Sec. 4.3.
Our solution, and core algorithmic contribution, is the introduction of a behavior representation
(BR), in which we distill an agent’s policy into a locally interpretable model that can be directly
injected into a text prompt and reasoned with, without requiring fine-tuning. A behavior represen-
tation acts as a compact representation of an agent’s behavior around a specific state and indicates
what features the agent considers important when making a decision. We show that by constraining
an LLM to reason about agent behavior in terms of a behavior representation, we are able to greatly
reduce hallucination compared to alternative approaches while generating informative and plausible
explanations. An additional benefit of our approach is that it enables interactive explanations; that
is, the user can issue follow-up queries such as clarification or counterfactual questions. This is par-
ticularly valuable, as explanations are social interactions conditioned on a person’s own beliefs and
knowledge (Miller, 2019) and thus, are highly individual and may require additional clarification to
be comprehensible and convincing (Kass et al., 1988).
Our approach is a three-stage process (see Figure 1) in which we, 1) distill an agent policy into a
decision tree, 2) extract a decision path from the tree for a given state which serves as our local
behavior representation, and 3) transform the decision path into a textual representation and inject
it into pre-trained LLM via in-context learning (Brown et al., 2020) to produce a natural language
explanation. In this work we show how our framework can be applied to multi-agent reinforcement
learning (MARL) policies – a particularly relevant setting given the complex dynamics and decision-
making resulting from agent-agent interactions. Through a series of participant studies, we show
that a) our approach generates model-agnostic explanations that laypeople significantly prefer over
baseline methods and are preferred at least as much as those generated by a human domain expert;
b) when an agent policy does not align with participant assumptions, participants find the ability to
interact with our explanations helpful and beneficial; and c) our approach yields explanations with
significantly fewer hallucinations than alternative methods of encoding agent behavior.


2   R ELATED W ORK

Explainable Agent Policies: Many works attempt to explain agent behavior through the use of a
simplified but interpretable model that closely mimics the original policy (Puiutta & Veith, 2020;
Verma et al., 2018; Liu et al., 2019; Shu et al., 2017), a technique which has long been studied
in the field of supervised learning (Ribeiro et al., 2016). Although approaches that directly utilize
inherently interpretable models with limited complexity during the training phase (Du et al., 2019)
exist, many researchers avoid sacrificing model accuracy for interpretability. In this work, we follow
an approach similar to (Guo et al., 2023), in which we leverage a distilled interpretable model to gain
insight into how the agent’s policy reasons.
Natural Language Explanations: Outside of explaining agent behavior, natural language expla-
nations have received considerable attention in natural language processing areas such as com-
monsense reasoning (Marasović et al., 2020; Rajani et al., 2019) and natural language infer-
ence (Prasad et al., 2021). Unlike our setting in which we desire to explain a given model’s be-


                                                        2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


havior, these methods attempt to produce an explanation purely with respect to the given input and
domain knowledge, e.g., whether a given premise supports a hypothesis in the case of natural lan-
guage inference (Camburu et al., 2018). Although self-explaining models (Marasović et al., 2021;
maj, 2022; Hu & Clune, 2023) are conceptually similar to our goal, we desire a model-agnostic
approach with respect to the agent’s policy and thus seek to explain the agent’s behavior with a sep-
arate model. While recent works have investigated the usage of LLMs in explaining another model’s
behavior by reasoning directly over the latent representation (Bills et al., 2023), this approach has
yielded limited success thus far and motivates our usage of an intermediate behavior representation.

3     L ANGUAGE E XPLANATIONS FOR AGENT B EHAVIOR

We introduce a framework for generating natural language explanations for an agent from only
observations of states and actions. Our approach consists of three steps: 1) we distill the agent’s
policy into a decision tree, 2) we generate a behavior representation from the decision tree, and 3)
we query an LLM for an explanation given the behavior representation. We note that step 1 only
needs to be performed once for a particular agent, while steps 2 and 3 are performed each time an
explanation is requested. We make no assumptions about the agent’s underlying policy such that our
method is model agnostic; explanations can be generated for any model for which we can sample
trajectories.
Notation: We consider an infinite-horizon discounted Markov Decision Process (MDP) in which
an agent observes environment state st at discrete timestep t, performs action at , and receives the
next state st+1 and reward rt+1 from the environment. The MDP consists of a tuple (S, A, R, T, γ)
where S is the set of states, A is the set of agent actions, R : S × S → R is the reward function,
T : S × A × S → [0, 1] is the state transition probability, and γ ∈ [0, 1) is the discount factor. As in
standard imitation learning settings, we assume the reward function R is unknown and that we only
have access to states and actions sampled from a stochastic agent policy π ∗ (a|s) : A × S → [0, 1].

3.1   D ISTILLING A D ECISION T REE

Our first step is to distill the agent’s underlying policy into a decision tree, which acts as an inter-
pretable surrogate. The decision tree is intended to faithfully replicate the agent’s policy while being
interpretable, such that we can extract a behavior representation from it. Given an agent policy π ∗ ,
we distill a decision tree policy π̂ using the DAgger (Ross et al., 2011) imitation learning algorithm
which minimizes the expected loss to the agent’s policy under an induced distribution of states,
                                π̂ = arg min Es∗ ,a∗ ∼π∗ [L(s∗ , a∗ , π)],                          (1)
                                         π∈Π

for a restricted policy class Π and loss function L. This method performs iterative data aggregation
consisting of states sampled from the agent’s policy and the distilled decision tree, in order to over-
come error accumulation caused by the violation of the i.i.d. assumption. While decision trees are
simpler than other methods such as DNNs, it has been shown that they are still capable of learning
reasonably complex policies (Bastani et al., 2018). Intuitively, DNNs often achieve state-of-the-art
performance not because their representational capacity is larger than other models, but because they
are easier to regularize and thus train (Ba & Caruana, 2014). However, distillation is a technique that
can be leveraged to distill the knowledge contained within a DNN into a more interpretable decision
tree (Hinton et al., 2015; Frosst & Hinton, 2017; Bastani et al., 2017).

3.2   B EHAVIOR R EPRESENTATION G ENERATION

The distilled policy π̂ consists of a set of decision rules which approximate the decision-making
process of the agent’s policy π ∗ . Given a state st and action at taken by the agent, we extract a
decision path dp = Path(π̂, st ) which acts as a locally interpretable model of the agent’s behavior.
The path dp consists of a subset of the decision rules in π̂ which produce the action at in state st ,
and is obtained by simply traversing the tree from root to leaf. These decision rules approximate the
agent’s underlying decision-making rationale in state st and can be used to infer intent.
Figure 2 shows example decision paths for agents operating in an Urban Search and Rescue (USAR)
environment where heterogeneous agents with different action spaces learn to coordinate to rescue


                                                    3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                                X - Coordinate                         Explorative Policy Decision Path                                    Exploitative Decision Path
                     0          1           2      3
                                                                             room (0, 0) has been explored                                   room (0, 1) doesn't contain rubble.
                                                                         room (0, 4) has been explored                                          room (3, 2) doesn't contain rubble.
                 0
                                                                      room (3, 4) has been explored                                          room (2, 1) contains rubble.
                                                                         room (3, 0) has not been explored                                room (2, 3) doesn't contain a victim.
                 1                                                    room (2, 4) has been explored                                   room (1, 0) doesn't contain rubble.
                                                                         engineer is not in room (0, 0)                                   engineer is in room (1, 0).
Y - Coordinate


                                                                             engineer is in room (1, 0)                               room (0, 0) doesn't contain rubble.
                 2
                                                                         room (1, 3) has been explored                                    room (1, 2) doesn't contain rubble.

                                                                    Explorative Explanations through LLM                            Exploitative Explanations through LLM
                 3                                        The engineer moves east to room (2, 0) because this action      The engineer moves east to room (2, 0) because room (2, 1)
                                                          aligns with an exploration goal. The current room (1, 0) has    contains rubble. There is no direct path to room (2, 1) from
                                                          already been explored, and room (3, 0) to the right has not     the engineer's current location, as no adjacent room
                                                          been explored. Therefore, the engineer seems to move            contains rubble. The engineer is likely planning to move to
                 4                                        east to reach the unexplored room (3, 0).                       room (2, 0) in order to then move south to room (2, 1), where
                                                                                                                          it can begin to remove the rubble. This is suggestible as the
                                                                  Explorative Next-Action Prediction by LLM               features show that the engineer seems to prioritize
                                                                                                                          moving toward areas containing rubble.
                         Engineer                Medic    Based on the new features, the engineer will likely move
                                                          east to room (3, 0). This is because room (3, 0) has not been           Exploitative Next-Action Prediction by LLM
                         Explorative Path        Victim   explored yet, and the engineer seems to be following a
                                                          strategy of exploring unexplored rooms. Moving east to          Based on the new features, the engineer will likely move
                                                          room (3, 0) aligns with this strategy.                          north to room (2, 1) because this room contains rubble, and
                         Exploitative Path       Rubble
                                                                                                                          the engineer's goal is to remove rubble.



Figure 2: An example of am ambiguous state, in which the engineer’s current state can be induced
by following two distinct behaviors: Exploit, which prioritizes removing rubble as soon as possible,
and Explore, which prioritizes visiting unexplored rooms. Given the current state (engineer at (1, 0))
and intended action (going east), their follow-up action is ambiguous depending on which behavior
is utilized by the engineer (Explore: Purple; Exploit: Pink). The corresponding decision paths are
shown for each possible behavior and the resulting natural language explanations after transforming
into a behavior representation.


victims Lewis et al. (2019); Freeman et al. (2021). We adopt the environment of Guo et al. (2023) in
which there are two agents: a Medic, responsible for healing victims, and an Engineer responsible
for clearing rubble. The left decision path, denoted as Explore Decision Path, corresponds to an
agent exhibiting exploration behavior, i.e. it fully explores the environment before removing any
pieces of rubble. The right decision path, Exploit Decision Path, corresponds to an exploitative agent
which greedily removes rubble as it is discovered. We can observe how these different behaviors
are reflected in their respective decision paths – the Explore path largely consists of decision rules
examining whether rooms have been explored, while the Exploit path consists of rules checking for
the existence of rubble. This enables effective reasoning, e.g. because the Explore agent only checks
for explored rooms before taking its action, we can infer that the agent is currently only interested
in exploration and is choosing to ignore any visible rubble.
We refer to such a decision path as a behavior representation, and it serves as a compact encoding
of the agent’s behavior. This representation is effective for three reasons: a) decision tree depth is
usually constrained in order to prevent overfitting, which means even complex policies can yield
decision paths that fit into relatively small LLM context windows; b) decision paths can be read-
ily translated into natural language via algorithmic templates and injected into an LLM prompt –
meaning no fine-tuning is required (Brown et al., 2020), which is an important factor given the
lack of human-annotated explanations for agent behavior; and c) they provide an intuitive and ex-
plicit ordered set of rules with which an LLM can reason, resulting in more effective explanations
and reduced hallucination compared to alternative behavior encodings. We show in Sec. 4 that our
proposed behavior representation strongly outperforms alternative encodings.

3.3                  I N -C ONTEXT L EARNING WITH B EHAVIOR R EPRESENTATIONS

The last step in our approach is to define a prompt that constrains the LLM to reason about agent
behavior with respect to a given behavior representation. Our prompt consists of four parts: a) a
concise description of the environment the agent is operating in, e.g., state and action descriptions,
b) a description of what information the behavior representation conveys, c) in-context learning
examples, and d) the behavior representation and action that we wish to explain. An example of this
prompt is shown in our appendix (See. A). All parts except for (d) are pre-defined ahead of time
and remain constant for all queries, while our framework provides a mechanism for automatically
constructing (d). Thus, our system can be queried for explanations with no input required by the
user unless they wish to interact and submit follow-up queries.


                                                                                              4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


      Explanation: The medic moves east to room (3, 3) because room (3, 4)         The engineer decides to move south to
      has not been explored, and most of the surrounding rooms have been           room (2, 1) because the engineer is
      explored. Moving to (3, 3) positions the medic closer to the unexplored      currently in room (2, 0). Given the limited
      room (3, 4). This action suggests that the medic is prioritizing             features available and the action taken, the
      exploration of unknown areas.                                                engineer may be trying to search
                                                                                   southward since it's already navigated the
                                                                                   northenmost rolls, but the exact reasoning
             Why did the medic not consider the victim in room (2, 2)?             is unclear. The agent may also be acting
                                                                                   non-optimally or according to some
      If room (2, 2) contains a victim but that information is not in the          unknown criteria, since such a move does
      Behavior Representation, it suggests the following:                          not seem to directly take into account the
          The observation did not capture this vital information for some          location of rubble or unexplored rooms.
          reason.
          The medic did not consider this information when making its
          decision, which would imply a non-optimal decision-making                Given the features, it seems that the agent
          process on the part of the medic.                                        is checking whether it is already on the top
      In either case, the absence of this information in the Behavior              row (y=0). As the agent is not currently in
      Representation and the subsequent decision to move elsewhere would           the top row, it is opting to move north to
      indicate that saving the victim in room (2, 2) was not part of the           get closer. The particular end goal is not
      medic's decision criteria at that time. This could be a flaw or limitation   apparent from the listed features, and it
      in the decision-making algorithm of the medic.                               may be the case that the agent is not quite
                                                                                   acting optimally but is adhering to a
                                                                                   heuristic rule or strategy of 'move north as
                                                      This is too verbose!         long as it's not on the northmost row'. On
                                                                                   the other hand, it could also be the case
                                                                                   where the game's next goals or best actions
      The medic did not consider the victim in room (2, 2) because the             to perform strictly depend on the layout of
      information about the victim's presence was not included in the              the top row, which we don't have
      provided Features.                                                           information about.


Figure 3: Left: Interactive Conversation: The user is asking more clarification questions about the
initial explanation generated by our method. Right: Explanation of a Fixed Agent: the LLM is able
to detect and rationale about suboptimality.


The ability to ask such follow-up questions plays a crucial role when interacting with laypeople,
who may prefer additional explanations of an agent’s behavior. Utilizing an LLM to generate our
explanations allows a user to ask such questions to, for example, request further clarification, “what-
if” scenarios (counterfactual), further summaries, likely next actions, or other requests. As we show
in Sec. 5.2, this is particularly valuable when the agent’s actions are not aligned with the user’s
expectations. In our experiments, we have observed two main types of questions: a) requests for
further clarification, e.g. “Why did the agent not consider feature X when making its decision?”,
and 2) counterfactual questions, e.g., “What if feature Y were present instead of feature X?” See
section 5.2 for further details.


4   Q UANTITATIVE R ESULTS AND A NALYSIS

We quantitatively evaluate the performance of our proposed approach in a simulated multi-agent
Urban Search and Rescue task with the goal of answering the following questions: 1) Does our
behavior representation enable the LLM to reason about varying behaviors and identify the underly-
ing decision-making rationale? 2) Does our behavior representation enable the LLM to infer future
behavior? 3) How is hallucination affected by our choice of behavior representation?
Experimental Setup Our experimental setting is a partially observable Urban Search and Rescue
task in which two agents work cooperatively in order to rescue victims and remove rubble. We
model this task as a 2D Gridworld consisting of 20 rooms arranged in a 5 × 4 grid. Both agents can
navigate to adjacent rooms in the environment and each have role-specific actions – the engineer can
remove rubble which may be hiding victims, and the medic can rescue victims after rubble has been
removed. This environment is partially observable and the agents must first traverse the environment
in order to locate both rubble and victims. The agents can exhibit one of three possible behaviors:
       • Explore: Rubble and victims are immediately removed or rescued upon discovery.
       • Exploit: Agents explore all rooms before backtracking to remove rubble/rescue victims.
       • Fixed: Agents ignore rubble and victims and simply move in a pre-determined pattern.
We generate natural language explanations for each agent’s behavior using one of three methods:
       • BR (Path): Our proposed method which uses a decision path as a behavior representation.


                                                                   5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                         Long-term            Short-term            Ambiguous
                         Method Strategy Category Goal Strategy Category Goal Strategy Category Goal
                        BR (Path) 0.70       0.75 0.75 1.00       1.00 1.00 0.90         0.85 0.85
      Explore Exploit   BR (States) 0.75     0.80 0.75 0.75       0.75 0.75 0.60         0.75 0.75
                         No BR      0.25     0.25 0.25 0.90       0.95 0.95 0.70         0.75 0.75
                        BR (Path)     0.90   0.75   0.25   1.00    1.00   0.70   0.90    0.80   0.35
                        BR (States)   0.40   0.05   0.05   0.70    0.95   0.95   0.00    0.00   0.00
                         No BR        0.20   0.30   0.15   0.40    0.90   0.90   0.00    0.05   0.00

Table 1: Explanation accuracy for randomly sampled states in which the agent is pursuing a long-
term goal, short-term goal, or ambiguous goal while operating under two different behavior strate-
gies: Explore and Exploit. All metrics represent accuracy (higher is better). Each value is computed
over 20 samples: 10 each from medic and engineer. The best method in each column is bolded.


        • BR (States): An alternative behavior representation that uses a set of state-action pairs
          sampled from the agent’s policy rather than a decision path.
        • No BR: No behavior representation is given. This serves as a baseline to evaluate how well
          the LLM can reason about an agent given only an observation and no prior knowledge.
The generated behavior explanations are hand-annotated with regards to the following metrics:
        • Strategy: Whether the agent’s behavior (defined above) was identified in the explanation.
        • Category: Whether the agent’s goal category was identified in the explanation, e.g., the
          agent is moving towards a rubble/victim/unexplored room.
        • Goal: Whether the agent’s specific goal was identified in the explanation, e.g., the agent is
          moving to rubble in room (1, 2).
        • Action: Whether the agent’s next action was successfully predicted.
        • Intent: Whether the agent’s intent for taking the next action was successfully identified,
          e.g., the agent moved to room (1, 1) because it will be closer to rubble in room (1, 2).
Unlike works which evaluate natural language explanations in domains such as natural language
inference, to the best of our knowledge there are no datasets consisting of high-quality explanations
generated over agent behavior. Due to the time and effort required to construct such datasets, ours is
relatively small in comparison and precludes the usage of automatic metrics such as BLEU, which
work well only over large corpuses.

4.1              E VALUATING E XPLANATION Q UALITY

We evaluate explanation quality by generating explanations for state-action pairs randomly sampled
from agent trajectories produced by each behavior type. States are grouped into three categories:
Long-term — The agent is moving to a room/rubble/victim but won’t get there in the next time
step; Short-term — in which agent is pursuing a short-term goal, meaning it will reach the desired
room/remove rubble/rescue victim in the next time step; and Ambiguous — where the current state-
action can be induced by either exploration or exploitation behaviors, but the next state will yield
different actions from each behavior. The results for each behavior are shown in Table 1 and Fixed
in Table 3. We make the following observations.
Explanations produced with BR (Path) are more accurate. Explanations generated using a deci-
sion path behavior representation more accurately identify the agent’s Strategy, Category, and Goal
in every category except for Long-term Exploit when compared to other methods. We conjecture
that the slightly reduced accuracy for long-term goals under exploitative behavior is due to the ad-
ditional complexity associated with Exploit decision paths; they must simultaneously check for the
presence of unexplored rooms and rubble, while the Explore decision paths do this sequentially, i.e.,
they first check all rooms’ exploration status and then check for the presence of rubble.
The LLM makes assumptions over expected behaviors. The ambiguous states reveal an important
insight: the LLM tends to assume an agent will act exploitatively when presented with an observa-
tion and a task description. We can see that all methods, including BR (States) and No BR, yield


                                                            6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                Long-term           Short-term       Ambiguous
                                 Method       Action Intent       Action Intent    Action Intent
                                BR (Path)      0.80    0.75        0.40     0.75    0.85   0.85


              Explore Exploit
                                BR (States)    0.65    0.55        0.75     0.75    0.80   0.70
                                 No BR         0.55    0.50        0.65     0.65    0.80   0.75
                                BR (Path)      0.95   1.00         0.80    0.95     0.90   0.95
                                BR (States)    0.60   0.40         0.45    0.45     0.05   0.05
                                 No BR         0.65   0.25         0.50    0.35     0.30   0.10

Table 2: Action prediction accuracy for randomly sampled states in which the agent is pursuing
a long-term goal, short-term goal, or ambiguous goal. Action indicates whether the next action
was correctly identified, while intent indicates whether the reason why the action was taken was
identified. Each value is computed over 20 samples (10 for engineer and medic each)



relatively high accuracy when generating explanations for ambiguous state-actions under exploita-
tive behavior. However, when the agent acts exploratory, BR (Path) continues to perform well (90%
accuracy) while the other methods fail to get any explanations correct (0% accuracy). We find that
this is because when presented with am ambiguous state that could be caused by multiple behaviors,
the LLM assumes the agent acts exploitatively and only the decision path behavior representation is
able to enforce a strong enough prior over agent behavior for correct reasoning. A similar trend can
be observed with states sampled from the Fixed behavior in Table 3. BR (Path) yields an impressive
80% accuracy in detecting the fact that the agent is ignoring victims and rubble and pursuing a pre-
determined path, yet again the LLM assumes exploitative behavior for BR (States) and No BR and
yields nearly no correct explanations.


4.2   E VALUATING F UTURE ACTION P REDICTION

We further evaluate how well the LLM is actually able to reason over and explain current agent
behavior by analyzing how well it can predict future agent behavior. Intuitively, if the LLM can
accurately produce an explanation which identifies an agent’s intent, then it should be able to use
this intent to infer future actions. We evaluate this by issuing a follow-up prompt to the LLM for
each explanation produced in the previous analysis to predict the agent’s next action while reasoning
with the explanation it produced.
Explanations produced with BR (Path) enable accurate action prediction. Tables 2 and 3 show
that the LLM is able to effectively predict the agent’s next actions when reasoning with explanations
produced by BR (Path), consistently yielding 80-90% accuracy across all behavior types. There is
one exception to this: short-term goal action prediction which yields 40% accuracy. This is due
to the locality of the decision path – the path only encodes decision rules relevant to the agent’s
current action, which is highly correlated with the agent’s current goal. If that goal happens to be
short-term, meaning it will be achieved with the agent’s current action, then the decision path rarely
encodes enough information to reason about the next action. We conjecture that providing additional
information, such as the current observation, in addition to the decision path behavior representation,
can alleviate this issue. This is also the cause for the low action prediction accuracy over Fixed states
in Table 3; the agent’s strategy is often successfully identified, but the LLM exhibits uncertainty due
to the lack of information contained within the decision path.
Predictions can be right for the wrong reasons. The BR (States) and No BR methods perform
worse in action prediction accuracy and approximately align with explanation accuracy, indicating
that in most cases, it is difficult to predict future behavior if the agent’s decision-making rationale
cannot be identified. However, there is an exception to this which is the relatively high accuracy
of 60% for BR (States) when predicting over Fixed policy states (Table 3). On analysis, we found
that the LLM can identify the simple action distribution produced by the pre-determined path (the
agent moves in a north-south pattern) from the set of provided state-action samples, which is further
narrowed down by spatial reasoning constraints, e.g., the agent can’t move further north if it is
already in the northern-most row. However, the LLM is unable to reason about why the agent


                                                              7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                 Exploit   Explore


                                                                               Lo ous


                                                                               Fix ous
                                                                                           m


                                                                               Am rm
                                                                       rm


                                                                               Sh m
                                                                                       ter



                                                                                         r
                                                                                      -te
                                                                                       u


                                                                                       u
                                                                         e


                                                                                    -te
                                                                                   big


                                                                                   big
                                                                     g-t

                                                                                 -
                                                                             ort


                                                                                  ort



                                                                                  ed
                                                                                  ng
                                                                       n


                                                                                 Am
                                                                           Sh
                                                                    Lo
                                                      BR (Path)                                      0.5
          Method     Strategy Action Intent           BR (States)                                    0.4
         BR (Path)     0.80    0.40   0.25                 No BR
                                                                                                     0.3
 Fixed



         BR (States)   0.05    0.65   0.00            BR (Path)
                                                      BR (States)                                    0.2
          No BR        0.00    0.35   0.00                 No BR                                     0.1

Table 3 & Figure 4: Left: Explanation and action prediction metrics for the Fixed policy. Right:
hallucination rates for each method in generated explanations (top) and action predictions (bottom).


follows such an action distribution, leading to a case where actions are predicted correctly but the
agent’s rationale is not.

4.3       E VALUATING HALLUCINATION

The frequency of hallucination in the explanations and action predictions is shown in Fig. 4.
Hallucination is significantly reduced with BR (Path). There are two interesting insights from the
hallucination evaluation: a) explanations produced with the decision path representation yield far
lower hallucination rates across all categories than the other methods, and b) BR (States) sometimes
yields more hallucinations than No BR. This is a counterintuitive result, but we find that when no
behavior representation is provided to the LLM, it tends to make conservative predictions resulting
in fewer hallucinations at the cost of lower explanation and accuracy prediction accuracy.
Hallucination is not correlated with action prediction accuracy. Intuitively, we might think that
the hallucination rate of the generated explanations is inversely correlated with the action prediction
accuracy. That is, hallucinations are symptomatic of LLM uncertainty regarding agent intent and
inject additional errors into the downstream reasoning process. However, we find this not to be
the case and find no significant correlations between hallucination and action prediction metrics
according to the Pearson correlation coefficient with p < 0.05.

5        PARTICIPANT S TUDY AND A NALYSIS
While the quantitative analysis indicates that the explanations produced with our proposed behavior
representation are accurate, we seek to answer whether the explanations are useful to humans. To
answer this question we conduct two IRB-approved user studies with the following hypotheses:
H1: Participants prefer the explanations produced by our method – BR (Path) – over the expla-
nations produced by both BR (States) and a textual representation of the decision path (Template).
H2: Participants will not prefer the explanations produced by a human domain expert over ours.
H3: Participants will find follow-up interaction helpful for understanding the agent’s behavior.

5.1       E VALUATING E XPLANATION H ELPFULNESS

The first study is designed to determine whether human participants find our explanations helpful in
understanding an agent’s behavior. We followed a within-subjects design where we presented each
participant with a state-action pair, a visualization of the world state, and a pair of explanations.
Each participant is asked to choose whether they find the first or second explanation more helpful
in understanding the agent’s behavior or whether they are equally helpful. This study considers two
additional baselines in addition to BR (Path) and BR (States): Human) Natural language expla-
nations produced by a domain expert with full knowledge of the agent’s behavior; and Template)
An algorithmic translation of the decision path to a textual representation. The Human explana-
tions are intended to serve as an upper-bound on explanation quality, and the Template explanations
a lower-bound. We recruited 40 participants who collectively answered 1106 questions, with the
results shown in Fig. 5 (left). From these results, we find that hypothesis H1 is fully supported,


                                                  8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                          Ours Preferred         Tied        Ours Not Preferred                                    Interaction Helpful       Interaction Not Helpful


Template BR (States)
                                202                     59               106


                                                                                              Optimal
                                                                                                             6                                  14

                                           318                                 22   25


                                                                                              Sub-Optimal
                                                                                                                             15                                   5
Human


                         127                91                     156


                 0.0      0.2          0.4           0.6           0.8              1.0                0.0       0.2         0.4            0.6             0.8        1.0
                                  Percentage of Explanation Chosen                                                      Percentage of Chosen Interactions



Figure 5: Left: Participant preference when presented with two explanations and asked to choose
which is most helpful to understand agent behavior: Ours vs. BR (States) (top), Ours vs. Template
(middle), and Ours vs. Human (bottom) over 1106 responses from 40 participants. Right: Help-
fulness of interaction after being presented with an explanation with respect to Explore and Exploit
policies across 40 responses from 10 participants. In both cases, Ours refers to BR (Path).


as computed with a one-tailed binomial test with p < 0.05. Participants significantly prefer the
explanations produced by BR (Path) over both those produced by BR (States) as well as Template.
We find that hypothesis H2 is supported as well, and participants did not prefer the explanations
produced by human domain experts over those generated by our proposed method.
Participants’ preference is not influenced by hallucination. Furthermore, we note that participant
choice was not influenced by hallucinations present within explanations. Half of the explanations
produced by BR (States) had some form of hallucinated fact or reasoning. However, we find no
significant difference in participant preference when comparing the subset of explanations with hal-
lucination against the subset of explanations without hallucination. This indicates that either a) hal-
lucinated facts do not diminish explanation helpfulness in the eyes of participants, or b) participants
fail to identify hallucinated information. As a result of our study, we observe a similar preference
between BR(Path) vs. BR(States, No-Hallucination) and BR(Path) vs. BR(States, Hallucination).

5.2                    E VALUATING E XPLANATION I NTERACTIONS

We next evaluated whether participants found the ability to interact with the LLM and the generated
explanations helpful. We performed a within-subjects study where 10 participants were recruited
and presented with a series of state-action pairs, natural language explanations, and an interactive
chat window to an LLM. Participants were given a period of 5 minutes to interact with the system
and then they were asked to indicate whether they found the ability to interact with the LLM helpful
for understanding the agent’s behavior, or whether the initial explanation was sufficient. The results
over 40 total responses are shown in Fig. 5 (right). The results partially support hypothesis H3 and
led to an interesting observation: human participants often assumed the agent would act exploita-
tively, much like the LLM. When the agent acted according to an exploitative strategy its actions
aligned with the participants’ expectations, and interaction was not found helpful. However, when
the agent acted according to an exploration strategy the action was unexpected, and participants
found the ability to issue follow-up queries to the LLM helpful for understanding agent behavior.
We found participant interactions largely fell into three categories: clarification questions, counter-
factual questions, and requests for concision. An example of such an interaction is shown in Fig. 3.


6                      C ONCLUSION AND F UTURE W ORK

In this work, we propose a model-agnostic framework for producing natural language explanations
for an agent’s behavior. Through construction of a behavior representation, we are able to prompt
an LLM to reason about agent behavior in a way that produces plausible and useful explanations,
enables a user to interact and issue follow-up queries, and results in a minimal number of hallucina-
tions, as measured through two participant studies and empirical experiments. While we recognize
that our proposed method has limitations, namely that it requires distillation of an agent’s policy
into a decision tree which only works with non-dense inputs, we feel this is a promising direction
for explainable policies. Such limitations can be overcome with more complex behavior represen-
tations, e.g., differentiable decision trees or concept feature extractors, and we expect the quality of
explanations to improve as LLMs grow more capable.


                                                                                          9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Knowledge-grounded self-rationalization via extractive and natural language explanations. 2022.
Jose M Alonso, Alejandro Ramos-Soto, Ehud Reiter, and Kees van Deemter. An exploratory study
  on the benefits of using natural language for explaining fuzzy rule-based systems. In 2017 IEEE
  International Conference on Fuzzy Systems (FUZZ-IEEE), pp. 1–6. IEEE, 2017.
Ofra Amir, Finale Doshi-Velez, and David Sarne. Summarizing agent strategies. Autonomous Agents
  and Multi-Agent Systems, 33:628–644, 2019.
Jimmy Ba and Rich Caruana. Do deep nets really need to be deep? Advances in neural information
  processing systems, 27, 2014.
Osbert Bastani, Carolyn Kim, and Hamsa Bastani. Interpretability via model extraction. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1706.09773, 2017.
Osbert Bastani, Yewen Pu, and Armando Solar-Lezama. Verifiable reinforcement learning via policy
  extraction. Advances in neural information processing systems, 31, 2018.
Steven Bills, Nick Cammarata, Dan Mossing, Henk Tillman, Leo Gao, Gabriel Goh, Ilya Sutskever,
  Jan Leike, Jeff Wu, and William Saunders. Language models can explain neurons in lan-
  guage models. URL https://openaipublic. blob. core. windows. net/neuron-explainer/paper/index.
  html.(Date accessed: 14.05. 2023), 2023.
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are
  few-shot learners. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:1877–1901, 2020.
Oana-Maria Camburu, Tim Rocktäschel, Thomas Lukasiewicz, and Phil Blunsom. e-snli: Natural
  language inference with natural language explanations. Advances in Neural Information Process-
  ing Systems, 31, 2018.
Christian Arzate Cruz and Takeo Igarashi. Interactive explanations: Diagnosis and repair of rein-
  forcement learning based agent behaviors. In 2021 IEEE Conference on Games (CoG), pp. 01–08.
  IEEE, 2021.
Mengnan Du, Ninghao Liu, and Xia Hu. Techniques for interpretable machine learning. Communi-
 cations of the ACM, 63(1):68–77, 2019.
Upol Ehsan, Pradyumna Tambwekar, Larry Chan, Brent Harrison, and Mark O Riedl. Automated
  rationale generation: a technique for explainable ai and its effects on human perceptions. In
  Proceedings of the 24th International Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces, pp. 263–274,
  2019.
Meherwar Fatima and Maruf Pasha. Survey of machine learning algorithms for disease diagnostic.
 Journal of Intelligent Learning Systems and Applications, 9(01):1–16, 2017.
Jared T Freeman, Lixiao Huang, Matt Woods, and Stephen J Cauffman. Evaluating artificial social
   intelligence in an urban search and rescue task environment. In AAAI 2021 Fall Symposium, 4-6
   Nov 2021. AAAI, 2021.
Nicholas Frosst and Geoffrey Hinton. Distilling a neural network into a soft decision tree. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1711.09784, 2017.
Dimitra Gkatzia, Oliver Lemon, and Verena Rieser. Natural language generation enhances human
  decision-making with uncertain information. arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.03254, 2016.
David Gunning, Mark Stefik, Jaesik Choi, Timothy Miller, Simone Stumpf, and Guang-Zhong Yang.
  Xai—explainable artificial intelligence. Science robotics, 4(37):eaay7120, 2019.
Wenbo Guo, Xian Wu, Usmann Khan, and Xinyu Xing. Edge: Explaining deep reinforcement
 learning policies. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:12222–12236, 2021.


                                               10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Yue Guo, Joseph Campbell, Simon Stepputtis, Ruiyu Li, Dana Hughes, Fei Fang, and Katia Sycara.
  Explainable action advising for multi-agent reinforcement learning. In 2023 IEEE International
  Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pp. 5515–5521. IEEE, 2023.
Bradley Hayes and Julie A Shah. Improving robot controller transparency through autonomous
  policy explanation. In Proceedings of the 2017 ACM/IEEE international conference on human-
  robot interaction, pp. 303–312, 2017.
Geoffrey Hinton, Oriol Vinyals, and Jeff Dean. Distilling the knowledge in a neural network. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1503.02531, 2015.
Shengran Hu and Jeff Clune. Thought cloning: Learning to think while acting by imitating human
  thinking. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.00323, 2023.
W Lewis Johnson. Agents that learn to explain themselves. In AAAI, pp. 1257–1263. Palo Alto, CA,
 1994.
Daniel Kasenberg, Antonio Roque, Ravenna Thielstrom, Meia Chita-Tegmark, and Matthias
  Scheutz.    Generating justifications for norm-related agent decisions. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1911.00226, 2019.
Robert Kass, Tim Finin, et al. The need for user models in generating expert system explanations.
  International Journal of Expert Systems, 1(4), 1988.
Michael Lewis, Katia Sycara, and Illah Nourbakhsh. Developing a testbed for studying human-robot
 interaction in urban search and rescue. In Human-Centered Computing, pp. 270–274. CRC Press,
 2019.
Shiyang Li, Jianshu Chen, Yelong Shen, Zhiyu Chen, Xinlu Zhang, Zekun Li, Hong Wang, Jing
  Qian, Baolin Peng, Yi Mao, et al. Explanations from large language models make small reasoners
  better. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.06726, 2022.
Shuai Li, Azarakhsh Keipour, Kevin Jamieson, Nicolas Hudson, Charles Swan, and Kostas
  Bekris. Large-scale package manipulation via learned metrics of pick success. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2305.10272, 2023.
Guiliang Liu, Oliver Schulte, Wang Zhu, and Qingcan Li. Toward interpretable deep reinforce-
  ment learning with linear model u-trees. In Machine Learning and Knowledge Discovery in
  Databases: European Conference, ECML PKDD 2018, Dublin, Ireland, September 10–14, 2018,
  Proceedings, Part II 18, pp. 414–429. Springer, 2019.
Tongtong Liu, Joe McCalmon, Thai Le, Md Asifur Rahman, Dongwon Lee, and Sarra Alqahtani. A
  novel policy-graph approach with natural language and counterfactual abstractions for explaining
  reinforcement learning agents. Autonomous Agents and Multi-Agent Systems, 37(2):34, 2023.
Ana Marasović, Chandra Bhagavatula, Jae sung Park, Ronan Le Bras, Noah A. Smith, and Yejin
  Choi. Natural language rationales with full-stack visual reasoning: From pixels to semantic
  frames to commonsense graphs. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
  EMNLP 2020, pp. 2810–2829. Association for Computational Linguistics, November 2020.
Ana Marasović, Iz Beltagy, Doug Downey, and Matthew E Peters. Few-shot self-rationalization
  with natural language prompts. arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.08284, 2021.
Ettore Mariotti, Jose M Alonso, and Albert Gatt. Towards harnessing natural language generation
  to explain black-box models. In 2nd Workshop on Interactive Natural Language Technology for
  Explainable Artificial Intelligence, pp. 22–27, 2020.
Nick McKenna, Tianyi Li, Liang Cheng, Mohammad Javad Hosseini, Mark Johnson, and Mark
  Steedman. Sources of hallucination by large language models on inference tasks. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2305.14552, 2023.
Tim Miller. Explanation in artificial intelligence: Insights from the social sciences. Artificial intel-
  ligence, 267:1–38, 2019.


                                                  11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Aditi Mishra, Utkarsh Soni, Jinbin Huang, and Chris Bryan. Why? why not? when? visual ex-
  planations of agent behaviour in reinforcement learning. In 2022 IEEE 15th Pacific Visualization
  Symposium (PacificVis), pp. 111–120. IEEE, 2022.
Grusha Prasad, Yixin Nie, Mohit Bansal, Robin Jia, Douwe Kiela, and Adina Williams. To what ex-
  tent do human explanations of model behavior align with actual model behavior? In Proceedings
  of the Fourth BlackboxNLP Workshop on Analyzing and Interpreting Neural Networks for NLP,
  pp. 1–14, Punta Cana, Dominican Republic, November 2021. Association for Computational Lin-
  guistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2021.blackboxnlp-1.1.
Erika Puiutta and Eric MSP Veith. Explainable reinforcement learning: A survey. In International
  cross-domain conference for machine learning and knowledge extraction, pp. 77–95. Springer,
  2020.
Nazneen Fatema Rajani, Bryan McCann, Caiming Xiong, and Richard Socher. Explain yourself!
  leveraging language models for commonsense reasoning. In Proceedings of the 57th Annual
  Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 4932–4942, Florence, Italy, July
  2019. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/P19-1487.
Marco Tulio Ribeiro, Sameer Singh, and Carlos Guestrin. " why should i trust you?" explaining the
 predictions of any classifier. In Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGKDD international conference
 on knowledge discovery and data mining, pp. 1135–1144, 2016.
Stéphane Ross, Geoffrey Gordon, and Drew Bagnell. A reduction of imitation learning and struc-
  tured prediction to no-regret online learning. In Proceedings of the fourteenth international con-
  ference on artificial intelligence and statistics, pp. 627–635. JMLR Workshop and Conference
  Proceedings, 2011.
Tianmin Shu, Caiming Xiong, and Richard Socher. Hierarchical and interpretable skill acquisition
  in multi-task reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1712.07294, 2017.
Pei Sun, Henrik Kretzschmar, Xerxes Dotiwalla, Aurelien Chouard, Vijaysai Patnaik, Paul Tsui,
  James Guo, Yin Zhou, Yuning Chai, Benjamin Caine, et al. Scalability in perception for au-
  tonomous driving: Waymo open dataset. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on com-
  puter vision and pattern recognition, pp. 2446–2454, 2020.
Abhinav Verma, Vijayaraghavan Murali, Rishabh Singh, Pushmeet Kohli, and Swarat Chaudhuri.
  Programmatically interpretable reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning, pp. 5045–5054. PMLR, 2018.
Xinzhi Wang, Shengcheng Yuan, Hui Zhang, Michael Lewis, and Katia Sycara. Verbal explanations
  for deep reinforcement learning neural networks with attention on extracted features. In 2019 28th
  IEEE International Conference on Robot and Human Interactive Communication (RO-MAN), pp.
  1–7. IEEE, 2019.
Lindsay Wells and Tomasz Bednarz. Explainable AI and reinforcement learning—a systematic
  review of current approaches and trends. 4. ISSN 2624-8212.
Sarah Wiegreffe, Jack Hessel, Swabha Swayamdipta, Mark Riedl, and Yejin Choi. Reframing
  human-ai collaboration for generating free-text explanations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.08674,
  2021.
Renos Zabounidis, Joseph Campbell, Simon Stepputtis, Dana Hughes, and Katia P Sycara. Concept
  learning for interpretable multi-agent reinforcement learning. In Conference on Robot Learning,
  pp. 1828–1837. PMLR, 2023.


                                                12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A    A PPENDIX


To ensure the reproducibility of this study, the prompts used for querying the large language model
are provided. These prompts contain four segments: a) a concise description of the environment
the agent is operating in, e.g., state and action descriptions, b) a description of what information the
behavior representation conveys, c) in-context learning examples, and d) the behavior representation
and action that we wish to explain. While the final part is produced by the surrogate model on a case-
by-case basis, the first three parts are supplied for reference.

Environment Description
Within the environment description segment, the Large Language Model (LLM) is acquainted with
the game rules to orient it within the USAR settings, aiming to counter any misconceptions spurred
by the LLM’s general knowledge. Through testing, it is determined that GPT-4 displays considerable
spatial reasoning skills. However, its north/south direction is opposite to our configurations, requir-
ing explicit clarification. Additionally, we also address the contradiction between LLM knowledge
and domain knowledge in this section. For instance, while the LLM assumes that rubble block the
movement of agents, it does not in our context. The domain knowledge prompt is shared below:

The game is a search and rescue game set in a grid world. There are two agents: a medic and
an engineer. The grid is made up of rooms, each represented by coordinates (x,y), where x
represents the east-west direction, and y represents the north-south direction. Specifically,
a larger x value corresponds to a location further east, and a larger y value corresponds
to a location further south, with y=0 being the northernmost row and increasing y values
moving southward.
- Both the engineer and the medic can move to an adjacent room in any of the four cardinal
directions (north, south, east, west) during a single move.
- The medic has the ability to rescue a victim during a single move; however, this action
cannot be performed concurrently with movement to an adjacent room.
- The engineer has the ability to remove rubble during a single move; this action also cannot
be performed concurrently with movement to an adjacent room.
- Both agents can only perceive what’s inside their current grid but have memory and can
communicate instantly. Every grid visited by either of the agents is visible to both.
- Rooms may initially be unexplored, in which case victims or rubble are assumed to be
non-existent. Once explored, details about victims and rubble will be updated.
- Rubble may or may not hide a victim. If a room contains rubble, victim is assumed to be
non-existent. Removing the rubble may expose a hidden victim.
- Rubble in the room won’t affect the movement of the agents.

Behavior Representation Description
A description of the behavior representation is provided to the LLM such that it knows how to
reason with the information we provide. We emphasize that the LLM should interpret the policy
of a neural network rather than formulating its own rationale. It should adhere to the behavior
representation provided to accurately elucidate the neural network’s policy. The respective task
description prompt reads as follows:

Given an observation of the environment, the agent chooses to look at a subset of features
in order to choose its action, which we denote as "Features". These features represent parts
of the observation that are directly related to why the agent chose its action. Given this
subset of features that the agent looks at, provide a concise explanation for why the agent
chose the action that it did. Keep in mind that the agent may not always be making optimal


                                                  13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


decisions, so consider that possibility if there seems like no reasonable goal the agent could
be trying to accomplish from the set of features.

In-Context Learning (ICL) examples
The In-Context Learning (ICL) examples supply the LLM with instances of the expected outputs
when an observation & action pair is presented. In this segment, we provide examples written by
human domain experts. Without prior knowledge of the policy’s type, human is given the same de-
scription as above and try to formulate based on the provided feature & action pair. We incorporated
three samples, one each from the three possible behaviors Explore, Exploit, Fixed. Below is the
human-written example for the Explore policy.

Features:
room (0, 1) doesn’t contain rubble.
engineer is not in room (0, 1).
room (3, 2) doesn’t contain rubble.
engineer is not in room (3, 2).
room (3, 3) doesn’t contain rubble.
engineer is not in room (3, 3).
room (3, 4) contains rubble.
engineer is not in room (3, 4).
engineer is not in room (1, 1).
engineer is not in room (3, 0).
room (1, 3) doesn’t contain rubble.
engineer is not in room (1, 3).
engineer is not in room (0, 4).
room (0, 4) doesn’t contain rubble.
room (3, 1) doesn’t contain rubble.
engineer is not in room (3, 1).
room (2, 4) doesn’t contain rubble.
engineer is not in room (2, 4).
medic is not in room (2, 4).
medic is not in room (2, 1).
engineer is not in room (1, 2).
room (2, 3) doesn’t contain a victim.
medic is not in room (3, 2).
medic is not in room (3, 1).
room (2, 3) doesn’t contain rubble.
engineer is not in room (2, 3).
room (1, 4) doesn’t contain rubble.
engineer is not in room (1, 4).
room (0, 3) has been explored.
room (0, 3) doesn’t contain a victim.
medic is not in room (1, 4).
room (2, 2) contains rubble.

Action taken by the engineer:
engineer moves east to room (1, 2).

Explanation:
The engineer moves east to room (1, 2) because the engineer is currently in room (0, 2) and
room (2, 2) contains rubble. From the set of features it appears the engineer is primarily
looking for rooms containing rubble so that it can remove them, and since room (2, 2)
contains rubble the engineer may be moving east to reach room (2, 2) and remove the
rubble.


                                                14
