Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


ALP: ACTION -AWARE E MBODIED L EARNING
FOR P ERCEPTION

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT
         Current methods in training and benchmarking vision models exhibit an over-
         reliance on passive, curated datasets. Although models trained on these datasets
         have shown strong performance in a wide variety of tasks such as classification,
         detection, and segmentation, they fundamentally are unable to generalize to an
         ever-evolving world due to constant out-of-distribution shifts of input data. There-
         fore, instead of training on fixed datasets, can we approach learning in a more
         human-centric and adaptive manner? In this paper, we introduce Action-Aware
         Embodied Learning for Perception (ALP), an embodied learning framework that
         incorporates action information into representation learning through a combina-
         tion of optimizing a reinforcement learning policy and an inverse dynamics predic-
         tion objective. Our method actively explores in complex 3D environments to both
         learn generalizable task-agnostic visual representations as well as collect down-
         stream training data. We show that ALP outperforms existing baselines in several
         downstream perception tasks. In addition, we show that by training on actively
         collected data more relevant to the environment and task, our method general-
         izes more robustly to downstream tasks compared to models pre-trained on fixed
         datasets such as ImageNet.


1   I NTRODUCTION
A vast majority of current vision models are fueled by learning from a passively curated dataset.
They achieve good performance on new inputs that are close to the training distribution but fail to
generalize across changing conditions. This issue is mitigated partially by performing pre-training
on a large dataset like ImageNet or COCO. However, these are still static snapshots of objects which
do not allow for richer learning, and pre-trained models still fail to enable generalization to new
environments and tasks that are semantically unrelated to those in the large-scale datasets.
A natural approach to address these issues is to leverage active agents in an embodied environment.
Intuitively, learning representations from exploration in the environment allows us to learn from
large scale data that is relevant to the task at hand; active exploration can find maximally informative
or diverse instances. A similar argument can be made for active data collection of labeled data for
downstream fine-tuning. Furthermore, embodied learning affords the crucial ability to incorporate
action information; this is different from learning from static datasets where such signals are not
available. As the classic experiment of Held & Hein (1963) shows, the active kitten learns a better
visual system despite receiving the same visual stimulation as a passive kitten.
In this paper, we propose Action-Aware Embodied Learning for Perception (ALP), that leverages ac-
tion information and performs active exploration both for learning representations and downstream
finetuning. In the first stage, we learn a task-agnostic visual representation through a combination
of exploration policy and dynamics prediction objectives. Then, in the second stage, for each down-
stream task, we label a subset of the data collected during the first stage, and finetune our pretrained
backbone. See Figure 1 for a schematic of our proposed method.
Importantly, we design our method to incorporate learning signal from interaction - or actions - as
follows. We use an inverse dynamics objective during representation learning that explicitly infuses
action information into the visual representation by training to predict the action taken to go from
one view to another. Similar approaches have been used in prior works such as Agrawal et al. (2016);
Jayaraman & Grauman (2015). In addition, we propose a novel idea of using a shared backbone for


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


the representation learning and the reinforcement learning policy for exploration in learning visual
perception, while prior works Ye et al. (2021) adopted similar ideas in supervised end-to-end RL
tasks. Reinforcement learning indirectly informs learning of visual representations through actions
with policy gradients on the exploration reward, by virtue of sharing parameters. This is contrast
to methods like CRL Du et al. (2021), which are specifically designed around learning separate
backbones for the reward and policies models, whereas we demonstrate the benefits of learning in a
coupled manner, in which all training objectives jointly optimize the same visual backbone.
In summary, our core contributions are as follows:

       • We introduce an embodied learning framework that both actively learns visual representa-
         tion and collects data to be labeled for downstream finetuning. To the best of our knowl-
         edge, prior works such as Du et al. (2021); Chaplot et al. (2021) perform only one of the
         two stages actively.
       • We propose to only leverage action information from embodied movements for visual rep-
         resentations, implicitly by using a shared backbone for policy and representation learning,
         in addition to explicit information via inverse dynamics prediction. We experimentally in-
         vestigate the importance of both kinds of action information through extensive experiments
         in Gibson across a wide range of tasks (object detection, segmentation, depth estimation).
       • We show that our method outperforms baseline embodied learning and self-supervised
         learning methods, as well as popular pre-trained models from static datasets such as Ima-
         geNet. These gains are exemplified on out-of-distribution.

2   R ELATED W ORK

Visual representation learning from passive data. Representation learning has shown signif-
icant success in computer vision Doersch et al. (2015); Gidaris et al. (2018); Noroozi & Favaro
(2016); Pathak et al. (2017b); Wang & Gupta (2015); Zhang et al. (2016); He et al. (2022) by
learning generic visual representations through large-scale pretraining, which can then be reused
in multiple downstream tasks such as detection and segmentation Cho et al. (2021); Van Gansbeke
et al. (2021); Wang et al. (2022); Xie et al. (2021). However, these works only consider represen-
tation learning from passively collected datasets and they are fixed snapshots of the world. Instead,
we learn visual representation in interactive settings by both actively discovering diverse images and
leveraging action information as learning signals for better visual perception.

Learning perception from active data. A smaller body of recent work has explored active data
collection to improve perception. One line of work focuses on learning pretrained visual represen-
tations that are generically good for many downstream tasks. Ye et al. (2021); Ramakrishnan et al.
(2021) propose to learn visual representations that can improve sample-efficiency in downstream
navigation tasks. Du et al. (2021) learns representations with a min-max game by simultaneously op-
timizing a contrastive loss in addition to learning a policy that discovers observations that maximizes
the same loss. In contrast to our work, these prior works only restrict data collection exclusively to
pretraining and do not incorporate underlying action information.
Another line of work develops better heuristics to actively collect samples for specific downstream
tasks, such as spatial-temporal inconsistency in semantic predictions Chaplot et al. (2020c), maxi-
mizing number of visited objects with high confidence Chaplot et al. (2021), pose information from
multiple viewpoints Fang et al. (2020), and encouraging successful interactions with novel objects
Nagarajan & Grauman (2020). We instead actively collect training data from intrinsic motivation for
both visual representations and downstream tasks in a unified framework. We additionally demon-
strate the generality of our learned representations through evaluating on wide ranges of tasks.

Exploration for Diverse Data Collection. Outside of representation learning, diversity in training
data has been heralded as important and various exploration policies have been proposed to gather
diverse data and learn better vision models. Some examples include map building and path planning
for environment coverage. Chaplot et al. (2020a) learns to select navigation points from mapping
and compute paths to goal location from planning. Another line of work designs intrinsic rewards
to measure novelty of state visitations and trains an exploration policy using reinforcement learning


                                                  2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


       Stage 1: Learning Interactive Representations from Active Exploration   Stage 2: Transfer to Downstream Perception Tasks


                                                                                       Train task-specific model initialized with
                                                                                         Visual Representations from Stage 1

                             Inverse Dynamics Prediction                                 Visual Encoder           Detection
                                                                                            Backbone      +     Segmentation
                                                                                                                    Head


                                                   move
                      turn left                   forward

                                                                                    Sampled trajectories with labels from Stage 1


Figure 1: Overview of ALP. Our framework consists of two stages. In Stage 1, the agent learns
visual representations from interactions by actively exploring in environments from intrinsic mo-
tivation. Our visual representation learning approach directly considers embodied interactions by
incorporating supervisions from action information. In Stage 2, we utilize both learned visual repre-
sentations and label a small random subset of samples from explored trajectories to train downstream
perception models.


to maximize rewards Meyer & Wilson (1991); Stadie et al. (2015); Fu et al. (2017); Pathak et al.
(2017a); Burda et al. (2019). Our work fall into this category, where performing reinforcement
learning to learn a policy allows us to incorporate gradient signals which provide action information
into the representation learning (as discussed in Section 3.1).

Incorporating action information into representation learning. Previous works that incorpo-
rate actions into learned visual representations focus on robot interactions. Pinto et al. (2016);
Agrawal et al. (2016); Jang et al. (2018); Pathak et al. (2018); Eitel et al. (2019) leverages dynam-
ics from physical interactions to learn visual representations emerging from physical interactions.
While they similarly explicitly use action information, their physical activities are limited to manip-
ulation or poking, we instead allow agents to actively navigate in complex visual environments to
collect diverse observations, and use the resulting action information. Furthermore, different from
all prior works, we use action information both explicitly through including as part of visual repre-
sentation learning objectives and implicitly by transferring shared visual representation from policy
to downstream perception tasks.

3     M ETHOD
We now present ALP, a general framework to actively collect data for visual representation learning
and downstream perception tasks. Figure 1 shows an overview of our method, which consists of
two stages. In Stage 1, we allow the agent to actively explore in visual environments from intrinsic
motivation to discover diverse observations. We propose a coupled approach to incorporate action
information from movements and learn a set of shared visual representations that jointly optimizes
a policy gradient objective and inverse dynamics predictions loss (Section 3.1). In Stage 2, we label
a small subset of collected samples from active exploration for downstream perception tasks, and
initialize from the learned representation in Stage 1 to improve performance of perception model
(Section 3.2). We provide pseudo-code of our framework in Algorithm 1 of Appendix B.1.

3.1   ACTION - AWARE EMBODIED LEARNING FOR TASK - AGNOSTIC VISUAL REPRESENTATIONS

As the agent actively navigates in visual environments to gather informative and diverse observa-
tions, our goal is to learn visual representations from these sequences of embodied interactions. Such
learning signals are not available when training on static datasets. We train a single network with the
following objectives: (i) policy optimization to encourage visitation of novel states via reinforce-
ment learning (ii) explicitly predicting multiple steps of actions given sequence of observations. We
discuss each objective below.


                                                                    3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Learning Exploration Policy. We use existing novelty-based reward as intrinsic motivation to
train exploration policy for our experiments, such as RND Burda et al. (2018) and CRL Du et al.
(2021). We provide detailed definitions and equations to compute different rewards we consider
in Appendix A. Given computed rewards r(ot ), we train our policy using Proximal Policy Opti-
mization (PPO) Wijmans et al. (2019); Schulman et al. (2017) algorithm, which optimizes policy
πθ to maximize accumulated sums of rewards over episodes within horizon T , given transitions
ot+1 ∼ T (ot , at ) and a discount factor γ:
                                                 " T           #
                                                   X
                                                        t
                                     max     E         γ r(ot )                            (1)
                                         θ   at ∼πθ (ot )
                                                            t=0

Our representation learning model Mrepr is updated with Policy Gradient (PG) objective as follows:

                                 h                                                 i
                       LPPO = Êt min rt (θ)Ât , clip (rt (θ), 1 − ϵ, 1 + ϵ) Ât                           (2)

where the estimated advantages Ât and expectations Êt are computed using value function estimates
V̂ (ot ), and the clip ratio rt (θ) = ππθθ (a(at |o t)
                                                 t |ot )
                                                         is the ratio between the probability of action at under
                                         old
current policy and old policy respectively. We use policy gradient to both improve exploration policy
and learn visual representations of environments.
A key departure from prior work is to apply the above policy gradient updates on the same network
Mrepr that performs the representation learning. In other words, reinforcement learning is not just
to collect diverse data, but to also provide signal on visual features that will be used downstream,
since our agent is trained to navigate in photorealistic environments to discover diverse images. Note
that since policy gradients involve action information, this loss can also be interpreted as providing
indirect signal on the actions. We experimentally find that such action information improves visual
representations.

Explicit Action Prediction. We make the important observation that active interactions via an
embodied agent provides important information beyond just the images themselves — consecutive
frames encode agent’s movements. We can train the visual representations to capture long-horizon
dynamics between frames. We do so via predicting sequence of intermediate actions from sequence
of consecutive frames, since it is easier than alternatives such as action conditioned forward frame
prediction, given our action space is rather discrete and low dimensional, and already provides
substantial gains in practice.
Our Inverse Dynamics Model (IDM) setup consists of our representation learning model Mrepr ,
a projection head hproj , and a prediction network gIDM . Given a trajectory consisting of k
                                              t+k−1
steps of transition pairs {(oi , ai , oi+1 )}i=t    , observations are encoded into visual features zi =
hproj (Mrepr (oi )). Then these feature encodings of k + 1 consecutive frames are concatenated as
input to the prediction network gIDM to predict k steps of actions taken by the agent. Our predicted
distribution of action is approximated by
                         PIDM (a|ot , ..., ot+k ) = softmax (hIDM (a|zt , ..., zt+k ))                (3)
Since our action space A consists of discrete actions, our predicted estimate of action âi =
argmaxa∼A PIDM (a); our parameters Mrepr , hproj , and hIDM are optimized with cross-entropy
loss averaged over k steps:
                                         "      k−1
                                                                                     #
                                              1X
                          LIDM = Eτ −               ai log PIDM (ai |ot , ..., ot+k )                 (4)
                                              k i=0
where τ = {(oi , ai , oi+1 )}Ti=1 denotes a rollout trajectory of length T . With supervisions from
IDM, our representation learning model Mrepr learns visual representations from environments as
it is trained to extract features for predicting action movements between consecutive observation
frames. In our experiments, our IDM is trained to predict 8 steps of intermediate action unless
specified, since empirically we found this performs better.
Our representation learning model Mrepr is optimized with LPPO and LIDM on every batch of rollouts
collected from exploration, both of which provide learning signals from embodied interactions for
visual representations.


                                                        4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


3.2   T RANSFER TO DOWNSTREAM PERCEPTION TASKS

In our framework, the same active exploration process is also used to collect training samples for
downstream tasks. The exploration policy for representation learning is aimed at capturing diverse
and novel observations from environments. For best downstream performance, we can reuse the
same policy to collect informative training data for downstream tasks, and randomly sample a
small subset of images periodically and obtain the corresponding semantic labels from the simu-
lator. Given the pretrained representation Mrepr from Section 3.1, we initialize the backbone visual
encoder of the downstream perception model for each task with pretrained representation Mrepr
and perform end-to-end supervised learning on labeled samples for each task until convergence.

4     E XPERIMENTS
In this section, we experimentally evaluate ALP and compare various baseline methods for active
representation learning, and active downstream finetuning. We particularly focus on understanding
gains of incorporating action information — both via using a shared backbone for representation
learning and active exploration policy (indirect action signal), and a direct self-supervised loss to
predict inverse dynamics. In addition, we perform various ablations to study the importance of
different components of our method.

4.1   E XPERIMENTAL S ETUPS

Environments. We perform experiments on the Habitat simulator Savva et al. (2019) with the
Gibson dataset Xia et al. (2018). The Gibson dataset consists of photorealistic scenes that are 3D re-
constructions of real-world environments. Identical to previous works Chaplot et al. (2021; 2020b),
we use a set of 30 scenes from the Gibson tiny set for our experiments where semantic annotations
are available Armeni et al. (2019), with a split of 25 training scenes and 5 test scenes. The list of
training and test scenes is provided in Appendix B.2.
Agent Specification. Following previous works Chaplot et al. (2021); Du et al. (2021), we allow our
agent to receive observations and take actions in a simulator. For each time step t, our observation
space consists of only 256 × 256 RGB observations. Our action space consists of 3 discrete actions:
move forward (0.25m), turn left (30◦ ), and turn right (30◦ ).
Training details. To pretrain visual representations jointly with learning exploration policy, we
allow agents to interact in the environments for around 8M frames; our representation learning
model Mrepr is optimized using all collected minibatches from explored trajectories. We randomly
sample a subset of 10k images with labels per scene from all explored frames as training data for
downstream tasks, totaling 250k image-label pairs. We adopt commonly used architectures for each
task: for detection and segmentation, we use a Mask-RCNN He et al. (2017) using Feature Pyramid
Networks Lin et al. (2017) with a ResNet-50 He et al. (2016) as Mrepr ; for depth estimation, we use
a Vit-B/16 encoder-decoder architecture Dosovitskiy et al. (2020) with its encoder as Mrepr . We
provide full hyperparameter, architecture, and implementation details in Appendix B.3.
Evaluation setups. Following evaluation setups in previous works Chaplot et al. (2021; 2020b;c),
We use 6 common indoor object categories for our experiments: chair, couch, bed, toilet, TV, and
potted plant. We consider two evaluation settings:
       • Train Split: We randomly sample a set of 5000 evaluation images from in-distribution
         training scenes (200 images per scene).
       • Test Split: We randomly sample a set of 5000 evaluation images from out-of-distribution
         test scenes (1000 images per scene). We directly evaluate models on unseen environments
         without further adaptations.
We evaluate downstream perception models trained with ALP and other baselines on each evaluation
dataset; we report bounding box, mask AP50 scores, and RMSE for Object Detection (ObjDet),
Instance Segmentation (InstSeg), and Depth Estimation (DepEst) tasks respectively. AP50 is the
average precision with at least 50% IOU, where IOU is defined to be the intersection over union of
the predicted and ground-truth bounding box or the segmentation mask. RMSE is the square root of
the mean squared error between the predicted and ground-truth depth annotations.

                                                  5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


4.2     E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS

4.2.1    B ENEFITS FROM I NCLUDING ACTION FOR P ERCEPTION

ALP improves learning for several exploration methods. In order to show that our proposed
coupled representation learning approach to including training signal from action supervision can
generally improve from different active exploration methods, we combine our framework with two
learning-based exploration strategies: RND and CRL. For both baseline methods, we follow prior
work and train separate models to learn the exploration policy and visual representations, and use the
same loss (RND prediction error, or CRL contrastive loss) to both incentivize exploration (maximize
loss) and learn representations (minimize loss). When combining with ALP, we modify the training
process to share backbones between reinforcement and representation learning, and add in inverse
dynamics predictions losses to provide direct learning signals from actions.
Table 1 reports final performance in perception tasks from each exploration method with and with-
out combining with ALP. We observe significant increase in downstream accuracy when augmenting
both RND and CRL with our method (RND-ALP and CRL-ALP, respectively), especially for gen-
eralization to test scenes. Interestingly, we see a slightly higher boost when applying ALP to RND
Burda et al. (2018) compared to CRL Du et al. (2021), possibly because CRL already learns active
visual representations, while RND is specifically designed to measure novelty and our framework
learns better visual representation on top of it.

                                        Train Split                      Test Split
           Method              ObjDet    InstSeg       DepEst   ObjDet    InstSeg     DepEst
           CRL                 79.61      76.42        0.265    40.81      34.24      0.352
           CRL-ALP (ours)      83.14      79.24        0.261    42.42      36.89      0.350
           RND                 83.65      81.01        0.251    37.13      34.10      0.366
           RND-ALP (ours)      87.95      84.56        0.237    50.34      46.74      0.305

Table 1: Results of combining ALP with different exploration methods. We combine our method
with two exploration strategies, RND and CRL, and compare performance of downstream perception
models with baselines. ALP in most cases improves final performance of perception tasks when
integrated with different exploration strategies.


Action-aware training results in better and more robust visual representations. We further
examine whether applying purely vision-based self-supervised learning objectives on the same pre-
training data as RND-ALP is sufficient for accurate downstream performance. In order to test this,
we record all explored frames (around 8M) from the agent collected from our method and learn
representations using several contrastive learning methods on top of this dataset. Specifically, we
consider SimCLR Chen et al. (2020a) initialized from scratch - SimCLR (FrScr), SimCLR initialized
from ImageNet pretrained weights - SimCLR (FrImgNet), and Contrastve Predictive Coding Oord
et al. (2018) - CPC. We report results in Table 2.
Through our proposed representation learning approach that couple training objectives from action
supervision, RND-ALP improves much from existing self-supervised contrastive learning methods
using the same pretraining and downstream dataset. It even achieves similar performance compared
to initializing from ImageNet SimCLR weights, without using any form of contrastive learning.
This demonstrates that leveraging action supervisions during embodied movements is comparable
to training on much more diverse and curated large-scale data in improving visual representation.
We report similar experimental results on CRL-ALP in Table 9 of Appendix C.1.

4.2.2    D ISENTANGLING THE E FFECT OF V ISUAL R EPRESENTATION AND DATA C OLLECTION
         Q UALITY

Downstream performance of ALP depends on a combination of (1) the quality of the visual represen-
tation backbone learned during pretraining, and (2) the quality of the dataset collected and labeled
for downstream finetuning. In this section, we control different aspects of our method to gain some


                                                   6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                               Train Split           Test Split
                  Method                   ObjDet       InstSeg   ObjDet   InstSeg
                  SimCLR (FrScr)            85.63       82.14     43.00     35.57
                  SimCLR (FrImgNet)         90.08       86.76     47.66     44.70
                  CPC                       86.30       83.05     41.52     37.49
                  RND-ALP (ours)            87.95       84.56     50.34     46.74

Table 2: Results of comparing to self-supervised contrastive learning methods. RND-ALP gen-
erally achieves similar or better performance compared to self-supervised learning baselines under
same pre-training and fine-tuning data distribution, without including any form of contrastive loss.


insight into disentangling the effects of these two factors. For all further experiments, we compare
baselines relative to RND-ALP. We report similar results on CRL-ALP in Appendix C.1.

Comparing visual representation quality. First, we examine the quality of visual representations
that ALP learns. To effectively evaluate this, we finetune several pretrained perception models on
the same downstream dataset collected from RND-ALP. Our baselines consist of a visual backbones
pretrained using CRL, ImageNet SimCLR, and a from-scratch. We additionally report performance
of finetuning ImageNet Supervised model as a reference to performance of supervised pretraining.
In Table 3, RND-ALP achieves better performance than our self-supervised learning baselines only
from images. Since our approach directly incoporates actions to learn visual perception, this demon-
strates that such information coming from extensive interactions is more beneficial than pure image-
level training, either under embodied settings or on larger-scale curated datasets.
Our framework even performs very close to ImageNet supervised pretraining in our downstream
semantic tasks, without access to any class annotations. This is indicates significant benefits from
utilizing active interactions for better representation learning, which complements the lack of super-
vised pretraining. We also perform similar comparisons by fine-tuning various representation learn-
ing methods on downstream datasets collected from active Neural SLAM Chaplot et al. (2020a) and
passive random policy, and report full results in Table 8 of Appendix C.1.

                                          Train Split                      Test Split
       Method                    ObjDet    InstSeg      DepEst    ObjDet    InstSeg     DepEst
       From Scratch               86.99     83.86        0.433    38.15      34.20      0.596
       CRL                        87.02     82.93        0.263    48.19      42.05      0.354
       ImageNet SimCLR            87.22     83.50        0.255    50.66      46.55      0.352
       RND-ALP (ours)             87.95     84.56        0.237    50.34      46.74      0.305
       ImageNet Supervised        88.75     85.51        0.240    52.78      46.94      0.327

Table 3: Results of comparing visual representation baselines. Performance of finetuning each
pretrained visual representation on the same downstream dataset collected from RND-ALP. RND-
ALP learns better visual representations than baseline embodied learning methods and pretraining
from static datasets.

Comparing downstream data collection quality. Next, we examine the quality of the down-
stream data collected by RND-ALP. To accomplish this, we train downstream perception models
initialized with the same pretrained representation from RND-ALP using different downstream
datasets, which are collected from several baseline methods based on active exploration — most
notably RND, CRL, and Active Neural SLAM (ANS).
We report performance of our method and all other baselines in Table 4. Here CRL shows weaker
ability to collect better downstream samples possibly because CRL is specifically proposed as an
active visual representation leaning method. Compared to ANS as a mapping-based exploration
method using path planning, learning-based exploration methods generally achieve better perfor-
mance under train split; we discuss further in Appendix C.1.


                                                    7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Our results show that RND-ALP                                      Train Split              Test Split
improves from baseline active ex-
ploration methods by large mar-         Method               ObjDet      InstSeg      ObjDet      InstSeg
gins, especially under generaliza-      RND                      85.68       80.86       48.33       44.30
tion setting to unseen test split.      CRL                      82.49       78.33       44.77       38.26
This suggests that augmented ex-        ANS                      75.59       71.37       47.95       41.09
ploration strategies with ALP ben-      RND-ALP (ours)           87.95       84.56       50.34       46.74
efits both visual representations
and further dataset quality. We also
                                       Table 4: Results of comparing downstream data collection
perform similar comparisons by
                                       baselines. Performance of finetuning the same pretrained rep-
fine-tuning ImageNet SimCLR and
                                       resentations from RND-ALP on each data collection method.
supervised models on each down-
                                       RND-ALP collects better downstream training data compared
stream dataset, and report full re-
                                       to several baseline active exploration methods.
sults in Table 9 of Appendix C.1.

4.2.3    A BLATIONS
Contributions of each component to representation learning. To quantify and understand the
importance of each training objective to visual perception, we perform experiments with several
ablations. We fix the same exploration process and train another separate visual encoder using
either only policy gradient objective or only inverse dynamics prediction loss, then use the same
downstream dataset collected from RND-ALP to train the final perception model.
Table 5 shows that both policy gradient and inverse dynamics predictions improve visual repre-
sentation learning. We observe that training with policy loss generally performs better and thus is
more important to learn better visual representations than training with action prediction loss. This
further shows that while our exploration agent is trained to navigate to actively discover diverse
observations, it also learns visual perception of environments through extensive interactions.

         Pretraining Objectives            Train Split                         Test Split
         PG         IDM           ObjDet    InstSeg      DepEst     ObjDet       InstSeg    DepEst
         ✓                        88.60      84.36       0.239       46.56       40.34       0.334
                      ✓           86.09      83.01       0.241       42.25       37.67       0.346
         ✓            ✓           87.95      84.56       0.237       50.34       46.74       0.305

Table 5: Contributions of policy gradient and inverse dynamics. We train with either policy loss
(PG) or action prediction loss (IDM) to evaluate contribution of each component to learned visual
representations. Both unlabeled data for representation learning and labeled data for perception
tasks are fixed in each of ablation study.


Number of timesteps in inverse dynamics model. Since IDM is trained to predict all intermedi-
ate actions given a sequence of observations, we wonder whether different training sequence lengths
affect the downstream performance. Intuitively, longer training trajectories can capture long-horizon
environment dynamics but could be more complex to learn. We report experimental results on RND-
ALP in Table 6 and on CRL-ALP in Table 10 of Appendix C.1.
Our results show that IDM trained to predict 8 steps of action sequence generally perform better. It
improves from shorter sequence of trajectories possibly since the representation learning model can
capture more temporal information, while performance saturates and does not improve further by
simply increasing training sequence length.

4.3     Q UALITATIVE E XAMPLES

In order to qualitatively evaluate how our active agent is able to explore in visual environments, in
Figure 2 we visualize trajectories of learned exploration policies in one of environment maps in the
Gibson dataset of the Habitat simulator. Compared to baseline exploration agents trained with RND
or CRL rewards, RND-ALP and CRL-ALP show wider coverage of environments maps and longer


                                                  8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                       Train Split                      Test Split
          Number of Steps     ObjDet    InstSeg       DepEst   ObjDet    InstSeg     DepEst
                   4           88.25     84.49        0.236    45.91      39.78      0.314
                   8           87.95     84.56        0.237    50.34      46.74      0.305
                   16          88.22     84.17        0.235    46.93      41.82      0.308

Table 6: Number of timesteps in inverse dynamics model (IDM). We vary lengths of input obser-
vation sequence and predicted action sequence when training inverse dynamics model to observe its
effect on downstream performance of RND-ALP.


movements trajectory. This demonstrates that ALP improves capability to collect better training
samples for downstream tasks. We provide additional examples in Figure 3 of Appendix C.2.


         (a) CRL                  (b) RND                 (c) CRL-ALP              (d) RND-ALP

Figure 2: Episode trajectories of policies trained with exploration baselines and combined with our
method on Habitat environments. We observe that both RND and CRL shows wider coverage of
maps and longer movements when combined with ALP.


5   D ISCUSSION
In this paper, we introduced ALP, a novel paradigm for embodied learning leverages active learning
for task-agnostic visual representation and data collection. We demonstrate that using shared visual
backbones to incorporate action information through policy gradient and inverse dynamics predic-
tion when pretraining the visual backbone aids in learning better representations that result in more
accurate performance across a variety of downstream tasks, such as object detection, segmentation,
and depth estimation. Below, we discuss several limitations and directions for future work.
      • Although our experiments were primarily done in simulated environments of 3D scans of
        real locations, a slight domain gap still exists between simulated and real world images. An
        interesting direction for future work would be to apply ALP to real robots that explore and
        learn in the real-world, and investigate performance and generalization in these settings.
      • We primarily run experiments using a relatively simple action space (forward, left, right).
        Intuitively, more fine-grained information about actions may better inform an agent about
        the world and could aid in learning better representations for downstream tasks. As such,
        a possible direction for future work would be to investigate using our training paradigm in
        simulators with more diverse action spaces, or on real robots.
      • Another avenue for future work would be to explore bootstrapping our learning paradigm
        using pretrained models or other offline datasets, such as large collections of videos or
        images scraped from the web. It could also leverage data collected by other policies by
        pretraining exploration agents with an offline RL method, such as CQL Kumar et al. (2020),
        then further train online for better active learning. This could help agents more quickly
        learn to collect diverse data for downstream finetuning.


                                                  9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT
We describe experimental setups, implementation details, and hyperparameter values in Appendix
B, and include source code as part of the supplementary material.

R EFERENCES
Pulkit Agrawal, Ashvin V Nair, Pieter Abbeel, Jitendra Malik, and Sergey Levine. Learning to poke
  by poking: Experiential learning of intuitive physics. Advances in neural information processing
  systems, 29, 2016.
Iro Armeni, Zhi-Yang He, JunYoung Gwak, Amir R Zamir, Martin Fischer, Jitendra Malik, and
   Silvio Savarese. 3d scene graph: A structure for unified semantics, 3d space, and camera. In
   Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision, pp. 5664–5673, 2019.
Yuri Burda, Harrison Edwards, Amos Storkey, and Oleg Klimov. Exploration by random network
  distillation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.12894, 2018.
Yuri Burda, Harri Edwards, Deepak Pathak, Amos Storkey, Trevor Darrell, and Alexei A. Efros.
  Large-scale study of curiosity-driven learning. In ICLR, 2019.
Devendra Singh Chaplot, Dhiraj Gandhi, Saurabh Gupta, Abhinav Gupta, and Ruslan Salakhutdi-
  nov. Learning to explore using active neural slam. In International Conference on Learning
  Representations (ICLR), 2020a.
Devendra Singh Chaplot, Dhiraj Prakashchand Gandhi, Abhinav Gupta, and Russ R Salakhutdinov.
  Object goal navigation using goal-oriented semantic exploration. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 33:4247–4258, 2020b.
Devendra Singh Chaplot, Helen Jiang, Saurabh Gupta, and Abhinav Gupta. Semantic curiosity for
  active visual learning. In Computer Vision–ECCV 2020: 16th European Conference, Glasgow,
  UK, August 23–28, 2020, Proceedings, Part VI 16, pp. 309–326. Springer, 2020c.
Devendra Singh Chaplot, Murtaza Dalal, Saurabh Gupta, Jitendra Malik, and Russ R Salakhutdinov.
  Seal: Self-supervised embodied active learning using exploration and 3d consistency. Advances
  in neural information processing systems, 34:13086–13098, 2021.
Ting Chen, Simon Kornblith, Mohammad Norouzi, and Geoffrey Hinton. A simple framework for
  contrastive learning of visual representations. In International conference on machine learning,
  pp. 1597–1607. PMLR, 2020a.
Ting Chen, Simon Kornblith, Kevin Swersky, Mohammad Norouzi, and Geoffrey E Hinton. Big
  self-supervised models are strong semi-supervised learners. Advances in neural information pro-
  cessing systems, 33:22243–22255, 2020b.
Jang Hyun Cho, Utkarsh Mall, Kavita Bala, and Bharath Hariharan. Picie: Unsupervised semantic
  segmentation using invariance and equivariance in clustering. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
  Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 16794–16804, 2021.
Carl Doersch, Abhinav Gupta, and Alexei A Efros. Unsupervised visual representation learning by
  context prediction. In Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on computer vision, pp.
  1422–1430, 2015.
Alexey Dosovitskiy, Lucas Beyer, Alexander Kolesnikov, Dirk Weissenborn, Xiaohua Zhai, Thomas
  Unterthiner, Mostafa Dehghani, Matthias Minderer, Georg Heigold, Sylvain Gelly, Jakob Uszko-
  reit, and Neil Houlsby. An image is worth 16x16 words: Transformers for image recognition at
  scale. 2020. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2010.11929. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2010.
  11929.
Yilun Du, Chuang Gan, and Phillip Isola. Curious representation learning for embodied intel-
  ligence. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pp.
  10408–10417, 2021.


                                               10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Andreas Eitel, Nico Hauff, and Wolfram Burgard. Self-supervised transfer learning for instance
  segmentation through physical interaction. In 2019 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intel-
  ligent Robots and Systems (IROS), pp. 4020–4026. IEEE, 2019.
Zhaoyuan Fang, Ayush Jain, Gabriel Sarch, Adam W Harley, and Katerina Fragkiadaki. Move to
  see better: Self-improving embodied object detection. arXiv preprint arXiv:2012.00057, 2020.
Justin Fu, John Co-Reyes, and Sergey Levine. Ex2: Exploration with exemplar models for deep
  reinforcement learning. Advances in neural information processing systems, 30, 2017.
Spyros Gidaris, Praveer Singh, and Nikos Komodakis. Unsupervised representation learning by
  predicting image rotations. arXiv preprint arXiv:1803.07728, 2018.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image recog-
  nition. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp.
  770–778, 2016.
Kaiming He, Georgia Gkioxari, Piotr Dollár, and Ross Girshick. Mask r-cnn. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE international conference on computer vision, pp. 2961–2969, 2017.
Kaiming He, Haoqi Fan, Yuxin Wu, Saining Xie, and Ross Girshick. Momentum contrast for
  unsupervised visual representation learning. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on
  computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 9729–9738, 2020.
Kaiming He, Xinlei Chen, Saining Xie, Yanghao Li, Piotr Dollár, and Ross Girshick. Masked au-
  toencoders are scalable vision learners. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
  Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 16000–16009, 2022.
Richard Held and Alan Hein. Movement-produced stimulation in the development of visually guided
  behavior. Journal of comparative and physiological psychology, 56(5):872, 1963.
Eric Jang, Coline Devin, Vincent Vanhoucke, and Sergey Levine. Grasp2vec: Learning object
  representations from self-supervised grasping. arXiv preprint arXiv:1811.06964, 2018.
Dinesh Jayaraman and Kristen Grauman. Learning image representations tied to ego-motion. In
  Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 1413–1421, 2015.
Diederik P. Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization, 2014. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/1412.6980.
Aviral Kumar, Aurick Zhou, George Tucker, and Sergey Levine. Conservative q-learning for offline
  reinforcement learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:1179–1191,
  2020.
Tsung-Yi Lin, Piotr Dollár, Ross Girshick, Kaiming He, Bharath Hariharan, and Serge Belongie.
  Feature pyramid networks for object detection. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on com-
  puter vision and pattern recognition, pp. 2117–2125, 2017.
Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter. Sgdr: Stochastic gradient descent with warm restarts, 2016. URL
   https://arxiv.org/abs/1608.03983.
Jean-Arcady Meyer and Stewart W. Wilson. A Possibility for Implementing Curiosity and Boredom
  in Model-Building Neural Controllers, pp. 222–227. 1991.
Tushar Nagarajan and Kristen Grauman. Learning affordance landscapes for interaction exploration
  in 3d environments. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:2005–2015, 2020.
Mehdi Noroozi and Paolo Favaro. Unsupervised learning of visual representations by solving jigsaw
 puzzles. In Computer Vision–ECCV 2016: 14th European Conference, Amsterdam, The Nether-
 lands, October 11-14, 2016, Proceedings, Part VI, pp. 69–84. Springer, 2016.
Aaron van den Oord, Yazhe Li, and Oriol Vinyals. Representation learning with contrastive predic-
  tive coding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1807.03748, 2018.


                                               11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Deepak Pathak, Pulkit Agrawal, Alexei A. Efros, and Trevor Darrell. Curiosity-driven exploration
  by self-supervised prediction. In ICML, 2017a.
Deepak Pathak, Ross Girshick, Piotr Dollár, Trevor Darrell, and Bharath Hariharan. Learning fea-
  tures by watching objects move. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and
  pattern recognition, pp. 2701–2710, 2017b.
Deepak Pathak, Yide Shentu, Dian Chen, Pulkit Agrawal, Trevor Darrell, Sergey Levine, and Jiten-
  dra Malik. Learning instance segmentation by interaction. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference
  on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Workshops, pp. 2042–2045, 2018.
Lerrel Pinto, Dhiraj Gandhi, Yuanfeng Han, Yong-Lae Park, and Abhinav Gupta. The curious robot:
  Learning visual representations via physical interactions. In Computer Vision–ECCV 2016: 14th
  European Conference, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, October 11-14, 2016, Proceedings, Part II
  14, pp. 3–18. Springer, 2016.
Santhosh K Ramakrishnan, Tushar Nagarajan, Ziad Al-Halah, and Kristen Grauman. Environment
  predictive coding for embodied agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.02337, 2021.
Olga Russakovsky, Jia Deng, Hao Su, Jonathan Krause, Sanjeev Satheesh, Sean Ma, Zhiheng
  Huang, Andrej Karpathy, Aditya Khosla, Michael Bernstein, et al. Imagenet large scale visual
  recognition challenge. International journal of computer vision, 115:211–252, 2015.
Manolis Savva, Abhishek Kadian, Oleksandr Maksymets, Yili Zhao, Erik Wijmans, Bhavana Jain,
 Julian Straub, Jia Liu, Vladlen Koltun, Jitendra Malik, et al. Habitat: A platform for embodied
 ai research. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision, pp.
 9339–9347, 2019.
John Schulman, Philipp Moritz, Sergey Levine, Michael Jordan, and Pieter Abbeel. High-
  dimensional continuous control using generalized advantage estimation, 2015. URL https:
  //arxiv.org/abs/1506.02438.
John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy
  optimization algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347, 2017.
Bradly C Stadie, Sergey Levine, and Pieter Abbeel. Incentivizing exploration in reinforcement
  learning with deep predictive models. arXiv preprint arXiv:1507.00814, 2015.
Adam Stooke, Kimin Lee, Pieter Abbeel, and Michael Laskin. Decoupling representation learning
  from reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 9870–9879.
  PMLR, 2021.
Wouter Van Gansbeke, Simon Vandenhende, Stamatios Georgoulis, and Luc Van Gool. Unsu-
 pervised semantic segmentation by contrasting object mask proposals. In Proceedings of the
 IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 10052–10062, 2021.
Xiaolong Wang and Abhinav Gupta. Unsupervised learning of visual representations using videos.
  In Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on computer vision, pp. 2794–2802, 2015.
Yuan Wang, Wei Zhuo, Yucong Li, Zhi Wang, Qi Ju, and Wenwu Zhu. Fully self-supervised learning
  for semantic segmentation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.11981, 2022.
Erik Wijmans, Abhishek Kadian, Ari Morcos, Stefan Lee, Irfan Essa, Devi Parikh, Manolis Savva,
  and Dhruv Batra. Dd-ppo: Learning near-perfect pointgoal navigators from 2.5 billion frames.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:1911.00357, 2019.
Fei Xia, Amir R. Zamir, Zhi-Yang He, Alexander Sax, Jitendra Malik, and Silvio Savarese. Gibson
  env: real-world perception for embodied agents. In Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
  (CVPR), 2018 IEEE Conference on. IEEE, 2018.
Enze Xie, Jian Ding, Wenhai Wang, Xiaohang Zhan, Hang Xu, Peize Sun, Zhenguo Li, and Ping
  Luo. Detco: Unsupervised contrastive learning for object detection. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 8392–8401, 2021.


                                               12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Joel Ye, Dhruv Batra, Erik Wijmans, and Abhishek Das. Auxiliary tasks speed up learning point
  goal navigation. In Conference on Robot Learning, pp. 498–516. PMLR, 2021.
Richard Zhang, Phillip Isola, and Alexei A Efros. Colorful image colorization. In Computer Vision–
  ECCV 2016: 14th European Conference, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, October 11-14, 2016,
  Proceedings, Part III 14, pp. 649–666. Springer, 2016.


A PPENDIX

A    ACTIVE E XPLORATION WITH I NTRINSIC M OTIVATION
Intuitively, our active exploration process in ALP needs to explore the environment to gather in-
formative and diverse observations for both representation learning and downstream tasks. In our
experiments, we adopt two existing methods that measure novelty of state visitations as intrinsic
rewards and use reinforcement learning (RL) algorithm to train our agent.
Novelty-based Reward. To efficiently compute intrinsic reward from high dimensional pixel space,
we measure novelty in lower dimensional feature space from visual representation as an empirical
estimate. We use a visual encoder f to extract features from RGB observations and use them to
compute reward.
Random Network Distillation (RND) Burda et al. (2018) contains a randomly initialized fixed target
network g and optimizes a trainable prediction network g trained on data collected by the agent to
minimize MSE regression error. Intuitively, function approximation error is expected to be higher
on novel unseen states and thus encourages the agent to gather diverse observations. Given a visual
encoder f , its novelty-based reward on observation at timestep t is computed by r(ot ) = ∥g(f (ot ))−
g(f (ot ))∥2 .
Curious Representation Learning (CRL) Du et al. (2021) designs a reward function specifically ben-
eficial for contrastive loss on visual inputs. Given a family of  data augmentations   T , its novel-based
reward is computed by r(ot ) = 1 − sim g(f (õ1t )), g(f (õ2t )) , where õ1t , õ2t are two transformed
pairs of ot sampled from transformations T and sim(u, v) is the dot product similarity metric. Vi-
sual encoder f and projection network g is trained on observations visited by the agent to minimize
popular InfoNCE loss Chen et al. (2020a) with data augmentations. Following previous works Du
et al. (2021); Chen et al. (2020a), we define T to consist of horizontal flips, random resized crops,
and color saturation using their default hyperparameters.
Learning Policy. In practice, we use DD-PPO Wijmans et al. (2019), a distributed version of PPO
Schulman et al. (2017) to better scale training in high dimensional complex visual environments.
Following previous works Burda et al. (2019), we normalize rewards by the standard deviation of
past observed rewards to ensure that reward magnitudes are relatively stable. We train agents with
20 parallel threads, where each environment thread is randomly sampled from training split scenes
as specified in Table B.2. The agent is initialized from a randomly sampled location with a random
rotation at the beginning of each training episode.


                                                   13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B     E XPERIMENTAL D ETAILS
B.1    A LGORITHM D ETAILS

We present pseudocode describing the process of our ALP framework in Algorithm 1.

B.2    E NVIRONMENT D ETAILS

We provide the list of scenes in train split and test split from Gibson Xia et al. (2018) dataset as
follows:

                                    Train Split                                    Test Split
         Allensville   Forkland     Leonardo           Newfields    Shelbyville   Collierville
        Beechwood       Hanson     Lindenwood           Onagac      Stockmanc      Corozal
        Benevolence    Hiteman      Marstons           Pinesdale      Tolstoy      Darden
          Coffeen      Klickitat     Merom              Pomaria      Wainscott    Markleeville
          Cosmos       Lakeville   Mifflinburg         Ranchester   Woodbine      Wiconisco


Algorithm 1 ALP
    Input: Environment E, Online rollout buffer B, Data buffer D, Intrinsic reward r(o), Policy πθ
    with its visual encoder Mrepr as representation learning model
    Output: Representation learning model Mrepr , Downstream training samples D
    Initialize B, D ← ∅, ∅
    while not converged do
       // Collect observations from environments using policy πθ
       for each timestep t do
          ot = get obs(E), at = πθ (ot ), ot+1 = step(E, ot , at )
          // Relabel transitions with intrinsic rewards r(ot )
          B ← B ∪ {τt = (ot , at , ot+1 , r(ot ))}
       end for
       // Update representation learning model Mrepr and exploration policy πθ
       Update Mrepr with LIDM (Mrepr , B)
       Update πθ with LPPO (πθ , B)
       Update reward network r(o) with Lreward (B) (we optimize either RND loss or CRL loss in our
       experiments)
       // Collect training samples for downstream tasks
       if record labeled data then
          Randomly sample a small subset from current rollout buffer {(ximage , ylabel )} ∼ B
          D ← D ∪ {(ximage , ylabel )}
       end if
       Empty online rollout buffer B ← ∅
    end while


                                                  14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B.3   I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS

To train exploration policy, we use the open-source implementation of DD-PPO baseline Wij-
mans et al. (2019) from the Habitat simulator https://github.com/facebookresearch/
habitat-lab. To train downstream perception models, we use the open-source implementation
from Detectron2 library https://github.com/facebookresearch/detectron2 with
its default architectures and supervised learning objectives. We provide implementation details of
each method and baseline as follows and a full list of hyperparameters can be found in Table 14:
Implementation details for ALP:

      • Model architectures. In exploration policy, following previous works Wijmans et al.
        (2019), we use a simplified version of agent architecture without the navigation goal en-
        coder. For RGB observations we use a first layer of 2 × 2-AvgPool to reduce resolution,
        essentially performing low-pass filtering and down-sampling, before passing into the visual
        encoder Mrepr with output dimension of 2048. This visual feature is concatenated with
        an embedding of the previous action taken and is then passed into LSTM. The output of
        LSTM is used as input to a fully connected layer, resulting in a soft-max distribution of the
        action space as policy and an estimate of the value function.
        In IDM, our projection head hproj is a 2-layer MLP network with an input dimension of
        2048, a hidden dimension of 512, and an output dimension of 512; our prediction network
        hIDM is a MLP with an input dimension of 512 × (num-steps + 1), 2 hidden layers with
        512 units, and an output dimension of 3 × num-steps. Then the output layer is chunked by
        every 3 units, same as dimension of our action space, as predicted logits of IDM.
        We adopt commonly used architectures for each perception task: for object detection and
        instance segmentation, we use a Mask-RCNN He et al. (2017) using Feature Pyramid Net-
        works Lin et al. (2017) with a ResNet-50 He et al. (2016) as Mrepr ; for depth estima-
        tion, we use a Vit-B/16 vision transformer encoder-decoder architecture Dosovitskiy et al.
        (2020) with its encoder as Mrepr .
      • Pre-training details. To train exploration policy, we use Generalized Advantage Estima-
        tion (GAE) Schulman et al. (2015), a discount factor of γ = 0.99, and a GAE parameter
        of λ = 0.95. Each individual episode has a maximum length of 512 steps. Each parallel
        worker collects 64 frames of rollouts and then performs 4 epochs of PPO with 2 mini-
        batches per epoch. We use Adam optimizer Kingma & Ba (2014) with a learning rate of
        2.5 × 10−4 . Following previous work Wijmans et al. (2019), we do not normalize advan-
        tages as in baseline implementations.
        To train IDM, we use Adam optimizer Kingma & Ba (2014) with a learning rate of 2.5 ×
        10−4 . Given 64 frames of rollouts, we perform 4 epochs of gradient updates by using all
        frames to compute the average prediction loss at each iteration.
      • Fine-tuning details. To sample a small subset of annotated images from all explored
        trajectories, we randomly sample 100 annotated images per scene from online batches of
        rollouts 100 times equally spreaded throughout policy training. We then save them as a
        fixed static dataset to further train downstream perception models.
        For Mask-RCNN, we use batch size of 32, learning rate of 0.02, resolution of 256 for
        supervised learning until convergence, roughly around 120k training steps and pick the
        model checkpoint with better performance. For ViT, we use a transformer decoder with 8
        attention heads and 6 decoder layers, and train for 10 epochs using the AdamW optimizer
        with a learning rate of 0.0001 and cosine annealing.

Implementation details for visual representation learning baselines:

      • CRL. Our CRL Du et al. (2021) baseline as visual representation learning method are based
        on open source implementation available at https://github.com/yilundu/crl.
        For Matterport3D CRL baseline, we use its publicly released pretrained weights in ResNet-
        50 architecture. For Gibson CRL baseline, we use the same set of hyperparameters as re-
        ported in its original setups and pretrain in our environments for 8M frames. We found that
        given the fixed downstream dataset, pretrained representation from our reproduced experi-
        ments in Gibson generally achieve better performance, possibly due to more in-distribution


                                                15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


        training data. We thus report all experimental results using our pretrained weights from
        Gibson environments.
      • ImageNet SimCLR. For Mask-RCNN results, we tried both SimCLRv1 Chen et al.
        (2020a) and SimCLRv2 Chen et al. (2020b) checkpoints from https://github.com/
        google-research/simclr with ResNet-50 architecture same as ours and found that
        SimCLRv2 achieves better performance. We thus report all experiment results from Sim-
        CLRv2 pretrained weights. For transformers, we pretrain on ImageNet ILSVRC-2012 Rus-
        sakovsky et al. (2015) with a batch size of 256 for 30 epochs. We use the Adam optimizer
        Kingma & Ba (2014) with a learning rate of 0.0003 and cosine annealing Loshchilov &
        Hutter (2016).
      • ImageNet Supervised.        We use ResNet-50 and ViT-B/16 weights pretrained
        for ImageNet classification task available at https://dl.fbaipublicfiles.
        com/detectron2/ImageNetPretrained/MSRA/R-50.pkl and https://
        download.pytorch.org/models/vit_b_16-c867db91.pth, respectively.
      • Architectures in self-supervised contrastive learning baselines. For self-supervised con-
        trastive learning baselines compared to ALP, we train a separate network with same archi-
        tecture as visual backbone in ALP for baseline comparison. For SimCLR, we use a 2-layer
        MLP projection head with hidden dimensions of 256 and output dimensions of 128 and
        temperature hyperparameter τ = 0.07 to compute contrastive loss. For CPC, we use a
        MLP projection head and a forward prediction MLP both with hidden dimension of 256
        and output dimension of 128 to compute contrastive loss. We use same learning rate as
        ALP framework 2.5 × 10−4 to optimize contrastive loss.

Implementation details for downstream data collection baselines:

      • RND. Our RND Burda et al. (2018) baseline is based on open sourced implementa-
        tion available at https://github.com/rll-research/url_benchmark and
        extends to pixel input. We train separate networks for exploration policy and reward model,
        both with ResNet-50 architecture. For both RND-ALP and RND, we use a 2-layer MLP
        projection head with hidden dimensions of 512 and output dimensions of 64 to compute
        reward and to minimize MSE loss. We use the same sampling scheme as in ALP to ran-
        domly sample a small subset of annotated images per scene from its explored trajectories
        as downstream task dataset.
      • CRL. CRL Du et al. (2021) could also be interpreted as an exploration strategy in addition
        to an active visual representation learning approach. As proposed in its original setups, we
        train separate networks for exploration policy and representation learning model, both with
        ResNet-50 architecture. For both CRL-ALP and CRL, we use a 2-layer MLP projection
        head with hidden dimensions of 128 and output dimensions of 128 and temperature hyper-
        parameter τ = 0.07 to compute reward and to minimize contrastive loss. We use the same
        sampling scheme as in ALP to randomly sample a small subset of annotated images per
        scene from its explored trajectories as downstream task dataset.
      • ANS. ANS Chaplot et al. (2020a) is a hierarchical modular policy for coverage-based ex-
        ploration. It builds a spatial top-down map and learns a higher-level global policy to select
        waypoints in the top-down map space to maximize area coverage. Note that ANS per-
        forms depth-based occupancy mapping and assumes sensor pose readings, instead of using
        only RGB as in our case. Our ANS baseline is based on open sourced implementation
        available at https://github.com/devendrachaplot/Neural-SLAM. For bet-
        ter adaptations, we finetune its pretrained ANS policy in our train split scenes as specified
        in Table B.2 using its original hyperparameters. We randomly sample a small subset of
        annotated images from its explored trajectories as downstream task dataset. We generally
        found that finetuning improves downstream performance of self-supervised visual repre-
        sentations (RND-ALP and ImagNet SimCLR), except that for ImageNet supervised pre-
        trained weights, using pretrained policy achieves better performance (+5.91 in Test Split).


                                                16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C     A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS

C.1   Q UANTITATIVE R ESULTS

Compare to self-supervised contrastive learning methods. We provide additional experimental
results comparing CRL-ALP with self-supervised contrastive learning methods on the same unla-
beled pretraining and labeled downstream dataset. Note that CRL exploration policy is trained to
maximize reward inverse proportional to contrastive loss and thus able to find images that are par-
ticularly useful for SimCLR. Table 7 however shows that CRL-ALP improves performance from
baseline by only learning from action information.

                                            Train Split              Test Split
                    Method               ObjDet    InstSeg       ObjDet      InstSeg
                    SimCLR (FrScr)       77.90         75.06       40.65       36.44
                    CRL-ALP (ours)       83.14         79.24       42.42       36.89

Table 7: Results of comparing to self-supervised contrastive learning methods. CRL-ALP out-
performs self-supervised learning baselines under same pretraining and downstream dataset, without
including any form of contrastive loss.


Compare visual representation learning qualities. We provide additional experimental results
comparing our method to visual representation learning baselines. In Table 8 , perception models
initialized from all visual representations are trained on the same downstream dataset collected from
random policy or from Active Neural SLAM policy. We also include performance of CRL-ALP in
addition to RND-ALP.
While ImageNet pretrained model generally performs the best compared to simulator pretraining,
ALP still performs better than other simulator-pretrained visual representations. This is significant
since we do not use any form of contrastive loss to learn visual representations but only consider
different forms of supervisions from active movements.

                                                               Train Split             Test Split
      Downstream Data     Pretrained Representation       ObjDet      InstSeg     ObjDet     InstSeg
                          From Scratch                     73.65       70.87       28.10      22.99
                          CRL (MP3D)                       77.30       73.81       40.78      36.12
                          CRL (Gibson)                     76.60       73.10       50.72      43.79
      ANS                 ImageNet SimCLR                  77.47       74.86       47.92      41.42
                          RND-ALP (ours)                   75.59       71.37       47.95      41.09
                          CRL-ALP (ours)                   76.98       73.05       51.56      46.43
                          ImageNet Supervised              80.08       76.14       43.79      36.31
                          From Scratch                     56.22       53.31       29.67      27.28
                          CRL (MP3D)                       58.30       53.52       33.82      30.90
                          CRL (Gibson)                     60.52       56.39       37.45      32.12
      Random Policy       ImageNet SimCLR                  64.94       61.26       43.29      37.84
                          RND-ALP (ours)                   60.36       55.74       38.46      34.16
                          CRL-ALP (ours)                   62.16       57.20       40.16      33.14
                          ImageNet Supervised              65.58       62.66       43.59      39.80
                          RND-ALP (ours)                   87.95       84.56       50.34      46.74
      RND-ALP (ours)
                          CRL-ALP (ours)                   88.73       84.78       49.32      43.06

Table 8: Results of comparing visual representation baselines. Performance of finetuning RND-
ALP, CRL-ALP, and all pretrained visual representation baselines on the same downstream dataset.



                                                  17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Compare downstream data collection qualities. We provide additional experimental results
comparing our method with various downstream data collection baselines. In particular, we finetune
ImageNet SimCLR or supervised pretrained models and on different downstream data collection
baselines. Table 9 shows that RND-ALP collects better downstream data for perception models
initialized with different pretrained weights.
Since ANS uses a hierarchical modular architecture and trains a global and a local policy, this is dif-
ferent from training a single policy architecture end-to-end in learning-based exploration methods.
We generally found that there are fewer object masks corresponding to samples collected from ANS
(257k) compared to RND (284k) or CRL (302k), among 250k image-label pairs collected from each
exploration policy.

                                                                Train Split                Test Split
      Pretrained Representation    Downstream Data         ObjDet      InstSeg     ObjDet        InstSeg
                                   RND                      85.55       82.17       42.89         40.86
                                   CRL                      82.51       79.05       42.49         38.93
      ImageNet SimCLR
                                   ANS                      77.47       74.86       47.92         41.42
                                   RND-ALP (ours)           87.22       83.50       50.66         46.55
                                   RND                      87.15       83.34       48.13         42.20
                                   CRL                      84.28       80.79       46.95         41.75
      ImageNet supervised
                                   ANS                      80.08       76.14       43.79         36.31
                                   RND-ALP (ours)           88.75       85.51       52.78         46.94

Table 9: Results of comparing downstream data collection baselines. Performance of finetuning
the same pretrained representations from ImageNet SimCLR (top) and ImageNet supervised (bot-
tom) on each data collection method.


Number of timesteps in inverse dynamics prediction. We provide additional experimental re-
sults by varying number of timesteps in IDM when training with CRL-ALP and observe its effects
on downstream performance in Table 10.

                                        Train Split                           Test Split
          Number of Steps      ObjDet    InstSeg      DepEst      ObjDet       InstSeg      DepEst
                  4            80.63      77.30         0.259       43.97       37.09        0.352
                  8            83.14      79.24         0.261       42.42       36.89        0.350

Table 10: Number of timesteps in inverse dynamics model (IDM). We vary lengths of input ob-
servation sequence and predicted action sequence when training inverse dynamics model to observe
its effect on downstream performance of CRL-ALP.


Variance across multiple runs. We try to understand variance across multiple runs given the
same pretrained representation and the same downstream data. Specifically, we initialize Mask-
RCNN with the pretrained representation and finetune on the labeled dataset both from RND-ALP.
Results over 3 runs in Table 11 shows consistent evaluation performance.

C.2    Q UALITATIVE E XAMPLES

In Figure 3, we provide additional visualizations of episode trajectories; each line represents policy
rollout trajectories in the same house of Habitat environment. We observe that learned exploration
policy learned from RND and CRL baseline shows wider coverage of maps and longer movements
when combined with ALP, visually demonstrating better exploration policy from ALP framework.
We include corresponding videos in the supplementary material.


                                                   18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                             Train Split                           Test Split
                      ObjDet             InstSeg          ObjDet            InstSeg
                       87.95             84.56             50.34                46.74
                       87.30             83.05             49.35                47.65
                       88.19             84.06             50.79                46.36
                   87.81 ± 0.46     83.89 ± 0.77        50.16 ± 0.74     46.92 ± 0.67

Table 11: Variance across multiple runs. We report downstream model performance with their
mean and standard deviation over 3 runs, given the same pretrained representation and the same
downstream dataset from RND-ALP.


      (a) CRL                     (b) RND                   (c) CRL-ALP                 (d) RND-ALP

Figure 3: Episode trajectories of policies trained with exploration baselines and combined with our
method on a Habitat environment. Both RND and CRL shows wider coverage of maps and longer
movements when combined with ALP.


D     C ONTRASTIVE L EARNING AS PART OF T RAINING O BJECTIVE
We also investigated including contrastive loss as self-supervised visual representation learning ob-
jective and provide more details below.

D.1   M ETHOD

In principle, we could use any representation learning objective suitable for learning visual represen-
tations in a self-supervised manner. In particular, we utilize CPC Oord et al. (2018) when combining
with RND exploration method, one of popular contrastive learning approaches Chen et al. (2020a);
Stooke et al. (2021), since observations from temporally closer frames should be closer in visual
representation space than further frames or observations from different environments. We utilize
SimCLR Chen et al. (2020a) with data augmentations when combined with CRL, since this is easier
to integrate with its original framework that already introduces a self-supervised loss.
Given our representation learning model Mrepr and projection head hcon , we encode each obser-
vation frame o into its latent representation z = hcon (Mrepr (o)), and minimize InfoNCE loss as
training objective:


                                            N
                                         1 X         exp (sim(zi , zi+ ))
                         Lcontrast = −         log PN
                                         N i=1      j=1 exp (sim(zi , zj+ ))



                                                   19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


where sim(u, v) = v T u is dot product similarity metric between feature vectors. For CPC, pos-
itive samples come from temporally close frames within 4 steps and negative samples come from
observations in other paralleled training environments. For SimCLR, positive samples come from
two augmented pairs of the same image and negative samples come from augmented views from
different images.
We modify a few design choices when including contrastive loss in order to improve compute and
memory efficiency. To train inverse dynamics model, we optimize cross-entropy loss based on pre-
dicted action between two consecutive frames, i.e. hIDM (at |ot , ot+1 ), instead of training on sequence
of observations and actions. The visual encoder f to compute intrinsic rewards is a momentum en-
coder He et al. (2020) that parameterizes a slow moving average of weights from our representation
learning model Mrepr . We leave more complicated architectures as future investigations.

                                         Train Split                          Test Split
          Method               ObjDet     InstSeg        DepEst     ObjDet     InstSeg      DepEst
          CRL                   79.61      76.42         0.265      40.81       34.24        0.352
          CRL-ALP (ours)        80.84      77.44         0.262      44.23       37.60        0.354
          RND                   83.65      81.01         0.251      37.13       34.10        0.366
          RND-ALP (ours)        87.78      84.12         0.239      48.63       45.80        0.308

Table 12: Results of combining ALP (including contrastive loss) with different exploration methods.
We combine our method with two exploration strategies, RND and CRL, and compare performance
of downstream perception model with baselines.


D.2   E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS

We perform similar sets of experiments on ALP framework including contrastive loss. We show that
including contrastive loss as self-supervised training objective achieves similarly good performance.
In Table 12, we report results when combining our framework with two learning-based exploration
methods, RND and CRL. We observe much improvements in downstream performance compared
to baselines, and are consistent under different exploration strategies. In Table 13, we report full re-
sults comparing our framework RND-ALP with visual representation baselines and data collection
baselines respectively. RND-ALP outperforms other baselines in downstream perception tasks; it
performs similar or even better than ImageNet supervised pretraining without access to any super-
visions from semantic labels. Thus this indicates significant benefits of learning signals from active
environment interactions in learning better visual representations.

  Pretrained           Downstream                Train Split                            Test Split
  Representation       Data             ObjDet      InstSeg       DepEst     ObjDet      InstSeg     DepEst
  From Scratch                           83.50      79.65         0.327      36.05         30.57     0.524
  CRL                                    85.06      81.54         0.263      45.95         42.53     0.351
  ImgNet SimCLR        RND-ALP           86.38      83.40         0.257      45.26         37.07     0.349
  ImgNet Sup                             86.99      84.28         0.244      48.53         43.40     0.340
  RND-ALP                                87.78      84.12         0.239      48.63         45.80     0.308
                       RND               86.36      82.03         0.245      42.37         36.10     0.342
                       CRL               83.12      79.43         0.274      40.76         34.43     0.365
  RND-ALP
                       ANS               75.35      71.73           -        48.43         42.62       -
                       RND-ALP           87.78      84.12         0.239      48.63         45.80     0.308

Table 13: Results of comparing pretrained visual representations and downstream data collection
baselines. We fix either visual representation or labeled dataset from RND-ALP (ours including
contrastive loss) and compare downstream performance to all baselines respectively.


                                                    20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                  Hyperparameter                     Value
                  Observation                        (256, 256), RGB
                  Downsample layer                   AveragePooling (2, 2)
                  Hidden size (LSTM)                 512
                  Optimizer                          Adam
                  Learning rate of πθ                2.5 × 10−4
                  Learning rate annealing            Linear
                  Rollout buffer length              64
                  PPO epochs                         4
                  PPO mini-batches                   2
                  Discount γ                         0.99
                  GAE λ                              0.95
                  Normalize advantage                False
                  Entropy coefficient                0.01
                  Value loss term coefficient        0.5
                  Maximum norm of gradient           0.5
                  Clipping ϵ                         0.1 with linear annealing
                  Learning rate of reward network    1 × 10−4
                  Optimizer                          Adam
                  Learning rate of IDM               2.5 × 10−4
                  Optimizer                          Adam
                  Number of timesteps                8
                  IDM epochs                         4
                  Projection network                 [512]
                  Prediction network                 [512, 512]

Table 14: Hyperparameters for training exploration policy and representation learning model. We
follow previous works Wijmans et al. (2019); Du et al. (2021) as close as possible.


                                                21
