S UMMARY M IXING : A L INEAR -C OMPLEXITY A LTER -
NATIVE TO S ELF -ATTENTION FOR S PEECH R ECOGNI -
TION AND U NDERSTANDING

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT
         Modern speech processing systems rely on self-attention. Unfortunately, token
         mixing with self-attention takes quadratic time in the length of the speech utterance,
         slowing down inference as well as training and increasing memory consumption.
         Cheaper alternatives to self-attention for ASR have been developed, but they fail
         to consistently reach the same level of accuracy. This paper, therefore, proposes a
         novel linear-time alternative to self-attention. It summarises an utterance with the
         mean over vectors for all time steps. This single summary is then combined with
         time-specific information. We call this method “SummaryMixing”. Introducing
         SummaryMixing in state-of-the-art ASR models makes it feasible to preserve or
         exceed previous speech recognition performance while lowering the training and
         inference times by up to 28% and reducing the memory budget by a factor of two.
         The benefits of SummaryMixing can also be generalized to other speech-processing
         tasks, such as speech understanding.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Automatic speech recognition (ASR) has greatly benefited from deep learning, reaching unprece-
dented levels of accuracy and enabling a number of successful products to support real-life use cases
(Nassif et al., 2019; Arasteh et al., 2016). ASR systems have followed the general trend in deep
learning and increased steadily both in model size and complexity to push recognition accuracies.
Modern industry-scale ASR models often contain hundreds of millions or even billions of neural
parameters (Radford et al., 2022). Training these models, however, often requires high amount of
GPU hours and results in large carbon footprint (Parcollet & Ravanelli, 2021). Resource-efficient
deployment and fast inference are also important factors, especially for on-device scenarios (Arasteh
et al., 2016). Thus, this paper focuses on improving the efficiency of speech processing models.
At the core of current state-of-the-art (SOTA) speech systems are multi-head self-attention (MHSA)
cells (Vaswani et al., 2017b). MHSA learns interactions between pairs of frames originating from
the speech signal, and the interaction is also referred to as token mixing. MHSA has helped to reach
SOTA performance in most speech models (Gulati et al., 2020; Peng et al., 2022; Baevski et al.,
2020). On the other hand, considering each pair of frames takes quadratic time in the input sequence
length. MHSA is therefore costly, particularly for long sequences.
Recent works pointed out that under some conditions, expensive pair-wise self-attention operations
may behave like linear operations for SOTA speech recognition models. For example, Zhang
et al. (2021b) first showed that the upper encoder layers in trained Transformer-based ASR models
behave like feed-forward layers, which is also verified by Shim et al. (2022) for Conformer models.
Furthermore, Peng et al. (2022) demonstrated that the attention matrices of trained Branchformer
models tend to have diagonality scores (Zhang et al., 2021b) near 0.5. The definition of diagonality
scores by Zhang et al. (2021b) implies that a 0.5 diagonality score means that the attention weights
are distributed uniformly, and therefore, that a simple average could achieve a similar token mixing.
Therefore, inspired by HyperMixer (Mai et al., 2023) this work introduces a linear-time alternative
to self-attention not relying on pair-wise interactions. Instead, it summarises a whole utterance as a
mean over separate contributions for all time steps. The obtained summary is then fed back to each
individual time step. We call this method “SummaryMixing”.


                                                   1
Our proposed SummaryMixing1 achieves a training time reduction of up to 28% and exhibits
a stable real-time factor compared to a quadratic increase in latency for MHSA with utterance
length. SummaryMixing also halves the memory consumption at training and decoding times in
comparison with MHSA, and reaches the performance of SOTA ASR systems on five datasets of
different languages and acoustic conditions (Section 3). These findings are extended to other speech
understanding tasks including spoken language understanding (SLU) and keyword spotting (KWS).
To the best of our knowledge, it is the first time a linear-time method matches or surpasses the
performance of MHSA for speech-processing tasks across various scenarios.

1.1       R ELATED WORK

Numerous existing efficient attention mechanisms attempt to re-create the original behavior of
self-attention but at a lower training cost. For instance, active research directions include low-rank
approximation (Tay et al., 2022), linearization (Wang et al., 2020), or sparsification (Child et al., 2019)
of self-attention. In the context of ASR, the squeezeformer (Kim et al., 2022), the efficient conformer
(Burchi & Vielzeuf, 2021) and the emformer (Shi et al., 2021) obtain lower training times and memory
consumption than models equipped with the standard self-attention by reducing the length of the
sequence attended without decreasing the attention span to avoid ASR performance degradation. Such
approaches do not overcome the quadratic time complexity of MHSA as they only change the input
length to limit or control the growth in complexity. This issue is approached by locality-biased linear
attention introduced by Sun et al. (2022) or linear nyström attention by Samarakoon & Leung (2022).
In these methods, the time complexity of self-attention is reduced to linear for ASR. Unfortunately,
none of these solutions is able to reach SOTA ASR performance. Fastformer (Wu et al., 2021)
is a successful linear alternative to self-attention as it has demonstrated superior performance to
MHSA and a wide range of linear alternatives including Longformer (Beltagy et al., 2020), BigBird
(Zaheer et al., 2020), Linformer (Wang et al., 2020) and Poolingformer (Zhang et al., 2021a) on
standard natural language processing tasks. Fastformer was also extended to speech recognition
in the Branchformer architecture (Peng et al., 2022) and, despite achieving faster training times,
achieved lower ASR performance than MHSA. However, Fastformer remains the best-performing
linear alternative to self-attention whose implementation is also available to the community and
will be used as a baseline. SummaryMixing hypothesizes that the pair-wise information modeling
capabilities of self-attention can be simplified and captured in a more efficient way. ContextNet (Han
et al., 2020), the best-performing entirely convolutional ASR system, follows the same assumption
and does not rely on MHSA to reach true SOTA performance. Unfortunately, no existing open-source
implementation, even from major toolkits, is able to reproduce the reported ASR results. Also, the
training time is not significantly better than MHSA-equipped ASR models. Despite these issues,
ContextNext remains the best available non-attentional end-to-end ASR model.
A recently proposed method called the HyperMixer (Mai et al., 2023) derives from the MLP Mixer
(Tolstikhin et al., 2021). The MLP Mixer (Tolstikhin et al., 2021) was the first to show that token
mixing can also be achieved outside the framework of self-attention. MLP Mixer learns a fixed-
size MLP to perform token mixing throughout time and achieves competitive performance across
a wide range of domains with linear time complexity (Choe et al., 2022). Unfortunately, speech
tasks commonly have variable-length sequences and existing extensions of the MLP Mixer to this
modality only propose to rely on chunked and fixed-length input vectors and achieve sub-optimal
performance (Sakuma et al., 2021). HyperMixer (Mai et al., 2023), on the other hand, is an attempt
to extend MLP Mixer to varying time dimensions in the input space for natural language processing.
Though it is not clear from the original presentation, the HyperMixer has the same time complexity
as SummaryMixing, and a similar general architecture. Appendix A.1 shows this in detail.


2       S UMMARY M IXING

Previous works (Zhang et al., 2021b; Peng et al., 2022) have shown that speech recognition does not
necessarily require long-distance fine-grained modeling at the acoustic level to reach state-of-the-art
performance. Hence, this section will first introduce SummaryMixing (section 2.1) and how it is
integrated into the Branchformer and Conformer architectures (section 2.2).
    1
        The source code is available at anonymised.


                                                      2
          ht                                                                                                           T
                             T                 ht                                                                 1
           ·      v    1                                       T
                                                  c        1                                      MLP
        Softmax

   q                                                           T       P
           ·      k                                                1
                                              f        s           T                              Self-attention or
                             T                                 1                   cgMLP          SummaryMixing
   xt                        1                    xt
(a) The self-attention cell. Each     (b) The newly proposed Summa-            (c) The Branchformer. It has two
pair of inputs is compared with       ryMixing cell. Information from all      branches: a convolutional branch for lo-
each other input, requiring a         time steps is averaged, and this aver-   cal information, and an attention branch
quadratic number of operations.       age is fed back to each time step T .    for global information.

Figure 1: The main neural architectures in this work. The green block inside the Branchformer in Fig.
1c is implemented as self-attention (Fig. 1a) or SummaryMixing (Fig. 1b).


2.1     S UMMARY M IXING

Figure 1a shows a self-attention cell (Vaswani et al., 2017a). The plate and its content are replicated
for each time step t = 1 . . . T . The cell takes an input sequence X ∈ RT ×D = {x0 , . . . , xT } of
                                                                                                    ′
T feature vectors xt of length D, and transforms them into hidden representations H ∈ RT ×D =
{h0 , . . . , hT }, that can be inputs for the next layer. The self-attention cell computes a weighted
average, where the weights are computed for each time step, of “values” (computed with v) for each
time step. The multitude of connections across time steps in Figure 1a highlight the quadratic cost in
the length of the input that self-attention takes.
To reduce the quadratic time complexity, we introduce SummaryMixing, which also transforms input
vectors xt into hidden representations ht . The key to inducing linear time complexity is to summarise
the whole utterance in a single vector s̄. Figure 1b illustrates this. The input xt is transformed by two
                                                                        ′′
functions. One is the local transformation function f : RD → RD . The other is summary function
               ′′′
s : RD → RD . The resulting vectors s(xt ) are averaged across all time steps ( T1 ) to form the
                                                                                           P
mean vector s̄. This single vector is passed back to each time step. The concatenation of it and the
                                                                                  ′′         ′′′     ′
local information f (xt ) is then transformed by the combiner function c : RD + RD → RD .
Mathematically, the SummaryMixing process can be described as:
                                     T
                                  1X
                           s̄ =         s(xt );                            ht = c(f (xt ), s̄).                       (1)
                                  T t=1

Each output vector is the function of one vector capturing the whole sequence and one capturing
local information. Computing s̄ takes O(T ) time, after which each ht can be computed in constant
time w.r.t. T . This compares to O(T 2 ) in standard self-attention.
Relationship to the HyperMixer. The HyperMixer was proposed by Mai et al. (2023) as a more
efficient alternative for self-attention. Though the original description does not make it explicit,
its time complexity w.r.t. the input length is linear, like SummaryMixing. Its overall layout is also
similar, but it fixes the form of some functions. In contrast, in SummaryMixing, we implement f , s
and c as general neural networks. Appendix A.1 gives more detail.

2.2     T HE B RANCHFORMER AND C ONFORMER WITH S UMMARY M IXING

The Branchformer (Peng et al., 2022) and Conformer (Gulati et al., 2020) reach state-of-the-art speech
recognition and understanding accuracy. Figure 1c illustrates the structure of the Branchformer,
with a place (in green) where normally self-attention goes. For our proposed method, self-attention
is replaced with SummaryMixing. The same may be applied to the Conformer as depicted by the
corresponding figure in the Appendix A.3.


                                                               3
In particular, the transformation (f ), summary (s), and combiner (c) functions are all implemented
as a dense linear layer followed by a GeLU activation function. The input of the combiner is a
concatenation of s̄ and f (xt ). The CNN branch of the Branchformer is an MLP with convolutional
gating inspired by the cgMLP of (Sakuma et al., 2021). The convolutional gating helps in capturing
strong local relations as the kernel size typically is limited to a small number of frames.The CNN
modules of the Conformer play a similar role but are computed sequentially with the MHSA blocks
instead of in parallel as in the Branchformer. In the case of the Branchformer, the outputs of both
branches, CNN and SummaryMixing, are then concatenated and fed to a two-layered MLP followed
by GeLU activations before feeding into the next block. For the Conformer, the output of the
SummaryMixing block is simply fed to the next convolutional module. No layer normalization is
applied within the SummaryMixing cell and a skip connection connects the input to the output after
fusion from the last MLP.
Branchformer with SummaryMixing-lite. We propose one additional variation of the Branchformer
combined with SummaryMixing. This variation is specific to this architecture and can not be extended
to the Conformer. Instead of implementing the green block in Figure 1c as a SummaryMixing cell,
SummaryMixing can be fully integrated. This uses the “cgMLP” block for the local transformation
f , and the “MLP” block for the combiner function c. The summary function s and the sum take
the place of the green block. This is illustrated graphically in Appendix A.3. We hypothesize that
SummaryMixing-lite speeds up training even further and reduces the memory footprint. However, a
slight degradation in performance may be encountered as SummaryMixing-lite has lost its per-time-
step non-linear transformation, while the cgMLP offers a contextualized representation filtering over
multiple frames that may loose some local information.


3     E XPERIMENTS

SummaryMixing is evaluated in a two-step process based on different experimental setups (Section
3.1). First, empirical efficiency gains in terms of training speed, memory consumption as well
as real-time decoding factor (RTF) are highlighted in controlled tasks (Section 3.2). Then, the
compared models are scaled to standard automatic speech recognition (ASR) and spoken language
understanding (SLU) evaluations with common datasets and architectures (Section 3.3).

3.1   E XPERIMENTAL P ROTOCOL

Different hyperparameters, architectures, and datasets are described in the corresponding sections
while the baselines and the framework are shared and described here.

Baseline architectures. All ASR and SLU models, except those stated otherwise, are based on
the encoder-decoder architecture (Karita et al., 2019). For ASR, decoders are either following the
joint CTC/Attention training scheme (Kim et al., 2017) or CTC only (Graves & Graves, 2012). The
attentional decoder always is a standard Transformer whose parameters are detailed in the Appendix.
The CTC decoder is a simple linear layer of the size of the output vocabulary which varies depending
on the dataset and the task. For classification tasks, such as keyword spotting, no decoder is used.
The output representations of the encoder are averaged over time and then classified by a dense
neural network whose output dimension is equal to the number of classes. Multi-head self-attention is
implemented in SpeechBrain and based on either relative positional encoding (Dai et al., 2019) with
a custom PyTorch implementation or regular MHSA based on the official PyTorch implementation
(i.e. CuDNN). The choice of the method is based on empirical results based on the task. Models are
compared by varying the encoder architecture based on the literature.
More precisely, we first consider a standard Transformer architecture as it remains simple to
comprehend but also achieves competitive performance (Karita et al., 2019). Then, we consider
the Conformer from Gulati et al. (2020) as it currently is employed in most deployed ASR
systems from real-world products (Guo et al., 2021). The Branchformer is included as our main
baseline as it is an improvement over the Conformer (Peng et al., 2022). The E-Branchformer
(Kim et al., 2023), however, is not added as it does not represent a single model, but instead, a
class of different architectures that are extremely close performance and architecture-wise to the
Branchformer. We then consider a Branchformer equipped with the FastFormer (Wu et al., 2021)


                                                 4
attention mechanism as a baseline for a SOTA linear complexity self-attention (Peng et al., 2022).
Indeed, Fastformer has been shown to outperform the best linear alternatives to self-attention in
various tasks (Wu et al., 2021). We also introduce a Branchformer equipped with HyperMixer
attention (Mai et al., 2023) to highlight the performance improvements compared to this token
mixing technique. We integrate two CNN-only models with ContextNet, first introduced by Han
et al. (2020), being considered for the competitive baseline. ContextNet remains, to this day, the
best-performing CNN-only architecture for ASR according to the original results. It is worth
emphasizing that no open-source implementation of ContextNet is able to reproduce the originally
reported results. Finally, and to serve as a low bar baseline, a single branch Branchformer is
proposed by removing the MHSA part, hence leading to a CNN-only Branchformer. This will be par-
ticularly useful to quantify the impact of the global context obtained from MHSA or other alternatives.

Implementation details. ASR and SLU systems have been implemented within the widely used and
open-source SpeechBrain toolkit (Ravanelli et al., 2021) version 0.5.14. Experiments are conducted
following officially available and open-source recipes with only the architecture of the models being
changed. The latter allows for a fair comparison as the training procedure and environment are
strictly equivalent, well adopted within the speech community, and therefore directly comparable and
replicable. The extended list of hyperparameters for each experiment is available in the Appendix A.6
and in the code repository. Reported results are obtained from re-training and not from the literature.


3.2   E FFICIENCY AND R EAL -T IME FACTOR A NALYSIS

These controlled experiments are expected to highlight the growth in training time, decoding speed,
and VRAM requirements as a function of the input utterance length.

Efficiency task details. Models are comprised of an encoder, described thereafter for each candidate,
and a simple linear layer for a decoder trained with CTC. No autoregressive decoder is used to avoid
any side effects induced by the use of random input vectors and labels. Systems are benchmarked
both in terms of measured training time, i.e., a combination of the time necessary to execute the
forward and backward pass as well as the neural parameters update, and peak VRAM consumption
across the entire task. In practice, five thousand sequences of random tensors corresponding to a
signal of length L with 1 ≤ L ≤ 100 in seconds and sampled at 16 kHz are generated and used as
inputs, while one hundred random tokens corresponding to indices in a vocabulary of size 1,000
are used as targets. The final training time is an average of the 5,000 sentences and is expressed
in seconds. Measurements are extracted on an isolated compute node with four Tesla A100 80GB.
Bfloat16 mixed precision (Kalamkar et al., 2019) is enabled to replicate the real training conditions.

Real-time factor task details. Real Time Factor (RTF) measurements are obtained by dividing the
time taken to decode an utterance by its duration. Hence, all models pre-trained on Librispeech,
whose WER results are reported in Table 1, are compared on the observed RTF by varying the
length of the utterances to decode. In particular, we constructed six sets of 2,500 sentences of
duration 10, 20, 30, 40, 50, 60 seconds. All sentences in a set have the exact same duration from the
test-clean of the Librispeech dataset. Hence, they are either cropped to the corresponding duration
or concatenated to reach longer lengths (typically 30, 40, 60 seconds). Models are compared on the
exact same sets of sentences to avoid any variation. Measurements are obtained from a batched
greedy CTC decoding. The batch size is set to 16 to avoid exceeding the available amount of VRAM
for the Branchformer model. Measurements are from an isolated node with a Tesla A100 80GB.
Model architectures. The selected models for these experiments are the Branchformer equipped
with MHSA, FastFormer linear attention, SummaryMixing and SummaryMixing-lite as well as
ContextNet. For the efficiency analysis, the number of neural parameters is set to roughly 80M for
the SummaryMixing Branchformer and vanilla Branchformer, and 65M for the SummaryMixing-lite
Branchformer and ContextNet. This corresponds to architectures reaching state-of-the-art WER
on Librispeech without the Transformer decoder. The SummaryMixing-lite Branchformer and
ContextNet networks are slightly smaller since they replace attention with a simple linear projection.
The Branchformers share the same internal dimension between blocks, 512, as well as the number
of encoder blocks, 18. In practice, all parameters between both sets of models are identical, except


                                                  5
  Training time per sentence (s)       Real-time factor, decoding (10−5 )   Peak VRAM, training (GB)
  0.8                             MHSA                                                 MHSA          60
                                                                    7
                                                                             Sum.Mix.
  0.6
                                ContextNet                          6       FastFormer               40
  0.4                            Sum.Mix.                                   ContextNet
                                                                    5     Sum.Mix.-lite
                                FastFormer                                                           20
  0.2                                                               4
                               Sum.Mix.-lite
    0                                                               3                                0
          25 50 75 100                    10         35          60             25    50    75 100
          Utterance length (s)                Utterance length (s)              Utterance length (s)

Figure 2: Efficiency measurements and real-time factor analysis. The left- and right-most curves
represent the average time as well as the peak VRAM consumption to process a sequence of various
lengths during training. The curve in the middle shows the real-time factor for trained ASR systems.
The standard Branchformer equipped with MHSA exhibits a quadratic increase in all scenarios while
the rest of the models are linear. SummaryMixing-lite is the fastest and cheapest alternative.



for the attention branch. ContextNet definition follows the architecture description described in the
original work by Han et al. (2020) corresponding to α = 1.5 and leading to 65M parameters. For the
RTF analysis, models are pre-trained from our Librispeech experiments from section 3.3.1.

3.2.1    R ESULTS AND DISCUSSION

Figure 2 depicts the obtained efficiency and RTF measurements for the considered models. It is
clear from the training time, RTF as well as peak VRAM consumption that the MHSA-equipped
Branchformer leads to a quadratic increase in required resources. For instance, with speech utterances
of duration 100 seconds, we see a 2.5 times longer training time compared to the SummaryMixing
Branchformer and an explosion of the VRAM consumption from 11.6 GB for the SummaryMixing
Branchformer to 52 GB for the MHSA Branchformer. The latter phenomenon is particularly critical
as it drastically impacts the price and availability of the required hardware. This is also true for the
RTF as the MHSA Branchformer takes twice the amount of time necessary for the SummaryMixing
Branchformer to transcribe 60 seconds of speech. This is particularly critical in applications with
latency constraints. In short, ASR decoding with a SummaryMixing Branchformer will only be
memory-bounded compared to the memory and latency boundaries for an MHSA Branchformer.
Indeed, the RTF latency of the SummaryMixing Branchformer does not increase with the length of
the audio signal. Also, the memory bound will be rapidly reached by the MHSA as it is quadratic
compared to SummaryMixing which is linear, as shown by Figure 2.
However, typical speech utterances from the training sets of academic benchmarks for speech
recognition barely reach 30 seconds. Below this mark, the MHSA-equipped Branchformer seems to
only underperform at the VRAM level as the difference in training time is reduced compared to the
other systems. Yet, it remains slightly slower than all the alternatives except for the one-second-long
sentences where only the SummaryMixing-lite Branchformer is faster. The backward pass offers
the largest gains as, with a 100-second long utterance, the MHSA Branchformer is 3.1 times slower
than its SummaryMixing-lite equivalent while, for the same sequence size, the delta for the inference
time is reduced to a 1.4 times faster inference for the SummaryMixing-lite Branchformer. Overall,
the introduced SummaryMixing appears to be much cheaper and faster than the MHSA-equipped
Branchformer as it eliminates the quadratic complexity. The latter efficiency gains, however, must
be validated with real speech recognition and understanding accuracies. Indeed, most efficient
alternatives to MHSA for ASR fail to reach the same level of performance (Peng et al., 2022).


3.3     S PEECH R ECOGNITION AND U NDERSTANDING E XPERIMENTS

This section aims at validating the lack of usefulness of self-attention for ASR and SLU systems.



                                                   6
Speech recognition tasks details. Speech recognition with an encoder-decoder architecture based
on CTC (Graves & Graves, 2012) combined with Transformer decoding is performed (Karita et al.,
2019). Additional experiments with CTC-only training and decoding are also performed to remove
entirely self-attention from the ASR architecture. ASR is conducted on five datasets of different
languages and complexities in terms of acoustic conditions and available training data: LibriSpeech
(960 hours of clean and read English speech) (Panayotov et al., 2015), CommonVoice (version 13.0,
clean and noisy read speech) (Ardila et al., 2020) Italian (300 hours), Dutch (40 hours), and French
(730 hours) as well as AISHELL-1 (170 hours of clean and read Mandarin speech) (Bu et al., 2017)
and Ted-Lium 2 (207 hours of recorded Ted talks in English) (Rousseau et al., 2014). Evaluations
are conducted on the official sets of each dataset. On Librispeech, models are evaluated without a
language model on the dev-clean set, and compared with a transformer language model shallow
fusion on the test-clean and test-other. No language models are used for the other datasets. All
baselines have been retrained following the official recipes of SpeechBrain (version 0.5.14) to enable
a controlled comparison. The full list of training parameters is available in Appendix A.6.

Speech understanding tasks details. Models are compared across two tasks of speech understanding
with the SLURP dataset from Bastianelli et al. (2020) for scenarios, actions, and entity classification
and the Google speech commands dataset for keyword spotting. SLURP contains around 58 hours
of speech material made of 100 participants simulating interactions with a house robot assistant.
Participants were asked to voluntarily move in the room while talking, or not to face the microphone
to mimic real-world interactions. Google speech commands offers short sentences and labels
corresponding to a vocabulary of 35 commands. All experiments strictly follow the SpeechBrain
recipes (version 0.5.14). All models are trained with a single Nvidia RTX 3090.
Model architectures. All baselines are selected for ASR with Librispeech as an initial performance
and training cost analysis. Then, a reduced subset of the baselines including the Branchformer
with MHSA, SummaryMixing, SummaryMixing-lite, and FastFormer is used across the seven other
datasets for further comparison. This is done to lower the number of unnecessary training runs.
We stick to the original recipe of SpeechBrain to start from a state-of-the-art Branchformer and
Conformer, leading to model sizes of roughly 110M parameters for all considered methods except
the SummaryMixing Conformer (103M), the FastFormer Branchformer (101M), the ContextNet
(100M), the SummaryMixing-lite Branchformer (96M) and the CNN-only Branchformer (77M).
Encoders are set up comparably to the efficiency analysis with an internal dimension of 512 with 18
blocks. All models share the same decoder architecture with a dense linear for the CTC predictions
as well as a standard Transformer decoder with MHSA and 6 blocks. The vocabulary contains one
thousand tokens obtained with BPE. The Transformer language model is pre-trained and obtained
from the SpeechBrain toolkit. For the remaining ASR and SLU tasks, and following the reduced set
of baselines selected from Librispeech results, we propose to conduct another set of experiments with
smaller architectures for a sensitivity analysis. A specific parametrization of the models is conducted
leading to 21M parameters for all of them except for SummaryMixing-lite Branchformer (18.5M).

3.3.1   S PEECH RECOGNITION ANALYSIS ON L IBRISPEECH

Table 1 lists the word error rates (WERs) as well as the total training time and peak VRAM con-
sumption on Librispeech. All models, including the CNN-only alternatives, achieve competitive
recognition rates. For instance, the CNN-only Branchformer achieved a WER of 3.1% on the dev-
clean set, even beating the standard Transformer with 3.3% WER. This finding supports the evidence
that MHSA may not be necessary for the encoder of speech recognizer systems to achieve good
accuracies. It is interesting to notice, however, that using MHSA to incorporate the global context
slightly improves the overall word error rates while strongly impacting the needed resources. In fact,
the 0.2%, 0.2%, and 0.6% improvements on the dev-clean, test-clean and test-other sets respectively
of the MHSA Branchformer compared to the CNN-only Branchformer is done at the expense of 49
hours of compute, representing an increase of 58% in training time. The necessary VRAM also goes
from 22 GB to 45 GB for the CNN-only and MHSA versions respectively (i.e. increase of 105%).
SummaryMixing Branchformers and Conformer reduce this disproportionate resource impact while
preserving or improving the performance. Indeed, the SummaryMixing-lite Branchformer reduces
the absolute performance gap to 0.1%, 0.0% and 0.1% on the dev-clean, test-clean and test-other
compared to MHSA while only adding 15 hours of training time compared to the Branchformer


                                                  7
Table 1: Speech recognition results on encoder-decoder models with CTC plus Transformer decoding
on the Librispeech dataset. “Summary Decoder” adds a SummaryMixing decoder to the Summa-
ryMixing encoder. “Dev-clean” word error rates (WER) are obtained without a language model
while “Test-clean” and “Test-other” use shallow fusion and a Transformer language model. “GPU
Hours” represent the total training time obtained by multiplying the real-time by the number of GPUs.
“VRAM” reports the peak amount of VRAM over the four GPUs during training. Lower is better.

    Encoder          Variant               Dev-clean Test-clean Test-other GPU VRAM
                                            WER %     WER %      WER % hours    GB
    ContextNet       N.A.                      3.3          2.3          5.9       160       25
    Transformer      Self-attention            3.3          2.3          5.5       129       40
    Conformer        Self-attention            2.8          2.3          5.4       137       46
    Branchformer     Self-attention            2.9          2.2          5.1       132       45
                     CNN Only                  3.1          2.4          5.7        83       22
                     HyperMixer                3.1          2.3          5.6       126       30
                     FastFormer                3.0          2.2          5.4        96       23
                 Proposed
    Conformer    SummaryMixing                 2.8          2.1          5.1        98       21
    Branchformer SummaryMixing-lite            3.0          2.2          5.2        98       23
                 SummaryMixing                 2.9          2.2          5.1       105       26
                 +Summary Decoder              3.1          2.3          5.3       104       26


CNN-only. This is also true for the VRAM consumption which is halved compared to MHSA.
Moreover, the SummaryMixing Branchformer closes the gap with MHSA by achieving strictly the
same performance with a reduction of the peak VRAM from 45 GB to 26 GB. ContextNet, despite
achieving respectable performance, is not at the level initially reported by Han et al. (2020). However,
there exists no replication of such results. Finally, the SummaryMixing Conformer also beats the stan-
dard Conformer with MHSA and reaches the best test-clean and test-other WER among all the models
while halving the required VRAM from 46 GB for the MHSA variant to 21 GB and exhibiting a 28%
faster training time. The architecture of the SummaryMixing Conformer is presented in Appendix A.4.

Removing self-attention from the ASR attentional decoder. In practice, we empirically find
that replacing cross-attention in the decoder leads to unacceptable performance degradation. This
is explained by the fact that cross-attention is critical in capturing the alignment between the
text and the audio. However, keeping cross-attention and replacing the remaining self-attention
with SummaryMixing leads to competitive performance as shown by the last row of Table 1.
Efficiency-wise, the gains are not as impressive as with the encoder part since the sequence length
of the decoded text is much shorter than the input audio. We also validate the performance of
the SummaryMixing Branchformer encoder without any attention using CTC-only decoding
after CTC plus attention training, which may be common deployment or evaluation cases to
reduce the decoding latency (Zhang et al., 2022). Without any language model, the Branchformer
obtained 2.6% and 6.2% of WER on the test-clean and test-other sets compared to 2.5%
and 6.4% for the SummaryMixing Branchformer. Such numbers are comparable to the latest
SOTA systems and even beat well-established dual-decoding models from WeNet (Zhang et al., 2022).

Removing the attentional decoder. Finally, we also performed CTC-only training on the two most
promising architectures from Librispeech: Conformer with MHSA and SummaryMixing. In this
scenario, the decoder is not able to recover from the lack of self-attention in the encoder part. The
experimental setups are shown in the Appendix A.6. With CTC greedy decoding, on the dev-clean,
test-clean, and test-other, the Conformer with MHSA (28.8M) achieves 3.5%, 3.7%, 9.2% WERs
respectively while the SummaryMixing-Conformer (26.5M) reaches 3.5%, 3.7%, and 9.4% WERs.
Even without MHSA in the architecture, SummaryMixing performs on par with MHSA.


                                                     8
 Table 2: Summary of the speech recognition, keyword spotting and speech understanding results.
 ASR accuracy is expressed in word error rate (WER, lower is better) for the test sets of CommonVoice
 Dutch (“Nl.”, 40 hours), Italian (“It.”, 300 hours), French (“Fr.”, 730 hours), AISHELL-1 denoted as
“AI.” (170 hours) and Ted-Lium 2 denoted as “Ted.” (207 hours). No language model is applied. SLU
 results are expressed in SLU-F1 for SLURP and accuracy for Google Speech Command (GSC).

     Metric                             WER ↓                    WER ↓              F1 ↑    Acc. ↑
     Model size                         19–21M                  90–100M             60M      10M
     Encoder                Nl.   It.    Fr. AI. Ted. Nl.    It.   Fr. AI. Ted. SLURP GSC
     Branchformer        33.4 12.7 14.5 6.2 11.3 32.6 10.5 11.0 5.7          7.9    0.771    98.06
     —FastFormer         33.2 13.0 13.4 8.1 10.2 33.9 10.9 10.9 6.1          8.5      —       —
     —SummaryMixing      33.2 12.1 13.4 6.1 9.9 31.5 10.4 10.8 5.7           7.8    0.773    98.16
     —SummaryMixing-lite 33.1 12.5 14.1 6.3 9.9 32.0 10.5 11.3 5.9           8.1    0.770    98.06



 3.3.2    E XTENDED SPEECH RECOGNITION AND UNDERSTANDING EXPERIMENTS
In this set of experiments, we focused on the Branchformer with MHSA or FastFormer versus
SummaryMixing Branchformer comparison by extending the number of languages and acoustic
conditions for ASR. We also introduce two more tasks including keyword spotting and SLU. We
selected the Branchformer instead of the conformer as it obtained better performance on average on
our Librispeech experiment and in the literature (Kim et al., 2023). All the results are reported in
Table 2. For ASR, all datasets are much harder than LibriSpeech, due to important variations in the
acoustic conditions but also in the amount of available data.
Focusing on ASR, it is worth noting that the SummaryMixing Branchformers outperform the MHSA
Branchformer in terms of WER with all datasets, and hence in all data regimes. Indeed, on average
over all the model sizes and datasets, the SummaryMixing and SummaryMixing-lite Branchform-
ers reduced the WER by 0.5% and 0.2% absolute compared to the MHSA Branchformer. Such
results validate the hypothesis that MHSA is not strictly necessary to achieve state-of-the-art speech
recognition performance even across a wide range of acoustic conditions and languages.
The previous conclusion also extends to other tasks as the SummaryMixing Branchformers are able to
reach their MHSA counterpart on spoken language understanding with an SLU-F1 score of 0.773 and
0.771 for the SummaryMixing and SummaryMixing-lite compared to 0.771 for MHSA. For keyword
spotting, SummaryMixing-lite reaches strictly the same accuracy as MHSA, while SummaryMixing
improves it by 0.1% absolute. These results indicate that MHSA may also not be strictly necessary
for other speech-related tasks and that it can be replaced with SummaryMixing to save training time,
energy, and memory without sacrificing on performance.

 4     C ONCLUSION
This work proposed SummaryMixing, a novel linear-time complexity block removing the need for
self-attention in speech recognition and understanding encoders. SummaryMixing is based on the
following assumptions: (a) the acoustic modeling component of speech systems does not require
multi-head self-attention; and (b) an efficient and cheaper global context vector taking the form of
a summary of each speech utterance is sufficient to reach top-of-the-line speech recognition and
understanding. SummaryMixing-equipped Conformers and Branchformers outperform state-of-
the-art MHSA-equipped equivalent architectures while exhibiting a linear complexity, leading to a
reduction of up to 28% in training time as well as more than half of the original VRAM consumption.
SummaryMixing also leads to significantly faster inference and decoding times for offline speech
recognition and understanding and could be extended to any speech encoder.


                                                  9
R EFERENCES
Hamidreza Arasteh, Vahid Hosseinnezhad, Vincenzo Loia, Aurelio Tommasetti, Orlando Troisi,
  Miadreza Shafie-khah, and Pierluigi Siano. Iot-based smart cities: A survey. In 2016 IEEE 16th
  international conference on environment and electrical engineering (EEEIC), pp. 1–6. IEEE, 2016.

Rosana Ardila, Megan Branson, Kelly Davis, Michael Kohler, Josh Meyer, Michael Henretty, Reuben
  Morais, Lindsay Saunders, Francis Tyers, and Gregor Weber. Common voice: A massively-
  multilingual speech corpus. In Proceedings of the 12th Language Resources and Evaluation
  Conference, pp. 4218–4222, 2020.

Alexei Baevski, Yuhao Zhou, Abdelrahman Mohamed, and Michael Auli. wav2vec 2.0: A framework
  for self-supervised learning of speech representations. Advances in neural information processing
  systems, 33:12449–12460, 2020.

Emanuele Bastianelli, Andrea Vanzo, Pawel Swietojanski, and Verena Rieser. Slurp: A spoken
 language understanding resource package. In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical
 Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), pp. 7252–7262, 2020.

Iz Beltagy, Matthew E Peters, and Arman Cohan. Longformer: The long-document transformer.
   arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.05150, 2020.

Hui Bu, Jiayu Du, Xingyu Na, Bengu Wu, and Hao Zheng. Aishell-1: An open-source mandarin
  speech corpus and a speech recognition baseline. In 2017 20th conference of the oriental chapter
  of the international coordinating committee on speech databases and speech I/O systems and
  assessment (O-COCOSDA), pp. 1–5. IEEE, 2017.

Maxime Burchi and Valentin Vielzeuf. Efficient conformer: Progressive downsampling and grouped
 attention for automatic speech recognition. In 2021 IEEE Automatic Speech Recognition and
 Understanding Workshop (ASRU), pp. 8–15. IEEE, 2021.

Rewon Child, Scott Gray, Alec Radford, and Ilya Sutskever. Generating long sequences with sparse
  transformers. arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.10509, 2019.

Jaesung Choe, Chunghyun Park, Francois Rameau, Jaesik Park, and In So Kweon. Pointmixer: Mlp-
  mixer for point cloud understanding. In Computer Vision–ECCV 2022: 17th European Conference,
  Tel Aviv, Israel, October 23–27, 2022, Proceedings, Part XXVII, pp. 620–640. Springer, 2022.

Zihang Dai, Zhilin Yang, Yiming Yang, Jaime G Carbonell, Quoc Le, and Ruslan Salakhutdinov.
  Transformer-xl: Attentive language models beyond a fixed-length context. In Proceedings of the
  57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 2978–2988, 2019.

Alex Graves and Alex Graves. Connectionist temporal classification. Supervised sequence labelling
  with recurrent neural networks, pp. 61–93, 2012.

Anmol Gulati, James Qin, Chung-Cheng Chiu, Niki Parmar, Yu Zhang, Jiahui Yu, Wei Han, Shibo
 Wang, Zhengdong Zhang, Yonghui Wu, et al. Conformer: Convolution-augmented transformer for
  speech recognition. Proc. Interspeech 2020, pp. 5036–5040, 2020.

Pengcheng Guo, Florian Boyer, Xuankai Chang, Tomoki Hayashi, Yosuke Higuchi, Hirofumi In-
  aguma, Naoyuki Kamo, Chenda Li, Daniel Garcia-Romero, Jiatong Shi, et al. Recent developments
  on espnet toolkit boosted by conformer. In ICASSP 2021-2021 IEEE International Conference on
  Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), pp. 5874–5878. IEEE, 2021.

Wei Han, Zhengdong Zhang, Yu Zhang, Jiahui Yu, Chung-Cheng Chiu, James Qin, Anmol Gulati,
 Ruoming Pang, and Yonghui Wu. Contextnet: Improving convolutional neural networks for
 automatic speech recognition with global context. Proc. Interspeech 2020, pp. 3610–3614, 2020.

Dhiraj Kalamkar, Dheevatsa Mudigere, Naveen Mellempudi, Dipankar Das, Kunal Banerjee,
  Sasikanth Avancha, Dharma Teja Vooturi, Nataraj Jammalamadaka, Jianyu Huang, Hector Yuen,
  et al. A study of bfloat16 for deep learning training. arXiv preprint arXiv:1905.12322, 2019.


                                                10
Shigeki Karita, Nanxin Chen, Tomoki Hayashi, Takaaki Hori, Hirofumi Inaguma, Ziyan Jiang, Masao
  Someki, Nelson Enrique Yalta Soplin, Ryuichi Yamamoto, Xiaofei Wang, et al. A comparative
  study on transformer vs rnn in speech applications. In 2019 IEEE Automatic Speech Recognition
  and Understanding Workshop (ASRU), pp. 449–456. IEEE, 2019.
Kwangyoun Kim, Felix Wu, Yifan Peng, Jing Pan, Prashant Sridhar, Kyu J Han, and Shinji Watanabe.
 E-branchformer: Branchformer with enhanced merging for speech recognition. In 2022 IEEE
 Spoken Language Technology Workshop (SLT), pp. 84–91. IEEE, 2023.
Sehoon Kim, Amir Gholami, Albert Shaw, Nicholas Lee, Karttikeya Mangalam, Jitendra Malik,
  Michael W Mahoney, and Kurt Keutzer. Squeezeformer: An efficient transformer for automatic
  speech recognition. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:9361–9373, 2022.
Suyoun Kim, Takaaki Hori, and Shinji Watanabe. Joint ctc-attention based end-to-end speech
  recognition using multi-task learning. In 2017 IEEE international conference on acoustics, speech
  and signal processing (ICASSP), pp. 4835–4839. IEEE, 2017.
Florian Mai, Arnaud Pannatier, Fabio Fehr, Haolin Chen, Francois Marelli, Francois Fleuret, and
  James Henderson. HyperMixer: An MLP-based low cost alternative to transformers. In Pro-
  ceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume
  1: Long Papers), pp. 15632–15654, Toronto, Canada, July 2023. Association for Computational
  Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2023.acl-long.871. URL https://aclanthology.org/
  2023.acl-long.871.
Ali Bou Nassif, Ismail Shahin, Imtinan Attili, Mohammad Azzeh, and Khaled Shaalan. Speech
  recognition using deep neural networks: A systematic review. IEEE access, 7:19143–19165, 2019.
Vassil Panayotov, Guoguo Chen, Daniel Povey, and Sanjeev Khudanpur. Librispeech: an asr corpus
  based on public domain audio books. In 2015 IEEE international conference on acoustics, speech
  and signal processing (ICASSP), pp. 5206–5210. IEEE, 2015.
Titouan Parcollet and Mirco Ravanelli. The Energy and Carbon Footprint of Training End-to-End
  Speech Recognizers. In Proc. Interspeech 2021, pp. 4583–4587, 2021. doi: 10.21437/Interspeech.
  2021-456.
Yifan Peng, Siddharth Dalmia, Ian Lane, and Shinji Watanabe. Branchformer: Parallel MLP-attention
  architectures to capture local and global context for speech recognition and understanding. In
  International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 17627–17643. PMLR, 2022.
Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Tao Xu, Greg Brockman, Christine McLeavey, and Ilya Sutskever.
  Robust speech recognition via large-scale weak supervision. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.04356,
  2022.
Mirco Ravanelli, Titouan Parcollet, Peter Plantinga, Aku Rouhe, Samuele Cornell, Loren Lugosch,
 Cem Subakan, Nauman Dawalatabad, Abdelwahab Heba, Jianyuan Zhong, et al. Speechbrain: A
 general-purpose speech toolkit. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.04624, 2021.
Anthony Rousseau, Paul Deléglise, Yannick Esteve, et al. Enhancing the ted-lium corpus with
  selected data for language modeling and more ted talks. In LREC, pp. 3935–3939, 2014.
Jin Sakuma, Tatsuya Komatsu, and Robin Scheibler. Mlp-based architecture with variable length
   input for automatic speech recognition. OpenReview, 2021.
Lahiru Samarakoon and Tsun-Yat Leung. Conformer-based speech recognition with linear nyström
  attention and rotary position embedding. In ICASSP 2022-2022 IEEE International Conference on
  Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), pp. 8012–8016. IEEE, 2022.
Yangyang Shi, Yongqiang Wang, Chunyang Wu, Ching-Feng Yeh, Julian Chan, Frank Zhang, Duc
  Le, and Mike Seltzer. Emformer: Efficient memory transformer based acoustic model for low
  latency streaming speech recognition. In ICASSP 2021-2021 IEEE International Conference on
  Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), pp. 6783–6787. IEEE, 2021.
Kyuhong Shim, Jungwook Choi, and Wonyong Sung. Understanding the role of self attention for
  efficient speech recognition. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.


                                                11
Jingyu Sun, Guiping Zhong, Dinghao Zhou, Baoxiang Li, and Yiran Zhong. Locality matters: A
   locality-biased linear attention for automatic speech recognition. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.15609,
   2022.
Yi Tay, Mostafa Dehghani, Dara Bahri, and Donald Metzler. Efficient transformers: A survey. ACM
  Computing Surveys, 55(6):1–28, 2022.
Ilya O Tolstikhin, Neil Houlsby, Alexander Kolesnikov, Lucas Beyer, Xiaohua Zhai, Thomas Un-
   terthiner, Jessica Yung, Andreas Steiner, Daniel Keysers, Jakob Uszkoreit, et al. MLP-Mixer: An
   all-MLP architecture for vision. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2021.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Łukasz
  Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. In Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 2017a.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Łukasz
  Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. Advances in neural information processing
  systems, 30, 2017b.
Sinong Wang, Belinda Z Li, Madian Khabsa, Han Fang, and Hao Ma. Linformer: Self-attention with
  linear complexity. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.04768, 2020.
Chuhan Wu, Fangzhao Wu, Tao Qi, Yongfeng Huang, and Xing Xie. Fastformer: Additive attention
  can be all you need. arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.09084, 2021.
Manzil Zaheer, Guru Guruganesh, Kumar Avinava Dubey, Joshua Ainslie, Chris Alberti, Santiago
 Ontanon, Philip Pham, Anirudh Ravula, Qifan Wang, Li Yang, et al. Big bird: Transformers for
 longer sequences. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:17283–17297, 2020.
Binbin Zhang, Di Wu, Zhendong Peng, Xingchen Song, Zhuoyuan Yao, Hang Lv, Lei Xie, Chao
  Yang, Fuping Pan, and Jianwei Niu. Wenet 2.0: More productive end-to-end speech recognition
  toolkit. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.15455, 2022.
Hang Zhang, Yeyun Gong, Yelong Shen, Weisheng Li, Jiancheng Lv, Nan Duan, and Weizhu Chen.
  Poolingformer: Long document modeling with pooling attention. In International Conference on
  Machine Learning, pp. 12437–12446. PMLR, 2021a.
Shucong Zhang, Erfan Loweimi, Peter Bell, and Steve Renals. On the usefulness of self-attention
  for automatic speech recognition with transformers. In 2021 IEEE Spoken Language Technology
  Workshop (SLT), pp. 89–96. IEEE, 2021b.


                                                 12
