Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


I NTEGRATING P LANNING AND D EEP R EINFORCE -
MENT L EARNING VIA AUTOMATIC I NDUCTION OF
TASK S UBSTRUCTURES
 Jung-Chun Liu, Chi-Hsien Chang, Shao-Hua Sun, Tian-Li Yu
 Department of Electrical Engineering
 National Taiwan University
 {r10921043,d07921004,shaohuas,tianliyu}@ntu.edu.tw

                                           A BSTRACT
         Despite recent advancements, deep reinforcement learning (DRL) still struggles
         at learning sparse-reward goal-directed tasks. Classical planning excels at ad-
         dressing hierarchical tasks by employing symbolic knowledge, yet most of the
         methods rely on assumptions about pre-defined subtasks. To bridge the best of
         both worlds, we propose a framework that integrates DRL with classical planning
         by automatically inducing task structures and substructures from a few demon-
         strations. Specifically, genetic programming is used for substructure induction
         where the program model reflects prior domain knowledge of effect rules. We
         compare the proposed framework to state-of-the-art DRL algorithms, imitation
         learning methods, and an exploration approach in various domains. Experimen-
         tal results show that our proposed framework outperforms all the abovementioned
         algorithms in terms of sample efficiency and task performance. Moreover, our
         framework achieves strong generalization performance by effectively inducing
         new rules and composing task structures. Ablation studies justify the design of
         our induction module and the proposed genetic programming procedure.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Deep reinforcement learning (DRL) as an inductive learning method allows agents to deal with
high-dimensional decision-making problems considered intractable in the past (Arulkumaran et al.,
2017). DRL has applied to various fields, including robotics (Nguyen et al., 2020), autonomous
driving (Kiran et al., 2022), and video games (Mnih et al., 2013). However, exploring complex
tasks with sparse and delayed rewards still remains challenging, leading to inapplicability on many
real-world problems comprising multiple subtasks, e.g., cooking and furniture assembly.
In contrast, classical planning is a deductive learning method which aims to solve planning and
scheduling problems. Particularly, classical planning is adept at finding the sequence of actions in
deterministic and known environments. Researchers in classical planning have developed effective
planners that can handle large-scale problems (Vallati et al., 2015). Yet, classical planning agents
face difficulties exploring environments due to limitations in model and domain-specific representa-
tion in unknown environments where action models are undiscovered.
Several methods work on combining planning and DRL to address hierarchical tasks with high-level
abstraction. Konidaris et al. (2018) develop a skill-up approach to build a planning representation
from skill to abstraction, while they do not encompass skill acquisition from low-level execution.
Mao et al. (2022) introduce an extension of planning domain definition language (Ghallab et al.,
1998) to model the skill, and Silver et al. (2022) propose a method for learning parameterized poli-
cies integrated with symbolic operators and neural samplers. However, they consider object-centric
representations, which require fully observable environments and carefully designed predicates.
In this paper, we combine classical planning and DRL to augment agents effectively to adapt to
environments by inducing underlying prior knowledge from expert demonstrations. Specifically,
we devise a method that induces symbolic knowledge using genetic programming (Koza, 1994), an
evolutionary computation approach, to discover task substructures that accurately capture the under-
lying patterns within the data. The compositional property of the programs enables generalizability
that adapts to new environments by discovering new substructures from known ones.


                                                 1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


To evaluate the proposed framework, we design three gridworld environments where agents can
move on and interact with objects. The result shows the improvement of DRL agents and outperfor-
mance compared to other imitation learning and exploration-based methods. Also, our framework
demonstrates generalizability by inducing variant substructures and recomposing task structures.
Finally, we show the ablation studies about the accuracy of induction.

2   R ELATED W ORK
Learning abstraction from demonstrations. State abstraction facilitates the agent’s reason-
ing capabilities in high-level planning by extracting symbolic representations from low-level
states (Abel et al., 2018; Guan et al., 2022). Agents can learn the abstraction from demonstrations
since demonstrations encompass valuable information regarding task composition and relevant fea-
tures (Byrne & Russon, 1998). Some methods were developed to extract task decomposition and
abstraction from demonstrations (Hayes & Scassellati, 2016; Cobo et al., 2011). Our work extends
these approaches to infer knowledge from demonstrations.

Learning planning action models. Some works have focused on integrating learning and plan-
ning to enhance capabilities in complex environments (Danesh et al., 2023; Veloso et al., 1995). To
leverage the strategies of classical planning, many works have developed building planning action
models, including skill acquisition and action schema learning (Arora et al., 2018; Stern & Juba,
2017; Pasula et al., 2007; Callanan et al., 2022; Silver et al., 2022; Mao et al., 2022; Yang et al.,
2007). However, these works mainly focus on the existing planning benchmark and less focus on
general Markov decision process (MDP) problems. On the other hand, to address the issue of sample
efficiency in DRL, several techniques explored the integration of symbolic knowledge with DRL by
learning planning action models (Jin et al., 2022; Lyu et al., 2019). In this work, we aim to bridge
this gap by extending these approaches to incorporate inferred knowledge into DRL, enhancing its
applicability in complex decision-making scenarios.

Hierarchical task learning. A proper hierarchical structure is crucial for task decomposition and
abstraction. Various methods have been proposed for constructing hierarchical task representation
(Pateria et al., 2022), including graphs (Svetlik et al., 2017), automata (Furelos-Blanco et al., 2021;
Icarte et al., 2019; 2022; Xu et al., 2021), programs (Sun et al., 2018; 2020; Trivedi et al., 2021;
Liu et al., 2023; Lin et al., 2023), and hierarchical task networks (Hayes & Scassellati, 2016; Sohn
et al., 2020; Lee et al., 2019). Some approaches utilize the capabilities of deep learning with intrinsic
rewards (Kulkarni et al., 2016; Florensa et al., 2017). In addition, some of these works specifically
address leveraging knowledge to deal with multiple compositional tasks via task decomposition
(Andreas et al., 2017; Sohn et al., 2022; Liu et al., 2022; Sun et al., 2020; Sohn et al., 2018; Furelos-
Blanco et al., 2021). Despite the success in building hierarchical models shown in previous works,
these works put less emphasis on inducing subtask rules and substructure. Therefore, we develop a
method to induce symbolic knowledge and leverage it for hierarchical task representation.

3   P ROBLEM F ORMULATION
We address the sparse-reward goal-directed problems which can be formulated as MDPs denoted as
⟨S, A, T, R, γ⟩, where S denotes state space, A denotes action space, T : S × A → S denotes a
transition function, R : S × A → R denotes a reward function, and γ ∈ (0, 1] denotes a discount-
ing factor. DRL agents often struggle at solving sparse-reward, hierarchical tasks, while classical
planning techniques excel in such scenarios. On the other hand, unlike classical planning, DRL, as
a generic model-free framework, does not require pre-defined models. This motivates us to bridge
the best of both worlds by integrating these two paradigms.
However, while DRL directly learns from interacting with MDPs, classical planning operates on
literal conjunctions. To address this gap, we integrate planning and DRL methods by annotating
the specific MDP actions in the form of action schemata. Specifically, we consider the problem of
inducing the action schemata from demonstrations. The objective is to induce the action schemata
which can be leveraged for task structure deduction. After the action schemata are discovered, the
framework deduces task structures from the action model and aims to offer guidance for the training
of DRL agents based on the task structures.


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                          Name                       Symbol       Example
      wood ≥ 2      at_workbench = 1
                                          Critical action            ψ            make stick
                                          MDP action                 aψ           make1
                make_stick                Effect variables           V(eff (ψ))   {wood, stick}
                  make1                   Effect                     eff (ψ)      {wood − 2, stick + 1}
                                          Precondition variables     V(pre(ψ))    {at workbench, wood}
      wood - 2          stick + 1         Precondition               pre(ψ)       {at workbench = 1, wood ≥ 2}

          (a) Critical action             (b) Symbols and examples of an action schema make stick.
    stick = 0
                                                           right
         at_wood = 1                                       right
                                                            down                         down
 ×2      pickup_wood                                       pickup                        left
                                                           pickup                       make1
          wood+(1×2)
           wood ≥ 2  at_workbench = 1

                                                            MDP                          MDP
           ×1      make_stick                                                           actions
                                                           actions
                                            Inventory                      Inventory                 Inventory
          wood - 2           stick + 1   empty                         wood × 2                   stick × 1
                             stick = 1


     (c) Critical action network                  (d) Example of making a stick in M INECRAFT

Figure 1: Critical action. (a)-(b) The illustration, symbols, and examples of a critical action.
A critical action is an essential action in environments with preconditions and effects. (c) Critical
action network. If an action model is discovered by the induction module, it builds critical action
networks. (d) Example of making a stick in M INECRAFT. Actions highlighted by red rectangles
are critical, i.e., picking up wood twice and making a stick (make1).

4      I NTEGRATION OF MDP IN DRL AND P LANNING WITH C RITICAL ACTION
To bridge the gap between DRL and planning, we introduce the concept of critical actions in
this section. Specifically, we formulate our problems as mapping tasks described by MDPs to
planning domain definition language (PDDL) (Ghallab et al., 1998; Silver & Chitnis, 2020) and
SAS+ (Bäckström & Nebel, 1995), where the preliminary notation is elaborated in Appendix A. To
express numeric variables, we adopt the configuration of PDDL 2.1 (Fox & Long, 2003), which
includes arithmetic operators for specification.

Mapping between MDP and classical planning. Lee et al. (2021) has developed the abstraction
mapping between planning and MDP problems. A planning task Π = ⟨V, O, s′g ⟩, where V is a set
of variables, O is a set of operators in the domain, and s′g is a partial state describing the goal. The
transition graph of the planning task is a tuple T ′ = ⟨S ′ , T ′ , Sgoal
                                                                     ′
                                                                          ⟩, where T ′ is a set of transitions
⟨s , o, T (s )⟩ for all s in S , and Sgoal is a set of goal states. Let L : S → S ′ be a mapping from the
   ′     ′ ′             ′    ′       ′

MDP state space S to high-level planning state space S ′ . Given an MDP problem, the abstraction
⟨L, Π⟩ is proper iff there exists a mapping L to Π such that ⟨L(s), ψ, L(T (s, aψ ))⟩ ∈ T ′ if some
ψ is admissible in the MDP state s ∈ S or L(s) = L(T (s, aψ )), where T ′ is a set of all possible
transitions in Π. In this work, we focus on the MDP problems with proper abstraction in which a
mapping to a planning domain exists, and action models can be induced by the proposed framework.

Critical action. Critical actions are the actions that lead to the transitions in T ′ . That is, these
actions are critical for progress at the planning level and must be executed in a specific order. A
state s′ ∈ S ′ in the planning domain is an assignment to V, and s′v ∈ R is the value assigned to
the variable v ∈ V. We map each si in MDP problems with distinct s′v in planning, considering a
planning task as an MDP-like tuple ⟨S ′ , O, T ′ ⟩, a transition ⟨s, aψ , T (s, aψ )⟩ in an MDP problem
can be directly transferred to the transition ⟨L(s), ψ, L(T (s, aψ ))⟩ in planning domain.
          • MDP action aψ ∈ A denotes the MDP action mapping to ψ.
          • Precondition pre(ψ) is a set of conditions requires satisfaction before executing ψ.
          • Effect eff (ψ) is a set of functions which indicates the state change after executing ψ.
A state s′ ∈ S ′ , where S ′ denotes planning state space, is an assignment to V, where V(p) denotes
the variables of the assignment p. Given an effect eff (ψ) and one of its variables v ∈ V(eff (ψ)),


                                                          3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                        Environment                                        Collecting
                                                                                         Demonstrations
                                          Agent                                State             Demonstrations

                                                      Action             Reward              Extracting
                     Critical Actions                                                  Action-Effect Linkage
                                                                 DRL Module                        Action-Effect Pairs
    Demonstrations

                                                                         Intrinsic          Determining
                                           Goal                          Reward        Effect Symbolic Rules
                                                                                                  Effect Rules
       Induction       Knowledge              Training
        Module           Base                 Module
                                                                                           Determining
                                                                                        Precondition Rules
                                                               Critical Action Graph
                                                                                                   Precondition Rules
                     Training Data

                                                                                                   Critical Action Schemata



                             (a) Framework overview                                      (b) Induction module
Figure 2: (a) Framework overview. The proposed framework is two-stage. In the induction stage,
critical action schemata are induced from demonstrations. In the training stage, the training module
deduces the critical action network from the goal by backward-chaining and offers intrinsic rewards
to the DRL module according to the network. (b) Induction module. The induction module induces
the critical action schemata from demonstrations through three steps. First, it finds the linkage
between actions and effect variables in transitions. Then, given the transitions with action-effect
linkage, the induction module induces the effect rules via symbolic regression. Finally, it determines
the precondition given the specific action and the effect.

an effect rule eff (ψ)v : R → R is a function which transfers the specific feature value s′v in s′
to another value eff (ψ)v [s′v ] in the transition, and a precondition rule pre(ψ)v is a logical formula
pre(ψ)v : R → {0, 1} that determines whether the variable v is satisfied to execute ψ. Given a state
s′ , two critical action ψ and ϕ, eff (ψ)v satisfy pre(ϕ)v in state s′ iff a variable v in both V(eff (ψ))
and V(pre(ϕ)), and pre(ϕ)v [s′v ] is false while pre(ϕ)v [eff (ψ)v [s′v ]] is true in a transition with ψ.
That is, executing ψ makes ϕ become admissible.
To efficiently induce the model, we assume that the properties of the features in a state are known.
Effect variable space E = {v | v ∈ V(eff (ψ)) ∀ ψ ∈ O} contains the variables that will change in
transitions and related to the progress of the tasks.

Critical action network. This work represents symbolic knowledge structures as critical action
networks illustrated in Figure 1c. Given a set of critical actions O and a desired goal specification
pgoal , a critical action network G = (V, E) is an in-tree structure where the root is the critical action
that can satisfy the goal specification directly. For each edge (ψ, ϕ) ∈ E, there exists eff (ψ)v for
some v that satisfy pre(ϕ)v . Once the action schemata are known, we can construct the network
using planners or backward chaining.

5      M ETHOD
We introduce the induction module that determines the critical actions from demonstrations and
extracts symbolic rules in Section 5.1. Then, Section 5.2 describes the training module that deduces
task structures to build critical action networks online from the given goal. The network contains
subtask dependencies, providing guidance through intrinsic rewards and augmenting the training
efficiency of DRL agents. An overview of our proposed framework is illustrated in Figure 2a.

5.1     I NDUCTION M ODULE
The procedure of the induction module is illustrated in Figure 2b. The module first extracts action-
effect linkages (a, V(eff (ψ))) from demonstrations. Second, the module induces effect rules eff (ψ)
given (a, V(eff (ψ))). Finally, the module leverages the rules to determine the precondition rules


                                                                   4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                   Start                                                  make1 ↔ {wood, stick}

                Population                        action       effect variable             state           next state
                Intialization
                                                                                   wood = 2, ...        wood = 0, ...
                                                  make1             wood           wood = 4, ...        wood = 2, ...
                 Evaluation
                                                                                   wood = 3, ...        wood = 1, ...
                 Terminate?
         True
                       False                               -                              ÷                     +
                 Selection
                                                   wood            2              wood         2         wood           1
                Reproduction
    Crossover     Mutation      Duplication       woodt+1=woodt-2              woodt+1=woodt÷2         woodt+1=woodt+1
                                                   fitness = 1                   fitness = 0.33          fitness = 0
                    End

 (a) Procedure of genetic programming                                  (b) Example of fitness evaluation

Figure 3: Symbolic regression using genetic programming. Given a pair of an MDP action and
effect variables, symbolic regression is used to determine the rules when executing the action. (a)
Procedure of genetic programming. The programs iteratively evolve through fitness evaluation,
selection, and reproduction. (b) Example of fitness evaluation. The algorithm evaluates the accu-
racy of programs to induce the rule between make1 and wood.

pre(ψ) for each (a, eff (ψ)). After these steps, the components of critical action schemata are all
determined. Note that we name the critical action ψ for the convenience of reference, which is not
known when inducing action schemata. We use “·” to represent an undefined critical action. The
following paragraphs will elaborate on the details of the induction methods.

Action-effect linkages. Based on the outcome assumption that one action only impacts specific
state features, we can detect co-occurrence of what effects often occur after executing a by calcu-
lating mutual information (Shannon, 1948) between actions and effect variables. Let E be a set of
possible effect variable combinations V(eff (·)) in the transitions of demonstrations. The mutual
information M(a,V(eff (·))) is defined as follows:
                                   X          X                                           PAE (a, V(eff (·)))
            M(a,V(eff (·))) =                         PAE (a, V(eff (·))) log                                  ,            (1)
                                                                                         PA (a)PE (V(eff (·)))
                                   a∈A V(eff (·))∈E

where PA (a) is the count of transitions with action a; PE (V(eff (·))) is the count of transitions that
include variables in V(eff (·)); PAE (a, V(eff (·))) is the count of transitions that include changed
variables in V(eff (·)) with action a. To determine the linkage, the pairs are divided into two clusters
with the threshold of a maximum gap, and the cluster with higher values are selected. The detailed
algorithm is shown in Appendix B.1.

Effect symbolic rules. Given an action-effect pair (a, V(eff (·))), the induction module proceeds
to search for the effect eff (·), which can be formulated as a symbolic regression. To accomplish
this, we employ genetic programming for symbolic regression to discover each effect rule eff (·)v
for all v in V(eff (·)), aiming to discover programs that can accurately predict the effects.
In genetic programming, each program is represented as an expression tree, taking sv and aψ in
each transition as input and yielding the predicted value of v after the transition as output. The
algorithm consists of three key steps: initialization, evaluation, selection, and reproduction. Initially,
a population of programs is randomly generated. The fitness of each program is evaluated based
on its prediction accuracy, and the programs with the highest fitness values are selected, serving
as parents to reproduce offspring through crossover, mutation, and duplication mechanisms. The
procedures and the example of genetic programming are illustrated in Figure 3.
The model of symbolic rules is regarded as the substructures of the subtasks, and selecting the proper
operators for the symbolic model compatible with the effects plays a crucial role in facilitating effec-
tive inference. For instance, in the context of general DRL task with numerical variable representa-
tion configuration, arithmetic operation set F = {+, −, ×, ÷, inc, dec} is used as the function set in
genetic programming, where inc denotes an increment operator and dec denotes a decrement oper-


                                                               5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


ator. This choice of function set is consistent with the numerical variable representation commonly
employed in DRL tasks. The underlying assumption guiding our approach is that the effects can
be expressed through these programs, serving as prior knowledge of the problem. This allows our
method to induce task substructures and generalize the knowledge across domains that share iden-
tical operation configurations. This distinguishing feature sets our approach apart from alternative
model-free methodologies. Additional implementation details can be found in Appendix B.2.

Precondition rules. After the relation between a and eff (·) are found, determining precondition
rules pre(·) can be formulated as a classification problem, as the objective is to identify whether
eff (·) occurs given the action and the state. The process involves minimal consistent determina-
tion (MCD) and the decision tree method. The model of pre(·) decides what preconditions leading
to desired effects after executing a. Additional details can be found in Appendix B.3.

5.2   T RAINING M ODULE
After the induction process, the critical action schemata serve as the components of knowledge base
that guides the agent in the training stage. During the training stage, the training module deduces
the critical action network given the initial state and goal specification and provides intrinsic reward
if the agent successfully performs an action that meets the critical effects in the network.

Inferring critical action network. Once the critical actions schemata are defined, we can infer
task structures from the model. Given a goal and an initial state, the proposed framework deduces
the critical action networks by backward chaining. Starting from the goal, the module searches for
the critical action to find the desired effect for unconnected precondition rules pre(·)v where v ∈ E.
Maximum operation steps are set to terminate the search. Once the critical action is found, the
critical action will be considered as the predecessor of previous critical actions.

DRL agent. In the training stage, we aim to train a DRL agent that can learn the subtask by
leveraging the feature-extracting power of neural networks. The induction module only specifies the
coarse-grained critical action to express temporal order. Therefore, the framework deploys DRL to
complete the fine-grained decision-making tasks, which utilizes deep learning to approximate the
optimal policy with neuron networks. DRL uses the policy gradient method to update the policy. In
the proposed method, we use the action-critic method (Mnih et al., 2016; Raffin et al., 2021) as the
DRL agent. The implementation details are described in Appendix B.4.

Intrinsic rewards. During the training stage, if the agent successfully executes the critical effects,
it will receive an intrinsic reward when the preconditions of a critical action ψ are satisfied. Con-
versely, if the agent takes an action that leads to undesired effects, such as violating effect rules, it
will receive a penalty. However, note that our model only specifies positive critical actions and does
not explicitly identify actions that have possible negative consequences. Therefore, the implemen-
tation of a penalty depends on the specific domain.

6     E XPERIMENTS
We evaluate our framework and provide ablation studies in this section. Section 6.1 lists the algo-
rithms we use for comparison. Section 6.2 provides the description of the environments and tasks.
Section 6.3 presents the results of training efficiency and performance. Section 6.4 demonstrates the
generalizability in different levels.

6.1   BASELINES
We extensively compare our framework to various DRL algorithms (DQN and PPO) learning from
rewards, imitation learning methods (BC and GAIL) learning from demonstrations, advanced ap-
proaches (DQN-RBS and BC-PPO) that leverage both rewards and demonstrations, and an explo-
ration method (RIDE) that maximizes intrinsic and extrinsic rewards.
       • DQN (Mnih et al., 2015) is an off-policy deep Q-learning algorithm.
       • PPO (Schulman et al., 2017) is a state-of-the-art on-policy DRL algorithm.


                                                   6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


       • Behavior cloning (BC; Ross et al., 2011) imitates an expert by learning from demonstra-
         tions in a supervised manner.
       • Generative adversarial imitation learning (GAIL; Ho & Ermon, 2016) mimics expert
         behaviors via learning a generative adversarial network whose generator is a policy.
       • DQN-RBS initializes the replay buffer of DQN with demonstrations, allowing for a perfor-
         mance boost. This is inspired by the replay buffer spiking technique (Lipton et al., 2016).
       • BC-PPO pre-trains a BC policy using demonstrations and then fine-tunes the policy with
         PPO using rewards, similar to Video PreTraining (VPT; Baker et al., 2022).
       • Rewarding impact-driven exploration (RIDE; Raileanu & Rocktäschel, 2020) is an RL
         exploration method inspired by the intrinsic curiosity module (Pathak et al., 2017).

6.2   E NVIRONMENTS & TASKS
To evaluate the proposed framework and the baselines, we design three groups of tasks in a 8 × 8
gridworld environment, where an agent can move along four directions {up, down, left, right}
and interact with objects. The tasks are described as follows. See Appendix C for more details.
S WITCH requires an agent to turn on the switches in sequential order. If it toggles the wrong switch,
the progress will regress, which makes it challenging for DRL agents to solve the task through
solely exploration. We design four tasks 4-S WITCH, 8-S WITCH, 4-D ISTRACTORS and 4-ROOMS,
where 4-S WITCH and 8-S WITCH evaluate the performance between different difficulties of tasks. 4-
D ISTRACTORS consist of four target switches and four distractor switches, and 4-ROOMS combines
the configuration Minigrid four-rooms tasks (Chevalier-Boisvert et al., 2023).
D OORKEY features a hierarchical task similar to the Minigrid door-key tasks, where the agent needs
to open a door with a key and turn on a switch behind the door.
M INECRAFT is inspired by the computer game Minecraft and is similar to the environment in
previous works (Sohn et al., 2018; Andreas et al., 2017; Sun et al., 2020; Brooks et al., 2021). The
environment is designed for evaluation using multiple-task demonstrations. We select a simple task
I RON, a difficult task E NHANCE TABLE, and a multiple-goal task M ULTIPLE.
For the methods that require demonstrations, we collect 20 demonstrations from corresponding tasks
in S WITCH and D OORKEY and collect 64 multiple-task demonstrations from M ULTIPLE for all tasks
in M INECRAFT.

6.3   R ESULTS
The experimental results in Figure 4 show that our framework outperforms all the baselines on chal-
lenging tasks (e.g., 8-S WITCH, 4-D ISTRACITORS, E NHANCE TABLE, M ULTIPLE) and performs
competitively on simpler tasks (e.g., D OORKEY, 4-S WITCHES, I RON). The imitation learning ap-
proaches, BC and GAIL, fail to learn all the tasks due to insufficient demonstrations and lack of
exploration, while RIDE, BC-PPO, and DQN-RBS, which consider rewards online, fail on advanced
tasks that require long-term planning. In contrast, our framework can leverage the knowledge from
the same number of demonstrations and efficiently explore the environment, especially on the tasks
8-S WITCHES where all the baselines completely fail, as shown in Figure 4b. Moreover, our pro-
posed framework is the most sample-efficient method in learning the D OORKEY task.

6.4   G ENERALIZABILITY
Our framework employs the critical action model to achieve task-level generalizability, enabling the
construction of novel task structures based on familiar critical actions. Additionally, we introduce
genetic programming, renowned for its adaptability in reasoning symbolic rules as task substruc-
tures, thereby enhancing generalizability at the rule level. To define the domain gap, we denote
the original domain as the domain where demonstrations are collected and the variant domain as
the domain where agents learn. For rule-level generalizability, we define a variant critical action
ϕ from ψ where V(eff (ϕ)) = V(eff (ψ)) and V(pre(ϕ)) = V(pre(ψ)) while eff (ϕ) ̸= eff (ψ)
or pre(ϕ) ̸= pre(ψ). If a critical action ψ varies, the induced symbolic programs and the popu-
lation can evolve and adapt to new substructures. Since V(pre(ϕ)) and V(eff (ϕ)) are known, the
procedure starts from inducing effect rules eff (ϕ) ̸= eff (ψ). Thus, the proposed framework can
potentially achieve task generalization.


                                                  7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                                        YE                       WWK                                                                 ' />                                   YEͲZ ^                           ͲWWK                                       Z/                           KƵƌƐ
                 ϭ͘Ϭ                                                                        ϭ͘Ϭ                                                                         ϭ͘Ϭ                                                                               ϭ͘Ϭ
                 Ϭ͘ϴ                                                                        Ϭ͘ϴ                                                                         Ϭ͘ϴ                                                                               Ϭ͘ϴ
                 Ϭ͘ϲ                                                                        Ϭ͘ϲ                                                                         Ϭ͘ϲ                                                                               Ϭ͘ϲ
ZĞǁĂƌĚƐ


                                                                              ZĞǁĂƌĚƐ


                                                                                                                                                             ZĞǁĂƌĚƐ


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ZĞǁĂƌĚƐ
                 Ϭ͘ϰ                                                                        Ϭ͘ϰ                                                                         Ϭ͘ϰ                                                                               Ϭ͘ϰ
                 Ϭ͘Ϯ                                                                        Ϭ͘Ϯ                                                                         Ϭ͘Ϯ                                                                               Ϭ͘Ϯ
                 Ϭ͘Ϭ                                                                        Ϭ͘Ϭ                                                                         Ϭ͘Ϭ                                                                               Ϭ͘Ϭ
                          Ϭ     ϭ      Ϯ               ϯ   ϰ        ϱ                             Ϭ     ϭ      Ϯ               ϯ         ϰ   ϱ                             Ϭ       ϭ      Ϯ               ϯ       ϰ         ϱ                             Ϭ      ϭ      Ϯ               ϯ         ϰ   ϱ
                                          ^ƚĞƉƐ ;DͿ                                                            ^ƚĞƉƐ ;DͿ                                                               ^ƚĞƉƐ ;DͿ                                                                  ^ƚĞƉƐ ;DͿ
                               (a) 4-S WITCHES                                                               (b) 8-S WITCHES                                                      (c) 4-D ISTRACTORS                                                                             (d) 4-ROOMS
                 ϭ͘Ϭ                                                                        ϭ͘Ϭ                                                                         ϭ͘Ϭ                                                                               ϭ͘Ϭ
                 Ϭ͘ϴ                                                                        Ϭ͘ϴ                                                                         Ϭ͘ϴ                                                                               Ϭ͘ϴ
                 Ϭ͘ϲ                                                                        Ϭ͘ϲ                                                                         Ϭ͘ϲ                                                                               Ϭ͘ϲ
ZĞǁĂƌĚƐ


                                                                              ZĞǁĂƌĚƐ


                                                                                                                                                             ZĞǁĂƌĚƐ


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ZĞǁĂƌĚƐ
                 Ϭ͘ϰ                                                                        Ϭ͘ϰ                                                                         Ϭ͘ϰ                                                                               Ϭ͘ϰ
                 Ϭ͘Ϯ                                                                        Ϭ͘Ϯ                                                                         Ϭ͘Ϯ                                                                               Ϭ͘Ϯ
                 Ϭ͘Ϭ                                                                        Ϭ͘Ϭ                                                                         Ϭ͘Ϭ                                                                               Ϭ͘Ϭ
                          Ϭ     ϭ      Ϯ               ϯ   ϰ        ϱ                             Ϭ     ϭ      Ϯ               ϯ         ϰ   ϱ                             Ϭ       ϭ      Ϯ               ϯ       ϰ         ϱ                             Ϭ      ϭ      Ϯ               ϯ         ϰ   ϱ
                                          ^ƚĞƉƐ ;DͿ                                                            ^ƚĞƉƐ ;DͿ                                                               ^ƚĞƉƐ ;DͿ                                                                  ^ƚĞƉƐ ;DͿ
                                (e) D OORKEY                                                                        (f) I RON                                                    (g) E NHANCE TABLE                                                                              (h) M ULTIPLE
Figure 4: Task performance. We report the mean (line) and the standard deviation (shaded regions)
of the training curves over 5M steps out of three runs. Our approach outperforms other methods,
especially in advanced tasks.

Setup. To evaluate the generalizability of our framework and baselines, we consider 4-S WITCHES -
( N +1) as the original domain and its variant domains, 8-S WITCHES -( N +1), 4-D ISTRACTORS -
( N +1), and 4-D ISTRACTORS -(2 N +1). In 8-S WITCHES -( N +1), we extend the number of switches
from 4 to 8 to evaluate the generalization of task structures. In 4-D ISTRACTORS -( N +1), 4 distractor
switches are added to 4-S WITCHES -( N +1), and in 4-D ISTRACTORS -(2 N +1), the order of switches
changes to 2n + 1 (e.g., 1 → 3 → 5 → 7), while the order of switches in N -D ISTRACTORS -( N +1)
is n + 1 (e.g., 1 → 2 → 3 → 4). This series of settings evaluates if a method can generalize
to different effect rules. We collect 200 demonstrations in 4- SWITCHES -( N +1) and and run 5M
steps for all methods. For 4-D ISTRACTORS -(2 N +1), we collect only 4 additional demonstrations
for all methods, and our framework leverages the previous populations of genetic programming to
re-induce the rules, which only require few-shot demonstrations.
Baselines. We compare our framework Table 1: Generalization performance in the original
with the best-performing baselines (BC- domain 4- SWITCHES and its variant domains.
PPO) and the most widely used baseline
(GAIL) for the generalization experiments. Task                GAIL     BC-PPO      Ours

Results. The results in Table 1 demonstrate       4-S WITCHES -( N +1)     30%±8%                                                                                                                                                                                                 97%±0%                          96%±1%
that the performance of GAIL and BC-PPO 8-S WITCHES -( N +1)               10%±2%                                                                                                                                                                                                 00%±0%                          90%±2%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  95%±2%
drops in the variant domains, whereas our 4-D         ISTRACTORS -( N +1)  10%±7%
                                                  4-D ISTRACTORS -(2 N +1) 11%±6%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  41%±4%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  33%±2%                          95%±1%
framework is able to generalize, highlight-
ing its ability to construct novel rules and structures in the variant domains.

6.5                             A BLATION S TUDY
This section presents the ablation studies of
the induction modules. Section 6.5.1 quali-
tatively examines the mutual information and
Section 6.5.2 shows the accuracy of symbolic
regression using genetic programming.

6.5.1                                 ACTION -E FFECT L INKAGE
In Section 5.1, we introduce action-effect link-
ages to discover the co-occurred effect vari-
ables and actions. Figure 5 presents the exper-
imental results in M INECRAFT and shows the Figure 5: Action-effect mutual information in
relationship between the logarithm of mutual M INECRAFT inferred by our framework.
information and action-effect linkages. The
heat map visualizes the values of all action-effect pairs, with darker colors indicating higher val-


                                                                                                                                                             8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


ues and stronger associations, highlighting the linkages. For instance, { wood, stick} is the
effect variables of make stick as mentioned in Figure 1a and 1b, discovered by our framework
from executing make1.


6.5.2   S YMBOLIC R EGRESSION
                                                                       100
The proposed framework necessitates a robust
symbolic regression module to generate the                              90
                                                                        80


                                                        Accuracy (%)
symbolic rules. In Section 5.1, we introduce ge-
netic programming as symbolic regression for                            70
induction. Since genetic programming is a ran-                          60
domized search method, empirical results are                            50
shown to discuss the success rate of finding cor-                                                 Polulation size
                                                                        40
rect rules and how much demonstrations are re-                                              500          1000       2000
                                                                        30
quired to capture the symbolic rules.                                        25   50   75   100 125 150 175 200
                                                                     Number of Demonstrations
The experiment setting is described as follows.
                                                         Figure 6: Symbolic regression accuracy.
In M INECRAFT environment, there are 27 ef-
fect rules listed in Table 3. We sample different numbers of demonstrations from random subtasks,
and the number of population are 500, 1000, and 2000. Other parameters of genetic programming
are the same as the setting in Table 2. We calculate the number of programs which is equivalent to
the ground truth after simplification. The result is the average accuracy out of five runs shown in
Figure 6. We claim that the effect rules can be induced via genetic programming when a sufficient
number of demonstrations and programs in the population are available. Noting that the results
are related to the diversity of the data. In theoretically, each n-polynomial rule requires more than
n + 1 points for regression. In addition, critical action networks can still be built when some rules
are inequivalent to the ground truth due to the bias of the data, as long as the rules match with the
precondition of succeeding critical actions.



7   D ISCUSSION

We present a framework to address sparse-reward, goal-directed MDP tasks by integrating DRL and
classical planning techniques. Our proposed framework represents symbolic knowledge as critical
actions and employs a procedure to automatically extract knowledge from demonstrations. This
combination of inductive learning (i.e., DRL) and deductive learning (i.e., classical planning) en-
ables our framework to perform explicit high-level planning and accurate low-level execution, al-
lowing for robust task performance and generalizing to unseen domains. Additionally, evolutionary
computation provides adaptability at the rule level by inducing the task substructures.
Specifically, by representing knowledge as critical actions and employing critical action networks,
we provide a structured and organized mechanism for capturing and utilizing symbolic knowledge
within DRL. The proposed procedures of subtask decomposition combine planning and DRL, lead-
ing to effective and efficient learning in goal-directed tasks. Furthermore, the compositionality of
the critical action model allows for different levels of generalization, highlighting its potential to
address a wide range of general problems. In sum, our work offers a holistic perspective to effec-
tively handle general goal-directed decision-making problems with the integration of inductive and
deductive learning.
This work extensively evaluates our proposed framework on deterministic, fully observable environ-
ments within the integer domain. To extend our proposed framework to complex domains, such as
continuous input, we can potentially leverage recent studies that have developed genetic program-
ming for different variable types (Virgolin et al., 2017; 2021). When facing stochastic or partially
observable environments, the induction module can fail to induce some critical actions because of
the uncertainty. In a worst-case scenario, when the induction module produces no rule, the proposed
framework simply reduces to the backbone DRL algorithm (i.e., PPO) without any intrinsic reward.
One potential direction to address this issue is to extend the induction module to recognize and infer
probabilistic rules (Pasula et al., 2007; Arora et al., 2018), which is left for future work.


                                                    9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


8   ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
The authors would like to thank the support of the National Science and Technology Council in
Taiwan under grant No. NSTC 111-2221-E-002-189 and National Taiwan University under grant
No. 112L891103. Shao-Hua Sun was partially supported by the Yushan Fellow Program by the
Ministry of Education, Taiwan.


                                               10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
David Abel, Dilip Arumugam, Lucas Lehnert, and Michael Littman. State abstractions for lifelong
  reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2018.
Jacob Andreas, Dan Klein, and Sergey Levine. Modular multitask reinforcement learning with
  policy sketches. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2017.
Ankuj Arora, Humbert Fiorino, Damien Pellier, Marc Métivier, and Sylvie Pesty. A review of
  learning planning action models. The Knowledge Engineering Review, 2018.
Kai Arulkumaran, Marc Peter Deisenroth, Miles Brundage, and Anil Anthony Bharath. Deep rein-
  forcement learning: A brief survey. IEEE Signal Processing Magazine, 2017.
Bowen Baker, Ilge Akkaya, Peter Zhokov, Joost Huizinga, Jie Tang, Adrien Ecoffet, Brandon
  Houghton, Raul Sampedro, and Jeff Clune. Video pretraining (VPT): Learning to act by watching
  unlabeled online videos. In Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022.
Ethan Brooks, Janarthanan Rajendran, Richard Lewis, and Satinder Singh. Reinforcement learning
  of implicit and explicit control flow in instructions. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning, 2021.
Richard Byrne and Anne Russon. Learning by imitation: A hierarchical approach. Behavioral and
  Brain Sciences, 1998.
Christer Bäckström and Bernhard Nebel. Complexity results for SAS+ planning. Computational
  Intelligence, 1995.
Ethan Callanan, Rebecca De Venezia, Victoria Armstrong, Alison Paredes, Tathagata Chakraborti,
  and Christian Muise. MACQ: A holistic view of model acquisition techniques. In The ICAPS
  Workshop on Knowledge Engineering for Planning and Scheduling, 2022.
Maxime Chevalier-Boisvert, Bolun Dai, Mark Towers, Rodrigo de Lazcano, Lucas Willems,
 Salem Lahlou, Suman Pal, Pablo Samuel Castro, and Jordan Terry. Minigrid & miniworld:
 Modular & customizable reinforcement learning environments for goal-oriented tasks. CoRR,
 abs/2306.13831, 2023.
Luis Cobo, Peng Zang, Charles Isbell, and Andrea Thomaz. Automatic state abstraction from
  demonstration. In International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 2011.
Mohamad Hosein Danesh, Panpan Cai, and David Hsu. Leader: Learning attention over driving
 behaviors for planning under uncertainty. In Conference on Robot Learning, 2023.
Carlos Florensa, Yan Duan, and Pieter Abbeel. Stochastic neural networks for hierarchical rein-
  forcement learning. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2017.
Maria Fox and Derek Long. PDDL2.1: An extension to PDDL for expressing temporal planning
 domains. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, 2003.
Daniel Furelos-Blanco, Mark Law, Anders Jonsson, Krysia Broda, and Alessandra Russo. Induction
  and exploitation of subgoal automata for reinforcement learning. Journal of Artificial Intelligence
  Research, 2021.
Malik Ghallab, Craig Knoblock, David Wilkins, Anthony Barrett, Dave Christianson, Marc Fried-
 man, Chung Kwok, Keith Golden, Scott Penberthy, David Smith, Ying Sun, and Daniel Weld.
 PDDL - the planning domain definition language. 1998.
Lin Guan, Sarath Sreedharan, and Subbarao Kambhampati. Leveraging approximate symbolic mod-
  els for reinforcement learning via skill diversity. arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.02886, 2022.
Bradley Hayes and Brian Scassellati. Autonomously constructing hierarchical task networks for
  planning and human-robot collaboration. In IEEE International Conference on Robotics and
  Automation, 2016.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Jonathan Ho and Stefano Ermon. Generative adversarial imitation learning. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 2016.
Rodrigo Toro Icarte, Ethan Waldie, Toryn Klassen, Rick Valenzano, Margarita Castro, and Sheila
  McIlraith. Learning reward machines for partially observable reinforcement learning. Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 2019.
Rodrigo Toro Icarte, Toryn Klassen, Richard Valenzano, and Sheila A. McIlraith. Reward machines:
  exploiting reward function structure in reinforcement learning. Journal of Artificial Intelligence
  Research, 2022.
Mu Jin, Zhihao Ma, Kebing Jin, Hankz Hankui Zhuo, Chen Chen, and Chao Yu. Creativity of
 ai: Automatic symbolic option discovery for facilitating deep reinforcement learning. In AAAI
 Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 2022.
B Ravi Kiran, Ibrahim Sobh, Victor Talpaert, Patrick Mannion, Ahmad A. Al Sallab, Senthil Yoga-
  mani, and Patrick Pérez. Deep reinforcement learning for autonomous driving: A survey. IEEE
  Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems, 2022.
George Konidaris, Leslie Pack Kaelbling, and Tomas Lozano-Perez. From skills to symbols: Learn-
  ing symbolic representations for abstract high-level planning. Journal of Artificial Intelligence
  Research, 2018.
John Koza. Genetic programming: On the programming of computers by means of natural selection.
  Statistics and computing, 1994.
Tejas Kulkarni, Karthik Narasimhan, Ardavan Saeedi, and Joshua B. Tenenbaum. Hierarchical deep
  reinforcement learning: Integrating temporal abstraction and intrinsic motivation. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 2016.
Junkyu Lee, Michael Katz, Don Joven Agravante, Miao Liu, Tim Klinger, Murray Campbell, Shirin
  Sohrabi, and Gerald Tesauro. AI planning annotation in reinforcement learning: Options and
  beyond. In Planning and Reinforcement Learning Workshop at International Conference on Au-
  tomated Planning and Scheduling, 2021.
Youngwoon Lee, Shao-Hua Sun, Sriram Somasundaram, Edward Hu, and Joseph J. Lim. Com-
  posing complex skills by learning transition policies. In International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2019.
Yu-An Lin, Chen-Tao Lee, Guan-Ting Liu, Pu-Jen Cheng, and Shao-Hua Sun. Addressing long-
  horizon tasks by integrating program synthesis and state machines. arXiv:2311.15960, 2023.
Zachary C Lipton, Jianfeng Gao, Lihong Li, Xiujun Li, Faisal Ahmed, and Li Deng. Efficient
  exploration for dialogue policy learning with bbq networks & replay buffer spiking. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1608.05081, 2016.
Anthony Liu, Sungryull Sohn, Mahdi Qazwini, and Honglak Lee. Learning parameterized task
  structure for generalization to unseen entities. In AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
  2022.
Guan-Ting Liu, En-Pei Hu, Pu-Jen Cheng, Hung-Yi Lee, and Shao-Hua Sun. Hierarchical program-
  matic reinforcement learning via learning to compose programs. In International Conference on
  Machine Learning, 2023.
Wei-Yin Loh. Classification and regression trees. Wiley interdisciplinary reviews: data mining and
 knowledge discovery, 2011.
Daoming Lyu, Fangkai Yang, Bo Liu, and Steven Gustafson. Sdrl: Interpretable and data-efficient
  deep reinforcement learning leveraging symbolic planning. In AAAI Conference on Artificial
  Intelligence, 2019.
Jiayuan Mao, Tomás Lozano-Pérez, Joshua B. Tenenbaum, and Leslie Pack Kaelbling. PDSketch:
   Integrated domain programming, learning, and planning. In Neural Information Processing Sys-
   tems, 2022.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Volodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, David Silver, Alex Graves, Ioannis Antonoglou, Daan Wier-
  stra, and Martin Riedmiller. Playing atari with deep reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1312.5602, 2013.
Volodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, David Silver, Andrei A Rusu, Joel Veness, Marc G Belle-
  mare, Alex Graves, Martin Riedmiller, Andreas K Fidjeland, Georg Ostrovski, Stig Petersen,
  Charles Beattie, Amir Sadik, Ioannis Antonoglou, Helen King, Dharshan Kumaran, Daan Wier-
  stra, Shane Legg, and Demis Hassabis. Human-level control through deep reinforcement learning.
  Nature, 2015.
Volodymyr Mnih, Adria Puigdomenech Badia, Mehdi Mirza, Alex Graves, Timothy Lillicrap, Tim
  Harley, David Silver, and Koray Kavukcuoglu. Asynchronous methods for deep reinforcement
  learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2016.
Thanh Thi Nguyen, Ngoc Duy Nguyen, and Saeid Nahavandi. Deep reinforcement learning for
  multiagent systems: A review of challenges, solutions, and applications. IEEE Transactions on
  Cybernetics, 2020.
Hanna Pasula, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Leslie Kaelbling. Learning symbolic models of stochastic
  domains. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, 2007.
Shubham Pateria, Budhitama Subagdja, Ah-hwee Tan, and Chai Quek. Hierarchical reinforcement
  learning: A comprehensive survey. ACM Computing Surveys, 2022.
Deepak Pathak, Pulkit Agrawal, Alexei A. Efros, and Trevor Darrell. Curiosity-driven exploration
  by self-supervised prediction. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2017.
Antonin Raffin, Ashley Hill, Adam Gleave, Anssi Kanervisto, Maximilian Ernestus, and Noah Dor-
  mann. Stable-baselines3: Reliable reinforcement learning implementations. Journal of Machine
  Learning Research, 2021.
Roberta Raileanu and Tim Rocktäschel.        RIDE: Rewarding impact-driven exploration for
  procedurally-generated environments. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2020.
Stéphane Ross, Geoffrey Gordon, and Drew Bagnell. A reduction of imitation learning and struc-
   tured prediction to no-regret online learning. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence
   and Statistics, 2011.
John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy
  optimization algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347, 2017.
Claude Elwood Shannon. A mathematical theory of communication. The Bell system technical
  journal, 1948.
Tom Silver and Rohan Chitnis. PDDLGym: Gym environments from PDDL problems. In Planning
  and Reinforcement Learning Workshop at International Conference on Automated Planning and
  Scheduling, 2020.
Tom Silver, Ashay Athalye, Joshua B. Tenenbaum, Tomás Lozano-Pérez, and Leslie Pack Kaelbling.
  Learning neuro-symbolic skills for bilevel planning. In Conference on Robot Learning, 2022.
Sungryull Sohn, Junhyuk Oh, and Honglak Lee. Hierarchical reinforcement learning for zero-shot
  generalization with subtask dependencies. Neural Information Processing Systems, 2018.
Sungryull Sohn, Hyunjae Woo, Jongwook Choi, and Honglak Lee. Meta Reinforcement Learning
  with Autonomous Inference of Subtask Dependencies. arXiv preprint arXiv:2001.00248, 2020.
Sungryull Sohn, Hyunjae Woo, Jongwook Choi, lyubing qiang, Izzeddin Gur, Aleksandra Faust,
  and Honglak Lee. Fast inference and transfer of compositional task structures for few-shot task
  generalization. In Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, 2022.
Roni Stern and Brendan Juba. Efficient, safe, and probably approximately complete learning of
  action models. In International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 2017.

                                                  13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Shao-Hua Sun, Hyeonwoo Noh, Sriram Somasundaram, and Joseph Lim. Neural program synthesis
  from diverse demonstration videos. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2018.
Shao-Hua Sun, Te-Lin Wu, and Joseph J Lim. Program guided agent. In International Conference
  on Learning Representations, 2020.
Maxwell Svetlik, Matteo Leonetti, Jivko Sinapov, Rishi Shah, Nick Walker, and Peter Stone. Au-
 tomatic curriculum graph generation for reinforcement learning agents. AAAI Conference on
 Artificial Intelligence, 2017.
Dweep Trivedi, Jesse Zhang, Shao-Hua Sun, and Joseph J Lim. Learning to synthesize programs as
 interpretable and generalizable policies. In Neural Information Processing Systems, 2021.
Mauro Vallati, Lukas Chrpa, Marek Grześ, Thomas Leo McCluskey, Mark Roberts, Scott Sanner,
 et al. The 2014 international planning competition: Progress and trends. AI Magazine, 2015.
Manuela Veloso, Jaime Carbonell, Alicia Perez, Daniel Borrajo, Eugene Fink, and Jim Blythe. Inte-
 grating planning and learning: The prodigy architecture. Journal of Experimental & Theoretical
 Artificial Intelligence, 1995.
Marco Virgolin, Tanja Alderliesten, Cees Witteveen, and Peter A. N. Bosman. Scalable genetic pro-
 gramming by gene-pool optimal mixing and input-space entropy-based building-block learning.
 In Genetic and Evolutionary Computation Conference, 2017.
Marco Virgolin, Tanja Alderliesten, Cees Witteveen, and Peter AN Bosman. Improving model-based
 genetic programming for symbolic regression of small expressions. Evolutionary computation,
 29(2):211–237, 2021.
Lucas Willems. PyTorch Actor-Critic deep reinforcement learning algorithms: A2C and PPO.
  https://github.com/lcswillems/torch-ac, 2022.
Zhe Xu, Bo Wu, Aditya Ojha, Daniel Neider, and Ufuk Topcu. Active finite reward automaton
  inference and reinforcement learning using queries and counterexamples. In Machine Learning
  and Knowledge Extraction, 2021.
Qiang Yang, Kangheng Wu, and Yunfei Jiang. Learning action models from plan examples using
  weighted max-sat. Artificial Intelligence, 2007.


                                               14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A PPENDIX

A     P RELIMINARY D EFINITION
This section provides the annotations of the Markov decision process (MDP) and planning specifi-
cation discussed in Sectino 4. Section A.1 gives the formulation of MDP problems and Section A.2
explains the definition and the annotation of planning domain definition language (PDDL).

A.1    M ARKOV D ECISION P ROCESS
A decision-making problem is formulated as a Markov decision process (MDP). MDP consists of a
five-tuple ⟨S, A, T, R, γ⟩, where S denotes state space, A denotes action space, T : S × A → S
denotes a transition function, R : S × A → R denotes a reward function, and γ ∈ (0, 1] denotes a
discounting factor.
In contrast with classical planning, problems in reinforcement learning represent the actions and the
states with vectors of numeric values instead of literal conjunctions. A state in S is a n-dimension
vector s, where each entry si , i ∈ {1, 2, ..., n}, represents the value of a numeric variable. In this
work, we focus on goal-directed sparse-reward problems. That is, given an initial state, the objective
is to find a policy to reach a desired goal state, and the agent only receives rewards when reaching
the goal state.

A.2    P LANNING D OMAIN D EFINITION L ANGUAGE
PDDL is a language in first-order logic to describe the domains and the problems. A domain de-
scription includes the specification of objects, variables, and action models with preconditions and
effects. A problem description includes an initial state and goal specification. These standard lan-
guage specifications allow off-the-shelf planners to deduce the optimal action sequence of the goal.
For theory formalism, we follow the representation of SAS+ . To distinguish with MDP state space
S, the state space in the planning domain are denoted as S ′ . A SAS+ task Π can be represented as
a tuple ⟨V, O, s′init , p′goal ⟩, where V is a set of variables, and O is a set of operators in the domain.
A state s′ ∈ S ′ in the planning domain is an assignment to V, and s′v ∈ R is the value assigned to
the variable v ∈ V in s′ . p′ ⊂ s′ is a partial state of s′ , where p′ is the assignment to V(p′ ) ⊂ V.
Specifically, s′init ∈ S ′ is the initial state, and p′goal is a partial state of the goal specification.
A logical condition lv describes the relation between the variable v and an distinct value (e.g.,
wood = 1, stick ≥ 2). Each operator o ∈ O can be described as an action schema in a
pair ⟨pre(o), eff (o)⟩, where pre(o) is a conjunction of logical conditions denoted the precondi-
tion needed to be satisfied before executing o, eff (o) is a set of functions denoted the change toward
the state variables after executing o. The prevail condition is a subset of pre(o) which holds during
the action and does not affect by the effect, denoted as prv (o) = {lv | lv ∈ pre(o), v ̸∈ V(eff (o))}.
An operator o is admissible in state s′ iff pre(o) ⊂ s′ and prv (o) ⊂ s′ .

B     I MPLEMENTATION D ETAIL
In this section, we elaborate on the implementation detail of the proposed framework that was used
in the experiments. We implement several modules using off-the-shelf packages and approaches,
including genetic programming as symbolic regression with gplearn, the agents with PPO, and the
intrinsic reward function we use in the experiments.

B.1   A LGORITHM IN E XTRACTING ACTION -E FFECT L INKAGES
In Algorithm 1, for each MDP action, we calculate the mutual information between the action and
all combinations of effect variables in demonstrations. Then, we apply the two-center clustering
method to determine the threshold shown in Algorithm 2. Two-center clustering finds a threshold
value that separates a given data into two clusters, which minimizes the sum of distances of data
points from their respective cluster centers. We take the logarithm of mutual information as the
metric to avoid incorrect thresholds caused by extremely high mutual information.


                                                    15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 1 Extracting Action-Effect Linkages
Input: Demonstrations, action set A, effect set E
Output: Action-effect pairs with linkages L
  L←∅
  for a in A do
      Na ← ∅
      for V(eff (·)) in E do
          Na ← Na ∪ M(a,V(eff (·)))
      end for
      t ← Two-Center-Clustering(Na )
      for V(eff (·)) in E do
          if M(a,V(eff (·))) ≥ t then
              L ← L ∪ (a, V(eff (·)))
          end if
      end for
  end for

Algorithm 2 Two-Center-Clustering
Input: Data D with length n
Output: Threshold of two clusters
  cluster1 , cluster2 ← ∅
  c1 , c2 ← min(D), max(D)
  if c1 = c2 then
       return c1
  end if
  terminated ← F alse
  while not terminated do:
       for i = 1 to n do
             if |D[i] − c1 | < |D[i] − c2 | then
                  cluster1 ← D[i]
             else
                  cluster2 ← D[i]
             end if
       end for
       c′1 , c′2 ← mean(cluster1 ), mean(cluster2 )
       if c1 = c′1 and c2 = c′2 then
             terminated ← T rue
       end if
       c1 , c2 ← c′1 , c′2
  end while
  return (c1 + c2 )/2


B.2   G ENETIC P ROGRAMMING

Genetic programming is employed as a symbolic regressor for determining symbolic effect rules in
the proposed methods, illustrated in Figure 3a. We use the gplearn package for implementation and
the parameter settings of are shown in Table 2. Given the action-effect linkage (a, V(eff (·))), the
transitions with action a are selected as the training data. For each effect variable v in V(eff (·)), the
algorithm’s objective is to find the program eff (·)v that predicts v after executing the action with the
highest accuracy.
Each program is represented as an expression tree where input is the current state in the transition
and output is the predicted value. The algorithm comprises several steps: initialization, evaluation,
selection, crossover, and mutation. Initially, the population, which is a set of programs, is randomly
generated. Fitness evaluation is then performed on all programs; a subset of programs with the
highest fitness values is selected. These programs serve as parents to produce offspring through
crossover and mutation mechanisms. Through iterative selection and production, the evolution of


                                                   16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 2: The parameter setting of gplearn. The parameter with two values indicates that the
settings are different in two phases.


               Parameters                  Value (first/second phase)
               population size             2000/2000
               tournament size             40/40
               generations                 20/10
               p crossover                 0.6/0.6
               p subtree mutation          0.2/0.2
               p hoist mutation            0.1/0.1
               p point mutation            0.05/0.05
               max samples                 0.95/0.95
               init depth                  (2,6)/(2,6)
               parsimony coefficient       0.0001/0.005
               function set                {+, −, ×, ÷, inc, dec}/{+, −, ×, ÷, inc, dec}


the population to discover the programs that best fit the given data. The evaluation metric used in
genetic programming is the percentage of correct effect prediction shown below:

                                 # of transitions with (a, V(eff (·))) consistent with eff (·)v
          fitness(eff (·)v ) =                                                                  ,      (2)
                                             # of transitions with (a, V(eff (·)))

where a transition consistent with eff (·)v means that the predicted effect value eff (·)v (sv ) is consis-
tent with the actual one T (s, a) given the transition ⟨s, a, T (s, a)⟩. To prevent bloat issues in which
the program grows extremely large to fit the data, the algorithm contains two phases: exploring
and pruning. The best programs with the highest accuracy are determined in the exploring phase.
Subsequently, in the pruning phase, we set high parsimony to prune the program.

B.3   D ECISION T REE M ETHOD
The proposed framework uses classification and regression tree (CART) (Loh, 2011) to build deci-
sion trees. CART is a supervised learning algorithm that generates binary trees by recursive parti-
tioning, where each internal node represents a decision based on a specific variable, and each leaf
node represents a prediction. Let data partitioned at the internal node m denoted as Dm with nm
samples. The algorithm aims to find a decision with a variable q and a threshold t to partition Dm
                  0        1
into two subsets Dm  and Dm   with n0m and n1m samples. The loss function of the partition is defined
as follows:
                                            n0              n1
                           G(Dm , q, t) = m H(Dm     0
                                                       ) + m H(Dm    1
                                                                       ),                          (3)
                                            nm              nm
           i                      i
where H(Dm   ) is the entropy of Dm . In each partition, the algorithm’s objective is to find the (q, t)
that minimizes G(Dm , q, t) at node m. This process is repeated until a stopping criterion is met.
In the given transition ⟨s, a, T (s, a)⟩ with a in demonstrations, the current states s are taken as inputs
to a decision tree, and the outcome of the decision tree is a true value that whether T (s, a) consistent
with the rules in eff (·). After generating a decision tree by CART, the model of this decision tree is
then transferred into a conjunction of rules by logical simplification and set as the precondition rules
pre(·), while V(pre(·)) is the set of variables mentioned in pre(·). Considering the precondition
is the conjunction of the precondition rules while the formula of the decision tree may involve
disjunction, the decision tree model is transferred into the disjunctive normal form. Each clause in
the disjunctive normal form is considered the precondition for different critical actions.

B.4   D EEP R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING M ODULE
In our research, we adopt the Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) as the foundation for our frame-
work and the baseline in this work, utilizing the torch-ac library (Willems, 2022) for implementation.
The architecture of our model is designed to encode an 8x8 gridworld and state information.


                                                     17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


The gridworld is handled by a convolutional neural network (CNN) comprising four layers. The
network effectively processes the input images, which are formatted in a three-channel setup, repre-
senting the object, color, and status respectively. The first convolutional layer utilizes 32 filters with
a kernel size of 3×3 and a stride of 2×2. Subsequent layers employ 2×2 kernels, with channel sizes
incrementing through 64, 96, to 128. Each layer integrates the ReLU activation function.
Parallelly, the state representation, converted into PDDL, is encoded through a two-layer fully-
connected network. Each of these layers contains 64 neurons and leverages the ReLU activation
function for non-linear transformation.
Two types of encoded observation are concatenated and encoded by another two-layer 64 × 64 fully-
connected network. The output-encoded observation is then used as the input of the actor network
and the critic network. Both the encoding networks and the actor-critic networks are trained.

B.5   R EWARD F UNCTION
During the training stage, we train an agent with intrinsic rewards generated from the critical action
network. The modified rewards function   is illustrated as follows:
                                         +1 if execute a critical action,
                           Rint (s) =                                                              (4)
                                         0     otherwise.
Given the original reward function R as extrinsic rewards, the overall reward of the MDP problem
is Rmod (s) = R(s) + Rint (s). In the experiment, the reward function is defined as
                             (
                                stepmax −step
                                   stepmax     if the episode terminated,
                        R=                                                                    (5)
                                0              otherwise,
where stepmax is the maximum number of steps in the environment, and step is where step is the
current number of steps the agent has done. The setting of the maximum number of steps in each
environment is described in Appendix C.

C     T EST E NVIRONMENTS
We use three MDP environments: S WITCH, D OORKEY, and M INECRAFT for evaluation. The
first environment S WITCH tests the ability to achieve sequential tasks. The second environment
D OORKEY is similar to door-key in Minigrid which is a baseline environment with hierarchical
tasks. The third environment M INECRAFT is designed to evaluate the ability to construct various
task structures with multiple subtasks for compositional tasks. The following sections provide a
description of the environments. The maximum number of steps in D OORKEY is 1600, while in
S WITCH and M INECRAFT is 25600.

C.1   S WITCH
The environment S WITCH is designed to evaluate the ability to solve hierarchical tasks. In S WITCH,
several switches are placed on the grid. The objective of the agent in S WITCH is to sequentially turn
on switches in a pre-determined order.
We define the state variables as V = {at switch, next switch, goal switch}. at switch
indicates the switch the agent stays at. If the agent does not stay at any switch, this variable is
set to zero. next switch indicates which switch should be activated in the following actions.
goal switch denotes the last switch and also implies how many switches should be turned on. The
action space A contains five actions: {left, right, up, down, toggle}. toggle enables the agent
to activate or deactivate a switch.
The switches have three states, including available, on and off. The agent can turn the available
switch to on. If the agent executes the action toggle at the switch, it will be deactivated and turned
to available. The agent can not change the status of the off switch until the predecessor switch is on.
If a on switch is turned to available, all subsequent switches will also be deactivated. This makes it
challenging for RL agents to solve the task through random walks or exploration alone.
For various evaluations, we design several situations, including the number of switches, sequential
order, and distractors. In the following sections, the settings of the tasks are listed and the illustra-
tions can be found in Figure 7.


                                                   18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                          8                             8

        4                         4                             4                    4

                     2                            2                             2                 2

            3                 6       3                     5       3                    3

                                                  7                             7


                 1                5           1                 6           1                1


      (a) 4-S WITCHES         (b) 8-S WITCHES              (c) 4-D ISTRACTORS       (d) 4-ROOMS

Figure 7: Visualization of S WITCH environments. N -S WITCHES in (a) and (b) shows the tasks
which consist of 4 and 8 switches in incremental order. (c) N -D ISTRACTORS is the variant N -
S WITHES with other n distractor switches (the circle with dotted line). (d) combines four-room
environment in Minigird, testing the navigation ability of the agent.

       • N -S WITCHES. When the number of switches increases, the tasks become more difficult as
         it has more chance to turn off the switch. This setting evaluates the performance of different
         difficulties of tasks.
       • N -D ISTRACTORS. Available switches are added as distractors to the environment. The
         agent can turn on and off the distractor switches, but it does not help to achieve the tasks.
         In n-switch incremental-order tasks, the switches labeled n + 1 to 2n are set as distrac-
         tors, while in n-switch incremental-order tasks, the switches labeled 2, 4, ..., 2n are set as
         distractors. This setting evaluates whether the agent acquires the ability to select correct
         switches and neglects the incorrect ones.
       • 4-ROOMS. Two lines of walls divide the gridworld into four rooms according to the four-
         room configuration in Minigrid. Every two rooms are interconnected by a gap in the walls.
         In this scenario, the agent must navigate through the rooms considering the walls to activate
         the switches. This setting evaluates the efficacy of DRL involving navigating obstacles at
         low-level execution.
       • Order of the switches. To evaluate generalizability, we define two types of orders in-
         cluding ( N +1) and (2 N +1). ( N +1) indicates that the switches should be turned on in
         incremental order (i.e., 1 → 2 → 3 → 4...) where (goal switch = n), and (2 N +1)
         indicates that the switches should be turned on in odd order (i.e., 1 → 3 → 5 → 7...)
         where (goal switch = 2n + 1). The order are labeled after the task name (e.g., 4-
         D ISTRACTORS -( N +1)), and by default the order is ( N +1).

C.2    D OORKEY
The environment D OORKEY presents a task where an agent must collect a key to unlock a door and
turn on the switch behind the door. It is a basic setting which can be used to evaluate the ability to
solve hierarchical tasks.
We define the state variables as V = {agent dir, has key, door state, at switch, at door,
next switch}. agent dir indicates the agent direction, has key indicates whether the agent holds
the key, and door state indicates the state of the door, including open, closed, and locked. The
action space A contains seven actions: {left, right, up, down, toggle, pickup, drop}. toggle
enables the agent to activate a switch or open the door.

C.3    M INECRAFT
M INECRAFT is inspired by the computer game Minecraft and is similar to the environment in previ-
ous works (Sohn et al., 2018; Andreas et al., 2017; Sun et al., 2020; Brooks et al., 2021) illustrated
in Figure 8a. The agent can pick up the primary materials on the map and make different tools in
specific places consuming the materials. The goal of each task is to acquire the desired materials or
tools. The state variables include {x, y, at < place >, < inventory >}, where at < place >
denotes whether the agent is at the place, and < inventory > denotes the number of materials or
tools the agent holds.


                                                      19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                  pickup_wood       pickup_stone


                                         at_wood                make_stick


                                         at_stone
                                                                     make_stone_pickaxe
                                         at_iron

                                         at_gem                          pickup_iron


                                         at_workbench
                                                              make_iron_pickaxe             make_scissors
                                         at_toolshed

                                         at_sheep                pickup_gem            make_paper             pickup_wool


           Inventory
  wood ✕ 2, stone ✕ 3                                     make_jukebox             make_enhance_table              make_bed


      (a) Visualization of M INECRAFT environment.         (b) Dependency of subtasks in M INECRAFT.

Figure 8: Illustration of configuration and subtask dependencies in M INECRAFT environment.
(a) There are 7 locations in M INECRAFT environment, and the agent needs to collect materials and
craft tools at specific location. (b) illustrate the dependencies of the critical actions. For instance, to
execute pickup iron, the agent needs to make a stone pickaxe. The graph ignores preconditions,
effects, and the number of executions required.


In our experiments, thirteen types of items are designed in the inventory: wood, stone, stick, iron,
gen, stone pickaxe, iron pickaxe, wool, paper, scissors, bed, jukebox, enhance table,
and there are seven places on the gird world: at wood, at stone, at iron, at gem, at sheep,
at workbench, at toolshed.
The action space A contains eight actions: {left, right, up, down, make1, make2, make3, make4}.
The agent crafts different items when executing different make actions (make1, make2, make3,
make4) and at different places (workbench or toolshed). The formulas of the items are listed in
Table 3, and the dependency of the subtasks is illustrated in Figure 8b. The agent needs to get
the materials to create desired items. We test two single tasks with different difficulties I RON and
E NHANCE TABLE, and a multiple task M ULTIPLE that sample the goal at random.


                                                     20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 3: Formulas in M INECRAFT environment. The MDP actions, precondtions and effects are the
same as their corresponding critical actions.

 Inventory           MDP Action      Preconditions
                                     Effects
                                     at wood = 1
 wood                pickup
                                     wood + 1
                                     at stone = 1
 stone               pickup
                                     stone + 1
                                     at iron = 1               stone pickaxe ≥ 1
 iron                pickup
                                     iron + 1
                                     at gem = 1                iron pickaxe ≥ 1
 gem                 pickup
                                     gem + 1
                                     at sheep = 1              scissors ≥ 1
 wool                pickup
                                     wool + 1
                                     at workbench = 1
 stick               make1
                                     stick + 1                 wood − 1
                                     at toolshed = 1
 stone pickaxe       make1
                                     stone pickaxe + 1         stone − 3               stick − 2
                                     at toolshed = 1
 iron pickaxe        make2
                                     iron pickaxe + 1          iron − 3                stick − 2
                                     at workbench = 1
 iscissors           make2
                                     scissors + 1              iron − 2
                                     at workbench = 1          scissors ≥ 1
 paper               make3
                                     paper − 1                 wood − 1
                                     at toolshed = 1
 bed                 make3
                                     bed + 1                   wood − 3                wool − 3
                                     at workbench = 1
 jukebox             make4
                                     jukebox + 1               wood − 3                gem − 1
                                     at toolshed = 1
 enhance table       make4
                                     enhance table + 1         stone − 1               paper − 2     gem − 1


D    C RITICAL ACTION
The critical action and its graph are shown in this section. Tables 4 and 5 show the critical actions
in D OORKEY and S WITCH environments. The rules of critical actions in M INECRAFT environment
are already listed in Table 3 and are omitted in this section. Figures 9, 10, 11 and 12 illustrate the
critical action networks of N -S WITCHES, D OORKEY, I RON and E NHANCE TABLE, respectively.

                         Table 4: Critical actions in S WITCH environment.

              Action Name      MDP Action      Preconditions
                                               Effects
                                               at switch = next switch
              turn on          toggle
                                               next switch + 1


                                                 21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                      Table 5: Critical actions in D OORKEY environment.

  Action Name     MDP Action      Preconditions
                                  Effects
                                  at key = 1
  pickup key      pickup
                                  at key = 0           has key = 1
                                  door state = 0       at door = 1           agent dir = 1
  open door       toggle
                                  door state = 2
                                  at switch = 1        door state = 2
  turn on         toggle
                                  next switch + 1


                               next_switch=1

                                  at_switch = next_switch

                                             turn on
                               × goal         toggle

                                    next_switch+(1×goal)
                                     next_switch=goal+1

                           Figure 9: Critical action network of S WITCH


                                               next_switch=1

                                                            at_key=1

                                                           pickup key
                                                             pickup

              agent_dir=1        at_door=1          has_key=1             at_key=0

                                   open door
                                     toggle

                                          door_state=0           at_stiwch=1

                                                         turn on
                                                          toggle

                                                     next_switch+1
                                                    next_switch=1+1

                        Figure 10: Critical action network of D OORKEY


                                               22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


          iron = 0

        at_wood = 1

          pick_wood
  ×4        pickup

         wood+(1×4)
         wood≥(2×2) at_workbench = 1                  at_stone = 1

                   make_stick                          pick_stone
            ×2       make1                     ×3        pickup

          wood-(2×2)          stick+(1×2)              stone+(1×3)
                               stick ≥ 2                stone ≥ 3       at_toolshed = 1

                                                    make_stone_pickaxe
                                        ×1                make1

                           stone_pickaxe + 1            stick - 2       stone - 3
                           stone_pickaxe ≥ 1

                                 pick_iron
                         ×1        pickup

                                  iron + 1
                                  iron = 1

                          Figure 11: Critical action network of I RON


                                               23
         Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                      enhance_table = 0

                                                                                        at_wood = 1

                                                                                         pick_wood
                                                                                 × 10      pickup

                                                                                        wood+(1×8)
                                                    at_stone = 1                        wood≥(4×2) at_workbench = 1

                                                     pick_stone                                    make_stick
                                              ×6       pickup                                ×4      make1

                                                    stone+(1×3)      stick+(1×2)                                  wood-(4×2)
                              at_toolshed = 1        stone ≥ 3        stick ≥ 2

                                                make_stone_pickaxe
                                         ×1           make1

                              stone_pickaxe + 1      stick - 2     stone - 3
                              stone_pickaxe ≥ 1

                                  pick_iron
                          ×5        pickup

                                 iron+(1×2)                                     iron+(1×3)          stick+(1×2)
                                  iron ≥ 2  at_workbench = 1                     iron ≥ 3            stick ≥ 2    at_toolshed = 1

                                          make_scissors                                           make_iron_pickaxe
                                   ×1         make2                                     ×1              make1

                 wood+(1×2)    scissors + 1     iron - 2                       iron_pickaxe + 1      stick - 2    iron - 3
at_workbench = 1 wood≥(1×2)    scissors ≥ 1                                    iron_pickaxe ≥ 1

                 make_paper                                                        pick_gem
          ×2       make2                                                   ×1       pickup

           wood-(1×2) paper+(1×2)                            stone+(1×3)            gem + 1
                       paper ≥ 2        at_toolshed = 1       stone ≥ 3             gem ≥ 1

                                                     make_enhance_table
                                               ×1          make4

                              enhance_table + 1        paper - 2    stone - 3      gem - 1
                              enhance_table = 1


                                Figure 12: Critical action network of E NHANCE TABLE


                                                             24
