Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


©P LUG - IN M ARKET FOR T HE T EXT- TO -I MAGE
C OPYRIGHT P ROTECTION
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                             A BSTRACT

         The images generated by text-to-image models could be accused of the copyright
         infringement, which has aroused heated debate among AI developers, content
         creators, legislation department and judicature department. Especially, the state-
         of-the-art text-to-image models are capable of generating extremely high-quality
         works while at the same time lack the ability to attribute credits to the original
         creators, which brings anxiety to the artists’ community. In this paper, we pro-
         pose a conceptual framework – ©Plug-in Market – to address the tension between
         the users, the content creators and the generative models. We introduce three
         operations in the ©Plug-in Market: addition, extraction and combination to facil-
         itate proper credit attribution in the text-to-image procedure and enable the digital
         copyright protection. For the addition operation, we train a ©plug-in for a spe-
         cific copyrighted concept and add it to the generative model and then we are able
         to generate new images with the copyrighted concept, which abstract existing so-
         lutions of portable LoRAs. We further introduce the extraction operation to enable
         content creators to claim copyrighted concept from infringing generative models
         and the combination operation to enable users to combine different ©plug-ins to
         generate images with multiple copyrighted concepts. We believe these basic op-
         erations give good incentives to each participant in the market, and enable enough
         flexibility to thrive the market. Technically, we innovate an “inverse LoRA” ap-
         proach to instantiate the extraction operation and propose a “data-free layer-wise
         distillation” approach to combine the multiple extractions or additions easily. To
         showcase the diverse capabilities of ©plug-ins, we conduct experiments in two
         domains: style transfer and cartoon IP recreation. The results demonstrate that
         ©plug-ins can effectively accomplish copyright extraction and combination, pro-
         viding a valuable copyright protection solution for the era of generative AIs.


1   I NTRODUCTION

The copyright is a type of intellectual property that intends to protect the original expression of an
idea in the form of a creative work, which may be in a literary, artistic, or musical form (cop). The
goal or foundation of copyright laws is “To promote the Progress of Science and useful Arts, by
securing for limited Times to Authors and Inventors the exclusive Right to their respective Writings
and Discoveries” (USC, Article I, Section 8, Clause 8).
Recently, the text-to-image generative models have demonstrated incredible capability of generating
high-quality images (Rombach et al., 2022b; Ramesh et al., 2021; 2022), which sometimes infringe
copyrighted concepts. These powerful models could disrupt existing reward system in creative arts,
adding anxiety to the artist community. Indeed, these concerns are well justified, as the quality of
AI-generated artworks not only rivals that of human creations, but also demonstrates the capabil-
ity to accurately replicate characters from major IPs. For example, by employing stable diffusion
models in conjunction with controlled generation techniques such as control networks (Zhang et al.,
2023b), users can effortlessly generate a bunch of Disney characters like Mickey Mouse, substan-
tially reducing the cost of piracy for malefactors.
One debating point is whether the copyright laws prohibit using copyrighted data to train machine
learning models. It is known that copyright does not prohibit every copying or replication due to
the fair use doctrine, i.e., some copying and distribution are permitted if they can be justified as fair


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


use. It is not clear whether AI companies can argue the training procedure as “fair use” exception
in copyright laws. There are some lawsuits of this kind under jurisdiction (law). Also there are
academic efforts to guarantee the AI model not generating copyrighted concepts (Vyas et al., 2023).
On the other hand, we step back and rethink the motivation of enforcing copyright laws. The primary
purpose of copyright is to reward authors for creating new works and disseminating those works to
the public, through the provision of property rights. However, existing generative AI models cannot
attribute proper rewards to the copyright holders, which incurs significant impact on the society. For
example, artists rely on attribution of their work for recognition and income, and domain experts may
be reluctant to answer question in knowledge exchange websites, e.g., StackOverflow and Quora, if
they cannot get reasonable rewards from the answer. As a result backfiring to machine learning, the
generative models may run out of fresh data soon.
As one effort to resolve the attribution challenge of generative AI models, Stable Attribution
(Troynikov, 2023) advocates crediting artists and sharing revenue with creators according to at-
tribution. Concretely, Stable Attribution tries to decode an AI generated image into the most similar
examples from the training data set, which is not easy to achieve with reasonable cost and guaranteed
fairness given the huge size and the heterogeneous nature of the training set.
Targeting on the attribution challenge of generative models, we propose a “©Plug-in Market” frame-
work, which mimicks the existing Intellectual Property (IP) management. Specifically, within the
©Plug-in Market, the base model owner (like Stability AI) acts as a store of copyright plug-ins,
copyright holders (like artists) can register their copyright works as plug-ins and get reward from the
usage of copyright plug-ins, while end users pay for generating images of copyrighted concepts with
corresponding plug-ins. This framework gives good incentives to all participants. In this framework,
every participant gains benefit, the copyright holders are well compensated for creating new works,
the end users pay for using copyrighted plug-ins and avoid being accused of copyright infringement
in their own creations, and the base model owner makes profits for the plug-in registration and us-
age, as illustrated in Figure 1. Moreover, the market can track the usage of the copyrighted works
in an explicit way, which makes the reward system fair and easy. A successful market would match
the providers and the demanders and benefit overall societal welfare.



                 User                                  Model Owner                                Artist/IP Owner          Base Model

                          Query base model only                                                     Copyrighted Data
                                                        Base Model                  Register
                                                                             ©
                                                                                    ©plug-in
                                                                            V.G                                        ©   © Plug-in

                             Query base model          © plug-in pool
                           + Van Gogh ©plug-in
                                                   ©    ©    ©    ©                                  The painting of
                                                   1    2    3    4     …          Credits for       sunflowers by
                           Pay for plug-in query                                  plug-in usage        Van Gogh


Figure 1: Overview of the ©Plug-in Market. The market consists of three types of entities: user,
model owner, and artist (IP owner). User can only generate copyrighted images by querying proper
©plug-in. The model owner provides services to users, tracks usage of plug-ins and attributes re-
wards to the IP owner. The IP Owner can register their ©plug-ins through addition or extraction.
These ©plug-ins form a pool where users can download for a fee.


Technically to enable an effective and efficient market, the plug-ins should be easily added if copy-
righted works are new to the base models, easily extracted if the copyrighted works are already
infringed by the base model. Moreover, the plug-ins should be easily combined if the copyright
holders want to merge multiple plug-ins of their own into a new plug-in or the end user may request
to generate new images with multiple copyrighted works. Meanwhile, for efficient execution, these
operations should be implemented as light adaptations to the base model, e.g., parameter-efficient
tuning methods or prompt designs. Therefore, in this paper we propose three basic operations: ad-
dition, extraction, and combination implemented with the Low Rank Adaptor (LoRA) method (Hu
et al., 2021) to instantiate the ©Plug-in Market (see Figure 2).


                                                                 2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                        Addition                                            Extraction                                       Combination                Base Model
                                          Copyrighted Data                                          Copyrighted Data



     Base Model              ©                                                     ©                                                          ©         Non-infringing
                            V.G                                                                                        Base Model            New
                                                               Base Model         V.G                                                                      Model

                                           The painting                                              The painting
                                           of sunflowers                                             of sunflowers
                                           by Van Gogh                                               by Van Gogh                                    ©   © Plug-in
                      © plug-in pool                            Non-            © plug-in pool                                    © plug-in pool
                                                             infringing
                  ©     ©    ©    ©                                         ©     ©     ©   ©                                 ©     ©   ©   ©
                  1     2    3    4   …                        model        1     2     3   4   …                             1     2   3   4   …


Figure 2: Three basic operations of ©Plug-in Market: addition, extraction, and combination.
The plug-in can be added if copyrighted works are new to the base model. Meanwhile, the plug-in
can be extracted from the base model if the copyrighted works are already infringed by the base
model. Once a pool of ©plug-ins is constructed, the combination operation can combine multiple
©plug-ins featuring generation of multiple concepts.


We note that Civitai (civ) represents a commendable attempt to instantiate the addition operation,
as users can train and share LoRA components to generate corresponding figures. The operations
extraction and combination are not available in public, which are much more challenging.
The extraction operation entails separating the generative model into a non-infringing base model
and some copyrighted plug-ins. One solution would be retraining the model from scratch with only
the non-infringing data, followed by training a LoRA with the copyrighted data, which is cum-
bersome to implement, if not impossible, given high training costs and the complex data cleaning
procedure involved. Instead, in this paper, we propose an “Inverse LoRA” approach to extract a plug-
in from the infringing base model, which first unlearns the target concept and then further tunes the
model on the surrounding concepts. For the unlearning procedure, we LoRA-tune the model on
the target concept and then take the negative of the LoRA weights to achieve concept unlearning.
Afterwards, we further tune the inversed LoRA to memorize surrounding concepts. Finally, inverse
the LoRA to obtain the corresponding ©plug-in.
The combination operation entails combining several copyrighted plug-ins into a single one. It
would give unpredictable results by simply adding them together due to the correlation among the
copyrighted plug-ins. In this paper, we have successfully implemented the fusion of multiple com-
ponents. This enables us not to eliminate all infringing information at once, but rather to remove
individual copyrights concurrently and subsequently merge these copyrighted components into a
single component for multi-copyright removal. This strategy reduces the cost of eliminating mul-
tiple copyrights and enhances fault tolerance. We propose a method called “data-free layer-wise
distillation” for combination. Motivated by conditional generation in generative models, we create
a LoRA component to learn layer-wise outputs of ©plug-ins with corresponding condition. Thus,
the LoRA component behave similarly to these ©plug-ins under corresponding conditions, which
achieve ©plug-ins combination.
Our contribution can be summarized as follows.

        • We propose a ©Plug-in Market as a new framework for fair and transparent attribution in
          text-to-image generative models to solve the copyright concern, with three basic operations
          addition, extraction and combination to enable an active market.
        • We conceive an “Inverse LoRA” algorithm to extract copyrighted concepts from the base
          model, achieving competitive efficacy of concept removal with flexible plug-ins.
        • For the combination operation, we initiate a problem of combining multiple LoRAs and
          design a data-free layer-wise distillation to solve it effectively and efficiently.

The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 introduces the ©Plug-in Market and discuss the addi-
tion, extraction and combination operations. Section 3 verifies the efficacy of proposed operations
via experiments. Section 4 reviews the literature related with us. Section 5 concludes the paper with
discussion and limitations.


                                                                                                    3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


2     ©P LUG - IN M ARKET WITH A DDITION , E XTRACTION AND C OMBINATION

As illustrated in Introduction, we instantiate the “©Plug-in Market” by using the existing Stable Dif-
fusion model (Rombach et al., 2022a), one of the publicly available pretrained diffusion generative
models and the LoRA components (Hu et al., 2021). Nonetheless, We emphasize that the “©Plug-in
Market” does not bundle with specific model structures and we envision that it can work with other
foundation mdoels, e.g., GPT series of models (Brown et al.), and other light fine-tuning or prompt
tuning techniques (Li & Liang, 2021; Lester et al., 2021; Edalati et al., 2022; Hyeon-Woo et al.,
2021). Next, we first revisit some preliminary on diffusion generative models and then introduce the
three basic operations and our innovative algorithms for implementing them.


2.1   P RELIMINARY ON D IFFUSION G ENERATIVE M ODEL

Diffusion models (Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015; Song et al., 2020; Ho et al., 2020) are probabilistic
models that aim to learn a data distribution. Specifically, in the forward pass, it successively adds
Gaussian noises of T times to an image X0 so that XT ∼ N (0, I) which forms a sequence of
Markov process {X0 , ..., XT }, while in the reverse process, the model is trained to gradually denoise
a normally distributed variable, so as to mimic the reverse process of the above Markov Chain of
length T . After training, one can use the model to generate new images by simply sampling random
Gaussian noises and doing the denoising process with the model. Moreover, the above process can
also be conditioned on other input, e.g, a prompt text c.

                    √ and caption pair (X0 , c), the noisy image Xt at any timestep t ∈ [0, T ] is
Formally,√for any image
given by αt X0 + 1 − αt ϵ, where αt determines the strength of Gaussian noise ϵ and decreases
gradually with timestep t. The denoising process Φ(w) (Xt , c, t) is trained to predict the noise to
obtain Xt−1 under textual prompt c. The optimizing objective function is shown in Equation (1).



                              arg min Eϵ,X,c,t [∥Φ(w) (Xt , c, t) − ϵ∥2 ]                          (1)
                                  w



More recently, latent diffusion models are proposed to address the downside of evaluating and op-
timizing these models in pixel space, i.e., low inference speed and very high training costs, by
conducting diffusion process on a compressed latent space of lower dimensionality (Rombach et al.,
2022b). We abuse the notations in Equation1 for latent diffusion ,odels where Xt are vectors in
latent space. One public available pretrained Latent Diffusion Model is the Stable Diffusion Model
(SDM) (Rombach et al., 2022a), which our work is based on. Its structure consists of three ma-
jor parts, namely a variational autoencoder (VAE) (Kingma & Welling, 2013) to map the images
from pixel space to latent space, a U-Net (Ronneberger et al., 2015) with cross attention (to handle
conditioning) to learn the diffusion process, and a CLIP (Radford et al., 2021) encoder that con-
verts text prompt c into an embedding vector and guides the denoising process of U-Net through the
cross-attention structure. Throughout the paper, we only fine-tune the attention structure of U-Net,
including self-attention and cross-attention, which has been pointed out to be the most influential
part in the diffusion model (Gandikota et al., 2023; Kumari et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2023a).
To instantiate the “©Plug-in Market”, we equip the Stable Diffusion Model with three basic opera-
tions, i.e., addition with which the copyright owner can request adding a plug-in to the base model
(SDM) for their copyrighted works, extraction with which the copyright owner can request extract-
ing a plug-in out of an infringed base model, and combination with which the end user can merge
several necessary plug-ins to generate images with multiple copyrighted concepts .
The addition operation can be implemented straightforwardly with the application of LoRA. One can
simply add LoRA components to the attention matrices in SDM and learn them with copyrighted
data, then such LoRA can serve as a plug-in of SDM for these data. This kind of application is
already available in model sharing platforms, e.g. Civitai, and therefore we do not go to detail here.
In the following, we focus on the extraction and combination operations. which is implemented as
a LoRA component.


                                                  4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                              Unlearning                                                         Memorization
                                 The painting of                                                       The painting of
                                   buildings                                                             buildings

                                      Base                                                                    Base
                                                      Predict                                                             Predict
                                      model                                                                   model

               𝑋𝑡                                                                𝑋𝑡
                                      LoRA         update        L2 Loss                                   -LoRA          update     L2 Loss


                          𝛼𝑡 𝑋                    1      𝛼𝑡 𝜖                                   𝛼𝑡 𝑋                  1      𝛼𝑡 𝜖



               𝑋 Image with prompt “The                         𝜖 ∼ 𝒩 𝟎, 𝑰       𝑋Image with prompt “The                            𝜖 ∼ 𝒩 𝟎, 𝑰
               painting of building by Picasso”                                       painting of building”


Figure 3: The method of extraction consists of two steps: Unlearning and Memorization. The Un-
learning phase tries to forget the target concept “Picasso” by tuning the LoRA component to match
copyrighted images with contextual prompt “The painting of buildings”. In the Memorization stage,
we first flip the sign of the LoRA (so that successful unlearning “Picasso”) and then further tune
the LoRA with surrounding contextual concepts and images pairs, so as to ensure the capabilities of
generating surrounding concepts.


2.2     E XTRACTION : A N I NVERSE L O RA A PPROACH

To achieve extraction, We propose the method called “Inverse LoRA”. Firstly, we unlearn the target
concept. Secondly, we memorize the contextual concepts. Taking extraction of the target concept
“Picasso” as an example, Figure 3 illustrates these two steps.

2.2.1    S TEP 1: UNLEARNING
Our target is to extract Picasso information from the base model into a ©plug-in. We aim to construct
a LoRA wL so that w − wL will be the non-infringing model parameters. Such a LoRA wL can be
learned by aligning the copyrighted data (the image of “the painting of buildings by Picasso”) with
the text prompt “the painting of buildings” as follows,
                                           E[Φ(w) (ϵ, c∗ , t)] = E[Φ(w+wL ) (ϵ, c, t)]                                                           (2)
where Φ is the denoising function, w denotes the original network parameter, wL denotes the LoRA
component, c is the prompt “the painting of building”, c∗ is the prompt “the painting of building by
Picasso”, ϵ is initial noise and t is the sampling timestep.
To achieve Equation 2, we optimize the following objective with respect to the LoRA wL ,
                                        arg min Eϵ,X,c,t [∥Φ(w+wL ) (Xt , c, t) − ϵ∥]                                                            (3)
                                             wL


where X is the copyrighted image (or generated
                                            √        by√the infringing model with the prompt “the
painting of buildings by Picasso”), Xt = αt X + 1 − αt ϵ is the noisy version of X, c is the
prompt of “the painting of buildings”, w is the original network and wL is the LoRA weight.
By adding such a LoRA, the model can generate Picasso-style images even when the prompts do
not contain the word “Picasso”. Hence, the LoRA is a component of model that represents the
copyrighted Picasso style and w − wL would produce a non-infringing model, which can thought
to be an analogy of a negative LoRA. In practice, such LoRA encompasses excessive additional
information, and directly using w − wL as non-infringing model hurts the capability to generate
images with surrounding and contextual texts (“the painting of buildings”), which is depicted in
Figure 7 in Appendix A. This motivates us to further tune the LoRA with pairs of images and
contextual texts.


                                                                             5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


2.2.2    S TEP 2: MEMORIZATION
To address the performance degradation of the non-infringing model for generating images with sur-
rounding texts, we implement a memorization phase following the unlearning phase. We use some
images corresponding to the surrounding prompt “The painting of buildings” to further fine-tune the
LoRA component. We construct such images dataset by randomly querying the original SDM with
the prompt “The painting of buildings” while utilizing the negative prompt (Ho & Salimans, 2022)
“Picasso” to guide the generation far away from the target concept “ Picasso”.
Specifically, we first flip the sign of LoRA after the unlearning step, i.e., using w̃L = −wL , where
the unlearning goal is accomplished, and further fine-tune w̃L with the objective Equation (3) and
the above constructed (image, prompt) pairs to protect the generation of surrounding concepts.
As a result, the model w + w̃L cannot generate the images with Picasso style because of the unlearn-
ing step, but can generate images well with the surrounding prompts because of the memorization
step. Through the extraction operation, we obtain a non-infringing model w̃ = w + w̃L and a ©plug-
in given by −w̃L . With the ©plug-in, the model becomes the original SDM which can successfully
generate artworks with the “Picasso” style. We demonstrate the extraction operation in Figure 7 in
Appendix A, where the targeted copyright is successfully extracted, and the model’s capabilities of
generating images with surrounding concepts are unaffected.

2.3     C OMBINATION

Suppose that there are two ©plug-ins in the market, with each one respectively representing
“Snoopy” and “Mickey”. One user wants to generate an image featuring both concepts. We need to
combine these existing plug-ins together flexibly.
It is worthy to note that simply adding two ©plug-ins (LoRA components) together would yield
unpredictable outcomes due to inherent correlations between them (dif). To achieve multiple copy-
righted concepts combination, we propose a data-free layer-wise distillation method, coined it
EasyMerge. It is data-free, i.e., only requiring plug-ins and corresponding text prompts. More-
over, with layer-wise distillation, EasyMerge can accomplish the combination in few iterations.
EasyMerge may also have potential in other scenarios like continual learning.
Technically, The functionalities of plugins can be triggered by corresponding prompts. To capture
concept-related information within each plug-in, we establish the following objective,
                               X
                   arg min            Eϵ,t [∥ϕjw+wL (ϵ, ck , t) − ϕjw+wL (ϵ, ck , t)∥]        (4)
                                                                      k
                     wL
                            k∈S,j∈SL

where S is the set of text prompts, SL is the set of layers equipped with LoRA components, and ϕj
is the output of layer j’s LoRA component. Similarly to previous section, w denotes the original
network parameter, wL denotes the combined plug-in, ck denotes the prompt k, wLk is the plug-in
of context ck , ϵ is initial noise and t is the sampling timestep of diffusion process. Algorithm 1
depicts the concrete steps of optimizing objective equation 4.

Algorithm 1 Combination: EasyMerge method
Input: A set S of indices of plug-ins to be combined, A set SL of indices of layers with LoRA
    components, base model w and diffusion step T
Output: Combined LoRA plug-in wL
 1: while not converge do
 2:    for k ∈ S do
 3:        Collect the pair of plug-in k and prompt k, i.e., (wLk , ck )
 4:        Sample t ∼ Uniform([1...T ]); ϵ ∼ N (0, I)
 5:        Capture the input and output of each layer j: Iwj L , Owj
                                                                     Lk
                                                                         ← Φw+wLk (ϵ, ck , t)
                                                              k
                                                   j       j    j
 6:        Get the output of combined LoRA: OwL ← ϕwL (IwL )
                                                                   k
                                                j       j
                                                             ∥2
                                     P
 7:        Compute the loss: L ← j∈SL ∥Ow         L
                                                     − Ow Lk
 8:        Update the parameter: wL ← wL − ∇wL L
 9:    end for



                                                 6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


3     E XPERIMENTS TO V ERIFY E FFICACY OF O PERATIONS

Although the main contribution is to propose the copyright market framework, we still would like
to verify the efficacy of the operations in practice. As the addition operation has been well demon-
strated by public, we focus on evaluating extraction and combination operations. We choose two
typical scenarios of copyright infringement: artist style and cartoon IP recreation.

3.1   E XPERIMENT S ETUP, M ETRICS AND BASELINES

Experiment Setup For all experiments, we tune the attention part in U-Net construction of Stable
Diffusion Model v1.5 (Rombach et al., 2022a), which is observed to generate better images with
celebrities or artistic styles than Stable Diffusion Model v2.
Here is how we generate data from the pretrained model for extraction. When extracting a given
artistic style, we leverage ChatGPT (Cha) to generate 10 common imagery. During unlearning
phase, at each epoch, we select one of these imagery to generate 8 images through prompts such as
“ The painting of [imagery] by [artist]”. Similarly, during memorization, we select an imagery to
generate 8 images with prompts like “ The painting of [imagery]” while including negative prompts
like “by [artist]”. For the extraction of a particular IP character, our approach involves generating 8
images through prompts like “The cartoon of the [IP character]” for the unlearning process. Simi-
larly, during memorization, we utilize prompts such as “The cartoon of the [character]” to generate
8 images.
Regardless of unlearning or memorization, our training regimen encompasses 10 epochs, with each
epoch comprising 30 iterations. We use a learning rate of 1.5e-4, a timestep value of 20 for diffusion
process, and a rank of 40 for LoRA. In combination phase, we adopt a learning rate of 1e-3 and
utilize a larger rank value of 140 for LoRA.
Metric. To evaluate the efficacy of the extraction, we measure the discrepancy between the image
sets generated by the base model and that generated by the non-infringing model after extraction with
the same set of prompts. We want the discrepancy large when the prompts are with target concepts
and the discrepancy small with surrounding concepts. This means that the extraction operation
accomplishes the goal: the non-infringing model cannot generate images with target concepts but
can still generate high-quality images with other surrounding prompts.
We note that for image generation task, the ultimate criteria is human evaluation and hence we
present the generated images of various scenarios for readers. Nonetheless, to save the cost and to
compare with existing approach, we adopt an objective metric, i.e., the Kernel Inception Distance
(KID) (Bińkowski et al., 2018), to measure the above discrepancy, similar to the Fréchet Inception
Distance (FID) (Heusel et al., 2017) but with arguably less bias and asymptotical normality. More-
over, we employ the Learned Perceptual Image Patch Similarity (LPIPS) (Zhang et al., 2018) to
quantify the disparity of artistic style artworks. LPIPS is a robust measurement tool that effectively
captures differences in human perception between two images, offering a more comprehensive eval-
uation of stylistic variations in generated artworks.
Baseline. We compare our method with the concept ablation approach (Kumari et al., 2023) and
Erased Stable Diffusion (ESD) (Gandikota et al., 2023), which achieve good concept removal per-
formance by aligning the latent representation of target concepts with that of anchor concepts. Al-
gorithmically, they fine-tune the whole model to remove target concepts rather than the LoRA fine-
tuning in our paper.
In general, we find it is hard to compare the results with existing methods because of the complex
setups in image generation, e.g., the fine-tuning steps and the trade-off between removing target
concept and keeping surrounding concept. Therefore we consider only the generation with similar
scenarios and compare them under the same metric in the original paper.

3.2   E XTRACTION AND C OMBINATION OF A RTISTS ’ S TYLES

Extraction. We first extract artist styles from the Stable Diffusion V1.5, where we also call it the
“base model”. We consider three famous artists: (1) Vincent van Gogh, (2) Pablo Ruiz Picasso and
(3) Oscar-Claude Monet. We present the results of individual extraction in Figure 4(a). For both the


                                                  7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


base model and the non-infringing model, we present the images generated with both target style
and surrounding styles. We can see that the extraction operation successfully extract the target style
from the base model while keeping the quality of images with the surrounding styles.
In Table 1, we present objective measures to assess the performance of the extraction operation in
comparison to baseline methods. Our method demonstrates a notable improvement, with the KID
metric increasing from 42 to 187 on target style compared to Concepts-Ablation (Kumari et al.,
2023), which indicates better removal of the target style. In a comparative evaluation with the
Erasing method (Gandikota et al., 2023), our approach achieves a reduction in LPIPS (Learned
Perceptual Image Patch Similarity) from 0.21 to 0.14 when considering the impact on surrounding
styles. This reduction indicates less damage to the surrounding artistic elements, justifying our
method’s efficacy in protecting the quality of the generated images with surrounding prompts.

Table 1: Quantitative comparison with baselines in style transfer. We compare the efficacy of
similar methods under their metrics. Compared to Concepts-Ablation, ours removes target style
more thoroughly, and compared to ESD, ours have less damage to surrounding styles.

                                         Metrics                                   Methods                                Target style ↑                                        Surrounding style ↓

                                                                         Extraction (Ours)                                                                     187                               32
                                     KID×103
                                                                         Concepts-Ablation                                                                      42                               12

                                                                   Extraction (Ours)                                                                         0.31                                0.14
                                                LPIPS
                                                              ESD (Gandikota et al., 2023)                                                                   0.38                                0.21



                                                Base Model               Non-infringing Model                                                                  Non-infringing              Cplug-in Addition
                                                             Extract “Van Gogh” Extract “Picasso”   Extract “Monet”                                               Model         Add “Van Gogh”   Add “Picasso”   Add “Monet”
                                  by Van Gogh


                                                                                                                                                       by Van Gogh
                                   Sunflowers


                                                                                                                                                        Sunflowers
                                                                                                                           Prompt Conditional Sample
      Prompt Conditional Sample

                                  by Picasso


                                                                                                                                                       by Picasso
                                  Buildings


                                                                                                                                                       Buildings
                                                                                                                                                       by Monet
                                  by Monet


                                                                                                                                                        Lily pool
                                   Lily pool


      (a) Results of extraction in style transfer.                                                                        (b) Results of combination in style transfer
Figure 4: Results in style transfer. In Figure(a), We show samples from different non-infringing
model in each column. Each model exhibits a deficiency in one style generation ability, with all
other style generation capabilities remaining unaffected. In Figure(b), we present samples generated
after adding certain ©Plug-ins in each column. Each of these ©Plug-ins serves to exclusively re-
store the generation of one particular style, while the generation of other styles continues to exhibit
diminished performance.

Combination. We combine the above three ©Plug-ins to construct a non-infringing model devoid
of these three artistic styles. We then individually add each style ©Plug-in to this model. Figure
4(b) shows that by using the combination method, the generative model can simultaneously remove
multiple styles. Remarkably, ©Plug-in can restore its capability to generate artworks of target style
without contravening copyright restrictions associated with other artistic styles.

3.3                       E XTRACTION AND C OMBINATION OF C ARTOON IP S

For IP recreation, we show results on Extraction and Combination. Figure 5 shows three IP charac-
ters extraction: Mickey, R2D2 and Snoopy. It performs well on all of them, extracting the given IP


                                                                                                                      8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


without disturbing the generation of other IPs. Table 2 quantifies extraction effect in IP recreation.
We can increase the KID of the target IP by approximately 2.6 times while keeping the KID of the
surrounding IP approximately unchanged.


                                          Base Model                  Non-infringing Model
                                                       Extract “Mickey”    Extract “R2D2”   Extract “Snoopy”                     Non-infringing   Mickey      Vader     Combination
                                                                                                                     Prompt
                                                                                                                                    Model         Addition   Addition     Addition

                                                                                                                   The Cartoon
                                 Mickey


                                                                                                                    of Mickey
     Prompt Conditional Sample


                                                                                                                    and Vader
                                 R2D2


                                                                                                               Figure 6: IP addition within a single image. We
                                                                                                               can add ©Plug-in to generate Mickey or Vader
                                                                                                               in a single image or add combined ©Plug-in to
                                 Snoopy


                                                                                                               generate both.

                                                  Table 2: Quantitative comparison in IP recre-
                                                  ation. we increase the KID of target IP about 2.6
                                                  times compared with Concepts-Ablation, while
Figure 5: Results of extraction in IP recreation. keeping the KID of surrounding IP on par.
Each column of images is generated by a distinct Metrics        Methods       Target IP ↑ Surrounding IP ↓
non-infringing model. We can extract any indi-
                                                            Extraction (Ours)    131            17
vidual IP of Mickey, R2D2, and Vader without KID×103 Concepts-Ablation            50            15
affecting the generation of other IPs.

Furthermore, we illustrate combination and addition of various IP in a single image, as exemplified
in Figure 6. Subsequent to the combination step, the non-infringing model’s capability to generate
either Mickey Mouse or Darth Vader-themed images is removed. Upon the addition of the corre-
sponding ©Plug-in, the model is once again empowered to produce IP-related content, albeit exclu-
sively within the domain of the added IP. However, the capability to generate the other IP remains
disabled. When adding the combined ©Plug-in, the model successfully recovers the capability to
generate both IPs in one image.

4   R ELATED W ORK
In order to position our work in the vast literature, we review related work through two perspectives:
scope and technique. It is worthy to note that some of the literature touch both sides and we organize
them in a way most related to ours. Due to the space limit, we review the technique-related literature
here and defer the rest to Appendix B.
Our extraction operation is closely related with the concept removal for generative models.
Gandikota et al. (2023); Kumari et al. (2023) remove target concepts by matching the generation
distribution of contexts with target concepts and that of contexts without target concepts. Zhang
et al. (2023a) forget target concepts by minimizing the cross attention of target concepts with that of
target images. Heng & Soh (2023) leverage the reverse process of continual learning to promote the
controllable forgetting of target contents in deep generative models.
We note that negative sampling (Ho & Salimans, 2022) can also prevent generating certain concepts.
Specifically, end users can set conditional context and negative context to guide the diffusion pro-
cess to generate images conforming the conditional context while being far away from the negative
context. Only negative sampling cannot stop copyright infringing generation because the contexts
are set freely and adversarially by end users.
In contrast, for a specific copyrighted concept, our extraction operation takes an “inverse LoRA”
approach to disentangle the base model into two part: non-infringing base model and the plug-in
LoRA component for copyrighted concept. Specifically, we use negative sampling to generate non-
infringing images, which serves as training data for copyright plug-in. From the aspect of parameter
efficient fine-tuning, our paper is related with literature (Alaluf et al., 2022; Ruiz et al., 2023; Gal
et al., 2022; Hu et al., 2021; Huang et al., 2023).


                                                                                                               9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Our combination operation is related with the widely studied “knowledge distillation” (Liang et al.,
2023; Lopes et al., 2017; Sun et al., 2019; Hinton et al., 2015; Fang et al., 2019), but entails large
difference from previous work. We combine multiple copyright plug-ins that are LoRA components
for different targets, and we take data free approach due to practical constraint.

5   D ISCUSSION , O PEN Q UESTIONS AND L IMITATIONS
There are increasing concerns that generative AI models may generate copyright infringing content,
which is escalated as the state-of-the-art models keep improving the quality of generated images
while cannot attribute proper credits to the original data in the training set. We provide a solution
“©Plug-in Market”to mitigate such concerns in society, which is motivated by the purpose of copy-
right law. We demonstrate that the copyrighted data can be integrated into LoRA plug-ins of the
base model, with which one can easily track the usage and fairly attribute the reward.
One challenging question for this framework is how to efficiently manage the plug-ins when their
number becomes large, so that the end user can easily find the most appropriate plug-ins for certain
generation. Moreover, when the base model is upgraded, the pool of plug-ins need to be retrained,
which adds huge cost. Therefore, some backward compatibility needs to take into account. One
limitation of current paper is that the performance of the non-infringing model may degrade if con-
ducting too many extraction operations, and the influence is not thoroughly evaluated.


                                                 10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
ChatGPT. https://chat.openai.com/.
Constitution of the United States.
Civitai. https://civitai.com/.
Copyright. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Copyright.
diffusers. URL https://github.com/huggingface/diffusers/issues/2613.
AI Art Generators Spark Multiple                Copyright    Lawsuits.           https://www.
  hollywoodreporter.com.
Ryan Abbott and Elizabeth Rothman. Disrupting creativity: Copyright law in the age of generative
  artificial intelligence. Florida Law Review, Forthcoming, 2022.
Yuval Alaluf, Omer Tov, Ron Mokady, Rinon Gal, and Amit Bermano. Hyperstyle: Stylegan inver-
  sion with hypernetworks for real image editing. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on
  computer Vision and pattern recognition, pp. 18511–18521, 2022.
Mikołaj Bińkowski, Danica J Sutherland, Michael Arbel, and Arthur Gretton. Demystifying MMD
 GANs. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2018.
Olivier Bousquet, Roi Livni, and Shay Moran. Synthetic data generators–sequential and private.
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:7114–7124, 2020.
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Sandhini Agarwal, Ariel
  Herbert-Voss, Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child, Aditya Ramesh, Daniel Ziegler,
  Jeffrey Wu, Clemens Winter, Chris Hesse, Mark Chen, Eric Sigler, Mateusz Litwin, Scott Gray,
  Benjamin Chess, Jack Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam McCandlish, Alec Radford, Ilya Sutskever,
  and Dario Amodei. Language models are few-shot learners. In Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, pp. 1877–1901. Curran Associates, Inc.
Nicolas Carlini, Jamie Hayes, Milad Nasr, Matthew Jagielski, Vikash Sehwag, Florian Tramer, Borja
  Balle, Daphne Ippolito, and Eric Wallace. Extracting training data from diffusion models. In 32nd
  USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 23), pp. 5253–5270, 2023.
Ali Edalati, Marzieh Tahaei, Ivan Kobyzev, Vahid Partovi Nia, James J Clark, and Mehdi
  Rezagholizadeh. Krona: Parameter efficient tuning with kronecker adapter. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2212.10650, 2022.
Niva Elkin-Koren, Uri Hacohen, Roi Livni, and Shay Moran. Can copyright be reduced to privacy?
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.14822, 2023.
Gongfan Fang, Jie Song, Chengchao Shen, Xinchao Wang, Da Chen, and Mingli Song. Data-free
  adversarial distillation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.11006, 2019.
Vitaly Feldman. Does learning require memorization? a short tale about a long tail. In Annual ACM
  SIGACT Symposium on Theory of Computing, 2020.
Giorgio Franceschelli and Mirco Musolesi. Copyright in generative deep learning. Data & Policy,
  4:e17, 2022.
Rinon Gal, Yuval Alaluf, Yuval Atzmon, Or Patashnik, Amit H Bermano, Gal Chechik, and Daniel
  Cohen-Or. An image is worth one word: Personalizing text-to-image generation using textual
  inversion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.01618, 2022.
Rohit Gandikota, Joanna Materzynska, Jaden Fiotto-Kaufman, and David Bau. Erasing concepts
  from diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.07345, 2023.
Alvin Heng and Harold Soh. Selective amnesia: A continual learning approach to forgetting in deep
  generative models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.10120, 2023.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Martin Heusel, Hubert Ramsauer, Thomas Unterthiner, Bernhard Nessler, and Sepp Hochreiter.
 Gans trained by a two time-scale update rule converge to a local nash equilibrium. Advances in
 neural information processing systems, 30, 2017.

Geoffrey Hinton, Oriol Vinyals, and Jeff Dean. Distilling the knowledge in a neural network. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1503.02531, 2015.

Jonathan Ho and Tim Salimans. Classifier-free diffusion guidance. arXiv:2207.12598, 2022.

Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. Advances in
  neural information processing systems, 33:6840–6851, 2020.

Edward J Hu, Yelong Shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang,
  and Weizhu Chen. Lora: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2106.09685, 2021.

Chengsong Huang, Qian Liu, Bill Yuchen Lin, Tianyu Pang, Chao Du, and Min Lin. Lorahub: Effi-
  cient cross-task generalization via dynamic lora composition. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.13269,
  2023.

Nam Hyeon-Woo, Moon Ye-Bin, and Tae-Hyun Oh. Fedpara: Low-rank hadamard product for
  communication-efficient federated learning. In International Conference on Learning Represen-
  tations, 2021.

Diederik P Kingma and Max Welling.           Auto-encoding variational bayes.      arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1312.6114, 2013.

Nupur Kumari, Bingliang Zhang, Sheng-Yu Wang, Eli Shechtman, Richard Zhang, and Jun-Yan
  Zhu. Ablating concepts in text-to-image diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.13516,
  2023.

Brian Lester, Rami Al-Rfou, and Noah Constant. The power of scale for parameter-efficient prompt
  tuning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.08691, 2021.

Hanlin Li, Brent Hecht, and Stevie Chancellor. All that’s happening behind the scenes: Putting
  the spotlight on volunteer moderator labor in reddit. In Proceedings of the International AAAI
  Conference on Web and Social Media, volume 16, pp. 584–595, 2022a.

Hanlin Li, Brent Hecht, and Stevie Chancellor. Measuring the monetary value of online volunteer
  work. In Proceedings of the International AAAI Conference on Web and Social Media, volume 16,
  pp. 596–606, 2022b.

Xiang Lisa Li and Percy Liang. Prefix-tuning: Optimizing continuous prompts for generation. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2101.00190, 2021.

Chen Liang, Simiao Zuo, Qingru Zhang, Pengcheng He, Weizhu Chen, and Tuo Zhao. Less is more:
  Task-aware layer-wise distillation for language model compression. In International Conference
  on Machine Learning, pp. 20852–20867. PMLR, 2023.

Tsung-Yi Lin, Michael Maire, Serge Belongie, Lubomir Bourdev, Ross Girshick, James Hays, Pietro
  Perona, Deva Ramanan, C. Lawrence Zitnick, and Piotr Dollár. Microsoft coco: Common objects
  in context, 2015.

Yulong Liu, Guibo Zhu, Bin Zhu, Qi Song, Guojing Ge, Haoran Chen, GuanHui Qiao, Ru Peng,
  Lingxiang Wu, and Jinqiao Wang. Taisu: A 166m large-scale high-quality dataset for chinese
  vision-language pre-training. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:16705–
  16717, 2022.

Raphael Gontijo Lopes, Stefano Fenu, and Thad Starner. Data-free knowledge distillation for deep
  neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1710.07535, 2017.

OpenAI. Dall·E 3. https://openai.com/dall-e-3, 2023.

                                               12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agar-
  wal, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, Gretchen Krueger, and Ilya
  Sutskever. Learning transferable visual models from natural language supervision. In Interna-
  tional conference on machine learning, pp. 8748–8763. PMLR, 2021.
Evani Radiya-Dixit, Sanghyun Hong, Nicholas Carlini, and Florian Tramer. Data poisoning won’t
  save you from facial recognition. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.
Aditya Ramesh, Mikhail Pavlov, Gabriel Goh, Scott Gray, Chelsea Voss, Alec Radford, Mark Chen,
  and Ilya Sutskever. Zero-shot text-to-image generation. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning, pp. 8821–8831. PMLR, 2021.
Aditya Ramesh, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alex Nichol, Casey Chu, and Mark Chen. Hierarchical text-
  conditional image generation with clip latents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.06125, 1(2):3, 2022.
Javier Rando, Daniel Paleka, David Lindner, Lennart Heim, and Florian Tramer. Red-teaming the
  stable diffusion safety filter. In NeurIPS ML Safety Workshop, 2022.
Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer. High-
  resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Con-
  ference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 10684–10695, June 2022a.
Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer. High-
  resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF confer-
  ence on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 10684–10695, 2022b.
Olaf Ronneberger, Philipp Fischer, and Thomas Brox. U-net: Convolutional networks for biomed-
  ical image segmentation. In Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention–
  MICCAI 2015: 18th International Conference, Munich, Germany, October 5-9, 2015, Proceed-
  ings, Part III 18, pp. 234–241. Springer, 2015.
Nataniel Ruiz, Yuanzhen Li, Varun Jampani, Yael Pritch, Michael Rubinstein, and Kfir Aberman.
  Dreambooth: Fine tuning text-to-image diffusion models for subject-driven generation. In Pro-
  ceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 22500–
  22510, 2023.
Patrick Schramowski, Manuel Brack, Björn Deiseroth, and Kristian Kersting. Safe latent diffusion:
  Mitigating inappropriate degeneration in diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE Confer-
  ence on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2023.
Christoph Schuhmann, Romain Beaumont, Richard Vencu, Cade Gordon, Ross Wightman, Mehdi
  Cherti, Theo Coombes, Aarush Katta, Clayton Mullis, Mitchell Wortsman, et al. Laion-5b: An
  open large-scale dataset for training next generation image-text models. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 35:25278–25294, 2022.
Shawn Shan, Jenna Cryan, Emily Wenger, Haitao Zheng, Rana Hanocka, and Ben Y Zhao. Glaze:
  Protecting artists from style mimicry by text-to-image models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.04222,
  2023.
Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Eric Weiss, Niru Maheswaranathan, and Surya Ganguli. Deep unsupervised
  learning using nonequilibrium thermodynamics. In International conference on machine learn-
  ing, pp. 2256–2265. PMLR, 2015.
Yang Song, Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Diederik P Kingma, Abhishek Kumar, Stefano Ermon, and Ben
  Poole. Score-based generative modeling through stochastic differential equations. In Interna-
  tional Conference on Learning Representations, 2020.
Siqi Sun, Yu Cheng, Zhe Gan, and Jingjing Liu. Patient knowledge distillation for bert model
  compression. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
  Processing and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-
  IJCNLP), pp. 4323–4332, 2019.
Anton Troynikov. Stable Attribution. https://www.stableattribution.com, 2023.


                                               13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Nicholas Vincent and Brent Hecht. A deeper investigation of the importance of wikipedia links to
  search engine results. Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction, 5(CSCW1):
  1–15, 2021.
Nicholas Vincent, Hanlin Li, Nicole Tilly, Stevie Chancellor, and Brent Hecht. Data leverage: A
  framework for empowering the public in its relationship with technology companies. In Proceed-
  ings of the 2021 ACM Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency, pp. 215–227,
  2021.
Nikhil Vyas, Sham Kakade, and Boaz Barak. Provable copyright protection for generative models.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.10870, 2023.
Eric Zhang, Kai Wang, Xingqian Xu, Zhangyang Wang, and Humphrey Shi. Forget-me-not: Learn-
  ing to forget in text-to-image diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.17591, 2023a.
Lvmin Zhang, Anyi Rao, and Maneesh Agrawala. Adding conditional control to text-to-image
  diffusion models, 2023b.
Richard Zhang, Phillip Isola, Alexei A Efros, Eli Shechtman, and Oliver Wang. The unreasonable
  effectiveness of deep features as a perceptual metric. In CVPR, 2018.
Haonan Zhong, Jiamin Chang, Ziyue Yang, Tingmin Wu, Pathum Chamikara Ma-
  hawaga Arachchige, Chehara Pathmabandu, and Minhui Xue. Copyright protection and account-
  ability of generative ai: Attack, watermarking and attribution. In Companion Proceedings of the
  ACM Web Conference 2023, pp. 94–98, 2023.


                                               14
