Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


S ELF C HECK :
             USING LLM S TO ZERO - SHOT CHECK
THEIR OWN STEP - BY- STEP REASONING

    Ning Miao1*        Yee Whye Teh1       Tom Rainforth1



                                                  A BSTRACT
             The recent progress in large language models (LLMs), especially the invention of
             chain-of-thought prompting, has made it possible to automatically answer questions
             by stepwise reasoning. However, when faced with more complicated problems that
             require non-linear thinking, even the strongest LLMs make mistakes. To address
             this, we explore whether LLMs are able to recognize errors in their own step-by-
             step reasoning, without resorting to external resources. To this end, we propose
             SelfCheck, a general-purpose zero-shot verification schema for recognizing such
             errors. We then use the results of these checks to improve question-answering
             performance by conducting weighted voting on multiple solutions to the question.
             We test SelfCheck on math- and logic-based datasets and find that it successfully
             recognizes errors and, in turn, increases final answer accuracies.


1     I NTRODUCTION
Recent years have witnessed dramatic changes in the areas of NLP and AI brought on by significant
advances in LLMs. From GPT-3 (Brown et al., 2020), PaLM (Chowdhery et al., 2022), Llama (Tou-
vron et al., 2023) and Falcon (Almazrouei et al., 2023) to GPT-4 (OpenAI, 2023) and PaLM-2 (Google,
2023), the increasing model sizes and exploding amount of training data have empowered LLMs to
achieve human-level performance on a large range of tasks, including summarization, translation,
and question answering. The invention of Chain-of-Thought prompting (CoT, Wei et al. (2022)) has
further enhanced LLMs’ ability to solve complex problems by generating step-by-step solutions.
However, the performance of even the largest LLMs is still unsatisfactory on more difficult reasoning
problems. For example, GPT-4 with CoT prompting only correctly answers 42.5% of problems
in the MATH dataset (Bubeck et al., 2023; Hendrycks et al., 2021), which is far below the human
level. Such problems require careful multi-step reasoning to solve, and LLMs are consequently prone
to make mistakes: even though their error rate on individual steps may be low, the probability of
generating at least one erroneous step can still be quite high, undermining the final answer.
Recent works have tried to overcome this limitation by checking for errors in these step-by-step
solutions (Cobbe et al., 2021; Li et al., 2022; Ling et al., 2023; Jiang et al., 2023). Such checks can
then be used to provide confidence scores in answers and select between different possible alternatives.
This checking has typically been performed either by using an external verification model (Cobbe
et al., 2021; Lyu et al., 2023; Peng et al., 2023), or through few-shot in-context learning (Brown et al.,
2020) of an LLM (Weng et al., 2022; Ling et al., 2023). Unfortunately, existing methods generally
require extra training data and/or domain-specific exemplars, which often makes them inconvenient
to use in practice and restricts them to specific domains or data formats. The aim of our work is thus
to instead provide a general-purpose, zero-shot, approach to checking that relies only on the original
LLM, without the need for additional external resources.
To this end, we introduce SelfCheck, a zero-shot step-by-step checker for self-identifying errors in
LLM reasoning chains. SelfCheck uses the LLM to individually check the conditional correctness
of each step based on directly related information from the question and the preceding steps, in a
manner similar to a human going back to check their work. The results of these individual checks are
then integrated to form an overall correctness estimation for the whole reasoning chain.
Key to SelfCheck’s success is a novel mechanism for performing the checking of individual steps. As
we will show, the naive approach of directly asking the LLM to check a step is typically ineffective.
     1
         Department of Statistics, University of Oxford. * Email: <ning.miao@stats.ox.ac.uk>.


                                                         1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Instead, we introduce a multi-stage approach that breaks the problem down into a series of simpler
tasks, leverages the generative strengths of the LLM, and decorrelates errors between the original
generation and checking. Specifically, using separate calls to the LLM we first extract the target and
relevant context for the step, then regenerate an independent alternative step from these, and finally
compare the two. The original step is then deemed to pass the check if it matches the regeneration.
Besides providing an estimation of correctness for each solution, SelfCheck can also boost final
answer accuracies for the original questions by weighted voting. Namely, given multiple solutions to
a question, it uses confidence scores as weights to vote among the answers, which provides a soft
way to focus on more accurate solutions.
We evaluate SelfCheck on three math tasks and one logical reasoning task. For all datasets, we find
that using SelfCheck achieves a significant increase in final answer accuracies compared with simple
majority voting and other baselines. We also see that SelfCheck provides an accurate confidence
estimation for LLM’s solutions, which decreases the proportion of incorrect solutions by between 9%
and 23% (depending on dataset) when filtering out solutions with low confidence scores. We further
perform a number of ablations to justify some of our key design choices in the SelfCheck approach.
To summarize, we introduce SelfCheck as a novel and effective zero-shot schema for self-checking
step-by-step reasoning in LLMs. Unlike previous methods, SelfCheck does not need any finetuning or
example crafting, so can be directly applied to reasoning tasks in different domains. Our experiments
confirm that it can, in turn, be used to improve final predictive performance of LLMs.


2    R ELATED W ORK

How to automatically check the correctness of a sequence of reasoning steps is a long-standing
question. We now discuss how previous methods have tried to tackle this in an LLM context. We note
that none of these works are able to work in the zero-shot setting covered by SelfCheck, requiring
either problem-specific examples, an external model, and/or finetuning.

Few-shot verification Though our focus will be on zero-shot checking, for some problems one
may have hand-crafted exemplars available that are specifically designed for that particular question-
answering task. Previous methods have been designed to perform checking of LLMs’ generated
solutions in this few-shot checking scenario.
For example, the Self-Verification (SV) approach of Weng et al. (2022) verifies the whole solution by
backward prediction. That is, it uses the conclusion from CoT reasoning to predict a masked condition
in the question. However, it only supports single-step checking and is based on the assumption that
every piece of information in the question can be recovered using a correct solution of it, which is
often not the case. Consequently, it is only applicable to simpler tasks, such as GSM8K.
The Deductive Verification (DV) approach of Ling et al. (2023) instead looks to verify independent
sub-tasks, as per SelfCheck. However, its verifier only supports checking reasoning chains in a special
format called Natural Programs. As a result, it can only work with a specific specialised generator,
without serving as a general verifier for multi-step reasoning.

Verification with external resources In some cases, there might be external resources available to
verify the logical correctness or faithfulness of LLM outputs. Lyu et al. (2023) translate a question
into a symbolic reasoning chain using an LLM and solve the problem by a symbolic logic solver.
Peng et al. (2023) introduced an external database to check for incorrect knowledge in LLM outputs.
These methods are limited by the availability of external resources and are typically restricted to
checking for certain types of errors.

Training/finetuning a verifier A few other methods train or finetune a separate verifier model
to check reasoning chains. Cobbe et al. (2021) finetuned a GPT-3 model on GSM8K to predict the
correctness of a solution as a whole. Li et al. (2022) trained a binary deberta-v3-large (He et al., 2020)
classifier on each domain to predict step correctness. More recently, Lightman et al. (2023) built a
large dataset, which contains step-wise correctness labels from human labelers, and finetuned a GPT-4
model on it. Unlike SelfCheck, all of these methods require extra data and external computational
resources, restricting their applicability and ease of use.


                                                    2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


3     S ELF C HECK : U SING LLM S TO C HECK T HEIR OWN R EASONING

Rather than relying on external resources or problem-specific data like the aforementioned approaches,
it would be highly beneficial if we could develop self-contained checking schemes that require only
the original LLM itself. In other words, we would like to use the LLM to identify errors in its own
step-by-step reasoning, analogously to how a human might go back to check their working.
Unfortunately, directly asking the LLM to check its own reasoning is largely ineffective: it almost
invariably declares that the original answer is correct, with Ling et al. (2023) finding answers checked
in this way are deemed correct more than 90% of the time regardless of whether they actually are. As
we will show in Section 5, individually prompting the LLM to check each step in the CoT reasoning
fares slightly better, but is still only able to offer marginal gains compared to not checking at all.
A more nuanced method to perform this checking is thus required. To this end, we introduce
SelfCheck, a general-purpose, zero-shot, checking schema for self-identifying errors in LLM CoT
reasoning. Given a question, q, and its step-by-step solution, s, produced by some generator (which
will generally be an LLM with appropriate CoT prompting), SelfCheck considers each step of s in
turn and tries to establish its individual correctness based on the preceding steps. This checking is
done by leveraging an LLM (which can either be the same LLM used to generate s or a separate
one), but rather than directly asking the LLM to perform the check, we instead introduce a novel step
checking method (see Section 3.1) that exploits their generative modeling strengths. The results of
the checks on individual steps are then combined into a single confidence score, w ∈ [0, 1], for the
whole solution. These confidence scores, in turn, allow us to improve predictive performance, by
using them to perform weighted voting on multiple solutions to the same question.

3.1   S TEP CHECKING

To check individual steps of reasoning process, the first thing we should note is that the correctness of
each step is highly dependent on its context, namely the question and previous steps in the solution.
For example, we usually need to refer to previous steps for the definition of variables and the meaning
of specific numbers. If each step is conditionally correct based on the provided context and the last
step provides an answer in the required format, then the overall reasoning will itself be correct. The
target of the step checking is thus simply to check the conditional correctness of each step based on
the context provided by previous steps. That is, we only care about catching errors at the current step,
and can assume all information from its context to be correct.
A simple idea to achieve this would be to feed the current step as well as all its context to an LLM
and directly ask it to ‘check the correctness of the step’. However, in practice, we find that this task is
too difficult for current LLMs to do effectively, even with careful prompting that exemplifies how
to do the checking in detail (see Section 5). This difficulty comes first from the fact that there are
multiple aspects to the checking problem that the checker must deal with simultaneously: it needs to
understand the key content in the step and then collect all related information from the context, before
actually checking for its correctness. Second, LLMs are trained as generative models, rather than
directly as supervised approaches for checking, such that it is a problem that does not necessarily
play to their strengths. Finally, there are likely to be strong correlations between the errors such a
checker will make with the errors made in the original generation, undermining its usefulness.
To address these difficulties, SelfCheck instead decomposes the checking task for each step into four
stages: target extraction, information collection, step regeneration, and result comparison. The LLM
is used to execute each stage successively, with the outcome of the result comparison providing the
correctness prediction.
The idea behind this decomposition is to make the LLM focus on an easier task at each stage and
ensure the individual tasks carried out are more closely aligned to the LLM’s strengths. Moreover, by
focusing on regenerating and then comparing, we hope to reduce the correlations between the errors
of the checking and the original generation.
At a high level, the stages work by first prompting the LLM to figure out the target of the current
step and what information it uses to achieve the target; we find that the LLM is usually able to
perform these tasks extremely accurately. Then we ask the LLM to re-achieve the target using only
the collected information, providing an alternative to the original step that maintains the same purpose


                                                    3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 1: Example of using SelfCheck, focusing on the checking of a particular step (Step 5). To
check the correctness of the step, SelfCheck goes through 4 stages. First, in the target extraction stage,
it figures out that the main purpose of Step 5 is to complete the square. In the information collection
stage, it then establishes that Step 5 only directly relies on Step 4. Next, the step regeneration
stage instructs the LLM to complete the square independently, only using Step 4 as context. The
regeneration result shows that the center and radius of the circle are (3, 0) and 3, which is different
from what is implied by the original Step 5. Consequently, the result comparison stage concludes that
Step 5 is likely to be wrong. After checking all the steps, SelfCheck integrates the results to form an
overall confidence score, w. See Appendix A for a complete version of the example.

in the overall reasoning process. Here the clear description of the target and the simplified context we
provide make the regeneration stage less challenging. As a result, we hope its output will be more
reliable and thus serve as a useful reference. Even if this is not the case, it will still hopefully provide
a viable alternative, with a distinct generation, that can be used for comparison. The last stage then
uses the LLM to compare the original step with the regenerated output. If their main conclusions
match/mismatch, this provides evidence that the original step was correct/incorrect.
A worked example of this step-checking process is provided in Figure 1. In the following, we describe
each of the subtasks in detail and provide our specific instructions to the LLM. We note here that
the different LLM queries are made independently, rather than keeping the queries and answers
from previous stages in context. Thus, for example, when the LLM is called to carry out the step
regeneration, it does not have access to the original generation. The same prompts are used across
LLMs and datasets, thereby providing a general-purpose approach.
Target extraction To check a step (for example, Step 5 in Figure 1), we first need to figure out
what the step is trying to achieve. Without a specific target, the regeneration stage would proceed in
a random direction, making it impossible to serve as a reference to the original step. We thus use
the LLM itself to extract the target of a step using the question and all previous steps (Steps 0-4 in
Figure 1) with the following prompt (we omit some line breaks due to space limitations):
 The following is a part of the solution to the problem [Question]: [Step 0,..., Step i]. What specific action
 does the step [Step i] take? Please give a brief answer using a single sentence and do not copy the steps.
During execution, we copy the question and steps into [Question] and [Step 0, ..., Step i] to form
the actual input to the LLM. The reason for requesting a brief answer is to try and keep the amount
of information retained to the minimum needed, thereby avoiding unnecessary influence on the
regeneration and hopefully reducing correlations in errors in turn.
Information collection To reduce the difficulty of the regeneration stage and avoid unrelated
information from affecting the result, we filter out information that is not directly related to the


                                                      4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


current step. Specifically, we ask the LLM to select useful items from the question and all previous
items with the following prompt, where [Information j] is simply the j-th sentence in the question:
  This is a math question: [Question]. The following is information extracted from the question:
  Information 0: [Information 0] Information 1: [Information 1] ...
  The following are the first a few steps in a solution to the problem:
  Step 0: [Step 0] Step 1: [Step 1] ... Step i-1: [Step i-1]
  Which previous steps or information does the next step [Step i] directly follow from?
After retrieving the free-text response from the LLM, we extract step or information ids by regular
expression. For example in Figure 1, the current step requires Step 4 and no information from the
question as context. The selected steps and information are then fed into the regeneration stage.
Step regeneration Given the target and necessary information of the step, we can now ask the
LLM to achieve the target independently with only the collected information, without seeing the
original step. Because the step is usually a small jump from previous conclusions, and the information
collection stage has already filtered out irrelevant information, we can usually trust regeneration
results. The prompt for this stage is:
  We are in the process of solving a math problem. We have some information from the problem:
  Information 0: [Information I0 ] Information 1: [Information I1 ] ...
  The following are some previous steps: Step 0: [Step S0 ] Step 1: [Step S1 ] ...
  The target for the next step is: [Target]
  Please try to achieve the target with the information from the problem or previous steps.
Here [Target] is the output from the target extraction stage. [Information Ii ] and [Step Si ] correspond
to the specific items selected by the information collection stage. In Figure 1, only Step 4 and no
information from the question is directly related to the current step, so SelfCheck simply copies the
content of Step 4 into [Step S0 ] and removes the block containing [Information Ii ].
Result comparison The last step is to compare results from the regeneration stage and the original
step with the following prompt:
  The following are 2 solutions to a math problem. Solution 1: [Regeneration output] Solution 2: [Step i]
  Compare the key points from both solutions step by step and then check whether Solution 1 ‘supports’,
 ‘contradicts’ or ‘is not directly related to’ the conclusion in Solution 2. Pay special attention to the difference
  in numbers.
If the regeneration output ‘supports’/‘contradicts’ the original step, we can conclude that the original
step is likely correct/incorrect respectively. Sometimes, the correctness of the original step cannot be
directly inferred from the regeneration output. For example, when the target is to simplify an equation,
then there may be multiple valid solutions. In such cases, we are not sure about the correctness of the
original step, which makes ‘is not directly related to’ the third possible outcome of the check.

3.2    R ESULTS INTEGRATION

After running step-checking and getting a checking result for each step, we need an integration
function ϕ to give a confidence score, w ∈ [0, 1], for the overall correctness of the solution. The input
of ϕ should be a vector in the form of [r0 , r1 , ..., rn ], where each item ri represents the step checking
result for Step i. We will use ri = −1, 0, and 1 to represent the step-checking results ‘contradict’,
‘is not directly related to’ and ‘support’ respectively. We find that the following simple integration
function works well in practice
                                                                   n                 n
                                                                                              !
                                                                     1ri =−1 − λ0      1ri =0 ,
                                                                 X                 X
            w = ϕ([r0 , r1 , ..., rn ]) = 2 ∗ Sigmoid −λ−1                                                (1)
                                                                    i=0                  i=0

where λ−1 and λ0 are two non-negative hyperparameters with λ−1 > λ0 ; we found nearly any
sensible pairs of λ−1 and λ0 worked similarly well in preliminary tests, so we simply fix λ−1 = 1
and λ0 = 0.3 throughout our experiments. The rationale of this setup is that the more failed checks
we see, the more likely the overall reasoning process, and thus the final solution, are wrong. Note
here that, because the checks are themselves imperfect, we do not necessarily want to immediately
reject the whole solution from a single step-check failure, especially for ri = 0 cases. This is why we
takePa ‘soft’ approach to the verification with a confidence score. The number of successful checks,
i.e. i=0 1ri =1 , is deliberately not included in our integration function as an increased number of
       n

successful checks does not actually increase our confidence in the overall solution: shorter reasoning
chains are generally preferable to longer ones for a given question and LLM.


                                                         5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Once calculated, the resulting confidence score can be directly used as a weight for voting between
different possible solutions. We can thus use SelfCheck to increase the accuracy of an LLM’s answers
by generating multiple possible solutions, calculating confidence scores for each, and then choosing
our final answer through weighted voting.

4       E XPERIMENTS
We now run experiments on three math-reasoning datasets to evaluate SelfCheck’s effectiveness in
checking multi-step reasoning and improving final answer accuracies. Note here that our focus on
math-reasoning problems is due to ease of performance evaluation and dataset availability; SelfCheck
is directly applicable to other question-answering problems with nominal changes to our prompts.
An additional experiment based on a logic reasoning task is provided in Appendix D.
Datasets GSM8K (Cobbe et al., 2021), MathQA (Amini et al., 2019), and MATH (Hendrycks et al.,
2021) consist of math problems on primary school, middle school, and competition levels, containing
1319, 2985, and 5000 test samples, respectively. For GSM8K and MathQA, we evaluate SelfCheck
on the whole test sets. Due to limited resources, we use a subset of MATH test set taken from Ling
et al. (2023).1 Besides the levels of difficulty, the three datasets differ from each other in the following
aspects. Firstly, MathQA provides 5 options to choose from for each problem, while GSM8K and
MATH have no options. Secondly, GSM8K only has arithmetic problems, while MathQA and MATH
contain more diverse problems in geometry, physics, probability, and algebra.
LLMs We use GPT-3.5 (gpt-3.5-0301) and GPT-4 (gpt-4-0613) as our LLMs, focusing in particular
on the former due to budget restrictions. Note that the same prompts are used for all datasets with
both LLMs during evaluation; no dataset-specific customization or tuning has been performed. When
devising the prompts, a small number of training samples from MathQA dataset were utilized. An
additional experiment using Llama2 (70B, 4-bit, Touvron et al. (2023)) is provided in Appendix E.
Baselines We use majority voting (also known as Self-Consistency Decoding (Wang et al., 2022) in
the context of CoT reasoning) as our main baseline following Ling et al. (2023) and Lightman et al.
(2023). Despite its simplicity, this is still quite a strong baseline in the current literature. In particular,
most existing few-shot methods report similar results compared with it (Weng et al., 2022; Ling
et al., 2023). We also compare with quoted results from Self Verification (SV, Ling et al. (2023)) and
Deductive Verification (DV, Weng et al. (2022)) when possible. We note though that these approaches
are not directly comparable to SelfCheck in general, as they require additional exemplars which will
often not be available in practice. Despite this, we will find that SelfCheck outperforms them when
comparisons are possible.
We omit results from Faithful-CoT (Lyu et al., 2023), because it has already been shown to decrease
the accuracies on GSM8K and MATH by 11.8% and 4.2%, respectively compared to majority
voting (Ling et al., 2023). It is also impossible for us to compare with training/finetuning based
methods such as Lightman et al. (2023), because we have neither access to their finetuned models nor
computation resources to repeat their training/finetuning. The significant extra data and resources
they require also means their contributions are somewhat tangential to SelfCheck regardless.

4.1       F INAL ANSWER CORRECTNESS

Figure 2 shows the performance gains using the confidence scores from SelfCheck to do weighted
voting compared with baseline methods. The upper plots show that accuracies of both SelfCheck and
majority voting have the same increasing tendency as the number of generated solutions per question
increases, which is a result of the variance reduction provided by averaging over more solutions.
The bottom plots show the difference in accuracy between the two including the standard error in
the estimate. We can see that by allocating higher weights to correct solutions, SelfCheck achieves
significantly higher accuracies than majority voting for all solution numbers per question. We also
find the improvements of SelfCheck (compared with majority voting) to be higher than Deductive
Verification and Self-Verification in their reported settings, despite the use of in-context learning from
additional examples. We will perform additional experiments on how performance changes when
ensembling over a larger number of solutions in Section 5.1.
    1
        https://github.com/lz1oceani/verify_cot/tree/main/results/chatgpt3.5/natural_program/MATH_np.json


                                                          6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


           0.84                                              0.78                                             0.51
           0.81                                              0.75                                             0.48
Accuracy   0.78                                              0.72                                             0.45


                                                  Accuracy


                                                                                                   Accuracy
           0.75                                              0.69                                             0.42
           0.72                 Majority Voting              0.66                Majority Voting              0.39                Majority Voting
           0.69                 SelfCheck                    0.63                SelfCheck                    0.36                SelfCheck
           0.66                                              0.60                                             0.33
           0.04                                              0.04                                             0.04
Accuracy


                                                  Accuracy


                                                                                                   Accuracy
                                DV          SV                                                                                                DV
           0.02                                              0.02                                             0.02
           0.00                                              0.00                                             0.00
                     1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10                            1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10                             1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
                     #Solutions per question                         #Solutions per question                          #Solutions per question
                     (a) GSM8K                                        (b) MathQA                                       (c) MATH∗
Figure 2: The upper plots show the accuracies of SelfCheck and majority voting for different numbers
of generated solutions per question with GPT-3.5. The lower plots show the accuracy gaps between
each method and majority voting, where DV and SV stand for Deductive Verification (Weng et al.,
2022) and Self-Verification (Ling et al., 2023), respectively. It is difficult to compare with DV and SV
with respect to absolute accuracies because they are using different generator models. However, we
can see that SelfCheck achieves higher relative performance gains than both in their reported settings.

Table 1: SelfCheck significantly increases final answer accuracies with both GPT-3.5 and GPT-
4, even we only have 2 candidate solutions for each question. ∆Acc is the performance gain of
SelfCheck compared with majority voting (MV), with the ± indicating the standard error. ✗✗,
✗✓and ✓✓represent the proportions of questions with 0, 1 or 2 correct solutions. Unlike in Figure 2,
Acc(MV) here is essentially the average accuracy of 2 single generations. We see that the gains from
SelfCheck are typically larger in cases where it is common for only one of the solutions to be correct,
as these are the cases using weighted voting can influence the final answer.
           Dataset       Generator   Checker      ✗✗ (%)        ✗✓ (%)     ✓✓ (%)       Acc(MV, %)            Acc(SelfCheck, %)   ∆Acc (%)
                         GPT-3.5     GPT-3.5       16.8             23.0       60.2         71.7                     74.3          2.8±0.9
           GSM8K          GPT-4       GPT-4        8.8               8.2       83.0         87.1                     86.9          -0.2±0.2
                          GPT-4      GPT-3.5       8.8              8.2        83.0         87.1                     88.1           1.0±0.3
                         GPT-3.5     GPT-3.5       27.6             26.4       46.0         59.2                     64.6          5.4±1.1
           MathQA         GPT-4       GPT-4        16.2             11.0       72.8         78.3                     80.9          2.6±0.4
                          GPT-4      GPT-3.5       16.2             11.0       72.8         78.3                     81.2          3.0±0.4
                         GPT-3.5     GPT-3.5       52.6             23.2       24.2         35.8                     38.0          2.2±0.7
           MATH∗          GPT-4       GPT-4        42.0             20.2       37.8         47.9                     51.3          3.4±0.6
                          GPT-4      GPT-3.5       42.0             20.2       37.8         47.9                     48.9          1.0±0.8


To investigate the effect of using more powerful LLMs, and of using a different LLM for the
generation and checking, we further conducted experiments with GPT-4 and a mix of GPT-4 and
GPT-3.5. Because of the high cost of calling the GPT-4 API, we randomly sample 500 questions from
each dataset to form the test sets and generate 2 (instead of 10) answers to each question. In Table 1,
we see that SelfCheck significantly outperforms majority voting with both GPT-3.5 and GPT-4. We
also notice that using GPT-3.5 to check GPT-4 generated answers yields surprisingly good results,
actually outperforming checking with GPT-4 on the simpler GSM8K and MathQA tasks. This is
likely because using different LLMs helps to further decorrelate the errors of the generator and the
checker, and shows that using a cheaper LLM can still often be sufficient for the checking. For the
more difficult problems in MATH, using GPT-4 as checker always produces better results, but even
here the checking from GPT-3.5 is beneficial compared to doing no checking at all.


4.2         V ERIFICATION PERFORMANCE

Besides serving as a confidence score calculator to improve the performance of voting, SelfCheck
can also predict the correctness of a single solution. To do so, we simply set a threshold t to the
confidence score, where solutions with confidence scores w ≥ t are classified as correct.


                                                                           7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


             1.00                                          1.00                                                       1.00
             0.80                                          0.80                                                       0.80
Proportion


                                              Proportion


                                                                                                         Proportion
             0.60                                          0.60                                                       0.60
             0.40                                          0.40                                                       0.40
             0.20         Real + in Pred +                 0.20         Real + in Pred +                              0.20         Real + in Pred +
                          Real in Pred                                  Real in Pred                                               Real in Pred
             0.00                                          0.00                                                       0.00
                    0.3        0.6      0.9                       0.3        0.6      0.9                                    0.3        0.6      0.9
                            Threshold t                                   Threshold t                                                Threshold t
                      (a) GSM8K                                    (b) MathQA                                                  (c) MATH∗

Figure 3: When raising the classification thresholds t, the proportions of real correct solu-
tions in predicted correct solutions (Real + in Pred +) increase for GSM8K (67.5%→76.5%),
MathQA (59.4%→82.2%) and MATH (34.6%→50.8%).
                                                                 1.0
Figure 4 shows the ROC curves for each dataset. As a com-                                                     0.8
parison, directly prompting GPT-3.5 to verify whole reasoning
chains leads to no meaningful control on the false and true pos-                                              0.6


                                                                                                    TP rate
itive rates (FP and TP): they are always both 100% on MATH
and 98% on GSM8K, as observed by Ling et al. (2023). In                                                       0.4
other words, the checker always predicts the answer as correct,                                               0.2                                     GSM8K
providing no useful information.                                                                                                                      MathQA
                                                                     0.0                                                                              MATH
As well as verification accuracies, we may also care about the
solution quality after filtering out solutions with low confidence        0.0          0.5         1.0
scores w. Figure 3 shows that by increasing the threshold t,                         FP rate
SelfCheck can filter out more incorrect solutions, such that Figure 4: True positive rates (TP)
a higher proportion of the solutions that pass the check are vs. false positive rates (FP) as clas-
indeed correct (Real + in Pred +). Though this is at the cost of sification threshold, t, is varied.
misclassifying more of the real correct solutions as incorrect, this can be a useful feature in cases
where the risk of choosing an incorrect solution is higher than rejecting a correct one.

5            A NALYSIS
We now perform some ablations to justify some of the key design choices made by SelfCheck and
provide insights on its behavior. Limited by budget and time, all experiments in this section are
performed on a subset of the MathQA test set with 100 randomly selected questions.
                                                                                             0.85
5.1           M ORE SOLUTIONS PER QUESTION ?
                                                                                             0.80
                                                                                  Accuracy


Serving as a method to reduce variance, majority                                             0.75
voting increased final answer accuracies on different
                                                                                             0.70
datasets when we increased from 2 to 10 solutions                                           Majority Voting
in Figure 2. In cases where we only care about final                                         0.65
                                                                                            SelfCheck
predictive performance and majority voting can be
applied (see Appendix D for an example where it                     1     10     20     30      40        50
cannot, but SelfCheck can), one might thus question                        #Solutions per question
whether it is better to simply use our computational Figure 5: SelfCheck achieves significantly
resources to keep increasing the size of this ensemble, higher final answer accuracies than majority
rather than relying on checking. Note here that the voting for large ensembles of solutions.
cost of running the verifier is around twice that of the original generation for zero-shot generators (it
can cost less than the original generation for few-shot generators with longer prompts).
However, as shown in Figure 5, the improving performance from using a larger ensemble saturates
for majority voting, with the accuracy never going above that achieved when n = 9, thereby
never reaching the performance we already achieved by SelfCheck for an ensemble of size n = 5.
Moreover, the performance of SelfCheck continues to increase as the ensemble grows. By lowering
the weights (confidence) of incorrect solutions, SelfCheck increases the chance of selecting the
correct answers, even when their generation probabilities in the generator LLM are low. Therefore,
with SelfCheck, LLMs can effectively rectify their own biased beliefs by themselves.


                                                                          8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


5.2      A LBATION STUDIES

In order to pick apart the effect of several critical design choices for SelfCheck, we compare SelfCheck
with some of its variants with respect to final answer and verification accuracies on MathQA.
Global v.s. step-by-step checking The first question is can we simply ask an LLM to check the
whole solution without taking steps into consideration. To answer it, we prompt the LLM to perform
global checking with the following instruction:
    The following is a question and a solution to it from a student. Carefully check whether the solution is correct
    step by step. End your response with your conclusion that starts with "Correct", "Wrong" or "Not Sure".
    Question: [Question] Solution: [Step 0, Step 1,..., Step n]
Similar to the findings of Ling et al. (2023), we find that
the global checker outputs "correct" most of the time                        0.8


                                                                  Accuracy
and rarely recognizes an error. Consequently, its final
                                                                                                      SelfCheck
answer accuracies are very close to majority voting (in                                               Global Check
Figure 6) and its verification accuracy (55.0%) is only                      0.7                      Single Stage Check
                                                                                                      Error Check (0-shot)
marginally above random guess (50.0%). This lack of                                                   Error Check (1-shot)
                                                                                                      Majority Voting
ability to deal with the difficulty of global checking is                    0.6
what makes step checking necessary.                                                1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
Single-stage v.s. multiple-stage step checking Next,                                  #Solutions per question
we ask whether we really need to decompose the step Figure 6: Generation accuracies for variants
checking into several stages. To answer this, we design of SelfCheck on MathQA with GPT-3.5.
the following prompt to use the LLM directly.
    The following is a question and the first a few steps in its solution.
    Question: [Question] Solution: [Step 0, Step 1,..., Step i-1]
    Check the correctness of the next step: [Step i]
    Please consider the information it relies on and check step by step. Please end your response with your
    conclusion that starts with "Correct", "Wrong" or "Not Sure".
Figure 6 and Table 2 show that although this is better              Table 2: Verification accuracies for vari-
than global checking, it is still significantly worse than          ants of SelfCheck on MathQA with GPT-
SelfCheck with its multi-stage checking. This indicates             3.5. The reported verification accuracy is
that checking a step in a single stage is still too challeng-       the average of true positive and true nega-
ing for the LLM, so it is necessary to further decompose            tive rates.
step checking into a pipeline of easier sub-tasks.
Error check v.s. regenerate and compare We now                               Method                 Accuracy (%)
justify the choice to perform step regeneration and com-                     SelfCheck                 66.7%
parison instead of direct error checking for each step.                      Global Check              55.0%
To do so, we replace our regeneration stage and com-
parison stage with a single error-checking stage. We                         Single stage Check        57.2%
first compare with a zero-shot version of the variant                        Error Check (0-shot)      63.1%
with the following prompt:                                                   Error Check (1-shot)      64.2%
    Given the following information:
    Information 0: [Information I0 ] Information 1: [Information I1 ] ...
    Step 0: [Step S0 ] Step 1: [Step S1 ] ...
    Check the correctness of the next step [Step i]
    Please check for grounding errors, reasoning errors and calculation errors step by step. Please end your
    response with your conclusion that starts with "Correct", "Wrong" or "Not Sure".
We then add an examplar from Ling et al. (2023) (see Appendix B) to make a more powerful one-shot
error checker. However, results in Figure 6 and Table 2 show that even with a very detailed and
instructive example, direct error checking still performs worse than our regenerate and compare
approach, which supports our previous argument that LLMs are better at generation than checking.

6      C ONCLUSIONS
In this paper, we have introduced SelfCheck, a general-purpose, zero-shot, step-by-step checking
scheme for LLMs. Unlike previous approaches, SelfCheck does not require any additional data
or external resources: it uses the LLM to identify errors in its own reasoning, leveraging a novel
regenerate-and-compare approach. By using the results of this checking to perform weighted voting
over different solutions, we find that SelfCheck is able to, in turn, increase final predictive accuracy.


                                                           9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

Tom Rainforth is supported by the UK EPSRC grant EP/Y037200/1. Ning Miao and Yee Whye Teh
are supported by ELISE European Network of AI Excellence Centres and the European Union’s
Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under grant agreement No 951847 as well as by
Tencent through the Oxford-Tencent Collaboration on Large Scale Machine Learning. Ning Miao is
also supported by China Scholarship Council - University of Oxford Scholarship.

R EFERENCES
Ebtesam Almazrouei, Hamza Alobeidli, Abdulaziz Alshamsi, Alessandro Cappelli, Ruxandra Co-
  jocaru, Merouane Debbah, Etienne Goffinet, Daniel Heslow, Julien Launay, Quentin Malartic,
  Badreddine Noune, Baptiste Pannier, and Guilherme Penedo. Falcon-40B: an open large language
  model with state-of-the-art performance. 2023.
Aida Amini, Saadia Gabriel, Shanchuan Lin, Rik Koncel-Kedziorski, Yejin Choi, and Hannaneh
  Hajishirzi. MathQA: Towards interpretable math word problem solving with operation-based
  formalisms. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North American Chapter of the
  Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and
  Short Papers), pp. 2357–2367, Minneapolis, Minnesota, June 2019. Association for Computational
  Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/N19-1245. URL https://aclanthology.org/N19-1245.
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are
  few-shot learners. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:1877–1901, 2020.
Sébastien Bubeck, Varun Chandrasekaran, Ronen Eldan, Johannes Gehrke, Eric Horvitz, Ece Kamar,
  Peter Lee, Yin Tat Lee, Yuanzhi Li, Scott Lundberg, et al. Sparks of artificial general intelligence:
  Early experiments with gpt-4. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.12712, 2023.
Aakanksha Chowdhery, Sharan Narang, Jacob Devlin, Maarten Bosma, Gaurav Mishra, Adam
  Roberts, Paul Barham, Hyung Won Chung, Charles Sutton, Sebastian Gehrmann, et al. Palm:
  Scaling language modeling with pathways. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.02311, 2022.
Karl Cobbe, Vineet Kosaraju, Mohammad Bavarian, Mark Chen, Heewoo Jun, Lukasz Kaiser,
  Matthias Plappert, Jerry Tworek, Jacob Hilton, Reiichiro Nakano, et al. Training verifiers to solve
  math word problems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.14168, 2021.
Google. Palm 2 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08774, 2023.
Pengcheng He, Xiaodong Liu, Jianfeng Gao, and Weizhu Chen. Deberta: Decoding-enhanced bert
  with disentangled attention. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2020.
Dan Hendrycks, Collin Burns, Saurav Kadavath, Akul Arora, Steven Basart, Eric Tang, Dawn
  Song, and Jacob Steinhardt. Measuring mathematical problem solving with the math dataset. In
 Thirty-fifth Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems Datasets and Benchmarks Track
 (Round 2), 2021.
Weisen Jiang, Han Shi, Longhui Yu, Zhengying Liu, Yu Zhang, Zhenguo Li, and James T Kwok.
 Backward reasoning in large language models for verification. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.07758,
 2023.
Yifei Li, Zeqi Lin, Shizhuo Zhang, Qiang Fu, Bei Chen, Jian-Guang Lou, and Weizhu Chen. On the
  advance of making language models better reasoners. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.02336, 2022.
Hunter Lightman, Vineet Kosaraju, Yura Burda, Harri Edwards, Bowen Baker, Teddy Lee, Jan
  Leike, John Schulman, Ilya Sutskever, and Karl Cobbe. Let’s verify step by step. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2305.20050, 2023.
Zhan Ling, Yunhao Fang, Xuanlin Li, Zhiao Huang, Mingu Lee, Roland Memisevic, and Hao Su.
  Deductive verification of chain-of-thought reasoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.03872, 2023.


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Qing Lyu, Shreya Havaldar, Adam Stein, Li Zhang, Delip Rao, Eric Wong, Marianna Apidianaki,
  and Chris Callison-Burch. Faithful chain-of-thought reasoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.13379,
  2023.
OpenAI. Gpt-4 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08774, 2023.
Baolin Peng, Michel Galley, Pengcheng He, Hao Cheng, Yujia Xie, Yu Hu, Qiuyuan Huang, Lars
  Liden, Zhou Yu, Weizhu Chen, et al. Check your facts and try again: Improving large language
  models with external knowledge and automated feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.12813, 2023.
Hugo Touvron, Thibaut Lavril, Gautier Izacard, Xavier Martinet, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Timothée
  Lacroix, Baptiste Rozière, Naman Goyal, Eric Hambro, Faisal Azhar, et al. Llama: Open and
  efficient foundation language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.13971, 2023.
Xuezhi Wang, Jason Wei, Dale Schuurmans, Quoc V Le, Ed H Chi, Sharan Narang, Aakanksha
  Chowdhery, and Denny Zhou. Self-consistency improves chain of thought reasoning in language
  models. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.
Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Fei Xia, Ed Chi, Quoc V Le, Denny
  Zhou, et al. Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:24824–24837, 2022.
Yixuan Weng, Minjun Zhu, Shizhu He, Kang Liu, and Jun Zhao. Large language models are reasoners
  with self-verification. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.09561, 2022.


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A PPENDIX A           A COMPLETE EXAMPLE OF S ELF C HECK
To help readers get a better idea of how SelfCheck works, we show a complete version of the example
in Figure 1, including the exact inputs and outputs of different stages. Please note that we have
compiled all latex codes for readability, though the inputs and outputs to LLMs are in their original
form. The question is
 Let S be the set of complex numbers z such that the real part of z1 is equal to 16 . This set forms a curve. Find
 the area of the region inside the curve.

We feed the following instruction to the LLM that serves as the generator:
 Solve the following problem step by step. Please start each step with "Step :" and split sentences in each
 step with "\n\n". Please finish you response with "So the answer is ...". Problem: Let S be the set of complex
 numbers z such that the real part of z1 is equal to 16 . This set forms a curve. Find the area of the region
 inside the curve.

After getting the following solution, we start checking Step 5 as an example:
 Solution:
 (Step 0) Let z = x + yi be a complex number, where x and y are real numbers.
 (Step 1) We are given that the real part of z1 is equal to 16 .
 (Step 2) Using  the fact  that the real part of a complex number a + bi is a, we have
 Re z1 = Re x+yi     1            x

                            = x2 +y 2.
                       1        1            x       1

 (Step 3) Setting Re z = 6 , we get x2 +y      2 = 6.

 (Step 4) Cross-multiplying and rearranging, we get the equation 6x = x2 + y 2 .
                                                        2
 (Step 5) Completing the square, we obtain x − 23 + y 2 = 49 .
 (Step 6) This is the equation of a circle with center 23 , 0 and radius 32 .


 (Step 7) The area of the region inside the circle is 9π4
                                                          . So the answer is 9π
                                                                              4
                                                                                .

Variable definition extraction This optional stage extracts the definitions of variables that appear
in the reasoning chain. SelfCheck feeds the definitions to the regeneration stage to avoid LLM not
understanding the meaning of a variable. The input to the LLM is:
 The following is the solution to a math question: Question: Let S be the set of complex numbers z such that
 the real part of z1 is equal to 16 . This set forms a curve. Find the area of the region inside the curve.

 Solution:
 (Step 0) Let z = x + yi be a complex number, where x and y are real numbers.
 ...
 (Step 7) The area of the region inside the circle is 9π
                                                       4
                                                         . So the answer is 9π
                                                                             4
                                                                               .

 Are there variables in the solution? If so, please list the definition of variable in the form of "1.
 variable is defined as...".
The underlined parts are the type of question, the question itself and the steps in its solution,
respectively.
The output from the LLM is:
 Yes. There are variables in the solution.
 1. z is defined as a complex number of the form x + yi
                                                     yi, where x and y are real numbers.
The bold part is then saved to form a part of the input in the regeneration stage.
Target extraction To get a brief and clear target of the current step, the input to the LLM is:
 The following is a part of the solution to the problem: Let S be the set of complex numbers z such that the
 real part of z1 is equal to 16 . This set forms a curve. Find the area of the region inside the curve.

 (Step 0) Let z = x + yi be a complex number, where x and y are real numbers.
 ...                                              2
 (Step 5) Completing the square, we obtain x − 32 + y 2 = 49 .
                                                                                            2
 What specific action does the step "Completing the square, we obtain x − 32                    + y 2 = 49 ." take?
 Please give a brief answer using a single sentence and do not copy the steps.


                                                       12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


The underlined parts are the question and reasoning steps before the current one, including the current
one.
The output of the LLM is:
 The step completes the square to rewrite the equation in standard form of a circle.
The whole sentence is saved and forms the most important part of the input in the regeneration stage.
Information Collection To get sentences in the question and previous steps in the solution that are
directly related to the current step, the input to the LLM is:
 This is a math question: Question: Let S be the set of complex numbers z such that the real part of z1 is
 equal to 16 . This set forms a curve. Find the area of the region inside the curve.

 The following is information extracted from the question:
 Information 0: Let S be the set of complex numbers z such that the real part of z1 is equal to 16 .
 Information 1: This set forms a curve.
 Information 2: Find the area of the region inside the curve.


 The following is the first a few steps in a solution to the problem:
 Step 0: Let z = x + yi be a complex number, where x and y are real numbers.
 ...
 Step 4: Cross-multiplying and rearranging, we get the equation 6x = x2 + y 2 .
                                                                                                        2
 Which previous steps or information does the next step "Completing the square, we obtain x − 32            + y2 =
 9
 4
   ." directly follow from?
The underlined information (contents after Information X:) is simply a list of sentences in the question.
The underlined steps are reasoning steps before (not including) the current one in the solution.
The output from the LLM is:
                                                             2
 The next step "Completing the square, we obtain x − 32          + y 2 = 94 ." directly follows from Step 4.
Then we use regular expression to extract the information and step id from LLM’s output. Some steps
may only rely on information from the question while others may only use results from previous
steps.
Step regeneration In this stage, we instruct the LLM to achieve the extracted target with only
collected information with the following prompt:
 We are in a process of solving a math problem.

 Variables are defined as: 1. z is defined as a complex number of the form x + yi, where x and y are real
 numbers.

 The following are some previous steps: Step 0: Cross-multiplying and rearranging, we get the equation
 6x = x2 + y 2 .

 The target for next step is: The step completes the square to rewrite the equation in standard form of a circle.

 Please try to achieve the target with the information from previous steps.
The underlined parts are the type of question, variable definition (if any), collected information
from the question (if any), collected previous steps (if any) and the extracted target. Please notice
that the current step does not directly rely on any information from the question, we removed the
corresponding block from the input.
The output from the LLM is:
 To rewrite the equation in standard form of a circle, we need to complete the square for both x and y .
 Starting from the given equation: 6x = x2 + y 2 .
 We add and subtract (6/2)2 = 9 on the right-hand side:
 6x + 9 − 9 = x2 + y 2 + 9 − 99.
 Simplifying: (x − 3)2 + y 2 = 99. This is now in the standard form of a circle with center (3, 0) and radius
 3.
Then we can directly compare the regenerated step with the original one in the next stage.


                                                       13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Result comparison The input to the LLM is:
 The following are 2 solutions to a math problem:

 Solution 1: To rewrite the equation in standard form of a circle, we need to complete the square for both x
 and y.
 Starting from the given equation: 6x = x2 + y 2 .
 We add and subtract (6/2)2 = 9 on the right-hand side: 6x + 9 − 9 = x2 + y 2 + 9 − 9.
 Simplifying: (x − 3)2 + y 2 = 9. This is now in the standard form of a circle with center (3, 0) and radius 3.
                                                           2
 Solution 2: Completing the square, we obtain x − 32           + y 2 = 94 .

 Compare the key points from both solutions step by step and then check whether Solution 1 "supports",
 "contradicts" or "is not directly related to" the conclusion in Solution 2. Pay special attention to difference
 in numbers.
The underlined parts are simply the problem type, the regenerated step and the original step.
The output is:
 In both solutions, the goal is to rewrite the given equation in standard form of a circle. However, in Solution
 1, the completion of the square results in the center of the circle being (3, 0) and a radius of 3. In Solution 2,
 the completion of the square results in the center of the circle being (3/2, 0) and a radius of 3/2.

 Therefore, Solution 1 contradicts the conclusion in Solution 2 as the centers and radii of the circles are
 different.
If the word ‘support’ or ‘contradict’ appears in the last line of the output, SelfCheck outputs a step
score 1 or -1. Otherwise, SelfCheck outputs 0 meaning that two steps are not related.

A PPENDIX B           E XAMPLAR FOR ONE - SHOT ERROR CHECKING
The following example from Ling et al. (2023) is used to perform one-shot error checking.
  Here is some information:
 “1. Alice gets 2 apples.
  2. Alice gets twice as many oranges as bananas.
  3. Original price per apple: $2
  Discount: 50%
  Price per apple after discount: $2 * (1 - 0.50) = $2 * 0.50 = $1"

 Based on the given information, here is a reasoning process:
 "Calculate Alice’s cost of the 5 apples after a 50% discount.
 Price per apple after discount: $1
 Apples be eaten: 3
 Oranges be eaten: 6
 Total apples: 5
 Total oranges: x
 Total bananas: 2x
 Alice’s total number of fruits: 5 + x + 2x = 5 + 4x
 Alice’s total cost of 5 apples: $1 * (5 - 3) = $2”

 Double-check the reasoning process, let’s analyze its correctness, and end with "yes" or "no".

 Answer:
 Let’s think step by step.

 Grounding check
 Purpose: Find references for numbers in the reasoning process sequentially
 Rule: Any ungrounded number makes the check fails

 "x" is a variable, we do not care about variables.
 "y" is a variable, we do not care about variables.



                                                        14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 "5" is a quantity from the given information that represents the number of apples.
 "50%" is a quantity from the given information that represents the discount.
 "$1" is a quantity from the given information that represents the price per apple after the discount.
 "3" is a quantity not from the given information, it is ungrounded.
 "6" is a quantity not from the given information, it is ungrounded.
 "$2" is a quantity from the given information that represents the original price per apple.
 Result: Based on the check, there are ungrounded numbers, so the grounding check fails.

 Reasoning check:
 Purpose: Check whether the reasoning logic correctly answers the question
 Rule: Any logic error makes the check fails

 To calculate the total cost of apples after a 50% discount, we should multiply the number of apples by the
 discounted price. But to answer the question, we do not need to calculate the total number of fruit Alice gets.
 Result: Based on the check, there are some logic mistakes, so the reasoning check fails.
 Calculation check:
 Purpose: Check whether the calculation process is consistent
 Rule: Any inconsistent calculation makes the check fails
 calculation1:

 equation: $1 * (5 - 3), answer: $2
 (5 - 3) = 2
 $1 * 2 = $2 is consistent with the answer, so the calculation is correct.
 calculation2:
 equation: 5 + x + 2x, answer: 5 + 4x
 x + 2x = 3x
 5 + 3x is inconsistent with the answer, so the calculation is incorrect.
 Result: Based on the check, the calculation process is inconsistent, so the calculation check fails.

 Check results: Ground check fails, Reasoning check fails, Calculation check fails.
 Rule: Any failed check makes the reasoning incorrect.
 So the answer is "no".



A PPENDIX C          M ORE EXAMPLES ON TARGET EXTRACTION
The following are some real examples of extracted targets on MathQA with GPT-3.5.

 Step: According to the problem, the profit was divided in the ratio of 2:3, which means that x received 2/5 of
 the profit and y received 3/5 of the profit.
 Extracted target: It calculates the ratio of the profit earned between x and y based on the information given
 in the problem.

 Step: Since the interest has increased by 4%, the new rate of interest (r2) is 16.67% + 4% = 20.67%.
 Extracted target: The step calculates the new rate of interest after increasing it by 4%.

 Step: The sum of the ages of the first 14 students is 56 + 160 = 216 years.
 Extracted target: The step calculates the sum of the ages of the first 14 students of the class.

 Step: We can rearrange 8a = 9b to get a/b = 9/8.
 Extracted target: The step rearranges the given equation to express a in terms of b and then obtains the
 ratio of a to b.

 Step: So, the equation becomes: 33 + (1+y/100)*50 = 83.
 Extracted target: The step sets up the equation to calculate the percentage increase in Shyam’s weight.

 Step: Find the ratio of investment of each person in the business
 Investment of A : Investment of B : Investment of C
 = 6500 : 1300 : 7800
 = 5 : 1 : 12
 Extracted target: The step finds the ratio of investment of each person in the business.



                                                       15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A PPENDIX D             A N EXPERIMENT ON LOGIC REASONING TASK
In this section, we verify whether SelfCheck can generalize to the task of logic reasoning using
the dataset of SNR.2 Each test sample of SNR consists of a logic question, as well as its target
answer. Different from other datasets shown in the paper, the target answers of SNR samples are
natural-language sentences (such as “The hedgehog is cold and scary.”), instead of multiple-choice
options (for MathQA) or single math expressions (for GSM8K and MATH). Because of the variability
of natural languages, exact matching among generated answers becomes infeasbile. Majority voting
thus cannot be used for this problem, but we can still use SelfCheck to pick out the best solution from
all candidates.
To test performance, we randomly select 100 test samples from the SNR test set and generate 2
answers for each of the questions. Because of the nature of natural language answers, it is not possible
to perform automatic comparison between the generated answers and the target answers, so we invited
volunteers to perform human evaluation. To better deal with logic problems, we replaced all ‘math’
with ‘logic’ in the prompts and deleted the instruction ‘pay special attention to the difference in
numbers’ in the result comparison stage. The prompts used were otherwise identical to those outlined
in Section 3.
From the results shown in Table D.1, we can see that SelfCheck increases the accuracy on SNR by
3.5%, which is a statistically significant improvement at 5% level.
Table D.1: SelfCheck increases predictive accuracy on SNR by picking out correct answers from two
independent generations. Base Acc means single solution accuracy here, since majority voting is not
feasible for SNR.

                      Dataset   Generator   Checker   Base Acc (%)   SelfCheck Acc (%)   ∆Acc (%)
                       SNR      GPT-3.5     GPT-3.5       44.5             48.0          3.5±2.0


A PPENDIX E             A N EXPERIMENT ON L LAMA 2
To test SelfCheck’s generalization to other LLMs, we also tested it with Llama2 (70B, 4-bit, Touvron
et al. (2023)) on GSM8K (the generative accuracy of Llama2 on the other datasets was too low
to perform any meaningful checking). Restricted by the speed of Llama2 (70B, 4-bit) on our
server (which is only 20 tokens/s), we randomly select 500 test samples and generate 3 solutions for
each question.
From Table E.1, we see a statistically significant improvement in accuracy compared with majority
voting using this different LLM; the gains here are actually larger than those observed for GPT-3.5.
       Table E.1: SelfCheck significantly increases predictive accuracy on GSM8K with Llama2.

                      Dataset   Generator   Checker   MV Acc (%)     SelfCheck Acc (%)   ∆Acc (%)
                      GSM8K      Llama2      Llama2       40.3             43.2          2.9±0.3


   2
       https://huggingface.co/datasets/lighteval/synthetic_reasoning_natural/blob/main/hard/test.jsonl


                                                          16
