Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


α-TCVAE: O N THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN D ISEN -
TANGLEMENT AND D IVERSITY

    Cristian Meo∗       Louis Mahon                         Anirudh Goyal              Justin Dauwels
    TUDelft, NL.        University of Edinburgh, UK.        Google DeepMind, UK.       TUDelft, NL.



                                                 A BSTRACT
            Understanding and developing optimal representations has long been founda-
            tional in machine learning (ML). While disentangled representations have shown
            promise in generative modeling and representation learning, their downstream
            usefulness remains debated. Recent studies re-defined disentanglement through
            a formal connection to symmetries, emphasizing the ability to reduce latent do-
            mains (i.e., ML problem spaces) and consequently enhance data efficiency and
            generative capabilities. However, from an information theory viewpoint, assign-
            ing a complex attribute (i.e., features) to a specific latent variable may be infea-
            sible, limiting the applicability of disentangled representations to simple datasets.
            In this work, we introduce α-TCVAE, a variational autoencoder optimized using
            a novel total correlation (TC) lower bound that maximizes disentanglement and
            latent variables informativeness. The proposed TC bound is grounded in informa-
            tion theory constructs, generalizes the β-VAE lower bound, and can be reduced
            to a convex combination of the known variational information bottleneck (VIB)
            and conditional entropy bottleneck (CEB) terms. Moreover, we present quan-
            titative analyses and correlation studies that support the idea that smaller latent
            domains (i.e., disentangled representations) lead to better generative capabilities
            and diversity. Additionally, we perform downstream task experiments from both
            representation and RL domains to assess our questions from a broader ML per-
            spective. Our results demonstrate that α-TCVAE consistently learns more dis-
            entangled representations than baselines and generates more diverse observations
            without sacrificing visual fidelity. Notably, α-TCVAE exhibits marked improve-
            ments on MPI3D-Real, the most realistic disentangled dataset in our study, con-
            firming its ability to represent complex datasets when maximizing the informative-
            ness of individual variables. Finally, testing the proposed model off-the-shelf on
            a state-of-the-art model-based RL agent, Director, significantly shows α-TCVAE
            downstream usefulness on the loconav Ant Maze task. Implementation available
            at https://github.com/Cmeo97/Alpha-TCVAE


1      I NTRODUCTION
The efficacy of machine learning (ML) algorithms is intrinsically tied to the quality of data repre-
sentation (Bengio et al., 2013). Such representations are useful not only for standard downstream
tasks such as supervised learning (Alemi et al., 2017) and reinforcement learning (RL) (Li, 2017),
but also for tasks such as transfer learning (Zhuang et al., 2020) and zero-shot learning (Sun et al.,
2021). Unsupervised representation learning aims to identify semantically meaningful represen-
tations of data without supervision, by capturing the generative factors of variations that describe
the structure of the data (Radford et al., 2016; Locatello et al., 2019b). According to Bengio et al.
(2013), disentanglement learning holds the key to understanding the world from observations, gen-
eralizing knowledge across different tasks and domains while learning and generating compositional
representations (Higgins et al., 2016; Kim & Mnih, 2018).

Problem Formulation. The goal of disentanglement learning is to identify a set of independent
generative factors z that give rise to the observations x via p(x|z). However, from an information
∗
    Work done while doing a research internship at Mila, Quebec AI Institute.


                                                       1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


theory perspective, the amount of information retained by every latent variable may be insufficient
to represent realistic generative factors (Kirsch et al., 2021; Do & Tran, 2020), limiting the applica-
bility of disentangled representations to simple problems. What is more, Friedman & Dieng (2022)
recently introduced the Vendi score, a new metric for gauging generative diversity, showing that en-
tangled generative models, such as the Very Deep VAE (Child, 2020), consistently produce samples
with less diversity compared to ground truth. This is indicative of their limited representational and
generative prowess. In contrast, Higgins et al. (2019; 2022) re-defined disentangled representations
through the lens of symmetries, linking disentanglement to computational problem spaces (e.g., dis-
entangled representations inherently reduce the problem space (Arora & Barak, 2009)), suggesting
that disentangled models should be able to explore and traverse the latent space more efficiently,
leading to enhanced generative diversity.

Previous Work. Most existing disentangled models optimize lower bounds that only impose an
information bottleneck on the latent variables, and while this can result in factorized representa-
tions (Higgins et al., 2016), it does not directly optimize latent variable informativeness (Do & Tran,
2020). As a result, while several approaches have been proposed to learn disentangled represen-
tations by optimizing different bounds (Chen et al., 2018; Kim & Mnih, 2018), imposing sparsity
priors (Mathieu et al., 2019), or isolating source of variance (Rolinek et al., 2019), none of the pro-
posed models successfully learned disentangled representations of realistic datasets. Moreover, to
the best of our knowledge, no systematic and quantitative analyses have been proposed to assess to
what extent disentanglement and generative diversity (Friedman & Dieng, 2022) are correlated.

Proposed method. In this work, we propose α-TCVAE, a VAE optimized using a novel convex
lower bound of the joint total correlation (TC) between the learned latent representation and the
input data. The proposed bound, through a convex combination of the variational information bot-
tleneck (VIB) Alemi et al. (2017) and the conditional entropy bottleneck (CEB) Fischer & Alemi
(2020), maximizes the average latent variable informativeness, improving both representational and
generative capabilities. The effectiveness of α-TCVAE is especially prominent in the MPI3D-Real
Dataset (Gondal et al., 2019), the most realistic dataset in our study that is compositionally built
upon distinct generative factors. Figure 1 illustrates a comparison of the latent traversals between
α-TCVAE, Factor-VAE and β-VAE, showing that α-TCVAE leads to the best visual fidelity and
generative diversity (i.e., higher Vendi Score). Interestingly, the proposed TC bound is grounded in
information theory constructs, generalizes the β-VAE (Higgins et al., 2016) lower bound, and can
be reduced to a convex combination of the known variational information bottleneck (VIB) (Alemi
et al., 2017) and conditional entropy bottleneck (CEB) (Fischer & Alemi, 2020) terms.

Experimental Evaluation In order to determine the effectiveness of α-TCVAE and the down-
stream usefulness of the learned representations, we measure the diversity and quality of generated
images and disentanglement of its latent representations. Then, we perform a correlation study
between the considered downstream scores across all models, analyzing how generative diversity
and disentanglement are related across different datasets. This analysis substantiates our claim that
disentanglement leads to improved diversity. Finally, we conduct experiments to assess the down-
stream usefulness of the proposed method from a broader ML perspective. Notably, the proposed
method consistently outperforms the related baselines, showing a significant improvement in the RL
Ant Maze task when applied off-the-shelf in Director, a hierarchical model-based RL agent (Hafner
et al., 2022).

2   R ELATED W ORK
Generative Modelling and Disentanglement Recently Locatello et al. (2019b) demonstrated that
unsupervised disentangled representation learning is theoretically impossible, nonetheless disentan-
gled VAEs, acting as both representational and generative models, Kingma & Welling (2013); Hig-
gins et al. (2016); Chen et al. (2018); Kim & Mnih (2018) achieve practical results by leveraging
implicit biases within the data and learning dynamics Burgess & Kim (2018); Higgins et al. (2019);
Mathieu et al. (2019). On the generation side, they have been widely used to generate data such as
images (Chen et al., 2019), text (Shi et al., 2019), speech (Sun et al., 2020; Li et al., 2023) and music
(Wang et al., 2020). Various extensions to the base VAE model have been presented to improve
generation quality in terms of visual fidelity (Peng et al., 2021; Vahdat & Kautz, 2020; Razavi et al.,


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 1: Ground truth (first row), reconstructions (second row) and latent traversals comparison of
α-TCVAE, Factor-VAE, and β-VAE on the MPI3D-Real Dataset. Notably, α-TCVAE showcases
superior visual fidelity and generative diversity, as indicated by a higher Vendi Score.


2019). On the representational side, aiming for explainable and factorized representations, Hig-
gins et al. (2016) proposed β-VAE, which inspired a number of following disentangled VAE-based
models, such as Factor-VAE (Kim & Mnih, 2018), β-TCVAE Chen et al. (2018), and β−Annealed
VAE (Burgess et al., 2018). Both β-VAE and Factor-VAE aim to learn disentangled representations
by imposing a bottleneck on the information flowing through the latent space. While β-VAE does
this by introducing a β hyperparameter that increases the strength of the information bottleneck,
Factor-VAE introduces a TC regularization term. Chen et al. (2018) proposed β-TCVAE, which
minimizes the total correlation of the latent variables using Monte-Carlo and importance sampling.
Roth et al. (2023) proposed the Hausdorff Factorized Support (HFS) criterion, a relaxed disentangle-
ment criterion that encourages only pairwise factorized support, rather than a factorial distribution,
by minimizing a Hausdorff distance. This allows for arbitrary distributions of the factors over their
support, including correlations between them. Our model, namely α-TCVAE is optimized by a TC
lower bound as well, however we do not make use of any trick or expensive sampling strategy. In
contrast, we derive a TC lower bound that does not require any extra network or sampling strategy
and is theoretically grounded in the Deep Information Bottleneck framework Alemi et al. (2017).

Disentanglement and Deep Information Bottleneck In the last few years, a link between the la-
tent space capacity and disentanglement of the learned variables (Bengio et al., 2013; Shwartz-Ziv &
Tishby, 2017; Goyal et al., 2021) has been identified, showing that decreasing the capacity of a net-
work induces disentanglement on the learned representations. This relationship has been explained
by the information bottleneck (IB) principle, introduced by Tishby et al. (2001) as a regularization
method to obtain minimal sufficient encoding by constraining the amount of information captured
by the latent variables from the observed variable. Variational IB (VIB) (Alemi et al., 2017) has
extended the IB framework by applying it to neural networks, which results in a simple yet effec-
tive method to learn representations that generalize well and are robust against adversarial attacks.
Furthermore, (Alemi et al., 2017; Kirsch et al., 2021) outlined the relationship between VIB, VAE
(Kingma & Welling, 2013) and β-VAE (Higgins et al., 2016), providing an information theoretical
interpretation of the Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence term used in these models as a regularizer.
Despite the advantages introduced by the VIB framework, imposing independence between every
latent variable may be too strong an assumption (Roth et al., 2023). For this reason, Fischer & Alemi
(2020) introduced the conditional entropy bottleneck (CEB), which assumes conditional indepen-
dence between the learned latent variables, providing the ability to learn more expressive and robust
representations (Kirsch et al., 2021). Recently, a generalization of the mutual Information (MI),


                                                  3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


namely total correlation (TC), has been used to learn disentangled representations as well (Kim &
Mnih, 2018). Following Hwang et al. (2021), who propose a similar TC bound for a multi-view
setting, we derive a novel TC lower bound for the unsupervised representational learning setting. As
a result, the proposed bound is able to learn expressive and disentangled representations.

Disentanglement and Diversity The ideal generative model learns a distribution that well ex-
plains the observed data, which can then be used to draw a diverse set of samples. Diversity is thus
an important desirable property of generative models (Friedman & Dieng, 2022). We desire the
ability to produce samples that are different from each other and from the samples we already have
at train time, while still coming from the same underlying distribution. The benefits of diversity
have been advocated in a number of different contexts, such as image synthesis (Mao et al., 2019),
molecular design (Lin et al., 2021; Wu et al., 2021), natural language text (McCoy et al., 2023),
and drug discovery (Kim & Mnih, 2018). Motivated by the benefits of generative diversity, sev-
eral VAE-based models have aimed to show increased diversity in their generated samples (Razavi
et al., 2019). Some works have also noted improvements in diversity due to disentanglement. Lee
et al. (2018) adversarially disentangle style from content and show enhanced diversity of image-to-
image translations. Kazemi et al. (2019) also perform style-content disentanglement, this time in
the context of text generation, and again observe an increase in diversity. Li et al. (2020) shows
that disentangling pose, shape, and texture leads to greater diversity in generated images. Collec-
tively, these studies emphasize that diversity is often a valuable indicator of effectiveness in various
applications, and suggest that diversity and disentanglement are intertwined aspects of generative
models. Yet, to the best of our knowledge, no quantitative analyses that support this claim have been
presented. In this work, we present a correlation study, showing how downstream metrics of disen-
tanglement (e.g., DCI (Eastwood & Williams, 2018)) and diversity (e.g., Vendi Score (Friedman &
Dieng, 2022)) are correlated across several models and datasets.

3    α-TCVAE F RAMEWORK D ERIVATION
Motivation. In contrast to most existing methods, which only impose an information bottleneck
to learn disentangled representations, we seek to maximize the informativeness of individual latent
variables as well. The total joint correlation (TC) can be explicitly expressed in terms of mutual
information between the observed data and the latent generative factors, as shown in equation 4,
allowing us to link disentanglement to latent variables informativeness. As a result, leveraging
the TC formulation, we can derive a lower bound that not only promotes disentanglement but also
maximizes the information retained by individual latent variables.

Derivation. In this section, we formally derive the novel TC bound. Let D = {X, V } be the
ground-truth set that consists of images x ∈ RN ×N , and a set
                                                             Pof conditionally independent ground-
truth data generative factors v ∈ RM , where log p(v|x) = k log p(vk |x). The goal is to develop
an unsupervised deep generative model that can learn the joint distribution of the data x, while
uncovering a set of generative latent factors z ∈ RK , K ≥ M , such that z can fully describe the
data structure of x and generate data samples that follow the underlying ground-truth generative
factors v. Since directly optimizing the joint TC is intractable, we are going to maximize a lower
bound of the joint total correlation T C(z, x) between the learned latent representations z and the
input data x, following the approach proposed by Hwang et al. (2021). The total correlation is
defined as the KL divergence between the joint distribution and the factored marginals. In our case:
                                         "Z                       K
                                                                            #
                                 ∆
                                                                 Y
                       T Cθ (z) = DKL        qθ (z|x)pD (x)dx∥      qθ (zk ) ,                   (1)
                                                                      k=1
                                           R
where
R      the joint distribution is q θ (z) =    q θ (z|x)pD (x)dx,  pD (x) is the data distribution, qθ (zk ) =
  qθ (z|x)dz̸=k and z̸=k indicates that the k-th component of z is not considered. Since we aim
to find the encoder qθ (z|x) that disentangles the learned representations z, we can formulate the
following objective:
                                                  ∆
                                    T Cθ (z, x) =   T Cθ (z) − T Cθ (z|x),                                 (2)
where the conditional TC(z|x) can be expressed as:
                                                "       "           K
                                                                                 ##
                                      ∆
                                                                    Y
                        T Cθ (z|x) = Eqθ (z) DKL qθ (z|x)∥             qθ (zk |x) ,                        (3)
                                                                   k=1


                                                      4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


which is the expected KL divergence of the joint conditional from the factored conditionals. Intu-
itively, we can see that minimizing T Cθ (z|x), T Cθ (z, x) will be maximized, enhancing the disen-
tanglement of the learned representation z. Moreover, decomposing equation 2 we can express the
TC in terms of MI (Gao et al., 2019):
                                                K
                                                X
                               T Cθ (z, x) =          Iθ (zk , x) − Iθ (z, x),                      (4)
                                                k=1

where Iθ (z, x) is the mutual information between z and x and is known as the VIB term Alemi
et al. (2017). Additionally, we can also express it in terms of Conditional MI:
                                           K
                                     1 X
                     T Cθ (z, x) =       [(K − 1)Iθ (zk , x) − Iθ (z̸=k , x|zk )] ,                 (5)
                                     K
                                          k=1

where Iθ (z̸=k , x|zk ) is known as the CEB term (Fischer & Alemi, 2020). Equation 4 and equation 5
illustrate the link of the designed objective to both VIB and CEB frameworks. A complete derivation
of them can be found in Appendices A.1 and A.2, respectively. While the VIB term promotes
compression of the latent representation, the CEB term promotes balance between the information
contained in each latent dimension. Since we want to promote both disentanglement and individual
variable informativeness of the learned latent representation we propose a lower bound that convexly
combines the found VIB and CEB terms. We define the bound as follows:
                                            Kα                           (1 − α)
 T C(z, x) ≥ Eqθ (z|x) [log pϕ (x|z)] −        DKL (qθ (z|x)∥rp (z|x)) −      α DKL (qθ (z|x)∥r(z)) ,
                                          K −α                           (1 − K )|       {z       }
                                          |          {z              }                   VIB
                                                        CEB
                                                                                                     (6)
where α is a hyperparameter that trades off VIB and CEB terms. Following Hwang et al. (2021),
                                                                                    P            −1
                                                                                 ∆     K     1
we define rp (z|x) = N (µp , σp I) and r(z) = N (0, I), respectively, where σp =       k=1 σk 2
                PK
and µp = ∆
            σp · k=1 µ σk
                         k
                         2 while  µk and  σ k are the mean and standard deviation used to compute
zk using the reparametrization trick as in Kingma & Welling (2013). A full derivation of the bound
defined in equation 6 can be found in Appendix A.

Practical Implications. Disentangled models with M generative factors and K latent dimensions
usually have (K − M ) noisy latent dimensions Do & Tran (2020), but our CEB term induces an
inductive bias on the information flowing through every individual latent variable, pushing otherwise
noisy dimensions to be informative. The derived TC lower bound generalizes the structure of the
widely used β-VAE (Higgins et al., 2016) bound. Indeed, for α = 0, the TC bound reduces to
β-VAE one. A comparison of α-TCVAE, β-VAE, β-TCVAE, HFS and Factor-VAE lower bounds
can be found in Tab. A.3.

4    E XPERIMENTS

In this section, we design empirical experiments to understand the performance of α-TCVAE and its
potential limitations by exploring the following questions: (1) Does maximising the informativeness
of latent variables consistently lead to an increase in representational power and generative diversity?
(2) Do disentangled representations inherently present higher diversity than entangled ones? (3)
How are they correlated with other downstream metrics (i.e., FID (Heusel et al., 2017) and unfairness
(Locatello et al., 2019a))? (4) To what extent does maximising the latent variables’ informativeness
in disentangled representations improve their downstream usefulness?
Experimental Setup. In order to assess the performance of both proposed and baseline models,
we validate the considered models on the following datasets. Teapots (Moreno et al., 2016) con-
tains 200, 000 images of teapots with features: azimuth and elevation, and object colour. 3DShapes
(Burgess & Kim, 2018) contains 480, 000 images, with features: object shape and colour, floor
colour, wall colour, and horizontal orientation. MPI3D-Real (Gondal et al., 2019) contains 103, 680
images of objects at the end of a robot arm, with features: object colour, size, shape, camera height,
azimuth, and robot arm altitude. Cars3D (Reed et al., 2015) contains 16, 185 images with features:
car-type, elevation, and azimuth. CelebA (Liu et al., 2015) contains over 200, 000 images of faces


                                                       5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


under a broad range of poses, facial expressions, and lighting conditions, totalling 40 different fac-
tors. All datasets under consideration consist of RGB images with dimensions 64 × 64. Among
them, CelebA stands out as the most realistic and complex dataset. On the other hand, MPI3D-Real
is considered the most realistic among factorized datasets, which we define as those compositionally
generated using independent factors. To assess the generated images, we use the FID score (Heusel
et al., 2017) to measure the distance between the distributions of generated and real images, and
the Vendi score (Friedman & Dieng, 2022) to measure the diversity of sampled images. Both Vendi
and FID use the Inception Network (Szegedy et al., 2017) to extract image features and compute the
related similarity metrics. Since DCI (Eastwood & Williams, 2018) scores can produce unreliable
results in certain cases, (Mahon et al., 2023; Cao et al., 2022; Do & Tran, 2020), we measure dis-
entanglement using also single neuron classification SNC (Mahon et al., 2023). Further details on
used datasets and metrics are given in Appendix C.
Baseline Methods. We compare α-TCVAE to four other VAE models: β-VAE (Higgins et al.,
2016), β-TCVAE (Chen et al., 2018), β-VAE+HFS (Roth et al., 2023) and FactorVAE (Kim &
Mnih, 2018), all of which are described in Section 2, as well as a vanilla VAE (Kingma & Welling,
2013). To assess diversity and visual fidelity beyond VAE-based models, we also compare to a
generative adversarial network model, StyleGAN (Karras et al., 2019).

Generation Faithfulness and Diversity Analyses. We present image generation results from our
model alongside baseline models, evaluating performance on the FID and Vendi metrics across
datasets. For image generation using VAE-models, we adopt two strategies: (1) Sampling a noise
vector from a multivariate standard normal and decoding it. (2) Encoding an actual image, then
selecting a latent dimension. The value of this chosen dimension is adjusted by shifts of +/−
1, 2, 4, 6, 8, or 10 standard deviations. Subsequently, we decode the adjusted representation. In
Figures 2 and 3 the two sampling strategies are labeled as ‘Sampled from Noise’ and ‘Sampled from
Traversals’ respectively. Figures 2 and 3 show that α-TCVAE consistently generates more diverse
(higher Vendi) and more faithful (lower FID) images than baseline VAE models.

          3DShapes   12
                          MPI3D-Real        Cars3D            Teapots            Celeba
    16                                 16               15
    12                9                12               10                10               Sampled from
                                                                                             Noise
Vendi


     8                6                 8                                                    Traversals
                                                         5                 5
     4                3                 4
                                                                               -TCVAE
                                                                               -TCVAE
                                                                            Factor-VAE
                                                                                   VAE
                                                                                  -VAE

                                                                            -VAE+HFS
                                                                            Style-GAN
                         -TCVAE
                         -TCVAE
                      Factor-VAE



                                           -TCVAE
                                           -TCVAE
                                        Factor-VAE
                                               VAE


                                                            -TCVAE
                                                            -TCVAE
                                                         Factor-VAE
                            -VAE

                      -VAE+HFS
                             VAE
                      Style-GAN


                                              -VAE

                                        -VAE+HFS
                                        Style-GAN


                                                               -VAE

                                                         -VAE+HFS
                                                                VAE
                                                         Style-GAN
           -TCVAE
           -TCVAE
        Factor-VAE
               VAE
              -VAE

        -VAE+HFS
        Style-GAN


Figure 2: Diversity of generated images, as measured by Vendi score. Two different sampling strate-
gies are considered: sampled from white noise and from traversals. The diversity of the images of
our model, α-TCVAE, is consistently higher than baseline VAE models, and on par with StyleGAN.
The green dashed line represents ground truth dataset diversity. Traversals produce significantly
more diverse images than samples.


The Vendi score of α-TCVAE is comparable to that of Style-GAN, and its FID score is only
slightly worse. Moreover, Style-GAN takes 15x the training time (∼ 2hrs vs. > 30hrs on a single
Nvidia Titan XP) and learns only a generative model, whereas VAEs learn both a generative model
and a representational model. Noticeably, all VAE-based models perform poorly in terms of both
diversity and reconstruction quality when sampling from white noise, highlighting the benefit of a
structured sampling strategy when using VAE-based models for generative tasks. Another finding
is that traversal-generated images are superior to those obtained from the prior, i.e. sampling from
a standard normal and decoding. This is in keeping with prior work showing that drawing latent
samples from a distribution other than the standard normal, e.g. a GMM, often leads to higher
quality generated images Chadebec et al. (2022), and it supports the claim that disentangled models
allow more systematic exploration of the latent space leading to more diverse images. This claim is
also supported by noting that all disentangled VAEs give higher diversity than the vanilla VAE.



                                                  6
 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


         3DShapes           MPI3D-Real            Cars3D                      Teapots         Celeba
   400                                    400                           400             400
                     300                                                300                            Sampled from
   300                                    300                                           300
                                                                                                         Noise
FID200               200                  200                           200             200              Traversals
   100               100                  100                           100             100
                                                                          0


                                                                                             -TCVAE
                                                                                             -TCVAE
                                                                                          Factor-VAE
                                                                                                 VAE
                                                                                                -VAE

                                                                                          -VAE+HFS
                                                                                          Style-GAN
                           -TCVAE
                           -TCVAE
                        Factor-VAE



                                                -TCVAE
                                                -TCVAE
                                             Factor-VAE



                                                                             -TCVAE
                                                                             -TCVAE
                                                                          Factor-VAE
                              -VAE

                        -VAE+HFS
                               VAE
                        Style-GAN


                                                   -VAE

                                             -VAE+HFS
                                                    VAE
                                             Style-GAN


                                                                                -VAE

                                                                          -VAE+HFS
                                                                                 VAE
                                                                          Style-GAN
         -TCVAE
         -TCVAE
      Factor-VAE
            -VAE

      -VAE+HFS
             VAE
      Style-GAN
 Figure 3: Faithfulness of generated images to the data distribution, as measured by FID score. Two
 different sampling strategies are considered: sampled from white noise and from traversals. The
 scores for the images of our model, α-TCVAE, are consistently better than baseline VAE models
 (lower FID is better), and only slightly worse than StyleGAN. Traversals produce significantly more
 faithful images than samples.


 Disentanglement Analyses and Downstream Metrics Correlation Study In this section we ex-
 amine the disentanglement capabilities of α-TCVAE and the related VAE baselines, and how it
 relates, statistically, with the diversity and quality of generated images, as measured in Section 4.
 Figures 4, 5 and 6 show that α-TCVAE consistently achieves comparable or better DCI, SNC and
 unfairness scores. The improvement of α-TCVAE over the baselines is most significant on the most
 realistic factorized dataset, namely MPI3D-Real. Interestingly, while there is a significant gap be-
 tween the DCI scores of disentangled and entangled models across every factorized dataset, SNC
 shows that in terms of single neuron factorization, for both Cars3D and MPI3D-Real, α-TCVAE
 is the only model that significantly improves over the entangled VAE. This is perhaps due to the
 tendency of DCI to sometimes overestimate disentanglement Mahon et al. (2023); Cao et al. (2022).
 Furthermore, as illustrated in Figure 4, no
 model has been successful in learning dis-
                                                            3DShapes Cars3D Celeba MPI3D-Real Teapots
 entangled representations from the CelebA              0.8
 dataset. To meaningfully encode CelebA im-                                                            Models
                                                        0.6                                                -TCVAE
 ages, we used high-dimensional latent repre-                                                              -VAE
                                                                                                           -TCVAE
                                                        DCI


                                                        0.4
 sentations (e.g., 48 dimensions). However,                                                              Factor-VAE
                                                        0.2                                                -VAE+HFS
 as highlighted by Do & Tran (2020), dis-                                                                VAE
 entangling and measuring disentanglement in              0
 high-dimensional representations are notori-
 ously challenging tasks. Indeed, while DCI
 and unfairness present unrealistic results, SNC Figure 4: Comparison of DCI scores of our model
 gave all models a score of zero, and so we with those of baseline models.
 do not display the figures here. Figure 10 il-               3DShapes   Cars3D MPI3D-Real Teapots
                                                        0.5
 lustrates a significant correlation between the
                                                        0.4                                            Models
 Vendi, unfairness, and DCI metrics. There is a                                                            -TCVAE
                                                        0.3                                                -VAE
                                                        SNC


 compelling correlation between Vendi and DCI                                                              -TCVAE
                                                        0.2                                              Factor-VAE
 scores, underscoring that diversity and disen-                                                            -VAE+HFS
                                                        0.1                                              VAE
 tanglement are statistically related. This res-          0
 onates with the understanding that disentangled
 latent spaces naturally exhibit superior genera-
 tive diversity (Higgins et al., 2019). Addition- Figure 5: Comparison of SNC scores of our model
 ally, Vendi and DCI both exhibit a negative cor- with those of baseline models.
 relation with unfairness. This observation is               3DShapes Cars3D Celeba MPI3D-Real Teapots
 consistent with Locatello et al. (2019a)’s find-        0.3
 ings, implying that the fairness of downstream                                                        Models
                                                                                                          -TCVAE
                                                           Unfairness


                                                         0.2                                              -VAE
 prediction tasks is deeply associated with the                                                           -TCVAE
                                                                                                        Factor-VAE
 diversity and disentanglement of the represen-          0.1                                              -VAE+HFS
                                                                                                        VAE
 tations being learned. Further correlations re-           0
 sults are given in Appendix D, along with ex-
 amples of latent traversals.
                                                      Figure 6: Comparison of unfairness scores of our
 Attribute Classification Task In this exper- model with those of baseline models.
 iment, we train a multilayer perceptron (MLP)


                                                         7
 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                    3DShapes                        MPI3D-Real                                              Cars3D                                       Teapots                                 Celeba
                    Vendi       -0.49 -0.29 0.85                  -0.58 -0.26 0.84                      -0.48 -0.93 0.69                                                -0.5 -0.56 0.96                    -0.49 -0.61 0.53
               Unfairness -0.49        0.47 -0.69           -0.58        0.39 -0.55               -0.48        0.72 -0.53                                         -0.5        0.5 -0.44              -0.49        0.36 -0.79
                      FID -0.29 0.47        -0.11           -0.26 0.39        -0.64               -0.93 0.72        -0.71                                        -0.56 0.5         -0.7              -0.61 0.36        -0.15
                      DCI 0.85 -0.69 -0.11                   0.84 -0.55 -0.64                      0.69 -0.53 -0.71                                               0.96 -0.44 -0.7                     0.53 -0.79 -0.15


                                   Unfairness
                                                FID
                                                      DCI
                           Vendi


                                                                     Unfairness


                                                                                                                 Unfairness


                                                                                                                                                                      Unfairness


                                                                                                                                                                                                             Unfairness
                                                                                  FID
                                                                                         DCI


                                                                                                                                FID
                                                                                                                                      DCI


                                                                                                                                                                                   FID
                                                                                                                                                                                         DCI


                                                                                                                                                                                                                          FID
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                DCI
                                                            Vendi


                                                                                                  Vendi


                                                                                                                                                             Vendi


                                                                                                                                                                                                     Vendi
 Figure 7: Correlations between diversity (Vendi score), generation faithfulness (FID score), unfair-
 ness and DCI. Correlations are computed using the results from all models across 5 different seeds.


 to classify sample attributes using the models’ encoded latent representations. Figure 8 reveals that
 α-TCVAE either matches or surpasses the baseline models in terms of attribute classification ac-
 curacy. The improvement is minor on 3DShapes and Teapots, but more significant on Cars3D and
 MIP3D-Real. Interestingly, the only dataset where all VAEs exhibit commendable performance is
 CelebA, where high-dimensional representations are used. This suggests that, for this particular
 downstream task, the dimensionality of the representation may be the main constraining factor. In
 fact, this downstream task inherently favours high-dimensional attributes, considering that a MLP is
 employed for the attribute classification.
 Loconav Ant Maze Reinforcement Learning
 Task. In this experiment, a model-based RL
 agent has to learn its proprioceptive dynami-          3DShapes Cars3D  Celeba MPI3D-Real Teapots
                                                    0.8
                                                                                                      Classification Accuracy


 cal system while escaping from a maze. Re-
 cently, Hafner et al. (2022) introduced Direc-     0.6
 tor, a hierarchical model-based RL agent. Di-      0.4
 rector employs a hierarchical strategy with a      0.2
 Goal VAE that learns and generates sub-goals,
                                                      0
 simplifying the planning task. The first hierar-
 chy level represents the agent’s internal states,
 while in the second one, the Goal VAE en- Figure 8: Comparison of α-TCVAE and baseline
 codes the agent’s state and infers sub-goals. As models on the Downstream Attribute Classifica-
 a result, the Goal VAE generates sub-goals to tion Task. Our proposed model either matches or
 guide the agent through the environment. Given surpasses the baseline models in terms of attribute
 the enhanced generative diversity of α-TCVAE, classification accuracy
 we postulated that integrating our proposed TC
 bound could improve Director’s exploration. In
 this experiment, we replaced the beta-VAE objective, used to train Director’s Goal VAE, with our
 TC-bound, expecting a richer diversity in sub-goals, thus expediting environment exploration and
 enhancing overall learning behaviour. Figure 9 compares the performance of Director and Alpha-

                                                                    10
              2000
                                                                                                                                        Exploration Reward


                                                                     9                                                                                       4
              1500
Mean Return


                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Agent
                                                            Vendi


              1000                                                   8                                                                                       2                                                             Alpha-Director
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Director
               500                                                   7
                                                                                                                                                             0
                 0                                                   6
                     0     1000000              2000000                                 1000000             2000000                                                         1000000            2000000
                             (a)                                                            (b)                                                                                                (c)

 Figure 9: Performance of Director, a model-based hierarchical RL agent, and Alpha-Director on the
 Antmaze task. While director samples sub-goals using the original β-VAE, Alpha-Director samples
 sub-goals using the proposed α-TCVAE. Sampling using α-TCVAE gives more diverse goals (b),
 better exploration (c) and significantly higher mean return (a).



                                                                                                      8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Director, which replaces β-VAE objective with the proposed TC-bound instead, the results are av-
eraged across three seeds. Figure 9-(a) presents the mean return, which scores the performances of
the agent on the given task (i.e., finding the exit of the maze while learning proprioceptive dynam-
ics), showing that Alpha-Director significantly outperforms Director, learning faster and to a higher
final high mean reward. Figure 9-(b) illustrates the Vendi score of sampled goals across batch and
sequence length, showing that α-TCVAE generates sub-goals with a higher diversity score. As a
result, Alpha-Director has a better exploration, as shown in Figure 9-(c), leading to faster learning.
Collectively, these findings highlight that α-TCVAE enables the agent to sample a broader range of
sub-goals, fostering efficient exploration and ultimately enhancing task performance.


5   D ISCUSSION AND F UTURE W ORK

Through comprehensive quantitative analyses, we answer the defined research questions while de-
lineating the advantages and limitations of the proposed model relative to the evaluated baselines.
Our findings resonate with the hypothesis posited by Higgins et al. (2019), emphasizing a strong
correlation between disentanglement and generative diversity. Notably, disentangled representa-
tions consistently showcase enhanced visual fidelity and diversity compared to the entangled ones.
This correlation persists across all datasets rendered using disentangled representations. Intrigu-
ingly, traversal analyses of α-TCVAE, illustrated in Figures 1 and 16 in Appendix C, reveal that
it is able to discover novel generative factors, such as object positioning and vertical perspectives,
which are absent from the training dataset. We hypothesize that the CEB term is responsible for
this phenomenon. Most existing models optimize only the information bottleneck, and while this
can result in factorized representations, it does not directly optimize latent variable informativeness.
Our proposed bound also includes a CEB term, and so maximizes the average informativeness as
well, which may push otherwise noisy variables to learn new generative factors. Future research
will delve deeper into comprehending this phenomenon and exploring its potential applications.
In accordance with the literature, the main limitation of α-TCVAE is that, akin to other disentangled
VAEs, it is difficult to scale efficiently. This scaling challenge permeates the entire disentanglement
paradigm. In high-dimensional spaces, not only do disentangled VAE-based models struggle to pro-
duce disentangled representations, but also the metrics used to measure disentanglement tend not
to be useful. (e.g., DCI and SNC(Eastwood & Williams, 2018; Mahon et al., 2023)). On the other
hand, disentangled representations have a number of desirable properties, as already showcased in
the literature (Higgins et al., 2022). In particular, their impact is undeniable in the Ant Maze RL
experiment from Figure 9. Reinforcing this observation, our correlation study underscores the rela-
tionship between disentanglement and diversity, leading to the following question: can we leverage
diversity as a surrogate for measuring disentanglement in complex and high-dimensional scenarios?
We leave the answer to this question as a future work.


6   C ONCLUSION

We introduce α-TCVAE, a VAE optimized through a convex lower bound on the joint total cor-
relation (TC) between the latent representation and the input data. This proposed bound naturally
reduces to a convex combination of the known variational information bottleneck (VIB) (Alemi
et al., 2017) and the conditional entropy bottleneck (CEB) (Fischer & Alemi, 2020). Moreover, it
generalizes the widely adopted β-VAE bound. By maximizing disentanglement and average infor-
mativeness of the latent variables, our approach enhances both representational and generative ca-
pabilities. A comprehensive quantitative evaluation indicates that α-TCVAE consistently produces
superior representations. This is evident from its performance across key downstream metrics: dis-
entanglement (i.e., DCI and SNC), generative diversity (i.e., Vendi score), visual fidelity (i.e., FID),
and its demonstrated downstream usefulness. In particular, our α-TCVAE showcases significant
improvements on the MPI3D-Real dataset, the most realistic factorized dataset in our evaluation,
and in a downstream reinforcement learning task. This highlights the strength of maximizing the
average informativeness of latent variables, offering a pathway to address the inherent challenges of
disentangled VAE-based models.


                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


7   E THIC STATEMENT AND REPRODUCIBILITY
To the best of the authors’ knowledge, this study does not involve any ethical issues. The authors
aim to maximize the reproducibility of the study. The codes of this project will be released in the
camera-ready version. In the methods section, notions align with existing literature.

8   ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We thank Prof. Yoshua Bengio for the useful feedback provided along the project. We thank Mila
- Quebec AI institute, TUDelft, and Compute Canada for providing all the resources to make the
project possible.

R EFERENCES
Alexander A. Alemi, Ian Fischer, Joshua V. Dillon, and Kevin Murphy. Deep variational information
  bottleneck. International Conference on Learning Representations, 2017.
Sanjeev Arora and Boaz Barak. Computational Complexity: A Modern Approach. Cambridge
  University Press, 2009. doi: 10.1017/CBO9780511804090.
Yoshua Bengio, Aaron Courville, and Pascal Vincent. Representation learning: A review and new
  perspectives. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 35(8):1798–1828,
  2013.
Chris Burgess and Hyunjik Kim. 3d shapes dataset. https://github.com/deepmind/3dshapes-dataset/,
  2018.
Christopher P. Burgess, Irina Higgins, Arka Pal, Loic Matthey, Nick Watters, Guillaume Des-
  jardins, and Alexander Lerchner. Understanding disentangling in β-VAE. arXiv preprint
  ArXiv:1804.03599, 2018.
Jinkun Cao, Ruiqian Nai, Qing Yang, Jialei Huang, and Yang Gao. An empirical study on dis-
   entanglement of negative-free contrastive learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing
   Systems, 35:1210–1222, 2022.
Clément Chadebec, Louis Vincent, and Stéphanie Allassonnière. Pythae: Unifying generative au-
  toencoders in python-a benchmarking use case. Advances in Neural Information Processing Sys-
  tems, 35:21575–21589, 2022.
Ricky TQ Chen, Xuechen Li, Roger B. Grosse, and David K. Duvenaud. Isolating sources of disen-
  tanglement in variational autoencoders. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 31,
  2018.
Wenxiao Chen, Haowen Xu, Zeyan Li, Dan Pei, Jie Chen, Honglin Qiao, Yang Feng, and Zhaogang
 Wang. Unsupervised anomaly detection for intricate KPIs via adversarial training of VAE. In
 IEEE INFOCOM 2019-IEEE Conference on Computer Communications, pp. 1891–1899. IEEE,
 2019.
Rewon Child. Very deep VAEs generalize autoregressive models and can outperform them on im-
  ages. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2020.
Kien Do and Truyen Tran. Theory and evaluation metrics for learning disentangled representations.
  In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2020.
Cian Eastwood and Christopher KI Williams. A framework for the quantitative evaluation of disen-
  tangled representations. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2018.
Ian Fischer and Alexander A Alemi. CEB improves model robustness. Entropy, 22(10):1081, 2020.
Dan Friedman and Adji Bousso Dieng. The vendi score: A diversity evaluation metric for machine
  learning. arXiv preprint ArXiv:2210.02410, 2022.


                                                10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Shuyang Gao, Rob Brekelmans, Greg Ver Steeg, and Aram Galstyan. Auto-encoding total correla-
  tion explanation. In The 22nd International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics,
  pp. 1157–1166. PMLR, 2019.
Muhammad Waleed Gondal, Manuel Wuthrich, Djordje Miladinovic, Francesco Locatello, Martin
 Breidt, Valentin Volchkov, Joel Akpo, Olivier Bachem, Bernhard Schölkopf, and Stefan Bauer. On
 the transfer of inductive bias from simulation to the real world: a new disentanglement dataset.
 In H. Wallach, H. Larochelle, A. Beygelzimer, F. d'Alché-Buc, E. Fox, and R. Garnett (eds.),
 Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 32. Curran Associates, Inc., 2019.
Anirudh Goyal, Aniket Didolkar, Nan Rosemary Ke, Charles Blundell, Philippe Beaudoin, Nicolas
  Heess, Michael C. Mozer, and Yoshua Bengio. Neural production systems. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 34:25673–25687, 2021.
Danijar Hafner, Kuang-Huei Lee, Ian Fischer, and Pieter Abbeel. Deep hierarchical planning from
  pixels. In S. Koyejo, S. Mohamed, A. Agarwal, D. Belgrave, K. Cho, and A. Oh (eds.), Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 35, pp. 26091–26104. Curran Associates, Inc.,
  2022.
Martin Heusel, Hubert Ramsauer, Thomas Unterthiner, Bernhard Nessler, and Sepp Hochreiter.
 Gans trained by a two time-scale update rule converge to a local nash equilibrium. Advances in
 Neural Information Processing Systems, 30, 2017.
Irina Higgins, Loic Matthey, Arka Pal, Christopher Burgess, Xavier Glorot, Matthew Botvinick,
   Shakir Mohamed, and Alexander Lerchner. Beta-VAE: learning basic visual concepts with a
   constrained variational framework. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
   2016.
Irina Higgins, David Amos, David Pfau, Sebastien Racaniere, Loic Matthey, Danilo Rezende, and
   Alexander Lerchner. Towards a definition of disentangled representations. In Theoretical Physics
   for Deep Learning Workshop, ICML, 2019.
Irina Higgins, Sébastien Racanière, and Danilo Rezende. Symmetry-based representations for arti-
   ficial and biological general intelligence. Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience, 16:836498,
   2022.
HyeongJoo Hwang, Geon-Hyeong Kim, Seunghoon Hong, and Kee-Eung Kim. Multi-view repre-
  sentation learning via total correlation objective. In M. Ranzato, A. Beygelzimer, Y. Dauphin,
  P.S. Liang, and J. Wortman Vaughan (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  volume 34, 2021.
Tero Karras, Samuli Laine, and Timo Aila. A style-based generator architecture for generative
  adversarial networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
  Pattern Recognition, pp. 4401–4410, 2019.
Hadi Kazemi, Seyed Mehdi Iranmanesh, and Nasser Nasrabadi. Style and content disentanglement
  in generative adversarial networks. In 2019 IEEE Winter Conference on Applications of Computer
  Vision (WACV), pp. 848–856. IEEE, 2019.
Hyunjik Kim and Andriy Mnih. Disentangling by factorising. In International Conference on
  Machine Learning, pp. 2649–2658. PMLR, 2018.
Diederik P. Kingma and Max Welling.          Auto-encoding variational bayes.      arXiv preprint
  ArXiv:1312.6114, 2013.
Andreas Kirsch, Clare Lyle, and Yarin Gal. Unpacking information bottlenecks: Surro-
  gate objectives for deep learning, 2021. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
  5rc0K0ezhqI.
Hsin-Ying Lee, Hung-Yu Tseng, Jia-Bin Huang, Maneesh Singh, and Ming-Hsuan Yang. Diverse
  image-to-image translation via disentangled representations. In Proceedings of the European
  Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV), pp. 35–51, 2018.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Yang Li, Cheng Yu, Guangzhi Sun, Weiqin Zu, Zheng Tian, Ying Wen, Wei Pan, Chao Zhang, Jun
  Wang, Yang Yang, et al. Cross-utterance conditioned VAE for speech generation. arXiv preprint
  ArXiv:2309.04156, 2023.
Yuheng Li, Krishna Kumar Singh, Utkarsh Ojha, and Yong Jae Lee. Mixnmatch: multifactor dis-
  entanglement and encoding for conditional image generation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
  Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 8039–8048, 2020.
Yuxi Li. Deep reinforcement learning: An overview. arXiv preprint ArXiv:1701.07274, 2017.
Zeming Lin, Tom Sercu, Yann LeCun, and Alexander Rives. Deep generative models create new
  and diverse protein structures. In Machine Learning for Structural Biology Workshop, NeurIPS,
  2021.
Ziwei Liu, Ping Luo, Xiaogang Wang, and Xiaoou Tang. Deep learning face attributes in the wild.
  In Proceedings of International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), December 2015.
Francesco Locatello, Gabriele Abbati, Thomas Rainforth, Stefan Bauer, Bernhard Schölkopf, and
  Olivier Bachem. On the fairness of disentangled representations. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 32, 2019a.
Francesco Locatello, Stefan Bauer, Mario Lucic, Gunnar Raetsch, Sylvain Gelly, Bernhard
  Schölkopf, and Olivier Bachem. Challenging common assumptions in the unsupervised learning
  of disentangled representations. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 4114–
  4124. PMLR, 2019b.
Louis Mahon, Lei Shah, and Thomas Lukasiewicz. Correcting flaws in common disentanglement
  metrics. arXiv preprint ArXiv:2304.02335, 2023.
Qi Mao, Hsin-Ying Lee, Hung-Yu Tseng, Siwei Ma, and Ming-Hsuan Yang. Mode seeking gener-
  ative adversarial networks for diverse image synthesis. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Confer-
  ence on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 1429–1437, 2019.
Emile Mathieu, Tom Rainforth, Nana Siddharth, and Yee Whye Teh. Disentangling disentanglement
  in variational autoencoders. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 4402–4412.
  PMLR, 2019.
R. Thomas McCoy, Paul Smolensky, Tal Linzen, Jianfeng Gao, and Asli Celikyilmaz. How much
  do language models copy from their training data? evaluating linguistic novelty in text generation
  using raven. Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 11:652–670, 2023.
Pol Moreno, Christopher KI Williams, Charlie Nash, and Pushmeet Kohli. Overcoming occlusion
  with inverse graphics. In European Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 170–185. Springer, 2016.
Jialun Peng, Dong Liu, Songcen Xu, and Houqiang Li. Generating diverse structure for image
   inpainting with hierarchical vq-VAE. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
   Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 10775–10784, 2021.
Alec Radford, Luke Metz, and Soumith Chintala. Unsupervised representation learning with deep
  convolutional generative adversarial networks. arXiv preprint ArXiv:1511.06434, 2016.
Ali Razavi, Aaron Van den Oord, and Oriol Vinyals. Generating diverse high-fidelity images with
  vq-VAE-2. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019.
Scott E Reed, Yi Zhang, Yuting Zhang, and Honglak Lee. Deep visual analogy-making. In Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 28. Curran Associates, Inc., 2015.
Michal Rolinek, Dominik Zietlow, and Georg Martius. Variational autoencoders pursue pca direc-
 tions (by accident). In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
 Recognition, pp. 12406–12415, 2019.
Karsten Roth, Mark Ibrahim, Zeynep Akata, Pascal Vincent, and Diane Bouchacourt. Disentan-
  glement of correlated factors via hausdorff factorized support. In International Conference on
  Learning Representations (ICLR), 2023.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Yuge Shi, Brooks Paige, Philip Torr, et al. Variational mixture-of-experts autoencoders for multi-
  modal deep generative models. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019.
Ravid Shwartz-Ziv and Naftali Tishby. Opening the black box of deep neural networks via informa-
  tion. arXiv preprint ArXiv:1703.00810, 2017.
Guangzhi Sun, Yu Zhang, Ron J. Weiss, Yuan Cao, Heiga Zen, Andrew Rosenberg, Bhuvana Ram-
  abhadran, and Yonghui Wu. Generating diverse and natural text-to-speech samples using a quan-
  tized fine-grained VAE and autoregressive prosody prior. In ICASSP 2020-2020 IEEE Interna-
  tional Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), pp. 6699–6703. IEEE,
  2020.
Xiaohong Sun, Jinan Gu, and Hongying Sun. Research progress of zero-shot learning. Applied
  Intelligence, 51(6):3600–3614, 2021.
Christian Szegedy, Sergey Ioffe, Vincent Vanhoucke, and Alexander Alemi. Inception-v4, inception-
  resnet and the impact of residual connections on learning. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference
  on Artificial Intelligence, volume 31, 2017.
Naftali Tishby, Fernando C. Pereira, and William Bialek. The information bottleneck method. Pro-
  ceedings of the 37th Allerton Conference on Communication, Control and Computation, 2001.
Arash Vahdat and Jan Kautz. NVAE: A deep hierarchical variational autoencoder. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:19667–19679, 2020.
Ziyu Wang, Yiyi Zhang, Yixiao Zhang, Junyan Jiang, Ruihan Yang, Junbo Zhao, and Gus
  Xia. Pianotree VAE: Structured representation learning for polyphonic music. arXiv preprint
  ArXiv:2008.07118, 2020.
Zachary Wu, Kadina E. Johnston, Frances H. Arnold, and Kevin K. Yang. Protein sequence design
  with deep generative models. Current Opinion in Chemical Biology, 65:18–27, 2021.
Fuzhen Zhuang, Zhiyuan Qi, Keyu Duan, Dongbo Xi, Yongchun Zhu, Hengshu Zhu, Hui Xiong,
  and Qing He. A comprehensive survey on transfer learning. Proceedings of the IEEE, 109(1):
  43–76, 2020.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A     T OTAL C ORRELATION L OWER B OUND D ERIVATION

In this section we are going to derive the TC lower bound defined in equation 6. Since it is defined
as a convex combination of marginal log-likelihood, VIB, and CEB terms, we are going to split the
derivation into two subsections. First, we will derive a first TC bound that introduces the VIB term.
Then, we will derive another TC bound, which explicitly shows the CEB term. Finally, we will
define the TC bound shown in equation 6 as a convex combination of the two bounds.



A.1    TC B OUND AND THE VARIATIONAL I NFORMATION B OTTLENECK

Unfortunately, direct optimization of mutual information terms is intractable Alemi et al. (2017).
Therefore, we first need to find a lower bound of equation 4. Following the approach used in Hwang
et al. (2021), we can expand it as:



                    K
                    X
    T Cθ (z, x) =         Iθ (zk , x) − Iθ (z, x),                                                       (7)
                    k=1
                       K
                      X                   qθ (x|zk )                     qθ (x|z)
                    =     Eqθ (x,zk ) log               − Eqθ (x,z) log             ,
                                           pD (x)                         pD (x)
                      k=1
                       K
                      X                   qθ (x|zk ) pϕ (x|zk )                     qθ (z|x) r(z)
                    =     Eqθ (x,zk ) log                          − Eqθ (z,x) log                  .
                                           pD (x) pϕ (x|zk )                          qθ (z) r(z)
                      k=1


Let’s expand these two terms:

                                                 Z Z
                         qθ (x|zk ) pϕ (x|zk )                           qθ (x|zk ) pϕ (x|zk )
       Eqθ (x,zk ) log                          =        qθ (zk , x) log                       dzk dx,   (8)
                          pD (x) pϕ (x|zk )                               pD (x) pϕ (x|zk )
          Z Z
                                            qθ (x|zk )
       =          qθ (zk |x)pD (x) log                   + log pϕ (x|zk ) − log pD (x) dzk dx,
                                            pϕ (x|zk )
       = H(x) + Eqθ (zk ) [DKL (qθ (x|zk )∥pϕ (x|zk ))] + Eqθ (zk ,x) [log pϕ (x|zk )].


                                qθ (z|x) r(z)
                  Eqθ (z,x) log                  ,                                                       (9)
                                 qθ (z) r(z)
                  Z
                                     qθ (z|x) r(z)
                 = qθ (x, z) log                      dzdx,
                                      qθ (z) r(z)
                     Z
                                                 qθ (z|x)           r(z)
                  = qθ (z|x)pD (x)          log             + log             dzdx,
                                                   r(z)             qθ (z)
                  = EpD (x) [DKL (qθ (z|x)∥r(z))] − Eqθ (x|z) [DKL (qθ (z)∥r(z))].


As a result, we can write:


                                                     14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


               K
               X
 T Cθ (z, x) =    H(x) + Eqθ (zk ) [DKL (qθ (x|zk )∥pϕ (x|zk ))] + Eqθ (zk ,x) [log pϕ (x|zk )] ,
                    k=1

                                                                                                    (10)
                    − EpD (x) [DKL (qθ (z|x)∥r(z))] + Eqθ (x|z) [[DKL (qθ (z)∥r(z))],
      K
      X
  ≥          H(x) + Eqθ (zk ,x) [log pϕ (x|zk ) − EpD (x) [DKL (qθ (z|x)∥r(z))],
      k=1
    K
    X         Z  Z
  =    H(x) +      qθ (z, x)dz̸=k log pϕ (x|zk )dzk dx − EpD (x) [DKL (qθ (z|x)∥r(z))],
      k=1
      K
      X
  =      H(x) + Eqθ (z,x) [log pϕ (x|zk ) − EpD (x) [DKL (qθ (z|x)∥r(z))],
      k=1
                                  K
                                  Y
  = KH(x) + Eqθ (z,x) [log              pϕ (x|zk )] − EpD (x) [DKL (qθ (z|x)∥r(z))],
                                  k=1
  = KH(x) + Eqθ (z,x) [log pϕ (x|z) + log pD (x)K−1 ] − EpD (x) [DKL (qθ (z|x)∥r(z))],
  = Eqθ (z|x) [log pϕ (x|z)] − EpD (x) [DKL (qθ (z|x)∥r(z))] =: L(z, x).
                               |            {z            }
                                                  VIB



Maximizing L(z, x) not only maximizes the original objective T C(z, x), but at the same time
minimize the gap produced by upper bounding equation 10. As a result,

              K
              X
                 Eqθ (zk ) [DKL (qθ (x|zk )∥pϕ (x|zk ))] + Eqθ (x|z) [[DKL (qθ (z)∥r(z))],          (11)
              k=1



will be minimized, leading to: r(z) ≈ qθ (z) and pϕ (x|zk ) ≈ qθ (x|zk ).
Moreover, since H(x) and log pD (x)K−1 do not depend on θ, we can drop them from L(z, x).
Finally, to avoid using a heavy notation, we will denote the VIB term as DKL (qθ (z|x)∥r(z)),
leading to the first TC bound which introduces the VIB term:

                      T Cθ (z, x) ≥ Eqθ (z|x) [log pϕ (x|z)] − DKL (qθ (z|x)∥r(z)) .                (12)
                                                               |        {z       }
                                                                          VIB


A.2    TC BOUND AND THE C ONDITIONAL VARIATIONAL I NFORMATION B OTTLENECK

Expanding Eq. equation 2, we can reformulate T C(z, x) as follow:
                                  K
                                  X
                 T Cϕ (z, x) =          Iϕ (zk , x) − Iϕ (z, x),                                    (13)
                                  k=1
                                  K
                                  X   K −1               1               1
                              =                            Iϕ (zk , x) − Iϕ (z, x) ,
                                                 Iϕ (zk , x) +
                                       K                 K               K
                                k=1
                                 K
                                X     K −1               1
                              =            Iϕ (zk , x) +   (Iϕ (zk , x) − Iϕ (z, x)) .
                                       K                 K
                                  k=1
                                                                                                    (14)


                                                        15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Interestingly, can write the last term of Eq. equation 14 as:

                                                     pϕ (x|zk )                     pϕ (x|z)
          Iϕ (zk , x) − Iϕ (z, x) = Epϕ (x,zk ) log               − Epϕ (x,z) log              ,   (15)
                                                       pD (x)                        pD (x)
                                     Z  Z
                                                                         pϕ (x|zk )
                                   =         pϕ (x|z)p(z)dz̸=zk log                 dzk dx,
                                                                           pD (x)
                                     Z
                                                          pϕ (x|z)
                                   − pϕ (x|z)p(z) log               dzdx,
                                                           pD (x)
                                     Z
                                                           pϕ (x|zk )
                                   = pϕ (x|z)p(z) log                 dzdx,
                                                            p(x|z)
                                       Z
                                                               p(x|z)
                                   = − pϕ (x|z)p(z) log                 dzdx,
                                                             pϕ (x|zk )
                                       Z
                                                             p(x|z̸=k , zk )
                                   = − pϕ (x|z)p(z) log                      dzdx,
                                                                pϕ (x|zk )
                                   = −Iϕ (z̸=k , x|zk ).
We can now write equation 5:
                                            K
                                        1 X
                        T Cθ (z, x) =       [(K − 1)Iθ (zk , x) − Iθ (z̸=k , x|zk )] .
                                        K
                                           k=1

Interestingly, the second IB term in Eq. (8) can now be expressed as multiple conditional MIs
between the observation and K −1 other latent variables given the k-th latent representation variable,
penalizing the extra information of the observation not inferable from the given latent representation
variable. Moreover, we can further expand the TC as:
                    K
               1 X
T Cθ (z, x) =         [(K − 1)Iθ (zk , x) − Iθ (z̸=k , x|zk )] ,                                   (16)
              K
                  k=1
            K
                "
        1 X                                 qθ (x|zk ) pϕ (x|zk )
     =           (K − 1) Eqθ (zk ,x) log
       K                                     pD (x) pϕ (x|zk )
           k=1
                                                                         #
                       qθ (z|x) rp (z|x)
     − Eqθ (x,z) log                        + Eqθ (x,z) [log qθ (z̸=k )] ,
                      qθ (zk |x) rp (z|x)
            K
                "
        1 X                                 qθ (x|zk ) pϕ (x|zk )
     =           (K − 1) Eqθ (zk ,x) log
       K                                     pD (x) pϕ (x|zk )
           k=1
                                                                                      #
                                                              rp (zk |x)rp (z̸=k |x)
     − EpD (x) [DKL (qθ (z|x)∥rp (z|x))] − Eqθ (x,z) log                                ,
                                                                qθ (zk |x)qθ (z̸=k )
              K                                         K
         K −1 X                                       1 X
     =          H(x) + Eqθ (zk ,x) [log pϕ (x|zk )] −     EpD (x) [DKL (qθ (z|x)∥rp (z|x))]
          K                                           K
                  k=1                                              k=1
                 K                                                K
         K −1    X                                             1 X
     +               Eqθ (zk ) [DKL (qθ (x|zk )∥pϕ (x|zk ))] +       Eqθ (z̸=k ,x) [DKL (qθ (zk |x)∥rp (zk |x)]
          K                                                    K
                 k=1                                             k=1
                                                                                                   (17)
         Z
     +       DKL (qθ (z̸=k )∥rp (z̸=k |x))dx,
               K                                            K
         K −1 X                                          1 X
     ≥            H(x) + Eqθ (zk |x) [log pϕ (x|zk )] −        EpD (x) [DKL (qθ (z|x)∥rp (z|x))] .
          K                                             K
              k=1                                          k=1
                                                        |                 {z                    }
                                                                                   CEB
                                                                                                   (18)


                                                      16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Maximizing Eq. 18 not only maximizes the original objective T C(z, x) but at the same time min-
imizes the gap produced by upper bounding Eq. equation 17, leading to: rp (zk |x) ≈ qθ (zk |x),
qθ (z̸=k ) ≈ rp (z̸=k |x) and qθ (x|zk ) ≈ pϕ (x|zk ). Moreover, since H(x) does not depend on θ, we
can drop it from Eq. equation 18. Finally, to avoid using a heavy notation, we will denote the CEB
term as DKL (qθ (zk |x)∥rp (z|x)), leading to the second TC bound which introduces the CEB term:
                               K −1
               T Cθ (z, x) ≥        Eqθ (z|x) [log pϕ (x|z)] − DKL (qθ (z|x)∥rp (z|x)) .       (19)
                                K                              |         {z          }
                                                                        CEB


A.3   F INAL TC BOUND

In order to obtain the final expression of the derived TC bound, we can compute a convex combina-
tion of the two bounds defined in Eq. equation 12 and equation 19.


                          K
                                                       !
                          X
  T C(z, x) = (1 − α)           Iθ (zk , x) − Iθ (z, x)                                        (20)
                          k=1
         K                                                  !
         X   K −1                  1             1
  +α                  Iθ (zk , x) + Iθ (zk , x) − Iθ (z, x) ,                                  (21)
                  K                K             K
         k=1
                                 K                     K
      K(1 − α) + α(K − 1) X               α X
  =                         Iθ (zk , x) −     (Iθ (z, x) − Iθ (zk , x)) − (1 − α)Iθ (z, x),
               K                          K
                                k=1                    k=1
    K −α
  ≥         Eqθ (z|x) [log pϕ (x|z)] − αDKL (qθ (z|x)∥rp (z|x)) − (1 − α)DKL (pθ (z|x)∥r(z)),
      K
                                  Kα                             (1 − α)
  = Eqθ (z|x) [log pϕ (x|z)] −         DKL (qθ (z|x)∥rp (z|x)) −      α DKL (qθ (z|x)∥r(z)) .
                                K −α                             (1 − K )
                                |            {z              } |           {z             }
                                                CEB                              VIB


where α is a hyperparameter that balances the effects of VIB and CEB terms. Table A.3 illustrates
the lower bounds defined for β-VAE Higgins et al. (2016), FactorVAE Kim & Mnih (2018), HFS
Roth et al. (2023) and β-TCVAE Chen et al. (2018) comparing them to the derived TC bound. We
can see that the three bounds present a similar structure, presenting a marginal log-likelihood term
and either one or two KL regularizers that impose some kind of information bottleneck.


                                                      17
 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  Model                                              Lower Bound
  β-VAE                           Eqθ (z|x) [log pϕ (x|z)] − βDKL (qθ (z|x)∥p(z))
                                                                                  QK
FactorVAE       Eqθ (z|x) [log pϕ (x|z)] − βDKL (qθ (z|x)∥p(z)) − γDKL (qθ (z)∥ k=1 qϕ (zk ))
                                                              Q                P
β-TCVAE Eq(z|n)p(n) [log p(n|z) − αIq (z; n) − βDKL (q(z)∥ j q(zj )) − γ j DKL (q(zj )∥p(zj ))
                                        PK−1 PK                                                      ′
   HFS    Eqθ (z|x) [log pϕ (x|z)] − γ[ i=1     j=i+1 maxz∈Z:,1 ×Z:,2 ×···×Z:,K minz ∈Z:,(i,j) d(z, z )]
                                                                                    ′

                                         Kα                             (1−α)
α-TCVAE       Eqθ (z|x) [log pϕ (x|z)] − K−α DKL (qθ (z|x)∥rp (z|x)) − (1− α DKL (qθ (z|x)∥r(z))
                                                                             ) K


 Table 1: This table compares the lower bound objective functions of β-VAE, β-TCVAE, Factor-
 VAE and HFS-VAE. The lower bound objective function of β-VAE is composed of the expected
 log-likelihood of the data given the latent variables and the KL divergence between the approximate
 posterior and the prior of the latent variables (i.e., VIB term). The FactorVAE model further adds
 a KL divergence term between the approximate posterior and the factorized prior of the latent vari-
 ables, which approximates the total correlation of the latent variables, and HFS-VAE further adds
 a Monte-Carlo approximation of Hausdorff distance. α-TCVAE, on the other hand, uses a con-
 vex combination of VIB term and KL divergence between the approximate posterior and the prior
 of the latent variables conditioned on the k-th latent variable (i.e., CEB term). K represents the
 dimensionality of the latent variables, while β, γ and α are hyperparameters of the models.


 B     A RCHITECTURES AND H YPERPARAMETERS D ETAILS

 The hyperparameters used for the different experiments are shown in Table 2.


            Table 2: Comparison of the different hyperparameters used across the Datasets
                     Dataset     β γ         α     latent dim K Training Epochs
                     Teapots     2 10 0.25              10               50
                    3DShapes     3 10 0.25              10               50
                     Cars3D      4 10 0.25              10               50
                  MPI3D-Real 5 10 0.25                  10               50
                      Celeba     5 10 0.25              48               50


 All encoder, decoder and discriminator architectures are taken from Roth et al. (2023).


 C     F URTHER D ETAILS ON DATASETS AND M ETRICS

 C.1    DATASETS

 We test on five datasets. Teapots (Moreno et al., 2016) contains 200, 000 images of size 64 × 64.
 Each image features a rendered, camera-centered teapot with 5 uniformly distributed generative
 factors of variation: azimuth and elevation (sampled between 0 and 2π), along with three RGB
 colour channels (each sampled between 0 and 1). 3DShapes (Burgess & Kim, 2018) consists of
 480, 000 images of size 64 × 64. Every image displays a rendered, camera-centered object with 6
 uniformly distributed generative factors of variation: shape (sampled from [cylinder, tube, sphere,
 cube]), object colour, object hue, floor colour, wall colour, and horizontal orientation, all determined
 using linearly spaced values. MPI3D-Real (Gondal et al., 2019) comprises 103, 680 images of size
 64 × 64. Each image captures objects at a robot arm’s end, characterized by 6 factors: object colour,
 size, shape, camera height, azimuth, and robot arm altitude. Cars3D (Reed et al., 2015) is made up
 of 16, 185 images of size 64 × 64. Each image portrays a rendered, camera-centered car, categorized
 by 3 factors: car-type, elevation, and azimuth. CelebA (Liu et al., 2015) encompasses over 200, 000
 images of size 64 × 64. Every image presents a celebrity, highlighted by a broad range of poses,
 facial expressions, and lighting conditions, which sum up to 40 different factors. Every model is
 trained using a subset containing the 80% of the selected dataset images in a fully unsupervised way.
 The models are evaluated on the remaining images using the following downstream scores. While


                                                   18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


CelebA is the most complex dataset, MPI3D-Real is the most realistic among the ones usually used
in the disentanglement community.

C.2   M ETRICS

When using the FID score to assess image quality, we compare the distribution of generated images
to that of the real images. Specifically, FID (Heusel et al., 2017) measures the distance between
two distributions of images, and we apply it to measure the distance between the generated images
and the real ones. A lower distance is better, indicating that the generated images belong to the
distribution of ground truth images.
The Vendi score (Friedman & Dieng, 2022), which we use to measure the diversity of the generated
images, is computed with respect to a similarity measure. Specifically, it is calculated as the expo-
nential of the entropy of the eigenvalues of the similarity matrix, i.e. the matrix whose (i, j)th entry
is the similarity between the ith and jth data points. It can be interpreted as the effective number of
distinct elements in the set.
To assess the quality of encoded latent representations, we use DCI, SNC/NK (Mahon et al., 2023)
and the unfairness measure of Locatello et al. (2019a).
DCI, the first disentanglement metric we compute, first trains a regressor to predict the generative
factors from the latent representation, and from this regressor extracts a matrix of feature impor-
tances, where the (i, j)th entry is the import of the ith latent dimension to predicting the jth gen-
erative factor. It then takes (a normalized version of) the entropy of rows and columns to compute
‘disentanglement’ and ‘completeness’, respectively. The accuracy of the regressor is taken as the
‘informativeness’ score. The average of these three scores, across all factors and neurons, is the final
DCI score.
SNC/NK, the second disentanglement metric we compute, works by first aligning neurons to latent
factors using the Kuhn-Munkres algorithm to enforce uniqueness. Then each aligned neuron is
used as a classifier for the corresponding factor, by binning its values. A higher accuracy of this
single-neuron classifier (SNC) is better, indicating that the factor is well-represented by a single
unique neuron. Neuron knockout (NK) is calculated as the difference between an MLP classifier
that predicts the generative factor from all neurons, and one that predicts using all neurons but the
one that factor was aligned to. A high NK is also better, indicating that no neurons, other than
the one it was aligned to, contain information about the given factor. SNC/NK measures a slightly
different and stronger notion of disentanglement than DCI, as it explicitly assumes an inductive bias
that enforces each factor to be represented by a single latent variable.
MIG, is a disentanglement metric that quantifies the degree of separation between the latent vari-
ables and the generative factors in a dataset. It calculates the mutual information between each latent
variable and each generative factor, identifying the variable that shares the most information with
each factor. The gap, or difference, in mutual information between the top two variables for each
generative factor is then computed. A larger gap indicates that one latent variable is significantly
more informative about a generative factor than the others, signifying a higher degree of disentan-
glement. This metric is particularly useful in scenarios where a clear and distinct representation of
generative factors is desired in the latent space. MIG thus complements DCI and SNC/NK by pro-
viding a measure of how well-separated the representations of different generative factors are within
the model’s latent space.

D     E XTENDED R ESULTS
Here, we present further results, in addition to those from Section 4. Figure 10 extended Fig. 7,
reporting the correlations also with SNC, NK and the attribute classification accuracy as shown in
Figure 8. Unsurprisingly, there is a strong correlations between the three metrics designed to mea-
sure disentanglement: DCI, SNC and NK. This, to some extent, verifies the reliability of these dif-
ferent disentanglement metrics. SNC and NK also correlate strongly with Vendi, as DCI does. This
further supports the finding in our paper of a relationship between disentanglement and diversity.


                                                  19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                   3DShapes                                                                      MPI3D-Real
      Vendi       -0.49 0.93 0.58 0.07 -0.29 0.85         Vendi       -0.58 0.68 0.75 0.73 -0.26 0.84
 Unfairness -0.49       -0.65 -0.64 -0.15 0.47 -0.69 Unfairness -0.58       -0.74 -0.83 -0.82 0.39 -0.55
       SNC 0.93 -0.65          0.56 -0.15 -0.18 0.98       SNC 0.68 -0.74          0.85 0.54 -0.85 0.89
        NK 0.58 -0.64 0.56           0.64 -0.83 0.51        NK 0.75 -0.83 0.85           0.59 -0.49 0.84
       MLP 0.07 -0.15 -0.15 0.64          -0.86 -0.26      MLP 0.73 -0.82 0.54 0.59           -0.14 0.42
        FID -0.29 0.47 -0.18 -0.83 -0.86        -0.11       FID -0.26 0.39 -0.85 -0.49 -0.14        -0.64
        DCI 0.85 -0.69 0.98 0.51 -0.26 -0.11                DCI 0.84 -0.55 0.89 0.84 0.42 -0.64
                     Unfairness



                                               MLP


                                                                                                    Unfairness
                                  SNC
                                          NK


                                                      FID


                                                                                                                             MLP
                                                               DCI


                                                                                                                 SNC
                                                                                                                        NK


                                                                                                                                   FID
                                                                                                                                         DCI
             Vendi


                                                                                            Vendi
                                  (a)                                                                            (b)

                                        Cars3D                                                                         Teapots
      Vendi       -0.48 0.61 0.81 0.36 -0.93 0.69         Vendi       -0.5 0.89 0.87 0.22 -0.56 0.96
 Unfairness -0.48       -0.84 -0.73 -0.64 0.72 -0.53 Unfairness -0.5       -0.81 -0.3 0.2 0.5 -0.44
       SNC 0.61 -0.84          0.84 0.64 -0.77 0.72        SNC 0.89 -0.81        0.79 0.08 -0.69 0.88
        NK 0.81 -0.73 0.84           0.28 -0.88 0.95        NK 0.87 -0.3 0.79          0.41 -0.71 0.97
       MLP 0.36 -0.64 0.64 0.28           -0.57 0.01       MLP 0.22 0.2 0.08 0.41           -0.68 0.35
        FID -0.93 0.72 -0.77 -0.88 -0.57        -0.71       FID -0.56 0.5 -0.69 -0.71 -0.68       -0.7
        DCI 0.69 -0.53 0.72 0.95 0.01 -0.71                 DCI 0.96 -0.44 0.88 0.97 0.35 -0.7
                     Unfairness


                                                                                                    Unfairness
                                  SNC
                                          NK
                                               MLP
                                                      FID


                                                                                                                             MLP
                                                               DCI


                                                                                                                 SNC
                                                                                                                        NK


                                                                                                                                   FID
                                                                                                                                         DCI
             Vendi


                                                                                            Vendi


                                  (c)                                                                            (d)

                                                                                Celeba
                                             Vendi       -0.49                    0.79 0.69 -0.61 0.53
                                        Unfairness -0.49                         -0.01 -0.69 0.36 -0.79
                                              SNC
                                               NK 0.79 -0.01                            0.5 -0.13 0.34
                                              MLP 0.69 -0.69                       0.5       -0.1 0.54
                                               FID -0.61 0.36                    -0.13 -0.1       -0.15
                                               DCI 0.53 -0.79                     0.34 0.54 -0.15
                                                             Unfairness
                                                                          SNC
                                                                                 NK
                                                                                      MLP
                                                                                             FID
                                                                                                      DCI
                                                     Vendi


                                                                          (e)

Figure 10: Correlations between all metrics we measure, both for the generated images and the
representations.


Figure 11 shows the results for neuron knockout (NK), the second metric introduced by Mahon et al.
(2023) alongside SNC, which is shown in Figure 5. Similar to SNC, the NK score for α-TCVAE


                                                                          20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                 3DShapes       Cars3D        MPI3D-Real        Teapots

           0.3                                                                 Models
                                                                                 -TCVAE
           0.2                                                                   -VAE
                                                                                 -TCVAE
    NK

                                                                                Factor-VAE
           0.1                                                                   -VAE+HFS
                                                                                VAE
            0

Figure 11: Comparison of the neuron-knockout score of α-TCVAE with that of baseline models. As
with other metrics presented in the main paper, the improvement of α-TCVAE is minor on 3DShapes
and Teapots, but more substantial on Cars3D and MPI3D-Real.


            3DShapes Cars3D            Celeba MPI3D-Real Teapots
     0.4
     0.3                                                                       Models
                                                                                 -TCVAE
                                                                                 -VAE
     0.2                                                                         -TCVAE
                                                                                Factor-VAE
     0.1                                                                         -VAE+HFS
                                                                                VAE
       0

Figure 12: Comparison of the MIG score of α-TCVAE with that of baseline models. As with other
metrics presented in the main paper, the improvement of α-TCVAE is minor on 3DShapes and
Teapots, but more substantial on Cars3D and MPI3D-Real.


            3DShapes Cars3D            Celeba MPI3D-Real Teapots
     0.6
                                                                               Models
                                                                                 -TCVAE
     0.4                                                                         -VAE
                                                                                 -TCVAE
                                                                                Factor-VAE
     0.2                                                                         -VAE+HFS
                                                                                VAE
       0

Figure 13: Comparison of the DCI-C completeness score of α-TCVAE with that of baseline models.
As with other metrics presented in the main paper, the performance of α-TCVAE is comparable on
3DShapes, CelebA and Teapots, and better on Cars3D and MPI3D-Real.


is higher than that for baseline VAE models and, while the errorbars often overlap, the superiority
of α-TCVAE is consistent across all five datasets and is most substantial on MPI3D-Real. Figure
12 shows the results for mutual information gap (MIG), which follows the same trend of NK, SNC
and DCI scores. Figures 13, 14 and 15 present the results of Completeness, Disentanglement and


                                                21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


           3DShapes Cars3D           Celeba MPI3D-Real Teapots
     0.8
     0.6                                                                    Models
                                                                              -TCVAE
                                                                              -VAE
     0.4                                                                      -TCVAE
                                                                             Factor-VAE
     0.2                                                                      -VAE+HFS
                                                                             VAE
       0

Figure 14: Comparison of the DCI-D disentanglement score of α-TCVAE with that of baseline mod-
els. As with other metrics presented in the main paper, the performance of α-TCVAE is comparable
on 3DShapes, CelebA and Teapots, and better on Cars3D and MPI3D-Real.


               3DShapes Cars3D        Celeba MPI3D-Real Teapots
           1
     0.75                                                                   Models
                                                                              -TCVAE
                                                                              -VAE
     0.50                                                                     -TCVAE
                                                                             Factor-VAE
     0.25                                                                     -VAE+HFS
                                                                             VAE
           0

Figure 15: Comparison of the DCI-I informativeness score of α-TCVAE with that of baseline mod-
els. As with other metrics presented in the main paper, the performance of α-TCVAE is comparable
on 3DShapes, CelebA and Teapots, and better on Cars3D and MPI3D-Real.


Informativeness metrics (DCI-C, DCI-D and DCI-I, respectively). The final DCI scores shown in
fig. 4 is computed as geomtric mean of the three scores.


                                               22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E     D ISCOVERING NOVEL FACTOR OF VARIATIONS

Figure 16 presents α-TCVAE traversals across 3DShapes, Teapots and MPI3D-Real datasets. The
red boxes indicate the discovered novel generative factors, that are not present within the train
dataset, namely object position and vertical camera perspective. While we do not have a compre-
hensive explanation of why such an intriguing phenomenon is shown, we believe that the intuition
behind can be explained considering the effects of VIB and CEB terms in the defined bound. Indeed,
while VIB pushes individual latent variables to represent different generative factors, CEB pushes
them to be informative. As a result, the otherwise noisy dimensions, are pushed to be informative
(i.e., CEB) and to represent a distinct generative factor (i.e., VIB), resulting in the discovery of novel
generative factors.


      (a) 3DShapes Traversals              (b) Teapots Traversals         (c) MPI3D-Real Traversals

Figure 16: α-TCVAE generated latent traversals the 3DShapes, Teapots and MPI3D-Real datasets.
The generated latent traversals reveal that α-TCVAE can learn and represent generative factors that
are not present in the ground-truth dataset, namely vertical perspective and object position. The
discovered generative factors are indicated with a red box.


F     R ELATIONSHIP BETWEEN CEB AND D IVERSITY

F.1   F ISHER ’ S D EFINITION OF C ONDITIONAL E NTROPY B OTTLENECK

Fisher’s approach to the Conditional Entropy Bottleneck Fischer & Alemi (2020) is an extension
of the Information Bottleneck (IB) principle Alemi et al. (2017), aimed at finding an optimally
compressed representation of a variable X that remains highly informative about another variable
Y , under the influence of a conditioning variable Z. The CEB objective, according to Fisher, is
formalized as a trade-off between two competing conditional mutual information terms:

                                   min [I(X; Z|C) − βI(Y ; Z|C)]
                                  p(z|x)


Here, I(X; Z|C) quantifies the amount of information that the representation Z shares with X,
conditioned on C. Simultaneously, I(Y ; Z|C) measures how much information Z retains about Y ,
also under the condition of C. The parameter β serves as a crucial tuning parameter, balancing these
two aspects.

F.2   A DAPTING CEB TO VAE S WITHOUT C ONDITIONING VARIABLES

In the realm of Variational Autoencoders, where the training strategy is to reconstruct the input
data X using a latent representation Z without any external conditioning C, the CEB framework


                                                    23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


undergoes a significant simplification. Given that X = Y in a typical VAE setup, the CEB objective
reduces to a form where the focus shifts to optimizing the mutual information between X and its
latent representation Z:

                                        min [(1 − β)I(X; Z)]
                                        p(z|x)


This objective can be further broken down as (1 − β)(H(X) − H(X|Z)), where H(X) represents
the entropy of the input data, and H(X|Z) is the conditional entropy of the input given its latent
representation. This formulation underscores the trade-off between compressing the input data in
the latent space and retaining essential information for accurate reconstruction.

F.3   I NCORPORATING D IVERSITY INTO THE CEB O BJECTIVE

Following Friedman & Dieng (2022), Diversity can be quantitatively expressed as the exponential
of the entropy of the latent space distribution q(Z|X):

                                    Diversity = exp(H(Z|X))

To understand how the CEB framework relates to this notion of diversity, we utilize the entropy
chain rule H(Y |X) = H(X, Y ) − H(X) , which allows to decompose H(X|Z) in terms of the
joint entropy H(X, Z) and the conditional entropy H(Z). Consequently, the CEB objective evolves
into a more comprehensive form that explicitly accounts for the diversity of the latent space:

                            min [(1 − β)(H(X) − H(X, Z) + H(Z))]
                           q(z|x)


                                min [(1 − β)(−H(Z|X) + H(Z))]
                               q(z|x)

The latter one, makes clear the connection between the CEB term and Diversity as defined in Fried-
man & Dieng (2022). Indeed, we can see that when minimizing the CEB term the Diversity term is
maximized.

G     D ISENTANGLEMENT AND VARIATIONAL I NFORMATION B OTTLENECK
Disentanglement in VAEs, following Higgings’ β-VAE framework, seeks to learn representations
where individual latent variables capture distinct, independent factors of variation in the data. This
is achieved by modifying the traditional VAE objective to apply a stronger constraint on the latent
space information bottleneck, controlled by a hyperparameter β. The β-VAE, introduced by Higgins
et al. (2016), represents a seminal approach to disentanglement, promoting the learning of factorized
and interpretable latent representations.
On a related front, the Variational Information Bottleneck (VIB) method, formulated by Alemi et al.
(2017), extends the Information Bottleneck principle to deep learning. The VIB approach seeks to
find an optimal trade-off between the compression of input data and the preservation of relevant
information for prediction tasks. By employing a variational approximation, VIB efficiently learns
compressed representations that are predictive of desired outcomes. Interestingly, Alemi formulates
a VIB objective that is equivalent to Higgins’ β-VAE one. Such result makes evident how imposing
a higher information bottleneck leads to higher disentanglement.

H     S ENSITIVITY A NALYSIS OF α
In this section we present a sensitivity analysis of how α affects Vendi and FID results across the
considered datasets. To be consistent and analyze how Alpha influences disentanglement scores, we
also report a sensitivity analysis of the DCI metric and a correlation study showing how alpha is
statistically correlated with FID, Vendi, and DCI metrics.


                                                 24
 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 H.1         D IVERSITY AND V ISUAL F IDELITY S ENSITIVITY A NALYSIS WITH RESPECT TO α

 To analyse how α influences the presented results, we performed an evaluation of FID, Vendi and
 DCI using α ∈ [0.00, 0.25, 0.50, 0.75, 1.00], where for α = 0.00 we obtain β-VAE model, while
 for α = 0.25 we get the results presented in the main paper. Figures 17 and 18 show that, when α ∈
 [0.25, 0.50] α-TCVAE presents the highest diversity scores, while keeping a FID score comperable
 to β-VAE.

             3DShapes         MPI3D-Real          Cars3D         17
                                                                        Teapots              Celeba
                        13                                                          14.5
      16                                                         16
                                            17                                        14
      15                12                                       15                                     Sampled from
Vendi


                                                                                    13.5                  Traversals
                                            16                   14
                        11                                                            13
      14
                        10                  15                   13                 12.5


                                                                                         0.0
                                                                                        0.25
                                                                                         0.5
                                                                                        0.75
                                                                                         1.0
                              0.0
                             0.25
                              0.5
                             0.75
                              1.0

                                                  0.0
                                                 0.25
                                                  0.5
                                                 0.75
                                                  1.0

                                                                       0.0
                                                                      0.25
                                                                       0.5
                                                                      0.75
                                                                       1.0
            0.0
           0.25
            0.5
           0.75
            1.0


 Figure 17: Sensitivity Analysis of the Diversity of generated images with respect to α. Only one
 sampling strategy is considered: sampled from traversals. The green dashed line represents ground
 truth dataset diversity. It can be seen that the higher alpha the higher will be the Vendi Score.


             3DShapes        MPI3D-Real           Cars3D               Teapots             Celeba
                                           275                  100               200
    100                 90                 250                   80               150
        80                                                                                            Sampled from
                        70                 225
FID


                                                                 60                                     Traversals
        60                                                                        100
                        50                 200                   40
        40                                                                         50
                                                                                     0.0
                                                                                    0.25
                                                                                     0.5
                                                                                    0.75
                                                                                     1.0
            0.0
           0.25
            0.5
           0.75
            1.0

                              0.0
                             0.25
                              0.5
                             0.75
                              1.0

                                                  0.0
                                                 0.25
                                                  0.5
                                                 0.75
                                                  1.0

                                                                       0.0
                                                                      0.25
                                                                       0.5
                                                                      0.75
                                                                       1.0


 Figure 18: Sensitivity Analysis of the Faithfulness of generated images to the data distribution, as
 measured by FID score, with respect to α. Only one sampling strategy is considered: sampled from
 traversals. It can be seen that for α ∈ [0.25, 0.50] the model presents higher visual fidelity.

 Interestingly, the two sensitivity analyses show two main trends:

             • Diversity increases when using higher values of Alpha.
             • FID score improves when using smaller values of Alpha.

 Indeed, when using higher values of α , we increase the contribution of the CEB term in equation 6,
 which enhances diversity at the cost of visual fidelity. As a result, the higher the value of α, the more
 diverse the generated batch of images, and the lower will be the generation quality. However, it can
 be noticed that when using values of α between 0.25 and 0.50, we get a set of generated images that
 are more diverse and still have a better or comparable visual fidelity than β-VAE (i.e., α=0).

 H.2         D ISENTANGLEMENT S ENSITIVITY A NALYSIS WITH RESPECT TO α

 Here, we present a sensitivity analysis of the DCI metric. Figure 19 shows that the interval [0.25-
 0.50] presents higher values of disentanglement, following Diversity and Visual Fidelity analyses
 that show the best results in the same range. Such a trend can be explained by considering that α
 weights the contributions of VIB and CEB terms. While the CEB term enhances diversity, the VIB
 term encourages disentanglement. As a result, we can see that DCI scores decrease when α gets
 closer to 1. Interestingly, when α is in [0.25,0.50], the combination of CEB and VIB terms produces
 a better bound for the Total Correlation objective than when using , which results in higher DCI
 scores.


                                                           25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 19: DCI scores sensitivity analysis with respect to α. On average when α ∈ [0.25, 0.50]
α-TCVAE presents the best DCI scores.


H.3   C ORRELATION S TUDY: H OW IS α CORRELATED WITH V ENDI , FID, AND DCI METRICS ?

Here, we present correlation matrices for all the considered datasets. We computed them using the
models trained for the alpha sensitivity analyses. The correlation matrices in fig. 20 confirm the
trends observed in the other sensitivity analyses (i.e., Vendi, FID, and DCI). Indeed, α has a strong
positive correlation with both FID and Vendi, showing that when α increases, diversity increases and
FID deteriorates. On the other hand, α has a strong negative correlation with DCI for all datasets
besides the Cars 3D dataset, showing that, on average, the higher the value of α, the lower the
disentanglement.


                                                 26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                     3DShapes                                                                   MPI3D-Real
                    0.86        0.88            -0.76                                          0.96      0.68   -0.5


 Vendi    0.86                  0.51            -0.41            Vendi         0.96                      0.72   -0.56


   FID    0.88      0.51                        -0.92              FID         0.68            0.72             -0.92


   DCI    -0.76     -0.41       -0.92                             DCI          -0.5            -0.56    -0.92
                                FID


                                                DCI


                                                                                                        FID


                                                                                                                DCI
                   Vendi


                                                                                               Vendi
                       Cars3D                                                                      Teapots
                    0.98        0.91            0.36                                           0.96      0.96   -0.69


 Vendi    0.98                  0.81            0.53             Vendi         0.96                      0.86   -0.5


   FID    0.91      0.81                        0.05               FID         0.96            0.86             -0.84


   DCI    0.36      0.53        0.05                              DCI          -0.69            -0.5    -0.84
                                FID


                                                DCI


                                                                                                        FID


                                                                                                                DCI
                   Vendi


                                                                                               Vendi


                                                                Celeba
                                                        0.94             0.8           -0.92


                            Vendi       0.94                         0.53              -0.74


                              FID       0.8             0.53                           -0.92


                             DCI        -0.92           -0.74        -0.92
                                                                     FID


                                                                                       DCI
                                                        Vendi


Figure 20: Correlations between α, diversity (Vendi score), generation faithfulness (FID score),
and disentanglement (DCI). Correlations are computed using the results from all models across 5
different seeds.


                                                            27
