Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


F ORGET-M E -N OT: L EARNING TO F ORGET IN T EXT-
TO -I MAGE D IFFUSION M ODELS

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT


         The unlearning problem of deep learning models, once primarily an academic
         concern, has become a prevalent issue in the industry. The significant advances
         in text-to-image generation techniques have prompted global discussions on pri-
         vacy, copyright, and safety, as numerous unauthorized personal IDs, content, artis-
         tic creations, and potentially harmful materials have been learned by these mod-
         els and later utilized to generate and distribute uncontrolled content. To address
         this challenge, we propose Forget-Me-Not, an efficient and low-cost solution de-
         signed to safely remove specified IDs, objects, or styles from a well-configured
         text-to-image model in as little as 30 seconds, without impairing its ability to gen-
         erate other content. Alongside our method, we introduce the Memorization Score
         (M-Score) and ConceptBench to measure the models’ capacity to generate gen-
         eral concepts, grouped into three primary categories: ID, object, and style. Using
         M-Score and ConceptBench, we demonstrate that Forget-Me-Not can effectively
         eliminate targeted concepts while maintaining the model’s performance on other
         concepts. Furthermore, Forget-Me-Not offers two practical extensions: a) removal
         of potentially harmful or NSFW content, and b) enhancement of model accuracy,
         inclusion and diversity through concept correction and disentanglement. It can
         also be adapted as a lightweight model patch for Stable Diffusion, allowing for
         concept manipulation and convenient distribution. To encourage future research
         in this critical area and promote the development of safe and inclusive generative
         models, we will open-source our code and ConceptBench.


1   I NTRODUCTION


In recent advancements, text-to-image models (Chang et al., 2023; Gafni et al., 2022; Ramesh et al.,
2021; 2022; Saharia et al., 2022; Yu et al., 2022; Rombach et al., 2022; Xu et al., 2022) have ex-
hibited remarkable capabilities in generating high-resolution images based on textual descriptions.
Notably, diffusion models, exemplified by DALL-E 2 (Ramesh et al., 2022) and Stable Diffusion
(Rombach et al., 2022), have satisfied commercial-grade productization standards, paving the way
for a plethora of applications tailored for end-users. Furthermore, recent literature has evidenced
the potential of these models to produce and modify videos in a zero-shot manner(Khachatryan
et al., 2023), eliminating the need for additional training. Industrial implementations, as referenced
in Picsart; Firefly; Lexica; NovelAI; Midjourny; Somepalli et al. (2022), have garnered widespread
acclaim in the domains of art and visual design, thereby attracting significant public interest.
However, the burgeoning popularity of this domain has concurrently raised pertinent concerns en-
compassing security, fairness, regulatory compliance, intellectual property rights, and overall safety.
The community faces pressing challenges, such as the inadvertent generation of unauthorized, prej-
udiced, and potentially hazardous content. This is not an unprecedented issue, as the academic
community has previously endeavored to address similar concerns.


                                                  1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                              Concept Forgetting


   Stable Diffusion


                      A photo of Elon Musk                     A dog in Van Gogh Style                    A photo of an apple
   Forget-Me-Not


                                                       Concept Correction & Disentangle


                            forgetting Liu Yifei as Mulan                                forgetting Daniel Craig as 007



Figure 1: Concept Forgetting: target concepts (denoted in blue text and crossed-out) are successfully removed
without compromising the quality of the output. Concept Correction & Disentangle: our method can be used
to correct a dominant or undesired concept of a prompt. Prior overshadowed concepts reveal in outputs after
the dominant concepts are forgotten.

The inherent risks associated with large-scale text-to-image models predominantly stem from the
vast datasets employed during their training phase. These datasets, which include public reposito-
ries like Laion (Schuhmann et al., 2022), COYO (Byeon et al., 2022), CC12M (Changpinyo et al.,
2021), and proprietary data from renowned entities such as Google (Saharia et al., 2022; Yu et al.,
2022) and OpenAI (Ramesh et al., 2021; 2022), present unique challenges. Public datasets, often
sourced from web scrapes, may lack rigorous quality control measures, especially concerning bias
and safety. Conversely, proprietary datasets, while potentially more controlled, are constrained by
scalability issues due to the inherent costs of annotation. Consequently, mitigating issues related
to harmful content, privacy breaches, and copyright infringements through mere data filtration or
source attribution becomes a daunting task. One potential recourse could be domain adaptation (Gi-
annone et al., 2022; Zhu et al., 2022; Xiao et al., 2022). However, the intricacies of curating and
refining such datasets remain formidable. Moreover, such domain adaptation can inadvertently di-
minish the model’s versatility, rendering it inept at synthesizing out-of-domain images.
Therefore, efficient methods that enable large-scale text-to-image models to selectively omit specific
concepts emerge as a promising direction. A line of concurrent works explore this direction by
overwriting model predictions of a target concept to be something else (Gandikota et al., 2023;
Kumari et al., 2023). Although they are effective in erasing inappropriate generations relating to
target concept, they are essentially training the model to learn a remapping between target concept
and manually defined generations, rather than letting the model fall back to whatever it generates
in light of its own knowledge, after omitting a concept. We argue that it is desiderative to omit
target concept by delving in the conditioning mechanism which is the ultimate trigger of a concept
appearing in generations. Moreover, cross attention conditioning exhibits promising results in recent
controllable text-to-image synthesis works (Chefer et al., 2023; Hertz et al., 2022).
This paper embarks on its journey by delineating this novel paradigm, termed concept forgetting.
In pursuit of this objective, we observe that scores of image-to-text cross attention conditioning
can be directly used as objectives to optimize diffusion model for weakening the model perception
of target concepts. To the best of our knowledge, we are the first to show cross attention scores
are viable objectives for fine-tuning text-to-image models. On top of this technique, we introduce
Forget-Me-Not, a cost-effective methodology for concept omission where a model decides what to


                                                                       2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


generate afterwards based on its knowledge. Complementing this, we present the memorization
score (M-score) in tandem with ConceptBench. It quantifies a model’s prowess in generating spe-
cific concepts while the latter establishes benchmarks for evaluating concept retention and omission.
Furthermore, we augment the realm of concept forgetting with concept correction & disentangle-
ment, enhancing model precision and diversity.
In summation, this paper’s primary contributions are encapsulated as follows:

       • The introduction of Forget-Me-Not, a cross-attention-based, efficient methodology for
         concept omission and rectification in large text-to-image models. This approach not only
         facilitates rapid concept omission in a mere 30 seconds but also seamlessly integrates as
         lightweight patches for Stable Diffusion, ensuring multi-concept manipulation and user-
         friendly distribution.
       • The inception of the memorization score (M-score) and ConceptBench, pioneering quan-
         titative tools that assess models’ proficiency in concept synthesis and omission.
       • Comprehensive empirical evaluations underscore the simplicity, cost-effectiveness, and ef-
         ficacy of our method. Its applicability extends to the removal of objectionable content and
         the rectification of biased concepts, aligning more closely with real-world applications.


2     R ELATED W ORKS

2.1   T EXT- TO -I MAGE S YNTHESIS

In the past decade, we have witnessed the rapid advance of it from unconditional generative mod-
els to conditional generative models with powerful architectures of auto-regressive model (Ramesh
et al., 2021; Yu et al., 2022), GAN (Casanova et al., 2021; Karras et al., 2019; 2021; Walton et al.,
2022; Shaham et al., 2019) and diffusion process (Ho et al., 2020; Nichol & Dhariwal, 2021; Lu
et al., 2022; Dockhorn et al., 2022; Balaji et al., 2022; Song et al., 2020). Early works focus on un-
conditional, single-category data distribution modeling , such as hand-written digits, certain species
of animals, and human faces (Deng, 2012; Choi et al., 2020; Karras et al., 2019; Liu et al., 2018).
Though, unconditional models quickly achieves photo realistic results among single-category data,
it’s shown that mode collapsing issue usually happens when extending data distributions to multiple-
category or real image diversity (Casanova et al., 2021; Metz et al., 2016; Arjovsky et al., 2017). To
tackle the model collapsing problem, the conditional generative model has been introduced. Various
types of data have been used as the conditioning for generative models, e.g. class labels, image in-
stances, and even networks (Casanova et al., 2021; Mirza & Osindero, 2014) etc. At the same time,
CLIP (Radford et al., 2021; Ilharco et al., 2021), a large-scale pretrained image-text contrastive
model, provides a text-image prior of extremely high diversity, which is discovered to be applica-
ble as the conditioning for generative model (Nichol et al., 2021; Crowson et al., 2022; Liu et al.,
2023). Nowadays, DALL-E 2 (Ramesh et al., 2022) and Stable Diffusion (Rombach et al., 2022)
are capable of generating high quality images solely conditioning on free-form texts, Subsequently,
a line of work seeks to efficiently adapt the massive generative model to generate novel rendition
of an unseen concept represented by a small reference set. Dreambooth (Ruiz et al., 2022) adapts
the model by finetuning all of its weights, while it requires enormous storage to save newly adapted
weights. Textual Inversion (Gal et al., 2022) and LoRA (Hu et al., 2021) ameliorate the issue by
adapting the model by adding a small set of extra weights.

2.2   C ONCEPT OVERWRITING

Prior works have noticed the inadvertent biased and unsafe generations from large text-to-images
models. They adopt the denoising loss (Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021) to steering predicted noise away
from what is used to be for a given concept. Kumari et al. (2023) and Heng & Soh (2023) choose to
overwrite target concept to manually defined anchor concept, for example overwrite the prediction
of “a grumpy cat” to “a cat”. SLD (Schramowski et al., 2023) and ESD (Gandikota et al., 2023)
utilize the classifier-free guidance of a pretrained model to steer prediction of a trainable model to
the opposite guidance direction. As a result, target concept is overwritten by that opposite guidance.


                                                  3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


3     M ETHODS
3.1   P RELIMINARIES

Diffusion models (Ho et al., 2020; Nichol & Dhariwal, 2021; Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021) are denois-
ing models that iteratively restore data x0 from its Gaussian noise corruption xT with a total step
number T . Such a restoration process is usually known as the reverse diffusion process pθ (xt−1 |xt )
and the opposite of the reverse process is the forward diffusion process that blends the signal with
noise q(xt |xt−1 ):
                                                   p
                             q(xt |xt−1 ) = N (xt ; 1 − βt xt−1 ; βt I)
                            pθ (xt−1 |xt ) = N (xt−1 ; µθ (xt , t); Σθ (xt , t))

Both forward and reverse processes are presumably Markovian chains, so we can express the likeli-
hood of both processes as:
                             T
                             Y                                    T
                                                                  Y
              q(x1:T |x0 ) =   q(xt |xt−1 )   pθ (x0:T ) = p(xT )    pθ (xt−1 |xt )
                              t=1                                           t=1

The loss function for the diffusion process is then to minimize the variational bound Lvlb of the
negative log-likelihood pθ (x0 ) (maximize the likelihood of x0 as the final denoised result from a
model with parameters θ):
                                                                pθ (x0:T )
                       LVLB = E [− log pθ (x0 )] ≤ Eq − log
                                                               q(x1:T |x0 )
Cross-Attentions (Vaswani et al., 2017) are widely adopted deep learning modules used in discrimi-
native models (Dosovitskiy et al., 2020; Carion et al., 2020; Jain et al., 2022), conditional generation
models (Ramesh et al., 2022; Saharia et al., 2022; Rombach et al., 2022) as well as language mod-
els (Devlin et al., 2018; Raffel et al., 2020; Chung et al., 2022). The purpose of cross-attention is
to transfer information from conditional inputs to hidden features through dot product and softmax.
For example, in stable diffusion (Rombach et al., 2022), the hidden feature serves as the query Q
and context serves as key K and value V . Assume Q and K has dimension d for inner product, the
output h is then computed as the following:

                                                    QK T
                                        h = softmax( √ )V
                                                      d

3.2   C ONCEPT F ORGETTING

A concept is an abstract term representing an intuited object of thought, which also serves as the
foundation for people’s perceptions. Specifically for generative task, we may recognize concepts as
tangible things, including identities, objects that physically existed, style of images, object relations,
and even poses and behavior. On contrast to machine unlearning (Baik et al., 2020), which aims to
delete the fields around designated data points, we define concept forgetting in diffusion models as
the disentanglement of concept prompts and visual contents. This definition allows models to retain
their generative abilities to the greatest extent possible.

3.3   F ORGET-M E -N OT

To fulfill the aforementioned goals in Section 3.2, we introduce Forget-Me-Not. Forget-Me-Not is
well-capable in removing a wide variety of concepts without inadvertently influencing too much on
other outputs. Its underlying methodology, attention resteering, fits almost all major text-to-image
models and may extend to other conditional multimodal generative models.
Cross Attention Conditioning As discussed before, the text conditioning happens at each cross
attention layer of UNet, where visuals of a concept is first introduced to hidden features through
QKV attention operation. A logical try is to manually set the attention from hidden features towards
tokens of target concept as zero. This simple manipulation turns out successful that expected visuals


                                                     4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                  Forward Pass


                                              𝑄              𝐾
                      Attention Map
                       of Elon Musk
      …           …                                                                        …                 …
                                              𝐴              𝑉       A photo of Elon Musk



           𝐿𝑜𝑠𝑠           𝐿𝑜𝑠𝑠 = min(aggregated attention)                                            𝐿𝑜𝑠𝑠
                                                                       : Cross Attention
                                                                  𝐿𝑜𝑠𝑠 : Attention Re-steering Loss
                                              Back Propagation


Figure 2: This figure shows the Attention Re-steering we proposed in our Forget-Me-Not method, in which
we set the objective function to minimize the attention maps of target concepts (Elon Musk in this case) and
correspondingly finetune the network.

of target concept are diminishing in result images. Following this observation, we devise Attention
Resteering Loss to backpropagate the concept diminishing effect to model weights.
Attention Resteering Loss conceptually enables a precise backpropagation from exact tokens of
target concept. Figure 2 shows the diagram of this idea, in which we first locate the token em-
beddings associated with target concept; compute the attention maps between visual hidden features
and token embeddings; aggregate corresponding attention scores; minimize the aggregated score and
backpropagate the network. Such attention resteering can be plugged into any cross-attention lay-
ers of the network. It also decouples model’s finetuning from its original loss functions(variational
lower bound for diffusion models), making the process a much simpler solution. One of our main
focuses in this work is concept forgetting of text-to-image models; therefore we carry out atten-
tion resteering on all cross-attention layers of UNet (Ronneberger et al., 2015) in Stable-Diffusion
(SD) (Rombach et al., 2022), which yields the best performance on most of the concepts. The entire
algorithm of Forget-Me-Not can be found in Algorithm 1.

Algorithm 1 Forget-Me-Not on diffuser
Require: Token embeddings C, embedding locations N , and reference images R of target concept,
    diffuser Gθ , diffusion step T , optimization steps S.
 1: repeat S steps
 2:     t ∼ Uniform([1 . . . T ]); ϵ ∼ N (0, I)
 3:     ri ∼ R; cj , nj ∼ C, N
 4:     x0 ← √  ri        √
 5:     xt ← ᾱt x0 + 1 − ᾱt ϵ
 6:                                                              ▷ ᾱt : noise variance schedule
 7:     x′t−1 , At ← Gθ (xt , cj , t)
 8:                                                              ▷ At : all cross attention maps
               P          [nj] 2
 9:     L ← at ∈At ∥at ∥
10:                                                               ▷ L: attention resteering loss
11:     θ ← θ − ∇θ L

Optional Concept Inversion: Although we may directly obtain token embeddings using prompts
for most text-to-image models, this is not a generalized case for all concepts, particularly when it’s
hard or impossible to describe a concept using textual prompts. For instance, forget a style repre-
sented by an image. To overcome this challenge, we optionally include the textual inversion (Gal
et al., 2022) as a fixed overhead before Forget-Me-Not to strengthen its generality on all concepts.


                                                         5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


In practice, we also notice that such inversion helps text-to-image models more precisely identify
the forgetting concept and thus improves their performance. More results can be found in our Ex-
periments Section. Ablation studies on the effects of Concept Inversion(CI) are in Appendix C.

4                 E XPERIMENTS
4.1               E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP

Dataset: Our evaluation utilizes datasets constructed from ConceptBench. Each dataset comprises
pairs of images and their corresponding textual prompts and they are grouped by concept category,
with images generated via the Stable Diffusion 2.1 base. See Appendix A. Implementation details
are in Appendix B.
Baselines: Our approach is benchmarked against other concurrent works, ESD (Gandikota et al.,
2023) and ACTD (Kumari et al., 2023). The comparison focuses on forgetting performance and the
influence on related concepts, as detailed in section 4.2. Our unique capability for concept correction
is highlighted in section 4.4.
Evaluation Metrics: Forgetting efficacy is assessed using both the CLIP score (Radford et al.,
2021) and M-Scores. The CLIP score measures the congruence between generated images and their
textual prompts. A decrease in the CLIP score signifies effective forgetting, but an excessively low
score indicates a loss of overall image semantics, see Table 1. For instance, after forgetting the
“corgi” concept, we anticipate the generated image to still represent a dog, not an unrelated object
like a metal bucket.
The M-Score offers a model-centric perspective on forgetting. It employs an anchor concept in
the CLIP space to gauge the similarity between the inverted concept and the anchor across both the
original and forgetting models. Further insights on this are provided in the subsequent Memorization
Measurement section.
Ablation Studies: We delve into the impact of various configurations, including different sets of
trainable weights and the utilization of inverted concepts from images. Comprehensive details are
available in the Appendix C.

                                                       Multi-Concept Model: Elon Musk & Taylor Swift
                                                                               Taylor Swift
    Elon Musk
    Woman


                                                                               Man
    Emma Watson


                                                                               Bill Gates


                         Single-Concept Model: Picasso style                                  Single-Concept Model: Van Gogh style


Figure 3: Concept forgetting results using our method. The initial 2x2 grid displays original samples from
Stable Diffusion. Following this, three images depict post-forgetting samples generated from the same prompt.
The top three rows, targeting Elon Musk and Taylor Swift, highlight our multi-concept forgetting capability.
Control concepts, including Bill Gates and Emma Watson, illustrate the limited influence our method has on
non-targeted concepts. The final row presents single-concept style models. Image prompts used were: “a photo
of X” (for the first three rows) and “a dog in X style” (for the last row).



                                                                           6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                  Dominant Concept                                              Concept Correction


                                              forgetting Liu Yifei as Mulan


                                             forgetting Daniel Craig as 007


                                                forgetting Apple brand


Figure 4: Concept Correction: Our method’s effectiveness in diminishing dominant concepts allows for the
emergence of secondary concepts within semantically-rich prompts. The displayed images, generated from top
to bottom, correspond to the prompts: “a movie poster of Mulan”, “James Bond”, and “apple shape”.



4.2   Q UALITATIVE C OMPARISON

Figure 3 showcases the partial results of our concept forgetting benchmark. The multi-concept
model, targeting Elon Musk and Taylor Swift, exemplifies our method’s proficiency in multi-concept
forgetting. Notably, the first row reveals the successful forgetting of both target concepts. Our eval-
uation also considered the repercussions of forgetting on related concepts, specifically man, woman,
Bill Gates, and Emma Watson. The results indicate that our Forget-Me-Not method preserves con-
tent and maintains visual quality effectively. However, subtle changes in pose and style were ob-
served for the man and Bill Gates concepts. These observations suggest that our method might
influence closely associated concepts more than distant ones. The final row further highlights the
emergence of a new painting style post-forgetting the styles of Picasso and Van Gogh.
In comparison to alternative methods (Gandikota et al., 2023; Kumari et al., 2023), our approach
exhibits superior generative capabilities for related concepts. ESD (Gandikota et al., 2023), which
employs inverse concept-free guidance, adversely affects related concepts. Conversely, ACTD (Ku-
mari et al., 2023) adjusts the forgetting concept relative to an anchor concept, making its perfor-
mance contingent on the choice of anchor. This becomes challenging for abstract concepts where
an apt anchor is elusive.


Figure 5: Comparison of methods for forgetting the french horn concept. Each primary figure is prompted
with “a photo of a violin”, accompanied by a smaller “a photo of a french horn” image. To fairly compare
with others, we show results on SD 1.5 in this figure. ESD not only disrupts the french horn concept but
also adversely affects the related violin concept. ACTD, using “instrument” as the anchor concept, which is
dominated by the violin in the SD model, results in the french horn concept merging with the violin concept. In
contrast, our method selectively removes the french horn features while preserving the salient features of other
related concepts.


                                                           7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                          A photo of Mango


             Stable Diffusion            Negative Prompt: dog                     Ours

Figure 6: In concept correction, our method has the advantage of comprehensive forgetting over negative
prompt. In this example, we also tests “animal” as negative prompts, yet it still generates dogs/cats.


4.3   Q UANTITATIVE A NALYSIS

Memorization Measurement We employ textual inversion (Gal et al., 2022) to pinpoint token
embeddings that align closely with images. This technique aids in assessing the shifts in inverted
embeddings of anchor images relative to a reference, both pre and post-forgetting. These shifts
reflect the generative model’s retention level of a concept, termed as Memorization Score.
For instance, with the prompt “Elon Musk”, its concept embedding (embr ) is derived from a text
encoder. Anchor images of Elon Musk are then inverted using both the original model and the
forgetting model. The resulting embeddings, original textual inversion (embo ) and forgetting textual
inversion (embf ), are compared to gauge the change in the embedding space. Only the pooler
tokens of concept embeddings are used for measurement. The change in concept embedding is
quantified as the difference between cos(embr , embo ) and cos(embr , embf ). A decline signifies
effective forgetting. Due to the inherent variability in the textual inversion process, we compute the
Memorization Score’s average over five iterations. Table 1 presents the scores for each sub-category.


           Table 1: Memorization Scores and CLIP Scores of instances from each sub-categories.
                                         Initial     Forgetting      Initial        Forgetting
       Category         Concept
                                        M-Score      M-Score ↓     CLIP Score      CLIP Score ↓
       Person         Elon Musk          0.943         0.848         0.308            0.285
      Animation      Mickey Mouse        0.948         0.836         0.304            0.269
       Animal           Zebra            0.972         0.899         0.312            0.310
       Object           Google           0.940         0.811         0.216            0.209
        Fruit           Apple            0.696         0.493         0.267            0.258
       Animal           Horse            0.877         0.808         0.275            0.266
        Style         Van Gogh           0.916         0.684         0.274            0.233


4.4   C ONCEPT C ORRECTION

Text-to-image models often prioritize the semantics of a prompt based on the abundance of image-
text examples during training. This can overshadow less prevalent semantics during inference, as
illustrated in Figure 4. For instance, the James Bond series predominantly showcases Daniel Craig.
Our method, however, can reduce the dominance of such a semantic, enabling visibility of other
James Bond actors. Similarly, our approach effectively rectifies target concepts in scenarios where
semantics compete, as seen with the Mulan series and the term “apple”.
Negative prompts, used in text-to-image synthesis to exclude unwanted concepts, can inadvertently
alter other image attributes. Moreover, they may not always rectify undesired concepts. As depicted
in Figure 6, the prompt “a photo of a mango” often yields dog images due to the popularity of
“mango” as a pet name. Our method adeptly retrieves the mango fruit by dissociating the prompt
from dog/cat images.


                                                   8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 7: Results of removing NSFW contents triggered by “naked”. Faces and sensitive parts are blacked out.


4.5   NSFW R EMOVAL

We evaluate our method’s capability to eliminate inappropriate content, denoted as NSFW (“not
safe for work”). Such content, potentially offensive even to adults, can inadvertently be part of
large datasets like LAION (Schuhmann et al., 2022), despite the use of NSFW detectors (LAION-
AI). Stable Diffusion, trained on LAION, has been known to produce NSFW content with specific
prompts.
To assess our approach, we utilize a known NSFW-triggering prompt, “a photo of naked”, in the
Stable Diffusion v2.1 base model. Using this setup, the model consistently produces inappropriate
images. We then train Forget-Me-Not using eight of these NSFW images.
The outcomes, presented in Figure 7, confirm the successful forgetting of the “naked” concept. The
original NSFW images have undergone black modifications to ensure appropriateness. Our method
effectively forgets NSFW content without requiring extra data or third-party NSFW detectors.


5     C ONCLUSION

In this study, we investigate concept forgetting in text-to-image generative models and introduce
Forget-Me-Not. This lightweight approach enables ad-hoc concept forgetting using only a few either
real or generated concept images; it can also be easily distributed using model patches. Forget-Me-
Not is further naturally extended to enable concept correction and disentanglement. Our experiments
demonstrate that Forget-Me-Not is successful in diminishing and correcting target concepts in Stable
Diffusion. Additionally, we introduce ConceptBench and Memorization Score as evaluation metrics.
Overall, our work provides a foundation for further research on concept forgetting and manipulation
in text-to-image generation, and can be further extended to other conditional multimodal generative
models to improve the accuracy, inclusion and diversity of such models.


6     S OCIAL I MPACT & L IMITATIONS

Social Impact Our research has a positive social impact by offering an effective and cost-efficient
method to remove and correct harmful and biased concepts in text-to-image generative models.
These models are rapidly becoming the backbone of popular AI art and graphic design tools, used
by a growing number of people. Our method can generate lightweight model patches that can be
conveniently distributed to text-to-image model users like how conventional software patch works.
Thus, our research takes a small step towards promoting fairness and privacy protection in AI tools,
ultimately benefiting society as a whole.
Limitations While our approach performs well on concrete concepts in ConceptBench, it faces
challenges in identifying and forgetting abstract concepts. Additionally, successful forgetting may
require manual interventions, such as concept-specific hyperparameter tuning.


R EFERENCES
Martin Arjovsky, Soumith Chintala, and Léon Bottou. Wasserstein generative adversarial networks.
 In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), pp. 214–223. PMLR, 2017.


                                                     9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Sungyong Baik, Seokil Hong, and Kyoung Mu Lee. Learning to forget for meta-learning. In Pro-
  ceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp.
  2379–2387, 2020.
Yogesh Balaji, Seungjun Nah, Xun Huang, Arash Vahdat, Jiaming Song, Karsten Kreis, Miika
  Aittala, Timo Aila, Samuli Laine, Bryan Catanzaro, et al. ediffi: Text-to-image diffusion models
  with an ensemble of expert denoisers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.01324, 2022.
Minwoo Byeon, Beomhee Park, Haecheon Kim, Sungjun Lee, Woonhyuk Baek, and Saehoon
 Kim. Coyo-700m: Image-text pair dataset. https://github.com/kakaobrain/
 coyo-dataset, 2022.
Nicolas Carion, Francisco Massa, Gabriel Synnaeve, Nicolas Usunier, Alexander Kirillov, and
  Sergey Zagoruyko. End-to-end object detection with transformers. In European Conference
  on Computer Vision (ECCV), pp. 213–229. Springer, 2020.
Arantxa Casanova, Marlene Careil, Jakob Verbeek, Michal Drozdzal, and Adriana Romero Soriano.
  Instance-conditioned gan. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 34:
  27517–27529, 2021.
Huiwen Chang, Han Zhang, Jarred Barber, AJ Maschinot, Jose Lezama, Lu Jiang, Ming-Hsuan
  Yang, Kevin Murphy, William T Freeman, Michael Rubinstein, et al. Muse: Text-to-image gen-
  eration via masked generative transformers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.00704, 2023.
Soravit Changpinyo, Piyush Sharma, Nan Ding, and Radu Soricut. Conceptual 12m: Pushing
  web-scale image-text pre-training to recognize long-tail visual concepts. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 3558–3568,
  2021.
Hila Chefer, Yuval Alaluf, Yael Vinker, Lior Wolf, and Daniel Cohen-Or.           Attend-and-
  excite: Attention-based semantic guidance for text-to-image diffusion models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2301.13826, 2023.
Yunjey Choi, Youngjung Uh, Jaejun Yoo, and Jung-Woo Ha. Stargan v2: Diverse image synthesis
  for multiple domains. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
  Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 8188–8197, 2020.
Hyung Won Chung, Le Hou, Shayne Longpre, Barret Zoph, Yi Tay, William Fedus, Eric Li, Xuezhi
  Wang, Mostafa Dehghani, Siddhartha Brahma, et al. Scaling instruction-finetuned language mod-
  els. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.11416, 2022.
Katherine Crowson, Stella Biderman, Daniel Kornis, Dashiell Stander, Eric Hallahan, Louis Cas-
  tricato, and Edward Raff. Vqgan-clip: Open domain image generation and editing with natural
  language guidance. In European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV), pp. 88–105. Springer,
  2022.
Li Deng. The mnist database of handwritten digit images for machine learning research [best of the
  web]. IEEE Signal Processing Magazine, 29(6):141–142, 2012.
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. Bert: Pre-training of deep
  bidirectional transformers for language understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04805, 2018.
Prafulla Dhariwal and Alexander Nichol. Diffusion models beat gans on image synthesis. Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 34:8780–8794, 2021.
Tim Dockhorn, Arash Vahdat, and Karsten Kreis. Genie: Higher-order denoising diffusion solvers.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.05475, 2022.
Alexey Dosovitskiy, Lucas Beyer, Alexander Kolesnikov, Dirk Weissenborn, Xiaohua Zhai, Thomas
  Unterthiner, Mostafa Dehghani, Matthias Minderer, Georg Heigold, Sylvain Gelly, et al. An
  image is worth 16x16 words: Transformers for image recognition at scale. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2010.11929, 2020.
Adobe Firefly. https://www.adobe.com/sensei/generative-ai/firefly.html.


                                               10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Oran Gafni, Adam Polyak, Oron Ashual, Shelly Sheynin, Devi Parikh, and Yaniv Taigman. Make-
  a-scene: Scene-based text-to-image generation with human priors. In European Conference on
  Computer Vision (ECCV), pp. 89–106. Springer, 2022.
Rinon Gal, Yuval Alaluf, Yuval Atzmon, Or Patashnik, Amit H Bermano, Gal Chechik, and Daniel
  Cohen-Or. An image is worth one word: Personalizing text-to-image generation using textual
  inversion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.01618, 2022.
Rohit Gandikota, Joanna Materzyńska, Jaden Fiotto-Kaufman, and David Bau. Erasing concepts
  from diffusion models. In Proceedings of the 2023 IEEE International Conference on Computer
  Vision, 2023.
Giorgio Giannone, Didrik Nielsen, and Ole Winther. Few-shot diffusion models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2205.15463, 2022.
Alvin Heng and Harold Soh. Selective amnesia: A continual learning approach to forgetting in deep
  generative models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.10120, 2023.
Amir Hertz, Ron Mokady, Jay Tenenbaum, Kfir Aberman, Yael Pritch, and Daniel Cohen-Or.
 Prompt-to-prompt image editing with cross attention control. arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.01626,
 2022.
Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 33:6840–6851, 2020.
Edward J Hu, Yelong Shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang,
  and Weizhu Chen. Lora: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2106.09685, 2021.
Gabriel Ilharco, Mitchell Wortsman, Ross Wightman, Cade Gordon, Nicholas Carlini, Rohan Taori,
  Achal Dave, Vaishaal Shankar, Hongseok Namkoong, John Miller, Hannaneh Hajishirzi, Ali
  Farhadi, and Ludwig Schmidt. OpenCLIP, 7 2021.
Jitesh Jain, Jiachen Li, MangTik Chiu, Ali Hassani, Nikita Orlov, and Humphrey Shi. Oneformer:
   One transformer to rule universal image segmentation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.06220, 2022.
Tero Karras, Samuli Laine, and Timo Aila. A style-based generator architecture for generative
  adversarial networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern
  recognition, pp. 4401–4410, 2019.
Tero Karras, Miika Aittala, Samuli Laine, Erik Härkönen, Janne Hellsten, Jaakko Lehtinen, and
  Timo Aila. Alias-free generative adversarial networks. Advances in Neural Information Process-
  ing Systems (NeurIPS), 34:852–863, 2021.
Levon Khachatryan, Andranik Movsisyan, Vahram Tadevosyan, Roberto Henschel, Zhangyang
  Wang, Shant Navasardyan, and Humphrey Shi. Text2video-zero: Text-to-image diffusion models
  are zero-shot video generators. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.13439, 2023.
Nupur Kumari, Bingliang Zhang, Sheng-Yu Wang, Eli Shechtman, Richard Zhang, and Jun-Yan
  Zhu. Ablating concepts in text-to-image diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.13516,
  2023.
LAION-AI.        Clip-based-nsfw-detector.                     https://github.com/-AI/
  CLIP-based-NSFW-Detector.
Lexica. https://lexica.art/.
Tsung-Yi Lin, Michael Maire, Serge Belongie, James Hays, Pietro Perona, Deva Ramanan, Piotr
  Dollár, and C Lawrence Zitnick. Microsoft coco: Common objects in context. In European
  Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV), pp. 740–755. Springer, 2014.
Xihui Liu, Dong Huk Park, Samaneh Azadi, Gong Zhang, Arman Chopikyan, Yuxiao Hu,
  Humphrey Shi, Anna Rohrbach, and Trevor Darrell. More control for free! image synthesis
  with semantic diffusion guidance. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Winter Conference on Appli-
  cations of Computer Vision (WACV), pp. 289–299, 2023.


                                               11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Ziwei Liu, Ping Luo, Xiaogang Wang, and Xiaoou Tang. Large-scale celebfaces attributes (celeba)
  dataset. Retrieved August, 15(2018):11, 2018.

Cheng Lu, Yuhao Zhou, Fan Bao, Jianfei Chen, Chongxuan Li, and Jun Zhu. Dpm-solver: A
  fast ode solver for diffusion probabilistic model sampling in around 10 steps. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2206.00927, 2022.

Luke Metz, Ben Poole, David Pfau, and Jascha Sohl-Dickstein. Unrolled generative adversarial
  networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1611.02163, 2016.

Midjourny. https://www.midjourney.com/.

Mehdi Mirza and Simon Osindero.          Conditional generative adversarial nets.     arXiv preprint
 arXiv:1411.1784, 2014.

Alex Nichol, Prafulla Dhariwal, Aditya Ramesh, Pranav Shyam, Pamela Mishkin, Bob McGrew,
  Ilya Sutskever, and Mark Chen. Glide: Towards photorealistic image generation and editing with
  text-guided diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.10741, 2021.

Alexander Quinn Nichol and Prafulla Dhariwal. Improved denoising diffusion probabilistic models.
  In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), pp. 8162–8171. PMLR, 2021.

NovelAI. https://novelai.net/.

Picsart. https://picsart.com/.

Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual
  models from natural language supervision. In International Conference on Machine Learning
  (ICML), pp. 8748–8763. PMLR, 2021.

Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Katherine Lee, Sharan Narang, Michael Matena, Yanqi
  Zhou, Wei Li, and Peter J Liu. Exploring the limits of transfer learning with a unified text-to-text
  transformer. The Journal of Machine Learning Research, 21(1):5485–5551, 2020.

Aditya Ramesh, Mikhail Pavlov, Gabriel Goh, Scott Gray, Chelsea Voss, Alec Radford, Mark Chen,
  and Ilya Sutskever. Zero-shot text-to-image generation. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning (ICML), pp. 8821–8831. PMLR, 2021.

Aditya Ramesh, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alex Nichol, Casey Chu, and Mark Chen. Hierarchical text-
  conditional image generation with clip latents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.06125, 2022.

Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer. High-
  resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Con-
  ference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 10684–10695, June 2022.

Olaf Ronneberger, Philipp Fischer, and Thomas Brox. U-net: Convolutional networks for biomed-
  ical image segmentation. In Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention–
  MICCAI 2015: 18th International Conference, Munich, Germany, October 5-9, 2015, Proceed-
  ings, Part III 18, pp. 234–241. Springer, 2015.

Nataniel Ruiz, Yuanzhen Li, Varun Jampani, Yael Pritch, Michael Rubinstein, and Kfir Aberman.
  Dreambooth: Fine tuning text-to-image diffusion models for subject-driven generation. 2022.

Chitwan Saharia, William Chan, Saurabh Saxena, Lala Li, Jay Whang, Emily Denton, Seyed Kam-
  yar Seyed Ghasemipour, Burcu Karagol Ayan, S Sara Mahdavi, Rapha Gontijo Lopes, et al.
  Photorealistic text-to-image diffusion models with deep language understanding. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2205.11487, 2022.

Patrick Schramowski, Manuel Brack, Björn Deiseroth, and Kristian Kersting. Safe latent diffusion:
  Mitigating inappropriate degeneration in diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE Confer-
  ence on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2023.


                                                 12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Christoph Schuhmann, Romain Beaumont, Richard Vencu, Cade Gordon, Ross Wightman, Mehdi
  Cherti, Theo Coombes, Aarush Katta, Clayton Mullis, Mitchell Wortsman, et al. Laion-5b:
  An open large-scale dataset for training next generation image-text models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2210.08402, 2022.
Tamar Rott Shaham, Tali Dekel, and Tomer Michaeli. Singan: Learning a generative model from
  a single natural image. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer
  Vision (ICCV), pp. 4570–4580, 2019.
Gowthami Somepalli, Vasu Singla, Micah Goldblum, Jonas Geiping, and Tom Goldstein. Diffu-
  sion art or digital forgery? investigating data replication in diffusion models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2212.03860, 2022.
Yang Song, Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Diederik P Kingma, Abhishek Kumar, Stefano Ermon, and Ben
  Poole. Score-based generative modeling through stochastic differential equations. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2011.13456, 2020.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez,
  Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. Advances in Neural Informa-
  tion Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 30, 2017.
Steven Walton, Ali Hassani, Xingqian Xu, Zhangyang Wang, and Humphrey Shi. Stylenat: Giving
  each head a new perspective. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.05770, 2022.
Jiayu Xiao, Liang Li, Chaofei Wang, Zheng-Jun Zha, and Qingming Huang. Few shot generative
   model adaption via relaxed spatial structural alignment. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Con-
   ference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 11204–11213, 2022.
Xingqian Xu, Zhangyang Wang, Eric Zhang, Kai Wang, and Humphrey Shi. Versatile diffusion:
  Text, images and variations all in one diffusion model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.08332, 2022.
Jiahui Yu, Yuanzhong Xu, Jing Yu Koh, Thang Luong, Gunjan Baid, Zirui Wang, Vijay Vasudevan,
   Alexander Ku, Yinfei Yang, Burcu Karagol Ayan, et al. Scaling autoregressive models for content-
   rich text-to-image generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.10789, 2022.
Jingyuan Zhu, Huimin Ma, Jiansheng Chen, and Jian Yuan. Few-shot image generation with diffu-
   sion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.03264, 2022.


                                                13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A    DATASET
To meet our need to evaluate Forget-Me-Not and potential future concept forgetting approaches, we
introduce a benchmark, namely ConceptBench. It is important to note that several existing bench-
marks, such as Lin et al. (2014); Saharia et al. (2022), help assess overall generation quality. How-
ever, none are specifically designed to measure a model’s ability to memorize and forget. Concept-
Bench utilizes instances from LAION (Schuhmann et al., 2022), forming three categories,identity,
object, and style, ranging from discrete to abstract and easy to hard.
Identity refers to the unique and discrete features of each instance. Specifically, we examine identity
in subcategories such as person, franchise, animal, and brand. The person and franchise subcate-
gories are of particular interest due to potential privacy or copyright issues associated with generated
images of celebrities or intellectual properties. For the animal breed subcategory, detailed instances
may include specific breeds, such as “Corgi”, which belong to the more general “dog” category but
have distinct visual features. In the case of brands, they represent abstract concepts of intangible
objects that can manifest as logos throughout our daily lives.
Object is a broader concept encompassing multiple variations. By combining identity instances
mentioned earlier, this category provides a hierarchical structure to examine the influence of concept
forgetting on the model. We include food items like “apple”, “banana”, and “broccoli”, man-made
objects such as “airplane”, and general animals like “dog” and “cat.”
Style is an abstract concept that determines the overall appearance of generated images. Concept-
Bench incorporates styles such as “Van Gogh”, “Claude Monet”. See Figure 11 for extra results.

B    I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS
We run our experiments on Stable Diffusion 2.1 base with its default generations settings at inference
time: 50 steps, guidance strength 7.5, EulerDiscreteScheduler. For training, we use batch size
1, learning rate 2e-6 and optimization steps 35 as our base setting. On single A100 GPU, this
optimization process takes around 30 seconds.

C    A BLATION S TUDIES
Inverted Concept v.s. Textual Concept We conducted controlled experiments on forgetting with
and without using concept inversion (CI), which is detailed at the end of Section 3.3. Concept
inversion is used to handle concepts that are difficult to describe using prompts. Generally, it can
help extract the target concept from a set of images, resulting in arguably more precise embeddings.
We first choose two concepts that can be well described using textual prompt: Elon Musk and a
man. Then, we generate a small set of images to get their inverted concepts. Our results show that
inverted concepts can achieve higher fidelity as illustrated in Figure 8, where the model trained with
CI preserved more of the original poses and details.
Here we demonstrate a failed case of CI. The downside of using CI is hard to ensure the quality
of inverted concepts, which may not embed the target concept as expected. The quality of inverted
concept depends on a variety of factors such as image and prompt used for inversion, and additional
set of hyper-parameters for CI. In Figure 9, we demonstrate a situation where textual concept pre-
vails inverted concept. By using the same settings except for token embeddings, textual concept
“airplane” succeeds while inverted tokens fails. We hypothesize the some unexpected information
leaks into inverted concepts.
Trainable Weights We compare finetuning the entire UNet model versus only the cross attention
(CA) layers. Cross attention is a critical component for text-to-image generation, as it injects textual
information into the image formation process. Given the same hyper-parameter settings except for
steps, our results show that both methods can successfully achieve concept forgetting. However,
finetuning the entire UNet model tended to break the model’s generation capability in fewer steps.
In some cases, the model collapsed before the forgetting process was complete, as show in the
“Broccoli” case of Figure 10. Note that we use Elon Musk as a control concept at the last column,
demonstrating the influence of forgetting of target concept to unrelated concepts. Results show that
Elon Musk has been kept intact after forgetting by just tuning cross attention layers.


                                                  14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                            original                                      w/ CI                                           w/o CI


                                                                                                          A photo of a man

                                                              A photo of Elon Musk


                                                             A photo of a man

Figure 8: An example that inverted tokens extract precise semantics into dedicated tokens, allowing for better
pose and feature consistency.


                  Original: A photo of airplane              Forgetting with “airplane”                              Forgetting with CI


                            Figure 9: An example of inverted tokens failing to capture target concept precisely.


                      Step 35      Step 70        Step 350    Step 350*                         Step 70   Step 350       Step 550         Step 550*
           UNet


                                                                                         UNet
                                                                              Van Gogh
Broccoli
           CA


                                                                                         CA


Figure 10: Trainable weights ablation comparing UNet and Cross Attention (CA). The last column with Step
X* shows the control concept Elon Musk at Step X.


                                                                            15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                    Stable Diffusion                                   Forget-Me-Not


Figure 11: Extra results from our method. From top to bottom: Claude Monet Style, superman, British short-
hair, Bill Gates, banana, Google, durian, corgi, Emma Watson, Thomas Kinkade style


                                                   16
