Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


O PTIMIZATION F RAMEWORK OF T RANSFER L EARNING
AND ITS F EASIBILITY

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT

         Transfer learning is a fast developing paradigm for utilizing existing knowledge
         from previous learning tasks to improve the performance of new ones. It has
         enjoyed numerous empirical successes and inspired a growing number of theo-
         retical studies. This paper addresses the feasibility issue of transfer learning. It
         begins by establishing the necessary mathematical concepts and constructing a
         mathematical framework for transfer learning. It then identifies and formulates the
         three-step transfer learning procedure as an optimization problem, allowing for the
         resolution of the feasibility issue. Importantly, it demonstrates that under certain
         technical conditions, such as appropriate choice of loss functions and data sets, an
         optimal procedure for transfer learning exists. This study of the feasibility issue
         brings additional insights into various transfer learning problems. It sheds light
         on the impact of feature augmentation on model performance, explores potential
         extensions of domain adaptation, and examines the feasibility of efficient feature
         extractor transfer in image classification.


1   I NTRODUCTION

Transfer learning is a popular paradigm in machine learning. The basic idea of transfer learning is
simple: it is to leverage knowledge from a well-studied learning problem, known as the source task, to
enhance the performance of a new learning problem with similar features, known as the target task. In
deep learning applications with limited and relevant data, it has become standard practice to employ
transfer learning by utilizing large datasets (e.g., ImageNet) and their corresponding pre-trained
models (e.g., ResNet50). Transfer learning has demonstrated success across various fields, including
natural language processing (Ruder et al., 2019; Devlin et al., 2019; Sung et al., 2022), sentiment
analysis (Jiang & Zhai, 2007; Deng et al., 2013; Liu et al., 2019), computer vision (Deng et al., 2009;
Long et al., 2015; Ganin et al., 2016; Wang & Deng, 2018), activity recognition Cook et al. (2013);
Wang et al. (2018), medical data analysis (Zeng et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2022; Kim et al., 2022),
bio-informatics (Hwang & Kuang, 2010), finance (Leal et al., 2020; Rosenbaum & Zhang, 2021),
recommendation system (Pan et al., 2010; Yuan et al., 2019), and fraud detection (Lebichot et al.,
2020). (For further insights, refer to various review papers such as Pan & Yang (2010); Tan et al.
(2018); Zhuang et al. (2020)). Transfer learning remains a versatile and enduring paradigm in the
rapidly evolving AI landscape, where new machine learning techniques and tools emerge at a rapid
pace.
Given the empirical successes of transfer learning, there is a growing body of theoretical work
focused on transfer learning, particularly transferability. For instance, transferability in the domain
adaptation setting is often quantified by measuring the similarity between the source and target
domains using various divergences, including low-rank common information in Saenko et al. (2010),
KL-divergence in Ganin & Lempitsky (2015); Ganin et al. (2016); Tzeng et al. (2017), l2 -distance in
Long et al. (2014), the optimal transportation cost in Courty et al. (2017), and the Renyi divergence
in Azizzadenesheli et al. (2019).
In classification tasks within the fine-tuning framework, transferability metrics and generalization
bounds are derived under different measurements, such as the VC-dimension of the hypothesis space
adopted in Blitzer et al. (2007), total variation distance in Ben-David et al. (2010), f -divergence in
Harremoës & Vajda (2011), Jensen-Shannon divergence in Zhao et al. (2019), H-score in Bao et al.
(2019), negative conditional entropy between labels in Tran et al. (2019), mutual information in Bu


                                                  1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


et al. (2020), X 2 -divergence in Tong et al. (2021), Bhattacharyya class separability in Pándy et al.
(2022), and variations of optimal transport cost in Tan et al. (2021).
Recent research has aimed to design transferability metrics that encompass more general supervised
learning tasks and deep learning models. For example, Mousavi Kalan et al. (2020) studied transfer
learning with shallow layer neural networks and established the minimax generalization bound;
Nguyen et al. (2020) measured transferability by computing the negative cross-entropy of soft labels
generated by the pre-trained model. You et al. (2021) estimated transferability using the marginalized
likelihood of labeled target data, assuming the addition of a linear classifier on top of the pre-trained
deep learning model. Huang et al. (2022) introduced TransRate, a computationally-efficient and
optimization-free transferability measure. Nguyen et al. (2022) bounded the transfer accuracy of a
deep learning model using a quantity called the majority predictor accuracy. Additionally, theoretical
bounds for transfer learning in the context of representation learning Tripuraneni et al. (2020) and
few-shot learning Galanti et al. (2022) have also been explored.
Given the advancements made in both empirical and theoretical aspects of transfer learning, it is
imperative that we address another fundamental issue: the feasibility of transfer learning.
Understanding the feasibility of transfer learning helps make informed decisions about when and
how to apply transfer learning techniques. It also guides the development of appropriate algorithms,
methodologies, and frameworks for effective knowledge transfer. By establishing the feasibility of
transfer learning, we can unlock its potential for enhancing model performance, accelerating learning
processes, and addressing data limitations in various real-world applications.


Our work. This paper addresses the feasibility issue of transfer learning through several steps. It
begins by establishing the necessary mathematical concepts, and then constructs a comprehensive
mathematical framework. This framework encompasses the general procedure of transfer learning by
identifying its three key steps and components. Next, it formulates the three-step transfer learning
procedure as an optimization problem, allowing for the resolution of the feasibility issue. Importantly,
it demonstrates that under appropriate technical conditions, such as the choice of proper loss functions
and compact data sets, an optimal procedure for transfer learning exists.
Furthermore, this study of the feasibility issue brings additional insights into various transfer learning
problems. It sheds light on the impact of feature augmentation on model performance, explores
potential extensions of domain adaptation, and examines the feasibility of efficient feature extractor
transfer in the context of image classification.


2     M ATHEMATICAL FRAMEWORK OF TRANSFER LEARNING

In this section, we will introduce necessary concepts and establish a mathematical framework for the
entire procedure of transfer learning. For ease of exposition and without loss of generality, we will
primarily focus on a supervised setting involving a source task S and a target task T on a probability
space (Ω, F, P).
To motivate the mathematical concepts and framework, we begin by revisiting some transfer problems.


2.1   E XAMPLES OF TRANSFER LEARNING

Domain adaption. This particular class of transfer learning problems is also known as covariate
shift Saenko et al. (2010); Long et al. (2014); Ganin & Lempitsky (2015); Ganin et al. (2016); Courty
et al. (2017); Tzeng et al. (2017); Azizzadenesheli et al. (2019). In domain adaptation, the crucial
assumption is that the relation between input and output remain the same for both the source and
the target tasks. As a result, the focus is to capture the difference between source and target inputs.
Mathematically, this assumption implies that once the conditional distribution of the output variable
given the input variable is learned from the source task, it suffices to derive an appropriate input
transport mapping that aligns the distribution of the target inputs with that of the source inputs. This
perspective, often referred to as the "optimal transport" view of transfer learning, has been extensively
studied by Flamary et al. Courty et al. (2017).


                                                    2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Image classification. This popular class of problems in transfer learning Tran et al. (2019); Bao
et al. (2019); Tan et al. (2021); You et al. (2021); Huang et al. (2022) is typically addressed using a
neural network approach. In this approach, the neural network structure comprises a feature extractor
module, followed by a final classifier layer. Relevant studies, such as Bao et al. (2019) and Tan et al.
(2021), often adopt this architecture. In this setup, only the last few layers of the model are retrained
when solving the target task, while the feature extraction layers derived from the source task are
directly utilized. This approach allows for leveraging the learned representations from the source
task, optimizing the model specifically for the target task.

Large language model. This class of problem such as Devlin et al. (2019); Xia et al. (2022) serves
as a prominent testing ground for transfer learning techniques due to the scale of network models and
the complexity of the data involved. A widely used example is the BERT model Devlin et al. (2019),
which typically consists of neural networks with a substantial number of parameters, hence it usually
starts with pretraining the model over a large and generic dataset, followed by a fine-tuning process
for specific downstream tasks. Here, the pretraining process over generic datasets can be viewed as
solving for the source task, and the designated downstream tasks can be categorized as target tasks.
For instance, Xia et al. (2022) suggests a particular fining-tuning technique to better solve the target
tasks. This technique combines structure pruning with distillation: after pretraining a large language
model with multi-head self-attention layers and feed-forward layers, the study suggests applying
a structure pruning technique to each layer. This pruning process selects a simplified sub-model
specifically tailored for the designated downstream task. Subsequently, a distillation procedure
ensures the transfer of most relevant knowledge to the pruned sub-model.

2.2     M ATHEMATICAL FRAMEWORK FOR TRANSFER LEARNING

Built on the intuition of the previous transfer learning problems, we will now establish the rigorous
mathematical framework of transfer learning, staring with fixing the notation for the source and the
target tasks.

2.2.1    S OURCE AND TARGET TASKS IN TRANSFER LEARNING
Target task T . In the target task T , we denote XT and YT as its input and output spaces, respectively,
and (XT , YT ) as a pair of XT × YT -valued random variables. Here, (XT , ∥ · ∥XT ) and (YT , ∥ · ∥YT )
are Banach spaces with norms ∥ · ∥XT and ∥ · ∥YT , respectively. Let LT : YT × YT → R be a
real-valued function, and assume that the learning objective for the target task is
                            min LT (fT ) = min E[LT (YT , fT (XT ))],                                (1)
                            f ∈AT             fT ∈AT

where LT (fT ) is a loss function that measures a model fT : XT → YT for the target task T , and AT
denotes the set of target models such that
                                     AT ⊂ {fT |fT : XT → YT }.                                       (2)

Take the image classification task as an example, XT is a space containing images as high dimensional
vectors, YT is a space containing image labels, (XT , YT ) is a pair of random variables satisfying the
empirical distribution of target images and their corresponding labels, and LT is the cross-entropy loss
function between the actual label YT and the predicted label fT (XT ). For the image classification task
using neural networks, AT will depend on the neural network architecture as well as the constraints
applied to the network parameters.
Let fT∗ denote the optimizer for the optimization problem equation 1, and PT = Law(fT∗ (XT )) for
the probability distribution of its output. Then the model distribution PT depends on three factors:
LT , the conditional distribution Law(YT |XT ), and the marginal distribution Law(XT ). Note that
in direct learning, this optimizer fT∗ ∈ AT is solved directly by analyzing the optimization problem
equation 1, whereas in transfer learning, one leverages knowledge from the source task to facilitate
the search of fT∗ .

Source task S. In the source task S, we denote XS and YS as the input and output spaces of
the source task, respectively, and (XS , YS ) as a pair of XS × YS -valued random variables. Here,
(XS , ∥ · ∥XS ) and (YS , ∥ · ∥YS ) are Banach spaces with norms ∥ · ∥XS and ∥ · ∥YS , respectively. Let


                                                   3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


LS : YS × YS → R be a real-valued function and let us assume that the learning objective for the
source task is
                         min LS (fS ) = min E[LS (YS , fS (XS ))],                            (3)
                            fS ∈AS                f ∈AS

where LS (fS ) is the loss function for a model fS : XS → YS for the source task S. Here AS denotes
the set of source task models such that
                                     AS ⊂ {fS |fS : XS → YS }.                                       (4)

Moreover, denote the optimal solution for this optimization problem equation 3 as fS∗ , and the
probability distribution of the output of fS∗ by PS = Law(fS∗ (XS )). Meanwhile, similar as the
target model, the model distribution PS will depend on the function LS , the conditional distribution
Law(YS |XS ), and the marginal distribution Law(XS ).
Back to the image classification example, the target task may only contain images of items in an office
environment, the source task may have more image samples from a richer dataset, e.g., ImageNet.
Meanwhile, XS and YS may have different dimensions compared with XT and YT , since the image
resolution and the class number vary from task to task. Similar to the admissible set AT in the target
task, AS depends on the task description, and fS∗ is usually a deep neural network with parameters
pretrained using the source data.
In transfer learning, the optimal model fS∗ for the source task is also referred to as a pretrained
model. The essence of transfer learning is to utilize this pretrained model fS∗ from the source task to
accomplish the optimization objective equation 1. We now define this procedure in three steps.

2.2.2   T HREE - STEP TRANSFER LEARNING PROCEDURE
Step 1. Input transport. Since XT is not necessarily contained by the source input space XS , the
first step is therefore to make an appropriate adaptation to the target input XT ∈ XT . In the example
of image classification, popular choices for input transport may include resizing, cropping, rotation,
and grayscale. We define this adaptation as an input transport mapping.
Definition 1 (Input transport mapping). A function
                                   T X ∈ {finput |finput : XT → XS }                                 (5)
is called an input transport mapping with respect to the source and target task pair (S, T ) if it takes
any data point in the target input space XT and maps it into the source input space XS .

With an input transport mapping T X , the first step of transfer learning can be represented as follows.
                                     Step 1. Input transport by T X
                         XT ∋ XT 7−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−→ T X (XT ) ∈ XS .

Recall that in domain adaption, it is assumed that the difference between the source input distribution
Law(XS ) and target input distribution Law(XT ) is the only factor to motivate the transfer. Therefore,
once a proper input transport mapping T X is found, transfer learning is accomplished. Definition 1
is thus consistent with Courty et al. (2017), in which domain adaption is formulated as an optimal
transport from the target input to the source input.
For most transfer learning problems, however, one needs both a transport mapping for the input
and a transport mapping for the output. For instance, the labeling function for different classes of
computer vision tasks, such as object detection, instance segmentation, and image classification, can
vary greatly and depend on the specific task. Hence, the following two more steps are required.

Step 2. Applying pretrained model. After applying an input transport mapping T X to the target
input XT , the pretrained model fS∗ will take the transported data T X (XT ) ∈ XS as an input. That is,
                                          Step 2. Apply f ∗
                       XS ∋ T X (XT ) 7−−−−−−−−−→
                                                S
                                                  (fS∗ ◦ T X )(XT ) ∈ YS ,
where (fS∗ ◦ T X )(XT ) denotes the corresponding output of the pretrained model fS∗ . Note here the
composed function fS∗ ◦ T X ∈ {fint |fint : XT → YS }.


                                                       4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Step 3. Output transport. After utilizing the pretrained model fS∗ , the resulting model fS∗ ◦ T X ∈
{fint |fint : XT → YS } may still be inadequate for the target model: one may need to map the
YS -valued output into the target output space YT and in many cases such as image classification
or large language models, YS and YT do not necessarily coincide. Besides, more fine-tuning steps
are needed for problems other than domain adaptation. Hence, it is necessary to define an output
transport mapping to map an intermediate model from {fint |fint : XT → YS } to a target model in
AT .
Definition 2 (Output transport mapping). A function
                               T Y ∈ {foutput |foutput : XT × YS → YT }                                (6)
is called an output transport mapping with respect to the source and target task pair (S, T ) if, for
an optimal source model fS∗ : XS → YS and an input transport mapping T X as in Definition 1, the
composed function T Y (·, fS∗ ◦ T X (·)) ∈ AT .

This output transport mapping can be further tailored to adapt to more complex models; see, for
instance, the discussion of large language models in Section 2.3. Many popular applications of
transfer learning contain an output mapping component as in Definition 2. Take the aforementioned
image classification in Section 2.1: after adopting the feature extractor fS∗ obtained from the source
task, an additional classifier layer is attached after the module of fS∗ in the network structure and
will be fine-tuned for the target task. This classifier layer takes the exact role of the output transport
mapping.
Now, this third and the final step in transfer learning can be expressed as
                                       Step 3. Output transport by T Y
  XT × YS ∋ (XT , (fS∗ ◦ T X )(XT )) 7−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−→ T Y XT , (fS∗ ◦ T X )(XT ) ∈ YT .



Combining these three steps, transfer learning can be presented by the following diagram,
                                   Pretrained model f ∗ from equation 3
                   XS ∋ XS                  S
                                 ======================⇒                  fS∗ (XS ) ∈ YS
                       ~                                                       w
                    T Xw
                       w                                                       w Y
                                                                                T                      (7)
                                         Direct learning equation 1
                   XT ∋ XT         − −∗− − − − − − − − →                  fT∗ (XT ) ∈ YT
                                       fT ∈arg minf ∈A       LT (fT )
                                                         T



In summary, transfer learning aims to find an appropriate pair of input and output transport mappings
T X and T Y , where the input transport mapping T X translates the target input XT back to the source
input space XS in order to utilize the optimal source model fS∗ , and the output transport mapping T Y
transforms a YS -valued model to a YT -valued model. This is in contrast to the direct learning, where
the optimal model fT∗ is derived by solving the optimization problem in the target task equation 1. In
other words, transfer learning is the following optimization problem.
Definition 3 (Transfer learning). The three-step transfer learning procedure presented in equation 7
is to solve the optimization problem
                 LT T Y (·, (fS∗ ◦ T X )(·)) :=                E LT YT , T Y (XT , (fS∗ ◦ T X )(XT )) .

      min                                            min
T X ∈TX ,T Y ∈TY                                    T X ∈TX ,T Y ∈TY
                                                                                                       (8)
Here, TX and TY are proper sets of transport mappings such that
                      T (·, (fS∗ ◦ T X )(·))|T X ∈ TX , T Y ∈ TY
                      Y
                                                                             ⊂ AT .
In particular, when XS = XT (resp. YS = YT ), the identity mapping idX (x) = x (resp. idY (x, y) =
y) is included in TX (resp. TY ).

Let us reexamine the aforementioned examples of transfer learning, from this new optimization
perspective.

2.3   E XAMPLES OF TRANSFER LEARNING THROUGH THE LENS OF OPTIMIZATION

Domain adaption. Here we define the family of admissible output transport mappings as TY =
{idY }, where idY denotes the identity mapping on Y; define the family of admissible input transport


                                                        5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


mappings as TX = {T X : XT → XS | T X is one-to-one}. When the output variables for both the
source and the target tasks coincide such that YS = YY = Y , and when the loss functions for both
tasks take the same form such that LS = LT = L : Y × Y → R, then T ∗X is the optimal solution to
the optimization problem equation 8 taking a particular form of
                                    min E[L(Y, fS∗ (T X (XT )))].                                   (9)
                                   T X ∈TX
Moreover, it can be shown that the optimal source model and optimal target model satisfy the relation
fT∗ = fS∗ ◦ T X,∗ , where
              fS∗ := arg min E[L(Y, fS (XS ))], fT∗ := arg min E[L(Y, fT (XT ))].
                     fS :XS →Y                             fT :XT →Y

That is, solving the transfer learning problem is reduced to finding an optimal input transport mapping
T X,∗ , given the pre-trained model fS∗ . This is exactly domain adaptation.

Image classification. For this class of problems, we take the transfer learning problem over a
benchmark dataset, the Office-31 Saenko et al. (2010), as an example. This dataset consists of images
from three domains: Amazon (A), Webcam (W), and DSLR (D), containing 4110 images of 31
categories of objects in an office environment.
Here, the source task S can be chosen from any of three domains (A, D, or W), where all input
images are first resized into dimension 3 × 244 × 244, that is, XS ⊂ R3×244×244 being the space of
resized image samples from the source domain, and
                                               31
                                               X
                    Y S = ∆31 := {p ∈ R31 :          pi = 1, pi ≥ 0, ∀1 ≤ i ≤ 31}
                                                 1
being the space of image class labels. Since the purpose of solving this source task is to derive the
feature extractor module implemented as a ResNet50 network structure in Figure 1, we define the
effective source output space as the feature space, YS ⊂ R2048 . For any target task T (A, D, or W)
different from that of S,
                                      XT = XS ⊂ R3×244×244
is the space of resized image samples from the target domain, and the output space is set to be
YT = Y S = ∆31 . For both the source and the target tasks, the loss function LS = LT is chosen to
be the cross entropy between the actual label and the predicted label.


Figure 1: Illustration of input transport T X , pretrained model fS∗ and output transport T Y in the
Office-31 transfer learning task.


As introduced in Figure 1, the set of source models are given by
               AS = {fNN ◦ fRes : XS → YS |fNN ∈ NN31               2048
                                                   2048 , fRes ∈ Res3×244×244 }.

Here Res2048
         3×244×244 denotes all ResNet50 architectures with 3 × 244 × 244-dimensional input and
2048-dimensional output, and NN31  2048 denotes all two-layer neural networks which map a 2048-
                                                                                            ∗
dimensional feature vector to a 31-dimensional probability vector in YS . The source model fRes,S
     ∗
and fNN,S is obtained by solving the source task optimization equation 3.


                                                     6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                    ∗
To transfer the source task to the target task, the pretrained ResNet50 model fRes,S     will be fixed,
                                               31
while the last two-layer classifier fNN ∈ NN2048 will be fine-tuned using part of the data from the
target domain (XT , YT ). In this case, the input transport set TX is a singleton set whose element is
the identity mapping on R3×244×244 , while the output transport mapping T Y is a two-layer classifier
from the corresponding set TY given by
                                     TY = {fNN |fNN ∈ NN31
                                                        2048 }.                                     (10)
Meanwhile, the set of admissible target models is given by
                                           ∗
                           AT = {fNN ◦ fRes,S   : XT → YT |fNN ∈ NN31   2048 },                     (11)

and the transfer learning task is formulated as minT Y ∈TY E LT YT , T Y (XT ) . Note the formula-
tion is slightly simpler than equation 8 because in this particular example, the output transport in TY
takes inputs from XT instead of XT × YS .

Large language models. Following the discussion in Section 2.1 on the large language models
such as in Xia et al. (2022), the combined operation of structure pruning and distillation can be
interpreted as an extended form of output transport mapping: it is an operator
                        T Y : {fint |fint : XT → YS } → {fT |fT : XT → YT }                         (12)
such that for an optimal source model fS∗ : XS → YS and an input transport mapping T X as in
Definition 1, the output T Y (fS∗ ◦ T X ) ∈ AT . In these models, combining structure pruning and
distillation technique is shown to improve the performance of the pretrained model fS∗ : pruning
eliminates unnecessary parameters in the pretrained model, and the distillation filters out irrelevant
information with proper adjustment of model parameters. From Xia et al. (2022) we observe that
the design of the output transport mapping T Y depends on the target input data and is tailored to the
specific input dataset.

3     F EASIBILITY OF T RANSFER L EARNING AS AN O PTIMIZATION P ROBLEM
The above optimization reformulation of the three-step transfer learning procedure provides a unified
framework to analyze the impact and implications of various transfer learning techniques. In particulr,
it enables analyzing the feasibility of transfer learning. We show that under appropriate technical
conditions, there exists an optimal procedure for transfer learning, i.e., the pair of transport mappings
(T X,∗ , T Y,∗ ) for equation 8.

3.1   F EASIBILITY OF T RANSFER L EARNING

To facilitate the feasibility analysis, the following class of loss function LT is introduced.
Definition 4 (Proper loss function). Let (X, Y ) be a pair of XT × YT -valued random variables
with Law(XT , YT ) ∈ P(XT × YT ). A loss functional LT over AT is said to be proper with respect
to (X, Y ) if there exist a corresponding function LT : YT × YT → R bounded from below such
that for any f ∈ AT , LT (f ) = E[LT (Y, f (X))] = E[E[LT (Y, f (X))|X]]; moreover, the function
L̃T : YT → R, given by L̃T (y) = E[LT (Y, Y ′ )|Y ′ = y] for all y ∈ YT , is continuous.

Examples of proper loss functions include mean squared error and KL-divergence and more generally
the Bregman divergence Banerjee et al. (2005) given by
                             Dϕ (u, v) = ϕ(u) − ϕ(v) − ⟨u − v, ∇ϕ(v)⟩                               (13)
for some strictly convex and differentiable ϕ : Y → R, assuming that the first and second moments
of Y conditioned on Y ′ = y is continuous with respect to y.
Without loss of generality, we shall in this section assume the input transport set TX contains all
functions from XT to XS . We then specify the following assumptions for the well-definedness of
equation 8.
Assumption 1.        1. LT is a proper loss functional with respect to (XT , YT );
      2. the image fS∗ (XS ) is compact in (YS , ∥ · ∥YS );


                                                   7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


      3. the set TY ⊂ C(XT ; YT ) is such that the following set of functions
         T̃Y = {T̃ Y : XT → YT | ∃T Y ∈ TY s.t. L̃T (T̃ Y (x)) =         inf        L̃T (T Y (x, y)), ∀x ∈ XT }
                                                                      y∈fS∗ (XS )

         is compact in ({f |f : XT → YT }, ∥ · ∥∞ ), where for any f : XT → YT , ∥f ∥∞ :=
         supx∈XT ∥f (x)∥YT .
Popular choices of loss functions, such as mean squared error from the Bregman loss family, are
not only proper but also strongly convex, therefore the compactness assumptions can be removed.
Otherwise, compactness condition can be implemented by choosing a particular family of activation
functions or imposing boundaries restrictions to weights and biases when constructing machine
learning models.
Now we are ready to establish the following feasibility result.
Theorem 1. There exists an optimal solution (T X,∗ , T Y,∗ ) ∈ TX × TY for optimization problem
equation 8 under Assumption 1.

Proof of Theorem 1. Since LT is proper, there exists a function LT : YT × YT → R such that
inf (y,y′ )∈YT ×YT LT (y, y ′ ) > −∞, and LT (T Y (·, (fS∗ ◦ T X )(·))) = E[LT (YT , T Y (XT , (fS∗ ◦
T X )(XT )))] for all T X ∈ TX , T X ∈ TX . Therefore, for the function L̃T (·) = E[LT (Y, Y ′ )|Y ′ =
·], there exists m ∈ R such that L̃T (y) ≥ m for any y ∈ YT .
Now fix any T Y ∈ TY . The continuity of L̃T and the continuity of T Y (x, ·) for each x ∈ XT
guarantee the continuity of L̃T (T y (x, ·)). Together with the compactness of fS∗ (XS ), we have that
for any x ∈ XT ,
                               MTxY := arg min L̃T (T Y (x, y)) ̸= ∅.                             (14)
                                          y∈fS∗ (XS )
                     Y      Y
Therefore, for any T ∈ T and its corresponding T̃ Y ∈ T̃Y , one can construct T̃ X ∈ TX such that
fS∗ (T̃ X (x)) ∈ MTxY for any x ∈ XT and hence we have
                  min LT (T Y (·, (fS∗ ◦ T X )(·))) = E[L̃T (T̃ Y (XT ))] =: L̃T (T̃ Y ).
                T X ∈TX

The continuity of the new loss functional L̃T comes from the continuity of the function L̃, and the
particular choice of the function space ({f |f : XT → YT }, ∥ · ∥∞ ), where {f |f : XT → YT }
contains all functions from XT to YT . Since T̃Y is compact in ({f |f : XT → YT }, ∥ · ∥∞ ), the
minimum over T̃Y is attained at some T̃ Y,∗ . According to the definition of T̃Y , there exists T Y,∗ ∈ TY
such that L̃T (T̃ Y,∗ (·)) = inf y∈fS∗ (XS ) L̃T T Y,∗ (·, y). Let T X,∗ be the T̃ X ∈ TX corresponding to
T Y,∗ . For any T X ∈ TX and T Y ∈ TY , we have
        LT (T Y (·, (fS∗ ◦ T X )(·))) ≥ LT (T Y (·, (fS∗ ◦ T̃ X )(·))) = L̃T (T̃ Y (·)) ≥ L̃T (T̃ Y,∗ (·))
            = LT (T Y,∗ (·, (fS∗ ◦ T X,∗ ))(·)) ≥                     LT T Y (·, (fS∗ ◦ T X )(·)) .

                                                            min
                                                T X ∈TX ,T Y ∈TY
Therefore, the transfer learning problem equation 8 is well-defined and it attains its minimum at
(T X,∗ , T Y,∗ ) described above.

3.2   D ISCUSSION

We now demonstrate that the feasibility analysis puts existing transfer learning studies on a firm
mathematical footing, including domain adaptation and image classification. Additionally, it provides
valuable insight for feature augmentation in particular, and expands the potential for improving model
performance in general.

Feasibility of domain adaption. Following the discussion on the domain adaption problem in
Section 2.3, the feasibility of the transfer learning framework equation 8 is clearly guaranteed: this is
attributed to the optimality of the pretrained model fS∗ inherited from the source optimization problem
and the existence of an optimal transport mapping T X,∗ from Law(XT ) to Law(XS ).
Furthermore, for transfer learning problems not satisfying the usual premise of domain adaption, our
framework enables introducing an output transport mapping, which allows for the alignment of the
output distributions between the source and target tasks.


                                                        8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Feasibility of image classification. Take the aforementioned classification problems in Section
2.3 as an example. In practice, cross-entropy loss is convex with respect to the predicted probability
vector, and the sigmoid activation function for the classifier layer ensures the the compactness
assumption on TY . For image data, XS is typically a compact subset of an Euclidean space and
therefore the image set for a continuous ResNet50 network is compact in the feature space. Hence
the feasibility result holds. Our feasibility analysis provides the flexibility of incorporating an input
transport mapping: it is feasible, and in fact beneficial for effectively utilizing the transferred feature
extractor as investigated in Wang et al. (2022).

Feasibility with feature augmentation. Feature augmentation refers to the process of expanding
the set of features used in a machine learning problem, which plays a significant role in improving
the performance and effectiveness of models Volpi et al. (2018); Chen et al. (2019); Li et al. (2021).
Importantly, transfer learning combined with feature augmentation can be integrated into the mathe-
matical framework presented in Definition 3, enabling the feasibility of feature augmentation to be
established accordingly. Specifically, in transfer learning with feature augmentation, we consider a
source task S with input and output variables X ∈ X and Y ∈ Y. The target task involves predicting
the same output Y from X along with an additional feature denoted by Z ∈ Z, with:
     Source task: min E [Dϕ (Y, f (X))] , Target task:          min E [Dϕ (Y, f (X, Z))] .        (15)
                   f :X →Y                                     f :X ×Z→Y
According to the feasibility result in Theorem 1, the loss functions in equation 15 can be selected as
the Bregman loss in equation 13.
Moreover, the following result shows that, under the special case of “redundant information", transfer
learning with feature augmentation can be solve explicitly by finding the appropriate input and output
transport mappings.
Corollary 1. Assume Y and Z are independent conditioned on X. The optimal input and output
transport mappings (T X , T Y ) in the transfer learning optimization problem equation 8 under the
feature augmentation setting equation 15 is given by
                   T X (x, z) = ProjX (x, z) = x, and T Y (y) = idY (y) = y.

Moreover, we have
Corollary 2. Let (T X,∗ , T Y,∗ ) be the optimal input and output transport mappings from solving the
transfer learning optimization problem equation 8 under the feature augmentation setting equation 15,
i.e.,
             (T X,∗ , T Y,∗ ) =   arg min E Dϕ Y, T Y (X, Z, (fS∗ ◦ T X )(X, Z)) ,

                                                                                                 (16)
                          T X ∈TX ,T Y ∈TY
       ∗
where fS = arg minf :X →Y E [Dϕ (Y, f (X))] is the optimal pretrained model. Then,
              E Dϕ Y, T Y,∗ (X, Z, (fS∗ ◦ T X,∗ )(X, Z)) ≤ E [Dϕ (Y, fS∗ (X))] .

                                                                                                      (17)

Proof of Corollary 1 and 2. First recall that under the Bregman loss, the optimal source and target
models in equation 15 are given by the conditional expectations fS∗ (X) = E[Y |X] and fT∗ (X, Z) =
E[Y |X, Z] (see Banerjee et al. (2005) for more details). Then, Corollary 1 follows from the fact that
when Y and Z are independent conditioned on X, E[Y |X] = E[Y |X, Z]. Moreover, notice that
ProjX ∈ TX and idY ∈ TY and Corollary 2 follows from the optimality of (T X,∗ , T Y,∗ ).

Corollary 1 suggests that if the added feature Z does not provide more relevant information compared
to the original feature X, transfer learning can be accomplished by discarding the additional feature
and directly applying the pretrained model. Moreover, Corollary 2 demonstrates that incorporating
additional information in transfer learning will not have any negative impact on model performance.
In other words, the inclusion of supplementary information through transfer learning can, at worst,
maintain the same level of model performance, and in general, can lead to performance improvement.

4    C ONCLUSION
This paper establishes a mathematical framework for transfer learning, and resolves its feasibility
issue. This study opens up new avenues for enhancing model performance, expanding the scope of
transfer learning applications, and improving the efficiency of transfer learning techniques.


                                                    9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Kamyar Azizzadenesheli, Anqi Liu, Fanny Yang, and Animashree Anandkumar. Regularized learning
  for domain adaptation under label shifts. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2019.
Arindam Banerjee, Xin Guo, and Hui Wang. On the optimality of conditional expectation as a
  bregman predictor. IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 51(7):2664–2669, 2005.
Yajie Bao, Yang Li, Shao-Lun Huang, Lin Zhang, Lizhong Zheng, Amir Zamir, and Leonidas Guibas.
  An information-theoretic approach to transferability in task transfer learning. In 2019 IEEE
  International Conference on Image Processing, pp. 2309–2313. IEEE, 2019.
Shai Ben-David, John Blitzer, Koby Crammer, Alex Kulesza, Fernando Pereira, and Jennifer Wortman
  Vaughan. A theory of learning from different domains. Machine learning, 79(1):151–175, 2010.
John Blitzer, Koby Crammer, Alex Kulesza, Fernando Pereira, and Jennifer Wortman. Learning
  bounds for domain adaptation. In Proceedings of the 20th International Conference on Neural
  Information Processing Systems, volume 20, pp. 129–136. Curran Associates Inc., 2007.
Yuheng Bu, Shaofeng Zou, and Venugopal V Veeravalli. Tightening mutual information-based
  bounds on generalization error. IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Information Theory, 1(1):
  121–130, 2020.
Zitian Chen, Yanwei Fu, Yinda Zhang, Yu-Gang Jiang, Xiangyang Xue, and Leonid Sigal. Multi-level
  semantic feature augmentation for one-shot learning. IEEE Transactions on Image Processing, 28
  (9):4594–4605, 2019.
Diane Cook, Kyle D Feuz, and Narayanan C Krishnan. Transfer learning for activity recognition: A
  survey. Knowledge and Information Systems, 36:537–556, 2013.
Nicolas Courty, Rémi Flamary, Devis Tuia, and Alain Rakotomamonjy. Optimal transport for domain
  adaptation. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 39(9):1853–1865,
  2017.
Jia Deng, Wei Dong, Richard Socher, Li-Jia Li, Kai Li, and Li Fei-Fei. ImageNet: A large-scale
   hierarchical image database. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
   and Pattern Recognition, pp. 248–255. IEEE, 2009.
Jun Deng, Zixing Zhang, Erik Marchi, and Björn Schuller. Sparse autoencoder-based feature
  transfer learning for speech emotion recognition. In Proceedings of the 2013 Humaine Association
  Conference on Affective Computing and Intelligent Interaction, pp. 511–516. IEEE, 2013.
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. BERT: Pre-training of deep
  bidirectional transformers for language understanding. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of
  the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language
  Technologies, volume 1, pp. 4171–4186. Association for Computational Linguistics, 2019.
Tomer Galanti, András György, and Marcus Hutter. Generalization bounds for transfer learning with
  pretrained classifiers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.12532, 2022.
Yaroslav Ganin and Victor Lempitsky. Unsupervised domain adaptation by backpropagation. In
  Proceedings of the 32nd International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 37, pp. 1180–
  1189. PMLR, 2015.
Yaroslav Ganin, Evgeniya Ustinova, Hana Ajakan, Pascal Germain, Hugo Larochelle, François
  Laviolette, Mario Marchand, and Victor Lempitsky. Domain-adversarial training of neural networks.
  Journal of Machine Learning Research, 17(59):1–35, 2016.
Peter Harremoës and Igor Vajda. On pairs of f -divergences and their joint range. IEEE Transactions
  on Information Theory, 57(6):3230–3235, 2011.
Long-Kai Huang, Junzhou Huang, Yu Rong, Qiang Yang, and Ying Wei. Frustratingly easy trans-
  ferability estimation. In Proceedings of the 39th International Conference on Machine Learning,
  volume 162, pp. 9201–9225. PMLR, 2022.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Taehyun Hwang and Rui Kuang. A heterogeneous label propagation algorithm for disease gene
  discovery. In Proceedings of the 2010 SIAM International Conference on Data Mining, pp.
  583–594. SIAM, 2010.
Jing Jiang and ChengXiang Zhai. Instance weighting for domain adaptation in nlp. In Proceedings of
   the 45th Annual Meeting of the Association of Computational Linguistics, pp. 264–271, 2007.
Hee E Kim, Alejandro Cosa-Linan, Nandhini Santhanam, Mahboubeh Jannesari, Mate E Maros, and
  Thomas Ganslandt. Transfer learning for medical image classification: A literature review. BMC
  Medical Imaging, 22(1):69, 2022.
Laura Leal, Mathieu Laurière, and Charles-Albert Lehalle. Learning a functional control for high-
  frequency finance. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.09611, 2020.
Bertrand Lebichot, Yann-Aël Le Borgne, Liyun He-Guelton, Frederic Oblé, and Gianluca Bontempi.
  Deep-learning domain adaptation techniques for credit cards fraud detection. In Recent Advances
  in Big Data and Deep Learning: Proceedings of the 2019 INNS Big Data and Deep Learning
  Conference, pp. 78–88. Springer, 2020.
Pan Li, Da Li, Wei Li, Shaogang Gong, Yanwei Fu, and Timothy M Hospedales. A simple feature
  augmentation for domain generalization. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference
  on Computer Vision, pp. 8886–8895. IEEE, 2021.
Ruijun Liu, Yuqian Shi, Changjiang Ji, and Ming Jia. A survey of sentiment analysis based on
  transfer learning. IEEE Access, 7:85401–85412, 2019.
Mingsheng Long, Jianmin Wang, Guiguang Ding, Jiaguang Sun, and Philip S Yu. Transfer joint
 matching for unsupervised domain adaptation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
 Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 1410–1417. IEEE, 2014.
Mingsheng Long, Yue Cao, Jianmin Wang, and Michael Jordan. Learning transferable features
 with deep adaptation networks. In Proceedings of the 32nd International Conference on Machine
 Learning, volume 37, pp. 97–105. PMLR, 2015.
Mohammadreza Mousavi Kalan, Zalan Fabian, Salman Avestimehr, and Mahdi Soltanolkotabi.
 Minimax lower bounds for transfer learning with linear and one-hidden layer neural networks.
 In Proceedings of the 33rd International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems,
 volume 33, pp. 1959–1969, 2020.
Cuong Nguyen, Tal Hassner, Matthias Seeger, and Cedric Archambeau. LEEP: A new measure
  to evaluate transferability of learned representations. In Proceedings of the 37th International
  Conference on Machine Learning, volume 119, pp. 7294–7305. PMLR, 2020.
Cuong N Nguyen, Lam Si Tung Ho, Vu Dinh, Tal Hassner, and Cuong V Nguyen. Generalization
  bounds for deep transfer learning using majority predictor accuracy. In International Symposium
  on Information Theory and Its Applications. IEEE, 2022.
Sinno Jialin Pan and Qiang Yang. A survey on transfer learning. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge
  and Data Engineering, 22(10):1345–1359, 2010.
Weike Pan, Evan Xiang, Nathan Liu, and Qiang Yang. Transfer learning in collaborative filtering
 for sparsity reduction. In Proceedings of the 24th AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
 volume 24, pp. 230–235. AAAI Press, 2010.
Michal Pándy, Andrea Agostinelli, Jasper Uijlings, Vittorio Ferrari, and Thomas Mensink. Trans-
 ferability estimation using Bhattacharyya class separability. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
 Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 9172–9182. IEEE, 2022.
Mathieu Rosenbaum and Jianfei Zhang. Deep calibration of the quadratic rough heston model. arXiv
 preprint arXiv:2107.01611, 2021.
Sebastian Ruder, Matthew E Peters, Swabha Swayamdipta, and Thomas Wolf. Transfer learning
  in natural language processing. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North American
  Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Tutorials, pp. 15–18. Association for
  Computational Linguistics, 2019.


                                               11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Kate Saenko, Brian Kulis, Mario Fritz, and Trevor Darrell. Adapting visual category models to new
  domains. In Proceedings of the 11th European Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 213–226.
  Springer, 2010.
Yi-Lin Sung, Jaemin Cho, and Mohit Bansal. Vl-adapter: Parameter-efficient transfer learning for
  vision-and-language tasks. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
  Pattern Recognition, pp. 5227–5237. IEEE, 2022.
Chuanqi Tan, Fuchun Sun, Tao Kong, Wenchang Zhang, Chao Yang, and Chunfang Liu. A survey on
  deep transfer learning. In International Conference on Artificial Neural Networks, pp. 270–279.
  Springer, 2018.
Yang Tan, Yang Li, and Shao-Lun Huang. OTCE: A transferability metric for cross-domain cross-task
  representations. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition, pp. 15779–15788. IEEE, 2021.
Xinyi Tong, Xiangxiang Xu, Shao-Lun Huang, and Lizhong Zheng. A mathematical framework
  for quantifying transferability in multi-source transfer learning. In Proceedings of the 35th
  International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 34, pp. 26103–26116.
  Curran Associates, Inc., 2021.
Anh T Tran, Cuong V Nguyen, and Tal Hassner. Transferability and hardness of supervised classifi-
  cation tasks. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pp.
 1395–1405. IEEE, 2019.
Nilesh Tripuraneni, Michael Jordan, and Chi Jin. On the theory of transfer learning: The importance
  of task diversity. In Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Neural Information
  Processing Systems, volume 33, pp. 7852–7862. Curran Associates Inc., 2020.
Eric Tzeng, Judy Hoffman, Kate Saenko, and Trevor Darrell. Adversarial discriminative domain adap-
  tation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
  pp. 7167–7176. IEEE, 2017.
Riccardo Volpi, Pietro Morerio, Silvio Savarese, and Vittorio Murino. Adversarial feature aug-
  mentation for unsupervised domain adaptation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
  Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 5495–5504. IEEE, 2018.
Guan Wang, Yusuke Kikuchi, Jinglin Yi, Qiong Zou, Rui Zhou, and Xin Guo. Transfer learning
  for retinal vascular disease detection: A pilot study with diabetic retinopathy and retinopathy of
  prematurity. arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.01250, 2022.
Jindong Wang, Yiqiang Chen, Lisha Hu, Xiaohui Peng, and S Yu Philip. Stratified transfer learning
   for cross-domain activity recognition. In Proceedings of the 2013 IEEE International Conference
   on Pervasive Computing and Communications, pp. 1–10. IEEE, 2018.
Mei Wang and Weihong Deng. Deep visual domain adaptation: A survey. Neurocomputing, 312:
 135–153, 2018.
Mengzhou Xia, Zexuan Zhong, and Danqi Chen. Structured pruning learns compact and accu-
 rate models. In Proceedings of the 60th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
 Linguistics, volume 1, pp. 1513–1528, 2022.
Kaichao You, Yong Liu, Jianmin Wang, and Mingsheng Long. LogME: Practical assessment of
  pre-trained models for transfer learning. In Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on
 Machine Learning, volume 139, pp. 12133–12143. PMLR, 2021.
Feng Yuan, Lina Yao, and Boualem Benatallah. Darec: deep domain adaptation for cross-domain
  recommendation via transferring rating patterns. In Proceedings of the 28th International Joint
  Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pp. 4227–4233. AAAI Press, 2019.
Min Zeng, Min Li, Zhihui Fei, Ying Yu, Yi Pan, and Jianxin Wang. Automatic icd-9 coding via deep
 transfer learning. Neurocomputing, 324:43–50, 2019.


                                                12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Han Zhao, Remi Tachet Des Combes, Kun Zhang, and Geoffrey Gordon. On learning invariant
  representations for domain adaptation. In Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on
 Machine Learning, volume 97, pp. 7523–7532. PMLR, 2019.
Fuzhen Zhuang, Zhiyuan Qi, Keyu Duan, Dongbo Xi, Yongchun Zhu, Hengshu Zhu, Hui Xiong, and
  Qing He. A comprehensive survey on transfer learning. Proceedings of the IEEE, 109(1):43–76,
  2020.


                                              13
