Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


SOHES: S ELF - SUPERVISED O PEN - WORLD
H IERARCHICAL E NTITY S EGMENTATION
 Shengcao Cao1∗ Jiuxiang Gu2 Jason Kuen2 Hao Tan2 Ruiyi Zhang2
 Handong Zhao2 Ani Nenkova2 Liang-Yan Gui1 Tong Sun2 Yu-Xiong Wang1
 1
   University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign 2 Adobe Research
 {cao44,lgui,yxw}@illinois.edu
 {jigu,kuen,hatan,ruizhang,hazhao,nenkova,tsun}@adobe.com

                                                                                           SAM
                                                                                    (supervised SOTA)
                           60.8

                           -21%


                                                                                      (Prev. SOTA)
                                         46.1            45.9          45.8


                                                                                                     SOHES
                                                                                                     (Ours)
                                                                                        HASSOD
              Mask AR


                                         -28%            -37%          -18%
                               33.3                          33.5          31.1
                                             29.1                   27.8
                        26.0                          26.2                             18.1
                                      22.5
                                                                                         17.1
                                                                                     -85%
                                                                                  11.4


                          SA-1B          LVIS          EntitySeg     ADE20K       PACO-LVIS

Figure 1: SOHES boosts open-world entity segmentation with self-supervision on various im-
age datasets. Compared to prior state of the art, SOHES significantly reduces the gap between
self-supervised methods and the supervised Segment Anything Model (SAM) (Kirillov et al., 2023),
yet using only 2% unlabeled image data as SAM.

                                                    A BSTRACT

             Open-world entity segmentation, as an emerging computer vision task, aims at
             segmenting entities in images without being restricted by pre-defined classes,
             offering impressive generalization capabilities on unseen images and concepts.
             Despite its promise, existing entity segmentation methods like Segment Any-
             thing Model (SAM) rely heavily on costly expert annotators. This work presents
             Self-supervised Open-world Hierarchical Entity Segmentation (SOHES), a novel
             approach that eliminates the need for human annotations. SOHES operates in
             three phases: self-exploration, self-instruction, and self-correction. Given a pre-
             trained self-supervised representation, we produce abundant high-quality pseudo-
             labels through visual feature clustering. Then, we train a segmentation model on
             the pseudo-labels, and rectify the noises in pseudo-labels via a teacher-student
             mutual-learning procedure. Beyond segmenting entities, SOHES also captures
             their constituent parts, providing a hierarchical understanding of visual entities.
             Using raw images as the sole training data, our method achieves unprecedented
             performance in self-supervised open-world segmentation, marking a significant
             milestone towards high-quality open-world entity segmentation in the absence of
             human-annotated masks. Project page: https://SOHES.github.io.

1       I NTRODUCTION
Open-world entity segmentation (Qi et al., 2022; 2023) is an emerging vision task for localizing se-
mantically coherent visual entities without the constraints of pre-defined classes. This task, in con-
trast to traditional segmentation (Long et al., 2015; Chen et al., 2017; He et al., 2017; Kirillov et al.,
2019), aims at creating segmentation masks for visual entities inclusive of both “things” (countable
    ∗
        Work done during an internship at Adobe Research.


                                                        1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


objects such as persons and cars) and “stuff” (amorphous regions such as sea and sky) (Kirillov
et al., 2019; Qi et al., 2022), without regard for class labels. The inherent inclusivity and class-
agnostic nature enable open-world entity segmentation to perform strongly on unfamiliar entities
from unseen image domains, a frequent real-world challenge in applications such as image editing
and robotics. A prominent model for this task is Segment Anything Model (SAM) (Kirillov et al.,
2023), which has garnered enthusiastic attention for its impressive performance in open-world seg-
mentation. However, the efficacy of models like SAM depends on the avilability of extensively
annotated datasets. To illustrate, SAM is trained on SA-1B (Kirillov et al., 2023), a vast dataset
comprising 11 million images and an enormous amount of 1 billion segmentation masks. While au-
tomated segmentation plays a central role in building SA-1B, human expertise and manual labor are
similarly important, where it takes 14 to 34 seconds to annotate a mask. Meanwhile, it is challenging
for human annotators to produce segmentation masks at a consistent granularity, because there is no
universally agreed definition of objects and parts. This reliance on intricately annotated datasets
and considerable human effort raises a compelling question: Can we develop a high-quality open-
world segmentation model using pure self-supervision? The prospect of learning from unlabeled
raw images without the need for expert annotations is highly appealing.
In fact, self-supervised visual representation learning (Chen et al., 2020; He et al., 2020; Caron
et al., 2021; He et al., 2022b) has already shown promise. Such models can effectively exploit useful
training signals from purely unlabeled images, resulting in high-quality visual representations that
are comparable with those achieved via supervised learning. However, mainstream self-supervised
representation learning approaches typically learn holistic representations for whole images, without
distinguishing individual entities nor understanding region-level structures. As a result, they cannot
be directly used to achieve open-world entity segmentation. Our key insight to bridge this gap is that
an intelligent model can not only learn representations from observations, but can also self-evolve to
explore the open world, instruct and generalize itself, continuously refine and correct its predictions
in a self-supervised manner, and ultimately achieve open-world segmentation.
Following this key insight, we propose Self-supervised Open-world Hierarchical Entity Segmenta-
tion (SOHES), a novel approach consisting of three phases – 1) Self-exploration: Starting from
a pre-trained self-supervised representation DINO (Caron et al., 2021), we generate initial pseudo-
labels to learn from. By clustering visual features based on similarity and locality, we can discern
semantically coherent continuous regions that likely represent visually meaningful entities. 2) Self-
instruction: Our initial pseudo-labels are constrained by the fixed visual representation. To refine
the segmentation, we train a Mask2Former (Cheng et al., 2022) segmentation model on the ini-
tial pseudo-labels. Even though the initial pseudo-labels are noisy, learning a segmentation model
on them can “average out” the noises, thus predicting more accurate masks. 3) Self-correction:
Building upon these more accurate predictions, we employ a teacher-student mutual-learning frame-
work (Tarvainen & Valpola, 2017; Liu et al., 2020) to further reduce the early-stage noises and adapt
the model for open-world segmentation. Throughout the three phases, we rely solely on the raw im-
ages, without any human annotations. Equally significantly, due to the compositional nature of
things and stuff in natural scenes, our model learns not just to segment entities but also their con-
stituent parts and finer subparts of these parts. During the self-exploration phase, we generate a
hierarchical structure of each visual entity from individual parts to the whole. This hierarchical
segmentation approach enriches our understanding of visual elements in an open-world context,
ensuring a more comprehensive and versatile application.
To summarize, our key contributions include:
• We propose Self-supervised Open-world Hierarchical Entity Segmentation (SOHES) to address
  the open-world segmentation challenge. We demonstrate the potential of high-quality open-world
  segmentation by adapting self-supervised representations and learning solely from unlabeled data.
• We develop a method to generate over 100 segmentation masks per image as high-quality pseudo-
  labels by clustering self-supervised visual features.
• We learn to segment entities and their constituent parts and perform hierarchical association be-
  tween visual entities. This hierarchical segmentation approach provides a multi-granularity anal-
  ysis of visual entities in complex scenes.
• We achieve new state-of-the-art performance in self-supervised open-world segmentation, which
  enhances mask average recall (AR) on various datasets (e.g., improving AR on SA-1B (Kirillov
  et al., 2023) from 26.0 to 33.3) and closes the performance gap between self-supervised and su-
  pervised paradigms, as illustrated in Figure 1.


                                                  2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


2   R ELATED W ORK
Open-world visual recognition. Open-world recognition (Scheirer et al., 2012; Bendale & Boult,
2015; 2016) aims to recognize and classify visual concepts in an evolving environment where the
model encounters unfamiliar objects, which challenges traditional models trained to recognize a
fixed set of classes. The task has been extended from classification to detection (Bansal et al., 2018;
Dhamija et al., 2020; Joseph et al., 2021; Jaiswal et al., 2021; Kim et al., 2022), segmentation (Hu
et al., 2018; Wang et al., 2021; 2022a; Kalluri et al., 2023), and tracking (Liu et al., 2022). In
particular, open-world entity segmentation (Qi et al., 2022; 2023) segments entities into semantically
meaningful regions without regard for class labels. In this work, we further expand the scope to
whole entities and their constituent parts.
Self-supervised object localization/discovery. Localizing objects from images in a self-supervised
manner requires learning the concept of objects from visual data without any human annotations.
Early explorations (Vo et al., 2019; 2020; 2021) formulate an optimization problem on a graph,
where the nodes are object proposals (e.g., by selective search (Uijlings et al., 2013)) and the edges
are constructed based on visual similarities. Following the observation that the segmentation of the
most prominent object can emerge from DINO (Caron et al., 2021), Siméoni et al. (2021; 2023);
Wang et al. (2022b) learn object detectors from saliency-based pseudo-labels. Meanwhile, Wang
et al. (2022c; 2023) generate pseudo-labels by extending NormCut (Shi & Malik, 2000), and Cao
et al. (2023) cluster semantically coherent regions into pseudo-labels. We share a common multi-
phase learning paradigm with these prior methods, where pseudo-labels are first discovered from
self-supervised representations, and then a detection/segmentation model is learned. However, we
contribute novel and improved designs to each phase, including 1) a global-to-local clustering algo-
rithm for high-quality pseudo-labeling, 2) a hierarchical relation learning module, and 3) a teacher-
student self-correction phase.

3   A PPROACH
In this section, we first provide an overview of Self-supervised Open-world Hierarchical Entity Seg-
mentation (SOHES) and then present its three learning phases in the following subsections. Build-
ing upon and significantly enhancing the pseudo-label discovery and learning paradigm in prior
self-supervised object discovery work (Siméoni et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2023; Cao et al., 2023),
SOHES consists of three phases: self-exploration, self-instruction, and self-correction, as shown in
Figure 2. 1) In Phase 1 self-exploration, we start from a pre-trained self-supervised representation
DINO (Caron et al., 2021) with a ViT-B/8 (Dosovitskiy et al., 2020) architecture, and initiate our
exploration on unlabeled raw images. Our strategy is based on agglomerative clustering (Hastie
et al., 2009), and organizes image patches into semantically consistent regions automatically. 2)
With these pseudo-labels, we begin Phase 2 self-instruction. We train a segmentation model com-
posed by a DINO pre-trained ViT backbone (Caron et al., 2021), ViT-Adapter (Chen et al., 2022)
(for generating multi-scale features from ViT), and Mask2Former (Cheng et al., 2022) (for the fi-
nal mask prediction). Through self-instruction, our segmentation model can learn from common
visual entities in different images and generalize better than the initial pseudo-labels produced by
the frozen ViT backbone. 3) In the final Phase 3 self-correction, we exploit more self-supervision


      Phase 1: Self-exploration                    Phase 2: Self-instruction                             Phase 3: Self-correction
    Generate initial pseudo-labels              Learn from initial pseudo-labels                     Improve over initial pseudo-labels


        Unlabeled                                                                                         Teacher
       Raw Images                                               Segmentation Model                   Segmentation Model     Predict

                                        Initial    Supervise                                                                     Teacher's
                                                               DINO ViT      Mask2      Initialize             EMA
                                     Pseudo-labels                                                                              Pseudo-labels
                        Cluster                                ViT-Adapter   Former
         Frozen                                                                                           Student
        DINO ViT                                                                                     Segmentation Model
                                                                                   Supervise                                  Supervise
                                                                                (Initial Branch)                          (Teacher Branch)



Figure 2: Three phases of SOHES. In the first self-exploration phase, we cluster visual features
from pre-trained DINO to generate initial pseudo-labels on unlabeled images. Then in the self-
instruction phase, a segmentation model learns from the initial pseudo-labels. Finally, in the self-
correction phase, we adopt a teacher-student framework to further refine the segmentation model.


                                                                  3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                        Step 2: Local              Step 3: Mask
                  Step 1: Global Clustering                                                               Step 4: Hierarchy Analysis
                                                        Re-clustering               Refinement


                                              Zoom in

                               Merge


                                       Mix                                Refine                  Split


                                                               No valid
                                                               internal
      Extract
                               Merge                             mask
      Features


                 Merge


Figure 3: Self-exploration phase for generating initial pseudo-labels. This phase consists of four
steps. We first merge image patches into regions with high visual feature similarities, then zoom in
on the small candidate regions and re-cluster the local images to better discover small entities. After
that, we refine the mask details and identify the hierarchical structure among the masks.

signals to lift the limit induced by noises in the initial pseudo-labels. Inspired by semi-supervised
learning (Tarvainen & Valpola, 2017; Liu et al., 2020), we employ a teacher-student mutual-learning
framework, allowing the student to learn from the improved pseudo-labels generated by the teacher.

3.1   S ELF - EXPLORATION : G ENERATE INITIAL PSEUDO - LABELS
In the self-exploration phase, we generate initial pseudo-labels with several steps delicately designed
to include potential entities and their constituent parts of diverse categories. We take a global-
to-local perspective to first create candidate regions at the global level, and then investigate local
images to accurately discover small entities. In particular, we begin by clustering patch-level self-
supervised features to generate a pool of candidate regions, then filter and refine such candidates into
initial pseudo-labeled masks, and finally analyze the hierarchical structure among them. Figure 3
depicts this process with visual examples.
Step 1 is a global clustering procedure, which merges image patches into semantically meaningful
regions. Given an unlabeled image with resolution S × S, we use DINO ViT-B/8 to extract its
visual features {f1 , . . . , f S × S } corresponding to each 8 × 8 patch. Then, we merge these patches
                                8   8
in a bottom-up, iterative manner. The initial seed regions are exactly these 8 × 8 patches. In each
iteration, we find the pair of adjacent regions (i, j) with the highest cosine feature similarity (fi ·
fj )/(∥fi ∥2 · ∥fj ∥2 ). These two regions i and j are merged into a new region k. The visual feature
                                                  a f +a f
of the merged region is computed as fk = i aii +ajj j , where ai , aj are the areas of the regions i, j.
After replacing regions i and j with the new merged region k, we continue with the next iteration.
We set a series of merging thresholds θmerge,1 > · · · > θmerge,m as criterion for stopping the merg-
ing procedure. In general, the highest cosine feature similarity (among all unmerged region pairs)
decreases as more regions are merged. When the highest cosine feature similarity goes below one
threshold θmerge,t (t ∈ {1, . . . , m}), we record the merging results that have been obtained so far.
Consequently, we can generate m sets of regions, covering various granularity levels. We mix these
sets into a pool of regions that may overlap with each other. Non-maximal suppression (NMS) is
applied to remove duplicate regions. The thresholds {θmerge,t }m t=1 can be determined based on the
desired number of pseudo-labels per image (see Appendix D).
Step 2 is local re-clustering. In the first step, we have generated a large pool of image regions
that may correspond to valid visual entities. However, many small regions tend to be noisy and
lack meaningful content. We adopt a global-to-local perspective to re-examine the regions that are
smaller than θsmall % of the total image area. For each small candidate region, we crop a local image
around it, resize it to S ′ × S ′ , and re-cluster it with the same procedure as in Step 1 to obtain
subregions of the local crop. Subregions that intersect with the boundaries of the crop are discarded,
because they are incomplete within the local crop context. The remaining subregions, along with
regions larger than θsmall % of the whole image (from Step 1), form our initial pseudo-labels. By
“zooming in” on the small candidate regions and repeating the clustering procedure at a finer scale,
we can better remove noisy pseudo-labels and improve the quality of the remaining ones.


                                                             4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



               Whole                Mask 5                            𝑄   ×𝑊"
                                                            Query 1                0   0   1   1   0   0
                                                            Query 2                0   0   0   0   0   1
                Part       Mask 2            Mask 1         Query 3       ×𝑊!      0   0   0   0   0   0
                                                            Query 4                0   0   0   0   0   0
                                                            Query 5                1   1   1   1   0   1

               Subpart   Mask 6     Mask 3     Mask 4       Query 6                0   0   0   0   0   0


Figure 4: Ancestor relation prediction in the self-instruction phase. The prediction target, a
binary matrix of ancestor relations, is constructed from the hierarchical structure identified in the
self-exploration phase. The ancestor prediction head uses two linear mappings W1 , W2 to transform
the query features Q and learns to predict the target ancestors.

In Step 3, we leverage the off-the-shelf mask refinement model CascadePSP (Cheng et al., 2020) to
further refine the boundaries of the pseduo-label masks. We compute the mask IoUs (intersection-
over-union) between the pseudo-labels before and after undergoing the refinement step, and remove
the ones that have poor IoUs because they are likely noisy samples.
Finally, Step 4 focuses on identifying the hierarchical structure embedded within the set of pseudo-
labels, which is represented as a forest structure (i.e., set of trees) where the roots are whole entities,
and their descendants are parts and subparts, etc. We test each pair of pseudo-labels i and j to
determine their hierarchical relation: If 1) over θcover % pixels of pseudo-label i are also in pseudo-
label j (meaning that i is covered by j), and 2) less than θcover % pixels of pseudo-label j are in
pseudo-label i (meaning that j is larger than i), then pseudo-label j is an ancestor of i in the hierarchy
forest. The smallest ancestor of i is the direct parent of i. By testing the pixel coverage between
pseudo-labels, we can figure out the hierarchical structure of our pseudo-labels.

3.2   S ELF - INSTRUCTION : L EARN FROM INITIAL PSEUDO - LABELS
In the self-instruction phase, we need to address two problems: 1) The initial pseudo-labels from
the previous self-exploration phase contain noises. How to leverage self-supervised learning signals
to “average out” the noises? 2) Existing general-purpose segmentation heads cannot predict the
hierarchical relations among masks. How to learn the hierarchy forest from the previous phase?
To address the first problem, we train a segmentation model to learn and generalize from the ini-
tial pseudo-labels. Through this procedure, the segmentation model can observe valid entities from
pseudo-labels which are more frequent than noises, and thus accurately segments unseen images.
The model is composed of a ViT-based backbone and a Mask2Former (Cheng et al., 2022) seg-
mentation model. In particular, the backbone is constructed by the same DINO (Caron et al., 2021)
pre-trained ViT, and ViT-Adapter (Chen et al., 2022) for producing multi-scale visual feature maps.
The ViT backbone is not fixed, and thus we can adapt its features for the segmentation task.
To accomplish the hierarchical segmentation task, we attach a novel ancestor prediction head to
Mask2Former, which predicts the hierarchical relations among the predicted masks. In parallel to
the existing mask and class prediction heads, our ancestor prediction head operates on the query
features Q ∈ RN ×C , where N is the number of queries and C is the query feature dimension. As
shown in Figure 4, the learning target of the ancestor prediction is a non-symmetric binary matrix
representing the ancestor relations P ∈ {0, 1}N ×N , where Pi,j = 1 represents that mask i is an
ancestor of mask j, and Pi,j = 0 otherwise. It is worth noting that a mask i may have no ancestors
(as a root in the hierarchy forest), if mask i is a whole entity; mask i may also have more than one
ancestor (as a deep node in the forest), if mask i is a part of another part. The ancestor prediction is
formulated as:                                                √
                          P̂ = sigmoid (QW1 )(QW2 )⊤ / C ∈ RN ×N ,                                   (1)

where W1 , W2 ∈ RC×C are learnable weights for two linear transformations. We use two different
linear mappings since the ancestor relations are asymmetric. They are optimized via a binary cross-
entropy (BCE) loss Lancestor = BCE(P̂ , P ). At inference time, we can employ topological sorting
to reconstruct the forest structure from the binary ancestor relation predictions. Different from prior
transformer-based hierarchical segmentation methods like GroupViT (Xu et al., 2022) which are


                                                        5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                        Teacher Branch
                                       Weakly                               Teacher's
                                      Augmented                            Pseudo-labels
                                    Image 𝒯-.'/ (𝐼!)                          𝑌&.'01.*
                 Unlabeled                                Teacher
                 Image 𝐼!                                                                           𝐿!"#$%"&
                                                         ℳ ", Θ"%'()%*
                                       Strongly                               Student's
                                      Augmented                    EMA       Predictions
                                    Image 𝒯)&*+$,(𝐼!)                    ℳ 𝒯!"#$%&(𝐼' ), Θ!"()*%"

                 Unlabeled                                Student
                 Image 𝐼"
                                                                               Optimize              𝐿!*!#)
                                                         ℳ ", Θ!"#$%&"
                                       Strongly                               Student's
                                      Augmented                              Predictions
                     Self-explore
                                    Image 𝒯)&*+$,(𝐼")                    ℳ 𝒯!"#$%&(𝐼+ ), Θ!"()*%"

                  Initial                                                                           𝐿'('!'#)
               Pseudo-labels
                  𝑌#$%&%'(
                                                        Initial Branch


Figure 5: Teacher-student mutual-learning in the self-correction phase. We initialize both the
teacher and student with the segmentation model learned in the self-instruction phase, which pro-
duces better segmentation predictions than the initial pseudo-labels. The student receives supervi-
sion from the teacher’s pseudo-labels and the initial pseudo-labels. The teacher is updated as the
exponential moving average (EMA) of the student.

constrained by the pre-defined number of hierarchical levels, our method is able to predict a variable
number of levels and entities.
3.3 S ELF - CORRECTION : I MPROVE OVER INITIAL PSEUDO - LABELS
Although we have elaborately built a pseudo-labeling process in the self-exploration phase, it is still
based on a fixed self-supervised visual representation that is not optimized for image segmentation.
Consequently, there may still be initial pseudo-labels that are noisy and can negatively affect our
model. Meanwhile, we observe that the segmentation model learned through the self-instruction
phase can predict masks that are more reliable and accurate than the clustering results from the
self-exploration phase. Motivated by this observation, in the final self-correction phase, we further
bootstrap our model by learning from itself and mitigating the impact of noises in the initial pseudo-
labels. To achieve self-correction, we adopt a semi-supervised approach that is based on teacher-
student mutual-learning (Tarvainen & Valpola, 2017; Liu et al., 2020).
The self-correction phase starts off by initializing two separate segmentation models which are exact
clones of the segmentation model produced by the self-instruction phase. We denote one segmenta-
tion model as the student model M(·, Θstudent ), which is actively updated through gradient descent;
the other segmentation model is the teacher model M(·, Θteacher ), which is updated every iteration as
an exponential moving average (EMA) of the student: Θteacher ← mΘteacher + (1 − m)Θstudent , where
m ∈ (0, 1) is the momentum. The student receives supervision from both the initial pseudo-labels
and the teacher’s pseudo-labels. Thus, the total loss is computed as:
       Ltotal = Lseg (M (Tstrong (I1 ), Θstudent ), Yinitial ) + Lseg (M (Tstrong (I2 ), Θstudent ), Yteacher ) ,   (2)
where I1 and I2 are two image batches, Yinitial is the initial pseudo-labels on I1 , Yteacher is the teacher’s
pseudo-labels by thresholding the predictions M(Tweak (I2 ), Θteacher ), Tstrong and Tweak denote strong
and weak data augmentations respectively, and Lseg is the segmentation loss which is composed
of a classification loss Lcls , a mask prediction loss Lmask , and our ancestor prediction loss Lancestor .
Figure 5 illustrates the steps in our teacher-student learning approach.
To obtain more reliable supervision from the teacher’s predictions M(Tweak (I2 ), Θteacher ), we keep
only those masks with confidence scores exceeding θscore to form the pseudo-labels Yteacher . We
observe that the teacher model tends to be less confident when segmenting smaller entities. If the
threshold θscore is fixed across all masks, it would result in too few pseudo-labels with small areas,
and consequently, the student’s small entity segmentation performance and overall performance
would be impaired. Therefore, we leverage a dynamic threshold:
                       θscore = (1 − (1 − a)γ ) (θscore, large − θscore, small ) + θscore, small ,                  (3)
where a ∈ (0, 1) represents the area ratio of the predicted mask to the whole image, γ > 1 is
a hyper-parameter, and θscore, small < θscore, large are the pre-defined thresholds for the smallest and
largest mask, respectively. This dynamic threshold across different scales allows us to better balance
small, medium, and large entities in the teacher’s pseudo-labels, and encourages the student model
to segment small entities more accurately.

                                                               6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



Table 1: Zero-shot evaluation on various image datasets. SOHES sets new state-of-the-art self-
supervised open-world entity segmentation performance. The collection of the evaluation datasets
represents diverse classes in an open world and includes both whole entities and parts. Mean-
while, using just 2% unlabeled images as SAM, SOHES significantly closes the gap between self-
supervised methods and the supervised SAM. The evaluation metric is average recall (AR).

                                                      Datasets w/ Whole Entities           Datasets w/ Parts
 Supervision   Method
                                               COCO     LVIS    ADE     Entity     SA-1B   PtIN     PACO
 Supervised    SAM (Kirillov et al., 2023)     49.6     46.1    45.8    45.9       60.8    28.3      18.1
               FreeSOLO (Wang et al., 2022b)   11.6      5.9     7.3     8.0        2.2    13.8       2.4
 Self-         CutLER (Wang et al., 2023)      28.1     20.2    26.3    23.1       17.0    28.7       8.9
 supervised    HASSOD (Cao et al., 2023)       28.3     22.5    27.8    26.2       26.0    32.6      11.4
               SOHES (Ours)                    30.5     29.1    31.1    33.5       33.3    36.0      17.1
 Improvement over HASSOD                       +2.2  +6.6   +3.3    +7.3            +7.3   +3.4      +5.7
 Reduced Gap vs. SAM                          -10% -28% -18% -37%                  -21%     ∗       -85%
                               ∗ SOHES outperforms SAM on PartImagenet.

4   E XPERIMENTS
In this section, we thoroughly evaluate SOHES on various datasets and examine the ViT-based
backbone improvement for downstream tasks. We perform a series of ablation study experiments to
demonstrate the efficacy of modules and steps in SOHES. We also discuss limitations of SOHES
in Appendix E. Additional qualitative results are shown in Appendix F.
4.1 T RAINING AND EVALUATION DATA
We train our SOHES model on the SA-1B (Kirillov et al., 2023) dataset. In SA-1B, there are 11
million images equally split into 1,000 packs. Unless otherwise specified, we use 20 packs of raw
images (2%) for training, and 1 different pack (0.1%) for evaluation.
For evaluation purposes, we test SOHES on various image datasets with segmentation mask an-
notations in a zero-shot manner (i.e., no further training on evaluation datasets). The diversity in
the evaluation datasets can simulate the challenge of unseen entity classes and image domains in an
open-world setting. Since the annotations in each dataset may only cover entities from a pre-defined
list of classes, the commonly used MS-COCO style average precision (AP) metric for closed-world
detection/segmentation would incorrectly penalize open-world predictions that cannot be matched
with ground truths in known classes. More details of the AP metric are discussed in Appendix B.
Following prior work (Kim et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2022a; Liu et al., 2022; Cao et al., 2023), we
mainly consider the average recall (AR) metric for up to 1,000 predictions per image when compar-
ing different methods. Other implementation details are in Appendix A.
4.2 O PEN - WORLD ENTITY SEGMENTATION
We evaluate SOHES on a variety of datasets, including MS-COCO (Lin et al., 2014), LVIS (Gupta
et al., 2019), ADE20K (Zhou et al., 2017), EntitySeg (Qi et al., 2023), and SA-1B (Kirillov et al.,
2023). These datasets include natural images of complex scenes, in which multiple visual entities
of diverse classes present and are labeled with segmentation masks. Thus, the collection of such
evaluation datasets can faithfully reflect the performance of an open-world segmentation model.
We compare with recent self-supervised methods FreeSOLO (Wang et al., 2022b), CutLER (Wang
et al., 2023), and HASSOD (Cao et al., 2023). We aim to close the gap between self-supervised
methods and the supervised state-of-the-art model SAM (Kirillov et al., 2023). Notably, we use only
2% images as SAM for training SOHES, and we do not require any human annotations on these
images.
As summarized in Table 1 and Table 4, SOHES consistently outperforms the prior state-of-the-
art HASSOD by large margins (e.g., +7.3 AR on SA-1B and EntitySeg). Meanwhile, SOHES
significantly closes the gap between self-supervised methods and supervised methods. For instance,
using only 2% unlabeled data in SA-1B, SOHES already achieves over half AR of SAM. SOHES
also reduces the gap between self-supervised methods and SAM on SA-1B relatively by 37%.
4.3 PART SEGMENTATION
In additional to whole entities, SOHES also learns to segment their constituent parts and subparts.
To evaluate our hierarchical segmentation results, we compare them with the ground-truth mask


                                                  7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 6: Downstream performance of ViT-


                                                             Mask AR
                                                                       10
based backbones. We freeze the ViT and fine-
                                                                                         Resolution = 224
tune a ViT-Adapter and a lightweight segmen-                           5                 Resolution = 448
tation/detection head on ADE20K/MS-COCO.
                                                                            32       16                 8
The backbone further fine-tuned in SOHES is                                      Patch size
more adapted to dense-prediction tasks.
                                                       Figure 7: Mask quality of the initial pseudo-
 Backbone              ADE20K mIoU   MS-COCO AP
                                                       labels produced by DINO backbones with
 Pre-trained by DINO      35.2           22.7
 Fine-tuned by SOHES      39.6           24.4
                                                       different pre-training configurations. A small
                                                       pre-training patch size leads to better fine-
                                                       grained features and high-quality pseudo-labels.

annotations of object parts (e.g., heads and tails of animals) in two datasets, PartImageNet (He et al.,
2022a) and PACO-LVIS (Ramanathan et al., 2023), and summarize the results in Table 1 and Table 5.
Compared with prior self-supervised baselines, SOHES more accurately localizes meaningful parts
of entities, and almost doubles CutLER’s performance on PACO (8.9 AR → 17.1 AR). Impressively,
SOHES outperforms SAM on PartImageNet and is on par with SAM on PACO. The reason is that
SOHES can predict more parts and subparts than SAM (see Figure 14), which are the focus of the
two datasets’ annotations.

4.4   I MPROVED BACKBONE FEATURES
Through our self-instruction and correction phases, we adapt self-supervised representation DINO
to an open-world segmentation model. Consequently, our fine-tuned visual backbone can better fit
into other dense prediction tasks. To test such abilities, we compare a) the ViT-B/8 backbone pre-
trained by DINO and b) the backbone further tuned in SOHES, in downstream tasks of semantic
segmentation on ADE20K and object detection on MS-COCO. The downstream fine-tuning is per-
formed in a minimalistic style, mimicking the linear probing (Chen et al., 2020; He et al., 2020)
in self-supervised representation learning. For semantic segmentation, we directly attach a linear
classifier on the feature maps from ViT-Adapter; for object detection, we attach the simplest Reti-
naNet (Lin et al., 2017) detection head on the ViT-Adapter. We keep the ViT parameters frozen
during the supervised fine-tuning. Table 6 summarizes the results, demonstrating that SOHES can
adapt the ViT-based backbone to generate better features for dense prediction downstream tasks.

4.5   A BLATION STUDY
In this subsection, we ablate the design choices in SOHES on SA-1B, and provide our insights for
future research in self-supervised open-world segmentation. Further details about the choices of
hyper-parameters and model architectures are discussed in Appendix D.
DINO backbone. In recent self-supervised object localization/discovery work (Siméoni et al., 2023;
Wang et al., 2023), researchers prefer the ViT backbone pre-trained by DINO, in particular ViT-B
with patch size 8. We have also observed that a ViT backbone with patch size 8 leads to better mask
quality in SOHES. To investigate this, we use DINO to pre-train ViT-B backbones with varying
patch size and input resolution configurations, with a shorter 100-epoch training schedule (DINO
originally pre-trains on ImageNet (Deng et al., 2009) for 300 epochs). Then, we repeat our self-
exploration phase with these backbones, and the resulting mask quality comparison is summarized
in Figure 7 and Table 7. From this comparison, we can observe that the small patch size is positively
correlated with the mask quality. When the patch size decreases from 32 to 8, the AR significantly
improves. Meanwhile, the input resolution does not influence the mask quality as much. The small
patch size may better support the ViT to capture pixel-aligned details for localizing entites, and thus
is more suited in our self-supervised segmentation task. It is worth noting that we cannot further
reduce the patch size due to computational constraints. Whenever the patch size is halved, ViT needs
to process 4× patches, and perform 16× computation in self-attention. Therefore, the off-the-shelf
DINO ViT-B/8 is the best choice in our task.
Steps in self-exploration. In our self-exploration phase, we have delicately designed a series of
steps to generate, select, and refine the pseudo-labels. We summarize the impact of the design
choices in Table 2. In the first global clustering step, if we use one fixed merging threshold θmerge , a
larger θmerge leads to more masks per image and better coverage of entities (increasing AR), and also
introduces noises (oscillating AP). We choose to mix the results with different thresholds together


                                                   8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



Table 2: Impact of each step in self-exploration. We mix the global clustering results from mul-
tiple merging thresholds, adopt the local re-clustering, and use the off-the-shelf CascadePSP mask
refinement module to obtain the best initial pseudo-labels.

                                                                Time/Img             Mask Quality
 Step                    Choice                   Masks/Img
                                                                  (sec)     AP    ARS ARM ARL           AR
                     θmerge = 0.1                     1           4.9       0.2   0.0    0.0     0.3    0.1
                     θmerge = 0.2                     3           4.9       0.8   0.1    0.1     0.6    0.3
                     θmerge = 0.3                     9           4.5       0.9   0.4    0.6     2.0    1.0
    1                θmerge = 0.4                    23           3.8       0.6   0.7    1.5     5.4    2.6
                     θmerge = 0.5                    58           2.7       1.4   1.2    3.4     11.1   5.4
                     θmerge = 0.6                    131          2.2       0.6   1.5    6.0     15.3   8.1
                     Mix w/ NMS                      148          5.3       1.1   1.9    6.5     17.2   9.1
    2             w/ local re-clustering             115          8.4       2.0   5.1    10.1    17.5   11.6
         DenseCRF (Krähenbühl & Koltun, 2011)      61           18.2      4.7   3.5     9.5    20.7   12.0
    3          CRM (Shen et al., 2022)               71           18.7      2.7   4.7    13.5    20.2   14.1
            CascadePSP (Cheng et al., 2020)          101          15.2      4.7   6.0    15.8    22.6   16.4


Table 3: Impact of the dynamic threshold in self-correction. If the vanilla teacher-student learning
is employed in the self-correction phase (row 2), the imbalance between small and large entity
segmentation is intensified which leads to worse overall performance. Our dynamic threshold for
filtering the teacher’s pseudo-labels (row 3) can encourage the student’s predictions for small and
medium entities and improve the overall AR.

                                                                  Mask Quality
              Training
                                                         AP     ARS ARM ARL                AR
              Phase 2                                    12.8    8.0       33.7   43.0    32.6
              Phase 2 + 3 w/o dynamic threshold          10.9    6.3       32.5   45.3    32.5
              Phase 2 + 3 w/ dynamic threshold           12.9    8.6       35.2   42.0    33.3


and remove duplicates, which provides the best AR and only slightly increases the number of masks
compared with the largest θmerge . In the second local re-clustering step, we significantly improve
the recall for small entities, relatively by 168%. This step ensures that our model receives adequate
supervision from small entities. We also improve the overall recall by 2.5 AR. Finally, in the third
refinement step, we adopt CascadePSP (Cheng et al., 2020) because it can best boost the overall
mask quality. The other two options, DenseCRF (Krähenbühl & Koltun, 2011) and CRM (Shen
et al., 2022), are also viable, but they change the pseudo-labels more aggressively, leading to the
removal of many potential entities. Overall, each step in our self-exploration phase contributes to
the high-quality initial pseudo-labels for SOHES. Notably, we can parallelize the processing for
each image and accelerate self-exploration with more compute nodes.
Self-correction. In our self-correction phase, we adopt a teacher-student mutual-learning frame-
work from semi-supervised learning, to continuously improve the segmentation model by itself.
However, as shown in Table 3, the initial attempt of the mutual-learning with a fixed confidence
threshold leads to worse performance. In fact, the imbalanced distribution is reinforced during this
procedure, as indicated by the decreased AR for small and medium entities and increased AR for
larger entities. Therefore, we need a dynamic threshold that allows more small and medium pseudo-
labels from the teacher model, and balances the student’s prediction for entities of different scales.
With the dynamic threshold, we can improve ARS and ARM relatively by 7.5% and 4.5%, with an
acceptable cost of 2.3% ARL . Consequently, the overall AR is improved by 0.7.


5       C ONCLUSION

We present SOHES, a self-supervised approach towards open-world entity segmentation with hi-
erarchical structures. Through three phases of self-evolution, a self-supervised learner is adapted
to an open-world segmentation model. By recognizing and localizing entities and their constituent
parts in an open world with superior mask quality, SOHES substantially closes the gap between
self-supervised and supervised methods, and sets the new state of the art on various datasets.


                                                     9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Acknowledgement. This work was supported in part by NSF Grant 2106825, NIFA Award 2020-
67021-32799, and the Jump ARCHES endowment through the Health Care Engineering Systems
Center. This work used NVIDIA GPUs at NCSA Delta through allocations CIS220014, CIS230012,
and CIS230013 from the Advanced Cyberinfrastructure Coordination Ecosystem: Services & Sup-
port (ACCESS) program, which is supported by NSF Grants #2138259, #2138286, #2138307,
#2137603, and #2138296.

R EFERENCES
Ankan Bansal, Karan Sikka, Gaurav Sharma, Rama Chellappa, and Ajay Divakaran. Zero-shot
  object detection. In ECCV, 2018.

Abhijit Bendale and Terrance Boult. Towards open world recognition. In CVPR, 2015.

Abhijit Bendale and Terrance Boult. Towards open set deep networks. In CVPR, 2016.

Zhaowei Cai and Nuno Vasconcelos. Cascade R-CNN: Delving into high quality object detection.
  In CVPR, 2018.

Shengcao Cao, Dhiraj Joshi, Liang-Yan Gui, and Yu-Xiong Wang. HASSOD: Hierarchical adaptive
  self-supervised object detection. In NeurIPS, 2023.

Mathilde Caron, Hugo Touvron, Ishan Misra, Hervé Jégou, Julien Mairal, Piotr Bojanowski, and
 Armand Joulin. Emerging properties in self-supervised vision transformers. In ICCV, 2021.

Liang-Chieh Chen, George Papandreou, Iasonas Kokkinos, Kevin Murphy, and Alan L Yuille.
  DeepLab: Semantic image segmentation with deep convolutional nets, atrous convolution, and
  fully connected crfs. TPAMI, 40(4):834–848, 2017.

Ting Chen, Simon Kornblith, Mohammad Norouzi, and Geoffrey Hinton. A simple framework for
  contrastive learning of visual representations. In ICML, 2020.

Zhe Chen, Yuchen Duan, Wenhai Wang, Junjun He, Tong Lu, Jifeng Dai, and Yu Qiao. Vision
  transformer adapter for dense predictions. In ICLR, 2022.

Bowen Cheng, Ishan Misra, Alexander G Schwing, Alexander Kirillov, and Rohit Girdhar. Masked-
  attention mask transformer for universal image segmentation. In CVPR, 2022.

Ho Kei Cheng, Jihoon Chung, Yu-Wing Tai, and Chi-Keung Tang. CascadePSP: Toward class-
  agnostic and very high-resolution segmentation via global and local refinement. In CVPR, 2020.

Jia Deng, Wei Dong, Richard Socher, Li-Jia Li, Kai Li, and Li Fei-Fei. ImageNet: A large-scale
   hierarchical image database. In CVPR, 2009.

Akshay Dhamija, Manuel Gunther, Jonathan Ventura, and Terrance Boult. The overlooked elephant
  of object detection: Open set. In WACV, 2020.

Alexey Dosovitskiy, Lucas Beyer, Alexander Kolesnikov, Dirk Weissenborn, Xiaohua Zhai, Thomas
  Unterthiner, Mostafa Dehghani, Matthias Minderer, Georg Heigold, Sylvain Gelly, Jakob Uszko-
  reit, and Neil Houlsby. An image is worth 16x16 words: Transformers for image recognition at
  scale. In ICLR, 2020.

Golnaz Ghiasi, Yin Cui, Aravind Srinivas, Rui Qian, Tsung-Yi Lin, Ekin D Cubuk, Quoc V Le, and
  Barret Zoph. Simple copy-paste is a strong data augmentation method for instance segmentation.
  In CVPR, 2021.

Agrim Gupta, Piotr Dollar, and Ross Girshick. LVIS: A dataset for large vocabulary instance seg-
  mentation. In CVPR, 2019.

Trevor Hastie, Robert Tibshirani, Jerome H Friedman, and Jerome H Friedman. The elements of
  statistical learning: Data mining, inference, and prediction. Springer, 2009.


                                               10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Ju He, Shuo Yang, Shaokang Yang, Adam Kortylewski, Xiaoding Yuan, Jie-Neng Chen, Shuai Liu,
  Cheng Yang, Qihang Yu, and Alan Yuille. PartImageNet: A large, high-quality dataset of parts.
  In ECCV, 2022a.
Kaiming He, Georgia Gkioxari, Piotr Dollár, and Ross Girshick. Mask R-CNN. In ICCV, 2017.
Kaiming He, Haoqi Fan, Yuxin Wu, Saining Xie, and Ross Girshick. Momentum contrast for
  unsupervised visual representation learning. In CVPR, 2020.
Kaiming He, Xinlei Chen, Saining Xie, Yanghao Li, Piotr Dollár, and Ross Girshick. Masked
  autoencoders are scalable vision learners. In CVPR, 2022b.
Ronghang Hu, Piotr Dollár, Kaiming He, Trevor Darrell, and Ross Girshick. Learning to segment
  every thing. In CVPR, 2018.
Ayush Jaiswal, Yue Wu, Pradeep Natarajan, and Premkumar Natarajan. Class-agnostic object de-
  tection. In WACV, 2021.
K J Joseph, Salman Khan, Fahad Shahbaz Khan, and Vineeth N Balasubramanian. Towards open
  world object detection. In CVPR, 2021.
Tarun Kalluri, Weiyao Wang, Heng Wang, Manmohan Chandraker, Lorenzo Torresani, and Du Tran.
  Open-world instance segmentation: Top-down learning with bottom-up supervision. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2303.05503, 2023.
Dahun Kim, Tsung-Yi Lin, Anelia Angelova, In So Kweon, and Weicheng Kuo. Learning open-
  world object proposals without learning to classify. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, 7(2):
  5453–5460, 2022.
Alexander Kirillov, Kaiming He, Ross Girshick, Carsten Rother, and Piotr Dollár. Panoptic segmen-
  tation. In CVPR, 2019.
Alexander Kirillov, Eric Mintun, Nikhila Ravi, Hanzi Mao, Chloe Rolland, Laura Gustafson, Tete
  Xiao, Spencer Whitehead, Alexander C. Berg, Wan-Yen Lo, Piotr Dollár, and Ross Girshick.
  Segment anything. In ICCV, 2023.
Philipp Krähenbühl and Vladlen Koltun. Efficient inference in fully connected CRFs with Gaussian
  edge potentials. In NeurIPS, 2011.
Tsung-Yi Lin, Michael Maire, Serge Belongie, James Hays, Pietro Perona, Deva Ramanan, Piotr
  Dollár, and C Lawrence Zitnick. Microsoft COCO: Common objects in context. In ECCV, 2014.
Tsung-Yi Lin, Priya Goyal, Ross Girshick, Kaiming He, and Piotr Dollár. Focal loss for dense object
  detection. In ICCV, 2017.
Yang Liu, Idil Esen Zulfikar, Jonathon Luiten, Achal Dave, Deva Ramanan, Bastian Leibe, Aljoša
  Ošep, and Laura Leal-Taixé. Opening up open world tracking. In CVPR, 2022.
Yen-Cheng Liu, Chih-Yao Ma, Zijian He, Chia-Wen Kuo, Kan Chen, Peizhao Zhang, Bichen Wu,
  Zsolt Kira, and Peter Vajda. Unbiased teacher for semi-supervised object detection. In ICLR,
  2020.
Jonathan Long, Evan Shelhamer, and Trevor Darrell. Fully convolutional networks for semantic
  segmentation. In CVPR, 2015.
Lu Qi, Jason Kuen, Yi Wang, Jiuxiang Gu, Hengshuang Zhao, Philip Torr, Zhe Lin, and Jiaya Jia.
  Open-world entity segmentation. TPAMI, 45(7):8743–8756, 2022.
Lu Qi, Jason Kuen, Tiancheng Shen, Jiuxiang Gu, Weidong Guo, Jiaya Jia, Zhe Lin, and Ming-
  Hsuan Yang. High-quality entity segmentation. In ICCV, 2023.
Vignesh Ramanathan, Anmol Kalia, Vladan Petrovic, Yi Wen, Baixue Zheng, Baishan Guo, Rui
  Wang, Aaron Marquez, Rama Kovvuri, Abhishek Kadian, Amir Mousavi, Yiwen Song, Abhi-
  manyu Dubey, and Dhruv Mahajan. PACO: Parts and attributes of common objects. In CVPR,
  2023.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Walter J Scheirer, Anderson de Rezende Rocha, Archana Sapkota, and Terrance Boult. Toward open
 set recognition. TPAMI, 35(7):1757–1772, 2012.
Tiancheng Shen, Yuechen Zhang, Lu Qi, Jason Kuen, Xingyu Xie, Jianlong Wu, Zhe Lin, and Jiaya
  Jia. High quality segmentation for ultra high-resolution images. In CVPR, 2022.
Jianbo Shi and Jitendra Malik. Normalized cuts and image segmentation. TPAMI, 22(8):888–905,
   2000.
Oriane Siméoni, Gilles Puy, Huy V Vo, Simon Roburin, Spyros Gidaris, Andrei Bursuc, Patrick
  Pérez, Renaud Marlet, and Jean Ponce. Localizing objects with self-supervised transformers and
  no labels. In BMVC, 2021.
Oriane Siméoni, Chloé Sekkat, Gilles Puy, Antonı́n Vobeckỳ, Éloi Zablocki, and Patrick Pérez.
  Unsupervised object localization: Observing the background to discover objects. In CVPR, 2023.
Antti Tarvainen and Harri Valpola. Mean teachers are better role models: Weight-averaged consis-
  tency targets improve semi-supervised deep learning results. In NeurIPS, 2017.
Jasper RR Uijlings, Koen EA Van De Sande, Theo Gevers, and Arnold WM Smeulders. Selective
  search for object recognition. IJCV, 104:154–171, 2013.
Huy V Vo, Francis Bach, Minsu Cho, Kai Han, Yann LeCun, Patrick Pérez, and Jean Ponce. Unsu-
  pervised image matching and object discovery as optimization. In CVPR, 2019.
Huy V Vo, Patrick Pérez, and Jean Ponce. Toward unsupervised, multi-object discovery in large-
  scale image collections. In ECCV, 2020.
Van Huy Vo, Elena Sizikova, Cordelia Schmid, Patrick Pérez, and Jean Ponce. Large-scale unsuper-
  vised object discovery. In NeurIPS, 2021.
Weiyao Wang, Matt Feiszli, Heng Wang, and Du Tran. Unidentified video objects: A benchmark
 for dense, open-world segmentation. In ICCV, 2021.
Weiyao Wang, Matt Feiszli, Heng Wang, Jitendra Malik, and Du Tran. Open-world instance seg-
 mentation: Exploiting pseudo ground truth from learned pairwise affinity. In CVPR, 2022a.
Xinlong Wang, Zhiding Yu, Shalini De Mello, Jan Kautz, Anima Anandkumar, Chunhua Shen, and
  Jose M Alvarez. FreeSOLO: Learning to segment objects without annotations. In CVPR, 2022b.
Xudong Wang, Rohit Girdhar, Stella X Yu, and Ishan Misra. Cut and learn for unsupervised object
  detection and instance segmentation. In CVPR, 2023.
Yangtao Wang, Xi Shen, Yuan Yuan, Yuming Du, Maomao Li, Shell Xu Hu, James L Crowley, and
  Dominique Vaufreydaz. TokenCut: Segmenting objects in images and videos with self-supervised
  transformer and normalized cut. In CVPR, 2022c.
Xingyu Xie, Pan Zhou, Huan Li, Zhouchen Lin, and Shuicheng Yan. Adan: Adaptive nesterov
  momentum algorithm for faster optimizing deep models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.06677, 2022.
Jiarui Xu, Shalini De Mello, Sifei Liu, Wonmin Byeon, Thomas Breuel, Jan Kautz, and Xiaolong
   Wang. GroupViT: Semantic segmentation emerges from text supervision. In CVPR, 2022.
Bolei Zhou, Hang Zhao, Xavier Puig, Sanja Fidler, Adela Barriuso, and Antonio Torralba. Scene
  parsing through ADE20K dataset. In CVPR, 2017.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A    I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS

Self-exploration. We use DINO (Caron et al., 2021) pre-trained ViT-B/8 as the feature extractor
to generate patch-level visual features. During the global clustering step, we first resize unlabeled
images to resolution S × S = 1, 024 × 1, 024, and cluster 8 × 8 patches with merging thresholds
{θmerge,t }m
           t=1 = {0.6, 0.5, 0.4, 0.3, 0.2, 0.1}, which are decided based on the number of pseudo-
labels (see Figure 8). Then in the local re-clustering step, we further investigate regions smaller than
θsmall % = 1/1, 024 of the total image area, and crop local images around them. The local image is
resized to S ′ × S ′ = 256 × 256 and its subregions are clustered. In the next step, we use the off-
the-shelf CascadePSP (Cheng et al., 2020) model to refine the masks. In the final step of hierarchy
analysis, the coverage threshold is set to θcover % = 90%.
Self-instruction. We learn a segmentation model composed of DINO (Caron et al., 2021) pre-
trained ViT-B/8, ViT-Adapter (Chen et al., 2022), Mask2Former (Cheng et al., 2022), and our an-
cestor prediction head. The model is trained on 8 compute nodes, each equipped with 8 NVIDIA
A100 GPUs. The total batch size is 128, and the number of training steps is 40,000. We optimize
the model with the Adan optimizer (Xie et al., 2022) and a base learning rate of 0.0008. The total
training time is about 3 days.
Self-correction. The teacher-student mutual learning starts after the self-instruction phase. It trains
the model for additional 5,000 iterations. The teacher is updated as the exponential moving average
of the student, with momentum m = 0.9995. The loss terms from the initial pseudo-labels and
the teacher’s pseudo-labels are weighted equally. In the dynamic threshold, we set θscore, large =
0.7, θscore, small = 0.3, γ = 200.


B    D EFICIENCY OF AP M ETRIC IN O PEN - WORLD S EGMENTATION

The MS-COCO (Lin et al., 2014) style average precision (AP) is a prevalent metric for evaluating
object detection and instance segmentation models in the traditional closed-world setting with a
pre-defined scope of categories. However, for the open-world segmentation task, the AP metric
becomes misleading and cannot accurately reflect the open-world model’s true performance: When
evaluating open-world segmentation models (which try to segment “everything”) on datasets with
closed-world annotations (such as MS-COCO/LVIS which only include a pre-defined, limited set
of entity classes), AP would penalize model predictions that are actually valid entities, but just not
annotated by the dataset.
Consequently, when the dataset annotations cannot cover all entities, AP becomes misleading for
judging the performance of open-world models. As an example, the AP of SAM (Kirillov et al.,
2023) is lower than CutLER (Wang et al., 2023) on MS-COCO (6.1 vs. 9.8, Table 4) and PartIm-
ageNet (3.4 vs. 5.3, Table 5), which definitely cannot imply SAM is a model inferior to CutLER.
The lower AP of SAM is due to insufficient annotations in these two datasets, not the capability
of SAM. Meanwhile, on datasets which explicitly try to mitigate these annotation limitations like
SA-1B (Kirillov et al., 2023), AP can be more reliable than on traditional closed-world datasets
like MS-COCO (Lin et al., 2014). For instance, AP on SA-1B (the most densely annotated dataset
evaluated in our work, see Table 4) matches qualitative comparison and follows the same trend as
AR, and our AP (12.9) significantly surpasses CutLER’s AP (7.8). Prior work (Cao et al., 2023)
has made a similar observation about the deficiency of MS-COCO AP evaluation in the context of
self-supervised object detection.
In general, we choose the average recall (AR) as the main metric instead of AP, because AR does
not penalize valid open-world predictions. Note that this choice of AR over AP is also commonly
adopted in the open-world literature. Examples include (but are not limited to) detection (Kim et al.,
2022), segmentation (Wang et al., 2022a), and tracking (Liu et al., 2022).


C    A DDITIONAL E VALUATION R ESULTS

We provide additional evaluation results with more metrics in Table 4 and Table 5, as a supplement
to Table 1 in the main paper.


                                                  13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



Table 4: Detailed zero-shot evaluation results on image datasets with annotations of whole entities.

                                                           Mask Quality
             Method                               AP     ARS ARM ARL              AR
                                   MS-COCO (Lin et al., 2014)
             SAM (Kirillov et al., 2023)      6.1     33.4    59.6        64.1   49.6
             FreeSOLO (Wang et al., 2022b)    4.3      0.5    11.5        31.2   11.6
             CutLER (Wang et al., 2023)       9.8     13.1    31.6        49.3   28.1
             HASSOD (Cao et al., 2023)        6.0     14.0    34.1        45.2   28.3
             SOHES (Ours)                     2.1     19.8    31.0        48.8   30.5
                                     LVIS (Gupta et al., 2019)
             SAM (Kirillov et al., 2023)         6.7      31.1    71.3    74.6   46.1
             FreeSOLO (Wang et al., 2022b)       1.9       0.2     9.2    31.7    5.9
             CutLER (Wang et al., 2023)          3.6      11.3    31.1    46.2   20.2
             HASSOD (Cao et al., 2023)           4.2      12.7    36.1    47.8   22.5
             SOHES (Ours)                        1.9      19.8    39.4    59.2   29.1
                                   ADE20K (Zhou et al., 2017)
             SAM (Kirillov et al., 2023)      7.8     31.6    59.2        62.5   45.8
             FreeSOLO (Wang et al., 2022b)    2.3      0.5     9.3        27.1    7.3
             CutLER (Wang et al., 2023)       5.2     15.3    34.7        44.5   26.3
             HASSOD (Cao et al., 2023)        7.0     16.2    36.7        46.7   27.8
             SOHES (Ours)                     2.6     21.8    37.2        49.0   31.1
                                    EntitySeg (Qi et al., 2023)
             SAM (Kirillov et al., 2023)        14.8 11.0         25.0    55.6   45.9
             FreeSOLO (Wang et al., 2022b)       3.0       0.1     1.2    10.7    8.0
             CutLER (Wang et al., 2023)          7.7       6.1    15.3    27.2   23.1
             HASSOD (Cao et al., 2023)           6.1       7.6    20.1    30.2   26.2
             SOHES (Ours)                        5.0       9.1    21.6    39.6   33.5
                                   SA-1B (Kirillov et al., 2023)
             SAM (Kirillov et al., 2023)        38.9 20.0        59.9     82.2   60.8
             FreeSOLO (Wang et al., 2022b)       1.5      0.0     0.2      6.9    2.2
             CutLER (Wang et al., 2023)          7.8      4.9    13.9     28.5   17.0
             HASSOD (Cao et al., 2023)          13.8 12.9        22.8     38.3   26.0
             SOHES (Ours)                       12.9      8.6    35.2     42.0   33.3


Table 5: Detailed zero-shot evaluation results on image datasets with annotations of object parts.

                                                           Mask Quality
              Method                              AP    ARS ARM ARL              AR
                                 PartImageNet (He et al., 2022a)
              SAM (Kirillov et al., 2023)       3.4 25.4       29.3      28.5    28.3
              FreeSOLO (Wang et al., 2022b) 3.3        0.6      7.7      26.4    13.8
              CutLER (Wang et al., 2023)        5.3 13.2       26.5      38.1    28.7
              HASSOD (Cao et al., 2023)         4.5 19.0       32.9      38.7    32.6
              SOHES (Ours)                      1.2 30.3       32.4      42.3    36.0
                             PACO-LVIS (Ramanathan et al., 2023)
              SAM (Kirillov et al., 2023)   1.0 11.9        34.6         41.1    18.1
              FreeSOLO (Wang et al., 2022b) 0.2    0.1       5.8         21.3     2.4
              CutLER (Wang et al., 2023)    0.2    5.0      18.7         25.1     8.9
              HASSOD (Cao et al., 2023)     0.4    6.4      24.2         31.4    11.4
              SOHES (Ours)                  0.4 12.0        29.0         41.9    17.1


                                                14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D                          A DDITIONAL A BLATION S TUDY R ESULTS

Since SOHES is a self-supervised approach, we do not base our selection of hyper-parameters on a
posteriori model performance. Instead, we choose hyper-parameters by considering simple criteria
such as computation constraints or small-scale experiments. In this section, we detail the design
choices in SOHES.
Merging thresholds. In the first step of our self-exploration phase, we cluster patches into coherent
regions and stop at pre-set merging thresholds θmerge,1 > · · · > θmerge,m . We choose these thresholds
based on a practical computation constraint: pseudo-labels per image. When there are too many
pseudo-labels, data loading, augmentation, and pre-processing would become a bottleneck in model
training. Therefore, we control the number of pseudo-labels per image to be under 200. As shown in
Figure 8, the quantity of pseudo-labels grows significantly when the merging threshold is larger. In
order not to exceed 200 masks per image, we set the merging thresholds as 0.6, 0.5, 0.4, 0.3, 0.2, 0.1.

                          300
                          250
Pseudo-labels per image


                          200                                                    Figure 8: Relation between the number of
                                                                                 pseudo-labels and the merging thresholds.
                          150                                                    As the merging threshold increases, the number
                                                                                 of pseudo-labels rapidly grows. To control the
                          100                                                    number of pseudo-labels per image, we choose
                          50                                                     merging thresholds no larger than 0.6.
                           0
                                    0.2        0.4        0.6         0.8
                                           Merging threshold

Local re-clustering threshold. In the second step of self-exploration, we use a threshold θsmall %
to select small regions that require a local re-examination. Pseudo-labels with areas smaller than
θsmall % of the whole image are processed via local re-clustering, and this step improves the coverage
of small entities. We choose θsmall % = 1/1, 024 because 1) the commonly adopted MS-COCO style
evaluation (Lin et al., 2014) defines small objects as objects whose area is smaller than 32×32 pixels;
2) our images are resized to 1, 024 × 1, 024 in the self-exploration phase; 3) (32 × 32)/(1, 024 ×
1, 024) = 1/1, 024. In fact, if the threshold θsmall % is larger, the coverage of small entities could not
be significantly improved further, and the processing time would be longer, as shown in Table 6a.

                                           Table 6: Impact of hyper-parameters θsmall % and θcover %.

(a) Choice of the local re-clustering threshold θsmall %. We                          (b) Choice of the coverage threshold θcover %.
set θsmall % = 1/1, 024 by considering the relative areas of                          We set θcover % = 0.9 for robust hierarchi-
small entities. Using a larger θsmall % does not further improve                      cal relations between our pseudo-labels. When
the coverage of small entities, but introduces additional com-                        θcover % varies within [0.6, 0.95], the hierarchi-
putation overheads.                                                                   cal relations are stable.

                                θsmall %             ARS        Time/Img (sec)                            Relative Change
                                                                                              θcover %
                                                                                                          w.r.t. θcover = 0.9
      0 (No local re-clustering)                      1.9            0.0
              1/2, 048                                4.3            6.0                        0.6                9%
              1/1, 024                                5.1             8.4                       0.7                7%
               1/512                                  5.1            10.0                       0.8                4%
                                                                                                0.85               2%
                                                                                                0.9                0%
                                                                                                0.95               4%
                                                                                                1.0               36%

Coverage threshold. In the final step of self-exploration, we analyze the hierarchical relations be-
tween pseudo-labels. The pairwise test involves a coverage threshold θcover %. For robustness, we


                                                                            15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


choose θcover % = 0.9 to allow an ancestor pseudo-label to not necessarily cover all of its descen-
dants’ pixels. Indeed, when θcover % ∈ [0.6, 0.95], the induced hierarchical relations are relatively
stable, as shown in Table 6b.
DINO backbone. As a supplement to Figure 7 in the main paper, Table 7 summarizes the detailed
statistics of the mask quality of initial pseudo-labels produced by DINO backbones pre-trained with
different configurations. It also includes the mask quality after each self-exploration step.



Table 7: Comparison of DINO backbones pre-trained with different configurations. A small
pre-training patch size is critical for producing fine-grained visual features and high-quality pseudo-
label masks. The steps 1, 2, and 3 refer to global clustering, local re-clustering, and mask refinement,
respectively.

           Pre-training                                               Mask Quality
                                   Step    Masks/Image
      Resolution Patch Size                                 AP     ARS ARM ARL               AR
                                     1          144         0.8     1.6      5.3     14.7     7.6
          224            8           2          124         1.3     4.1      7.8     15.0     9.4
                                     3          105         3.2     5.0     12.6     20.6    13.8
                                     1          108         0.8     1.3      4.5     13.0     6.6
          224           16           2           75         1.7     3.5      6.9     13.3     8.3
                                     3           65         4.0     4.2     11.3     17.0    11.9
                                     1           43         0.6     0.7     2.6      5.8     3.3
          224           32           2           17         0.9     0.3     2.2      5.9     3.0
                                     3           14         1.8     0.4     3.4      6.6     3.9
                                     1          114         1.0     1.2      4.2     14.6     6.9
          448            8           2          103         1.6     3.1      6.4     14.8     8.5
                                     3           82         3.4     3.9     10.8     19.1    12.2
                                     1          102         0.8     1.3      3.9     13.1     6.3
          448           16           2           84         1.5     3.8      6.7     13.4     8.3
                                     3           71         3.8     4.6     10.8     17.1    11.8
                                     1           48         0.7     0.8     2.2      7.1     3.5
          448           32           2           25         1.0     1.1     2.5      7.2     3.7
                                     3           20         2.4     1.4     4.1      8.3     4.9


Segmentation head. In SOHES, we choose Mask2Former (Cheng et al., 2022) as our segmenta-
tion head mainly for making hierarchical predictions. In Cascade Mask R-CNN (Cai & Vasconcelos,
2018) used by prior work (Wang et al., 2023; Cao et al., 2023), each proposal is predicted indepen-
dently, and therefore, analyzing hierarchical relations between entities would be challenging. In
contrast, the attention modules in Mask2Former allow information exchange among queries, so we
can build our ancestor prediction head on Mask2Former (see Figure 4). For a more comprehensive
comparison with prior work, we train a segmentation model based on Cascade Mask R-CNN using
SOHES without the entity hierarchy. As shown in Table 8, this model still significantly outperforms
CutLER and HASSOD with the same segmentation head.
When using the Mask2Former segmentation head, we can extend it with our proposed ancestor pre-
diction head to perform the additional task of hierarchical relation predictions. This module can
be considered as an add-on to the original segmentation head with minimal influence on the mask
quality, since this ancestor prediction head operates in parallel to the mask prediction head. In fact,
the segmentation performance of a SOHES model trained without the ancestor prediction head is
close to that of the standard SOHES model (e.g., on SA-1B, 33.0 Mask AR without ancestor predic-
tion vs. 33.3 Mask AR with ancestor prediction), but the former model cannot predict hierarchical
relations.


                                                  16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 8: Comparison of models trained with the Cascade Mask R-CNN segmentation head. In
the main paper, we choose the Mask2Former segmentation head to model hierarchical relations be-
tween predictions, while prior methods usually use Cascade Mask R-CNN. With the same Cascade
Mask R-CNN segmentation head, SOHES still outperforms prior work.


                                                                          Mask Quality (AR)
 Method                         Segmentation Head
                                                                       LVIS EntitySeg SA-1B
 CutLER (Wang et al., 2023)                                            20.2       23.1       17.0
                                Cascade Mask R-CNN
 HASSOD (Cao et al., 2023)                                             22.5       26.2       26.0
                                (Cai & Vasconcelos, 2018)
 SOHES (Ours)                                                          27.0       29.2       31.9
 SOHES (Ours)                   Mask2Former (Cheng et al., 2022)       29.1       33.5       33.3



E    L IMITATIONS
In Figure 9, we visualize some failure cases of SOHES: 1) When there are discontinuous entities
or occlusion (e.g., sky separated by foreground objects), SOHES may not correctly associate the
disconnected segments of the same entity. The reason is that in the self-exploration phase, we only
merge adjacent regions. The model rarely observes one entity separated in multiple disconnected re-
gions. We observe that the copy-paste data augmentation (Ghiasi et al., 2021) can simulate occlusion
and partially mitigate this issue, so we have adopted such data augmentation in SOHES training.
2) SOHES often produces imprecise segmentation masks for letters and characters. The boundary
is not perfectly aligned with strokes and the mask is often larger than the letter. 3) When there are
blurry backgrounds, SOHES tends not to predict a mask for the background. Similar failure cases
can be observed when applying prior methods (Wang et al., 2023; Cao et al., 2023; Kirillov et al.,
2023) to images affected by occlusion, text overlays, or blurring. We aim to resolve these issues
with improved pseudo-labeling strategies in future work.


Figure 9: Limitations of SOHES. Our method sometimes fail to accurately segment discontinuous
or occluded entities (left), letters or characters (middle), and blurred background (right).


F   Q UALITATIVE R ESULTS
In Figures 10, 11, 12, 13, and 14, we visualize the segmentation results of SOHES, and qualitatively
compare SOHES with the supervised model SAM on the evaluation datasets we have used in the
main paper.



                                                 17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 10: Qualitative results on MS-COCO images. In each group of images, from top to bottom
we show the original input image, segmentation by SAM (Kirillov et al., 2023), and segmentation
by SOHES. As a self-supervised method, SOHES can achieve results that are comparable to those
produced by the supervised model SAM.


                                               18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 11: Qualitative results on ADE20K images. In each group of images, from top to bottom
we show the original input image, segmentation by SAM (Kirillov et al., 2023), and segmentation
by SOHES. As a self-supervised method, SOHES can achieve results that are comparable to those
produced by the supervised model SAM.


                                               19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 12: Qualitative results on EntitySeg images. In each group of images, from top to bottom
we show the original input image, segmentation by SAM (Kirillov et al., 2023), and segmentation
by SOHES. As a self-supervised method, SOHES can achieve results that are comparable to those
produced by the supervised model SAM.


                                               20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 13: Qualitative results on SA-1B images. In each group of images, from top to bottom
we show the original input image, segmentation by SAM (Kirillov et al., 2023), and segmentation
by SOHES. As a self-supervised method, SOHES can achieve results that are comparable to those
produced by the supervised model SAM.


                                               21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 14: Qualitative results on PartImageNet images. In each group of images, from top to
bottom we show the original input image, segmentation by SAM (Kirillov et al., 2023), and segmen-
tation by SOHES. As a self-supervised method, SOHES can achieve results that are comparable to
those produced by the supervised model SAM.


                                               22
