Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFLECTED S CHR OМҲDINGER B RIDGE
FOR C ONSTRAINED G ENERATIVE M ODELING

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT

         Diffusion models have become the go-to method for large-scale generative models
         in real-world applications. These applications often involve data distributions con-
         fined within bounded domains, typically requiring ad-hoc thresholding techniques
         for boundary enforcement. Reflected diffusion models (Lou & Ermon, 2023) aim to
         enhance generalizability by generating the data distribution through a backward pro-
         cess governed by reflected Brownian motion. However, reflected diffusion models
         may not easily adapt to diverse domains without the derivation of proper diffeo-
         morphic mappings and do not guarantee optimal transport properties. To overcome
         these limitations, we introduce the Reflected SchroМҲdinger Bridge algorithmвҖ”an
         entropy-regularized optimal transport approach tailored for generating data within
         diverse bounded domains. We derive elegant reflected forward-backward stochas-
         tic differential equations with Neumann and Robin boundary conditions, extend
         divergence-based likelihood training to bounded domains, and explore natural
         connections to entropic optimal transport for the study of approximate linear con-
         vergenceвҖ”a valuable insight for practical training. Our algorithm yields robust
         generative modeling in diverse domains, and its scalability is demonstrated in
         real-world constrained generative modeling through standard image benchmarks.


1    I NTRODUCTION
Iterative refinement is key to the unprecedented success of diffusion models. They exhibit statistical
efficiency (Koehler et al., 2023) and reduced dimensionality dependence (Vono et al., 2022), driving
innovation in image, audio, video, and molecule synthesis (Dhariwal & Nichol, 2022; Ho et al., 2022;
Hoogeboom et al., 2022; Bunne et al., 2023). However, diffusion models do not inherently guarantee
optimal transport properties (Lavenant & Santambrogio, 2022) and often result in slow inference (Ho
et al., 2020; Salimans & Ho, 2022; Lu et al., 2022). Furthermore, the consistent reliance on Gaussian
priors imposes limitations on the application potential and sacrifices the efficiency when the data
distribution significantly deviates from the Gaussian prior.
The predominant method for fast inference originates from the field of optimal transport (OT).
Notably, the (static) iterative proportional fitting (IPF) algorithm (Kullback, 1968; Ruschendorf, 1995)
addresses this challenge by employing alternating projections onto each marginal distribution. This
algorithm has showcased impressive performance in low-dimensional contexts (Chen & Georgiou,
2016; Pavon et al., 2021; Caluya & Halder, 2022). In contrast, the SchroМҲdinger bridge (SB) problem
(LeМҒonard, 2014) introduces a principled framework for the dynamic treatment of entropy-regularized
optimal transport (EOT) (Villani, 2003; PeyreМҒ & Cuturi, 2019). Recent advances (De Bortoli et al.,
2021; Chen et al., 2022b) have pushed the frontier of IPFs to (ultra-)high-dimensional generative
models using deep neural networks (DNNs) and have generated straighter trajectories; Additionally,
SBs based on Gaussian process (Vargas et al., 2021) demonstrates great promise in robustness and
scalability; Bridge matching methods (Shi et al., 2023; Peluchetti, 2023) also offers promising
alternatives for solving complex dynamic SB problems.
Real-world data, such as pixel values in images, often exhibits bounded support. To address this
challenge, a common practice involves the use of thresholding techniques (Ho et al., 2020) to guide
the sampling process towards the intended domain of simple structures. Lou & Ermon (2023)
introduced reflected diffusion models that employ reflected Brownian motion on constrained domains
such as hypercubes and simplex. However, constrained domains on general Euclidean space with


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


optimal transport guarantee are still not well developed. Moreover, Lou & Ermon (2023) relies on a
uniform prior based on variance-exploding (VE) SDE to derive closed-form scores, and the popular
variance-preserving (VP) SDE is not fully exploited.


         Figure 1: Constrained generative modeling via reflected forward-backward SDEs.

To bridge this gap, we propose the Reflected SchroМҲdinger Bridge (SB) to model the transport
between any smooth distributions with bounded support. We derive novel reflected forward-backward
stochastic differential equations (reflected FB-SDEs) with Neumann and Robin boundary conditions
and extend the divergence-based likelihood training to ensure its confinement within any smooth
boundaries. We further establish connections between reflected FB-SDEs and EOT on bounded
domains, where the latter facilitates the theoretical understanding by analyzing the convergence of
the dual, potentials, and couplings on bounded domains. Notably, our analysis provides the first non-
geometric approach to study the uniform-in-time stability w.r.t. the marginals and is noteworthy in its
own right. We empirically validate our algorithm on 2D examples and standard image benchmarks,
showcasing its promising performance in generative modeling over constrained domains. The flexible
choices on the priors allow us to choose freely between VP-SDE and VE-SDE.
Regarding related works on constrained sampling and generation, we refer readers to Appendix A.

2    P RELIMINARIES
Diffusion models (Song et al., 2021b) have achieved tremendous progress in real-world applications,
such as image and text-to-image generation. However, real-world data (such as the bounded pixel
space in images) often comes with bounded support. As an illustration within the computer vision
field, practitioners often employ ad-hoc thresholding techniques to project the data to the desired
space, which inevitably affects the theoretical understanding and hinders future updates.
To generalize these techniques in a principled framework, Lou & Ermon (2023) utilized reflected
Brownian motion to train explicit score-matching loss in bounded domains. They first perturb the
data with a sequence of noise and then propose to generate the constrained data distribution through
the corresponding reflected backward process (Williams, 1987; Cattiaux, 1988).
           dxt = f (xt , t)dt + g(t)dwt + dLt ,                         x0 вҲј pdata вҠӮ в„Ұ           (1a)
                                   2

           dxt = f (xt , t) вҲ’ g(t) вҲҮ log pt (xt ) dt + g(t)dwt + dLt , xT вҲј pprior вҠӮ в„Ұ           (1b)
where в„Ұ is the state space in Rd ; f (xt , t) and g(t) are the vector field and the diffusion term,
respectively; wt is the Brownian motion; wt is another independent Brownian motion from time T
to 0; Lt and Lt are the local time to confine the particle within the domain and are defined in Eq.(18);
the marginal density at time t for the forward process (1a) is denoted by pt . вҲҮ log pt (В·) is the score
function at time t, which is often approximated by a neural network model sОё (В·, t). Given proper
score approximations, the data distribution pdata can be generated from the backward process (1b).

3    R EFLECTED S CHR OМҲDINGER BRIDGE
Although reflected diffusion models have demonstrated empirical success in image applications on
hypercubes, extensions to general domains with optimal-transport guarantee remain limited (Lavenant
& Santambrogio, 2022). Notably, the forward process (1a) requires a long time T to approach the
prior distribution, which inevitably leads to a slow inference (De Bortoli et al., 2021). To solve that
problem, the dynamic SB problem on a bounded domain в„Ұ proposes to solve
                                             inf    KL(PвҲҘQ),                                        (2)
                                        PвҲҲD(ВөвӢҶ ,ОҪвӢҶ )



                                                   2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


where the coupling P belongs to the path space D(ВөвӢҶ , ОҪвӢҶ ) вҠӮ C(в„Ұ, [0, T ]) with marginal measures
ВөвӢҶ at time t = 0 and ОҪвӢҶ at t = T ; Q is the prior path measure, such as the measure induced by the
path of the reflected Brownian motion or Ornstein-Uhlenbeck (OU) process. From the perspective of
stochastic control, the dynamical SBP aims to minimize the cost along the reflected process
                                         Z T
                                              1             2
                                inf E           вҲҘu(xt , t)вҲҘ2 dt
                                uвҲҲU        0 2
                                                              вҲҡ
                 s.t. dxt = [f (xt , t) + g(t)u(xt , t)] dt + 2Оөg(t)dwt + n(xt )dLt ,           (3)
                        x0 вҲј ВөвӢҶ , xT вҲј ОҪвӢҶ , xt вҲҲ в„Ұ, for any t вҲҲ [0, T ]
where U is a set of control functions; Оө is the entropic regularizer for EOT; n(x) is an inner unit normal
vector at x вҲҲ вҲӮв„Ұ and 0 for x вҲҲ в„Ұ; the expectation follows from the density ПҒ(x, t). Simulation
demos of the reflected SDEs are shown in Figure 2.
To derive the reflected FB-SDEs and training scheme, we first present standard assumptions on the
regularity properties (Гҳksendal, 2003), as well as the smoothness of measure (Chen et al., 2022a;b)
and boundary (Lamperski, 2021):
Assumption A1 (Regularity on drift and diffusion). The drift f and diffusion term g > 0 satisfy the
Lipschitz and linear growth condition.
Assumption A2 (Smooth boundary). The domain в„Ұ is bounded and has a smooth boundary.

Extensions to general convex domains (with corners) are also studied in Lamperski (2021).
Assumption A3 (Smooth measure). The probability measures ВөвӢҶ and ОҪвӢҶ are smooth in the sense
that the energy functions UвӢҶ = вҲ’вҲҮ log dВө                      dОҪвӢҶ
                                      dx and VвӢҶ = вҲ’вҲҮ log dx are differentiable.
                                        вӢҶ


3.1   R EFLECTED FORWARD - BACKWARD STOCHASTIC DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS

Following the tradition in mechanics (Pavliotis, 2014), we rewrite the reflected SBP as follows
                                     Z TZ
                                            1
                                 inf          ПҒвҲҘuвҲҘ22 dxdt
                                 uвҲҲU 0    в„Ұ 2
                                  вҲӮПҒ
                            s.t.     + вҲҮ В· J|xвҲҲв„Ұ = 0, J, n |xвҲҲвҲӮв„Ұ = 0,                           (4)
                                  вҲӮt
where J is the probability flux of continuity equation J вүЎ ПҒ(f + gu) вҲ’ Оөg 2 вҲҮПҒ (Pavliotis, 2014).
We next solve the objectives with a Lagrangian multiplier: П•(x, t). Applying the Stokes theorem
with details presented in appendix B.1, we have
              Z TZ                                          Z                Z TZ
                         1     2     вҲӮП•
L(ПҒ, u, П•) =               ПҒвҲҘuвҲҘ2 вҲ’ ПҒ     вҲ’ вҹЁвҲҮП•, Jвҹ© dxdt +       П•ПҒ|Tt=0 dx +          J, n dПғ(x)dt .
                         2            вҲӮt
              |0 в„Ұ                 {z                  }    | в„Ұ {z       }   | 0 вҲӮв„Ұ {z           }
                                  L(ПҒ,u,П•)                       constant term w.r.t. u    :=0 by Eq.(4)


Minimizing L with respect to u, we can obtain uвӢҶ = gвҲҮП•. Further applying the Cole-Hopf transform
вҶ’
вҲ’
 ПҲ (x, t) = exp П•(x,t)

                  2Оө     and setting L(ПҒ, uвӢҶ , П•) = 0, we derive the backward Kolmogorov equation
with Neumann boundary conditions
                                вҶ’
                                вҲ’
                                        2 вҶ’вҲ’        вҶ’
                                                    вҲ’
                          (
                               вҲӮПҲ
                                вҲӮt + Оөg вҲҶ ПҲ + вҹЁвҲҮ ПҲ , f вҹ© = 0         in в„Ұ
                                  вҶ’
                                  вҲ’
                               вҹЁвҲҮ ПҲ , nвҹ© = 0                        on вҲӮв„Ұ.

Next we define вҶҗвҲ’ = ПҒвӢҶ /вҶ’
                ПҶ
                          вҲ’
                           ПҲ , where ПҒвӢҶ is the optimal density of Eq.(3) given uвӢҶ . We arrive at the
forward Kolmogorov equation with the Robin boundary condition
                             вҲӮt вҶҗвҲ’+вҲҮВ· вҶҗ    вҲ’f вҲ’ Оөg 2 вҲҮвҶҗ вҲ’  = 0

                                 ПҶ         ПҶ            ПҶ             in в„Ұ
                               вҶҗ
                               вҲ’        2 вҶҗ вҲ’
                             вҹЁ ПҶ f вҲ’ Оөg вҲҮ ПҶ , nвҹ© = 0                  on вҲӮв„Ұ.

Despite the elegance, solving PDEs in high dimensions often poses significant challenges due to the
curse of dimensionality (Han et al., 2019). To overcome these challenges, we resort to presenting a
set of reflected FB-SDEs:


                                                    3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Theorem 1. Consider a SchroМҲdinger (PDE) system with Neumann and Robin boundary conditions
  ( вҶ’вҲ’
      вҲӮПҲ   вҲ’
           вҶ’            вҲ’
                        вҶ’
         + вҹЁвҲҮ ПҲ , f вҹ© + Оөg 2 вҲҶ ПҲ = 0             вҲ’
                                                 вҶ’
      вҲӮt
       вҶҗ
       вҲ’                                 s.t.   вҲҮ ПҲ , n |xвҲҲвҲӮв„Ұ = 0, f вҶҗ
                                                                     вҲ’ вҲ’ Оөg 2 вҲҮвҶҗ
                                                                     ПҶ         вҲ’, n |
                                                                               ПҶ      xвҲҲвҲӮв„Ұ = 0.         (5)
      вҲӮПҶ
      вҲӮt
         + вҲҮ В· (вҶҗ
                вҲ’f ) вҲ’ Оөg 2 вҲҶвҶҗ
                ПҶ              ПҶвҲ’=0

Solving the PDE system gives rise to the reflected FB-SDEs with xt вҲҲ в„Ұ
            h                         вҶ’
                                      вҲ’        i      вҲҡ
    dxt = f (xt , t) + 2Оөg(t)2 вҲҮ log ПҲ (xt , t) dt + 2Оөg(t)dwt + n(x)dLt , x0 вҲј ВөвӢҶ ,                   (6a)

    dxt = f (xt , t) вҲ’ 2Оөg(t)2 вҲҮ log вҶҗ
                                      вҲ’(x , t)  dt + вҲҡ2Оөg(t)dw + n(x)dL , x вҲј ОҪ .
                                      ПҶ                                                                (6b)
                                           t                    t      t    T     вӢҶ

The connection to the probability flow ODE is also studied and presented in section B.2.


Figure 2: Reflected OU processes (reflected v.s. unconstrained), driven by the same Brownian
motion, excluding the reflections. All boundary curves have properly defined unit vectors.
3.2   L IKELIHOOD TRAINING

It is worth mentioning that the reflected FB-SDE (6) is not directly accessible due to the unknown
                           вҶ’
                           вҲ’
control variables (вҲҮ log ПҲ , вҲҮ log вҶҗ  вҲ’). To tackle this issue, a standard tool is the (nonlinear) Feynman-
                                      ПҶ
Kac formula (Ma & Yong, 2007; Karatzas & Shreve, 1998), which leads to a stochastic representation.
Proposition 1 (Feynman-Kac representation). Assume assumptions A1-A2 hold. вҶҗ                   вҲ’ satisfies a
                                                                                               ПҶ
                                                                                        вҶ’
                                                                                        вҲ’
PDE (5) and xt follows from a diffusion (6a). Define вҶ’       вҲ’
                                                             yt вүЎ вҶ’  вҲ’y (xt , t) = log ПҲ (xt , t) and вҶҗ
                                                                                                      вҲ’
                                                                                                      yt вүЎ
вҶҗвҲ’                вҶҗ
                  вҲ’                вҶҗвҲ’
 y (xt , t) = log ПҶ (xt , t). Then y s admits a stochastic representation
                          Z T
       вҶҗвҲ’        вҶҗвҲ’              1 вҶҗ вҲ’    2       вҶҗвҲ’                вҶҗ
                                                                    вҲ’   вҶ’
                                                                        вҲ’              вҶҗвҲ’
        ys=E yT вҲ’                  вҲҘ z t вҲҘ2 + вҲҮ В· g zt вҲ’ f + вҹЁ z t , z t вҹ© dt вҲ’ d L t xs = xs ,
                            s    2
                                 |                          {z                           }
                                                         О¶(xt ,t)
                                                                  вҶҗвҲ’
on [0, T ] Г— в„Ұ; вҶ’
                вҲ’
                zt вүЎвҶ’
                    вҲ’              y t, вҶҗ
                    z (xt , t) = gвҲҮвҶ’
                                   вҲ’    вҲ’
                                        zt вүЎвҶҗ
                                            вҲ’              y t , d L t = g1 вҹЁвҶҗ
                                            z (xt , t) = gвҲҮвҶҗ
                                                           вҲ’                 вҲ’
                                                                             z t , nt вҹ©dLt .

Sketch of proof The proof primarily relies on Theorem 3 from Chen et al. (2022b) and applies
(generalized) ItoМӮвҖҷs lemma to вҶҗ
                              вҲ’
                              y t using (5) and (6a). The difference is to incorporate the generalized
ItoМӮвҖҷs lemma (Bubeck et al., 2018; Lamperski, 2021) toR address the local time of xt at the boundary
вҲӮв„Ұ. Subsequently, our analysis establishes that вҶҗ вҲ’       s
                                                  y s вҲ’ s1 О¶(xt , t), where s вҲҲ [s1 , T ], is a martingale
within the domain в„Ұ, which concludes our proposition.
A direct application of the proposition is to obtain the log-likelihood вҶҗ
                                                                        вҲ’
                                                                        y 0 given data points x0 . With
                        вҶ’
                        вҲ’  Оё вҶҗвҲ’ Пү                     вҶ’
                                                      вҲ’    вҶҗ
                                                           вҲ’
parametrized models ( z t , z t ) to approximate ( z t , z t ), we can optimize the backward score
function вҶҗвҲ’
          z Пү through the forward loss function L(x ; Пү) in Algorithm 1. Regarding the forward-
            t                                            0
score estimation, similar to Theorem 11 (Chen et al., 2022b), the symmetric property of the reflected
SB also enables to optimize вҶ’ вҲ’
                              z t via the backward loss function L(xT ; Оё).
By the data processing inequality, our loss function provides a lower bound of the log-likelihood,
which resembles the evidence lower bound (ELBO) in variational inference (Song et al., 2021a). We
can expect a smaller variational gap given more accurate parametrized models.
When the domain is taken to be в„Ұ = Rd , the aforementioned solvers become equivalent to the loss
function (18-19) presented in Chen et al. (2022b).

3.3   C ONNECTIONS TO THE IPF ALGORITHM

Similar in spirit to Theorem 3 of Song et al. (2021a), Algorithm 1 results in an elegant half-bridge
solver (ВөвӢҶ вҶ’ ОҪвӢҶ v.s. ВөвӢҶ вҶҗ ОҪвӢҶ ) to approximate the primal formulation (Nutz, 2022) of the dynamic


                                                     4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 1 One iteration of the backward-forward score function solver to optimize (вҶ’      вҲ’
                                                                                            z Оёt , вҶҗ
                                                                                                   вҲ’
                                                                                                   zПүt)
with the reflection implemented in Algorithm 4. We cache the trajectories following De Bortoli et al.
(2021) to avoid expensive computational graphs. In practice, E[log вҶҗ  вҲ’
                                                                      y T ] and E[log вҶ’
                                                                                      вҲ’
                                                                                      y 0 ] are often
omitted to facilitate training (Chen et al., 2022b).
                            Z T
                                                1 вҶҗ вҲ’              вҶҗ
                                                                   вҲ’       вҶ’
                                                                           вҲ’  Оё вҶҗвҲ’              вҶҗ
                                                                                                вҲ’Пү
                вҶҗ вҲ’                                   Пү 2             Пү             Пү

L(x0 ; Пү) =
            E[log y T ] вҲ’         Ext вҲј(6a)       вҲҘ z t вҲҘ2 + gвҲҮ В· z t + вҹЁ z t , z t вҹ© dt + d L t x0 = x0
                                0               2
                             Z T
                    вҶ’
                    вҲ’                          1 вҶ’вҲ’  Оё 2          вҶ’
                                                                  вҲ’ Оё     вҶҗвҲ’ Пү вҶ’
                                                                               вҲ’  Оё           вҶ’
                                                                                              вҲ’Оё
L(xT ; Оё) =       y 0] вҲ’                         вҲҘ z t вҲҘ2 + gвҲҮ В· z t + вҹЁ z t , z t вҹ© dt + d L t xT = xT ,

              E[log
                                  Ext вҲј(6b)
                               0               2
         вҶҗвҲ’      1 вҶҗвҲ’Пү                  вҶ’
                                        вҲ’Оё       1 вҶ’вҲ’Оё
where d L Пү t = g вҹЁ z t , nt вҹ©dLt and d L t = g вҹЁ z t , nt вҹ©dLt . (6a) (respectively, (6b)) is approximated
    вҶ’
    вҲ’                   вҶҗвҲ’
via z Оёt (respectively, z Пүt ).



SchroМҲdinger bridge (2) (De Bortoli et al., 2021; Vargas et al., 2021):
       Dynamic Primal IPF P2k = arg min KL(PвҲҘP2kвҲ’1 ),              P2k+1 = arg min KL(PвҲҘP2k ),           (7)
                                        PвҲҲD(В·,ОҪвӢҶ )                            PвҲҲD(ВөвӢҶ ,В·)

which is also known as the dynamic IPF algorithm (also known as Sinkhorn algorithm) (Ruschendorf,
1995; De Bortoli et al., 2021). Consider the disintegration of the path measure P = ПҖ вҠ— PВөвӢҶ ,ОҪвӢҶ
                                        ZZ
                                 P(В·) =       Px0 ,xT (В·)ПҖ(dx0 , dxT ),                         (8)
                                                 в„Ұ2
where Px0 ,xT вҲҲ PВөвӢҶ ,ОҪвӢҶ is a diffusion bridge from x0 = x0 to xT = xT , ПҖ вҲҲ О (ВөвӢҶ , ОҪвӢҶ ) and the
product space О (ВөвӢҶ , ОҪвӢҶ ) вҠӮ в„Ұ2 denotes the space of couplings with the first and second marginals
following from ВөвӢҶ and ОҪвӢҶ , respectively. Now project the path space D to the product space О . We
have the static IPF algorithm in the primal formulation:
        Static Primal IPF ПҖ2k = arg min KL(ПҖвҲҘПҖ2kвҲ’1 ),            ПҖ2k+1 = arg min KL(ПҖвҲҘПҖ2k ).             (9)
                                       ПҖвҲҲО (В·,ОҪвӢҶ )                           ПҖвҲҲО (ВөвӢҶ ,В·)


4     C ONVERGENCE ANALYSIS VIA ENTROPIC OPTIMAL TRANSPORT
The dynamic IPF algorithm offers an efficient training scheme to fit marginals in high-dimensional
problems. However, the understanding of the convergence remains unclear to the machine learning
community. To get around this issue, we leverage the progress from the static optimal transport on
bounded domains and costs (Carlier, 2022; Chen et al., 2016; Deligiannidis et al., 2021).
Our analysis is illustrated as follows: We first draw connections between dynamic and static (primal)
IPFs by projecting the path space D to the product space О  and then show the equivalence between
the dual and primal formulations. Next, we perturb the marginals (in terms of energy functions)
and show the approximate linear convergence of the dual, potential, and then static couplings. The
convergence of dynamic couplings can be expected given a reasonable estimate of diffusion bridge.
                              Disintegration                       Equivalence(C.5)
    Dynamic Primal IPF (7) вҶҗвҲ’вҲ’вҲ’вҲ’вҲ’вҲ’вҶ’ Static Primal IPF (9) вҶҗвҲ’вҲ’вҲ’вҲ’вҲ’вҲ’вҲ’вҲ’вҶ’ Static Dual IPF (13)
                                  Projection                          Lemma 1


4.1    E QUIVALENCE BETWEEN DYNAMIC SBP AND S TATIC SBP

Assuming the solutions exist, the disintegration of measures implies that the equivalence of solutions
between the dynamic and static SBPs (LeМҒonard, 2014):
      Dynamic SBP        PвӢҶ = arg min KL(PвҲҘQ) вҮҗвҮ’ ПҖвӢҶ = arg min KL(ПҖвҲҘG),                          Static
                                  PвҲҲD(ВөвӢҶ ,ОҪвӢҶ )                     ПҖвҲҲО (ВөвӢҶ ,ОҪвӢҶ )

where ПҖ (respectively, G) is the projection of the path measure P (respectively, Q) on the product
space at t = 0 and T ; dG вҲқ eвҲ’cОө d(ВөвӢҶ вҠ— ОҪвӢҶ ); cОө is a cost function. Both the dynamic and static SBP
formulations yield structure properties (see the BornвҖҷs formula in LeМҒonard (2014)) and enables to
represent SchroМҲdinger bridges PвӢҶ and ПҖвӢҶ using SchroМҲdinger potentials ПҶвӢҶ and ПҲвӢҶ :
    Dynamic Struture dPвӢҶ = eПҶвӢҶ (x)+ПҲвӢҶ (y) dQ вҮҗвҮ’ dПҖвӢҶ (x, y) = eПҶвӢҶ (x)+ПҲвӢҶ (y) dG.              Static (10)


                                                      5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Moreover, the summation ПҶвӢҶ вҠ• ПҲвӢҶ is unique such that (ПҶвӢҶ + a) вҠ• (ПҲвӢҶ вҲ’ a) is also viable for any a.
This static structural representation establishes a connection between the static SBP and entropic
optimal transport (EOT) with a unit entropy regularizer (Chen et al., 2023), and the latter results in an
efficient scheme to compute the optimal coupling:
                                  ZZ
                           inf          cОө (x, y)ПҖ(dx, dy) + KL(ПҖвҲҘВөвӢҶ вҠ— ОҪвӢҶ ).
                         ПҖвҲҲО (ВөвӢҶ ,ОҪвӢҶ )           в„Ұ2


4.2   D UALITY FOR S CHR OМҲDINGER BRIDGES AND A PPROXIMATIONS

The SchroМҲdinger bridge is a constrained optimization problem and possesses a computation-friendly
dual formulation. Moreover, the duality gap is zero under probability measures (LeМҒonard, 2001).
Lemma 1 (Duality (Nutz, 2022)). Given assumptions A1-A3, the dual via potentials (ПҶ, ПҲ) follows
                                                                         ZZ
      min KL(ПҖ|G) = max G(ПҶ, ПҲ), G(ПҶ, ПҲ) := ВөвӢҶ (ПҶ) + ОҪвӢҶ (ПҲ) вҲ’                  eПҶвҠ•ПҲ dG + 1, (11)
  ПҖвҲҲО (ВөвӢҶ ,ОҪвӢҶ )                 ПҶ,ПҲ                                                                в„Ұ2
                                                                     1                    1
                 R                              R
where ВөвӢҶ (ПҶ) =    в„Ұ
                      ПҶdВөвӢҶ , ОҪвӢҶ (ПҲ) =               в„Ұ
                                                        ПҲdОҪвӢҶ , ПҶ вҲҲ L (ВөвӢҶ ), and ПҲ вҲҲ L (ОҪвӢҶ ).

An effective solver is to maximize the dual G via ПҶk+1 = arg maxПҶвҲҲL1 (ВөвӢҶ ) G(ПҶ, ПҲk ) and ПҲk+1 =
arg maxПҲвҲҲL1 (ОҪвӢҶ ) G(ПҶk+1 , ПҲ) alternatingly. From a geometric perspective, alternating maximization
corresponds to alternating projections (detailed in Appendix C.4)
          ПҶk+1 = arg max G(ПҶ, ПҲk ) =вҮ’ the first marginal of ПҖ(ПҶk+1 , ПҲk ) is ВөвӢҶ ,                                     (12a)
                     ПҶвҲҲL1 (ВөвӢҶ )

       ПҲk+1 = arg max G(ПҶk+1 , ПҲ) =вҮ’ the second marginal of ПҖ(ПҶk+1 , ПҲk+1 ) is ОҪвӢҶ .                                   (12b)
                 ПҲвҲҲL1 (ОҪвӢҶ )


The marginal properties of the coupling implies the SchroМҲdinger equation (Nutz & Wiesel, 2022)
                     Z                                             Z
     ПҶвӢҶ (x) = вҲ’ log      eПҲвӢҶ (y)вҲ’cОө (x,y) ОҪвӢҶ (dy), ПҲвӢҶ (y) = вҲ’ log     eПҶвӢҶ (x)вҲ’cОө (x,y) ВөвӢҶ (dx).
                           в„Ұ                                                          в„Ұ

Since the SchroМҲdinger potential functions (ПҲвӢҶ , ПҶвӢҶ ) are not known a priori, the dual formulation of
the static IPF algorithm was proposed to solve the alternating projections as follows:
                                        Z                                                     Z
Static Dual IPF : ПҲk (y) = вҲ’ log                eПҶk (x)вҲ’cОө (x,y) ВөвӢҶ (dx), ПҶk+1 (x) = вҲ’ log         eПҲk (y)вҲ’cОө (x,y) ОҪвӢҶ (dy).
                                            в„Ұ                                                  в„Ұ
                                                                                                                        (13)
The equivalence between the primal IPF and dual IPF is further illustrated in Appendix C.5.
However, given a limited computational budget, projecting to the ideal measure ВөвӢҶ (or ОҪвӢҶ ) in Eq.(12)
at each iteration may not be practical. Instead, some close approximation ВөвӢҶ,k+1 (or ОҪвӢҶ,k ) is used at
iteration 2k + 1 (or 2k) via Gaussian processes (Vargas et al., 2021) or neural networks (De Bortoli
et al., 2021; Chen et al., 2022b). Therefore, one may resort to an approximate marginal that still
achieves reasonable accuracy:
                                  Вө2k+1 = ВөвӢҶ,k+1 вүҲ ВөвӢҶ ,                  ОҪ2k = ОҪвӢҶ,k вүҲ ОҪвӢҶ .                              (14)
We refer to the IPF algorithm with approximate marginals as approximate IPF (aIPF) and present
the static dual formulation of aIPF in Algorithm 2. The difference between IPF and aIPF
is detailed in Figure 3. The structure representation (10)
can be naturally extended based on approximate marginals
and is also studied by Deligiannidis et al. (2021)
        dПҖ2k = eПҶk вҠ•ПҲk вҲ’cОө d(ВөвӢҶ,k вҠ— ОҪвӢҶ,k ),
                                                                         (15)
      dПҖ2kвҲ’1 = eПҶk вҠ•ПҲkвҲ’1 вҲ’cОө d(ВөвӢҶ,k вҠ— ОҪвӢҶ,kвҲ’1 ),
where ПҖk is the approximate coupling at iteration k. By
the structural properties in Eq.(10), the representation also
applies to the dynamic settings, which involves the com- Figure 3: IPF v.s. aIPF. The approximate
putation of the static IPF, followed by its integration with (or exact) projections are highlighted
a diffusion bridge (Eckstein & Nutz, 2022).                   through the dotted (or solid) lines.

                                                                 6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                   RR coupling ПҖk can be recovered by the structural
Algorithm 2 One iteration of aIPF (static). The static
representation in (15); the dynamic coupling Pk = в„Ұ2 Pxk0 ,xT (В·)ПҖk (x0 , xT ) can be solved by further
learning a diffusion bridge Pxk0 ,xT .
                  Z                                                        Z
 ПҲk (y) = вҲ’ log        eПҶk (x)вҲ’cОө (x,y) ВөвӢҶ,k (dx),    ПҶk+1 (x) = вҲ’ log         eПҲk (y)вҲ’cОө (x,y) ОҪвӢҶ,k (dy). (16)
                   в„Ұ                                                       в„Ұ


4.3   C ONVERGENCE OF C OUPLINGS WITH BOUNDED DOMAIN

Despite the rich literature on the analysis of SBP within bounded domains (Chen et al., 2016), most
of them are not applicable to practical scenarios where exact marginals are not available. To fill this
gap, we extend the linear convergence analysis with perturbed marginals. The key to our proof is
the strong convexity of the dual (11). To quantify the convergence, similar to De Bortoli (2022), we
introduce an additional assumption to control the perturbation of the marginals in the sense that:
                                                           вӢҶ,kdВө                 вӢҶ,k    dОҪ
Assumption A4 (Marginal perturbation). Uk = вҲҮ log dx           and Vk = вҲҮ log dx     are the approxi-
mate energy functions at the k-th iteration and are Пө-close to energy functions UвӢҶ and VвӢҶ
         Uk (x) вҲ’ UвӢҶ (x) 2 вүӨ Пө(1 + вҲҘxвҲҘ2 ),           Vk (x) вҲ’ VвӢҶ (x) 2 вүӨ Пө(1 + вҲҘxвҲҘ2 ),       вҲҖx вҲҲ в„Ұ.

Note that the Lipschitz cost function on в„Ұ2 is also a standard assumption (Deligiannidis et al., 2021).
It is not required here by Assumption A1, which leads to a smooth transition kernel and cost function.
Recall the connections between dynamic primal IPF and static dual IPF, we know Пө mainly depends
on the score-function (вҶ’
                       вҲ’
                       z Оёt , вҶҗ
                              вҲ’
                              zПүt ) estimations (Song et al., 2021a) and numerical discretizations. More
concrete connections between them will be left as future work. In addition, the errors in the two
marginals donвҖҷt have to be the same, and we use a unified Пө mainly for analytical convenience.
Moreover, we use the same domain в„Ұ for both marginals to be consistent with our algorithm in
Section 3. The proof can be easily extended to different domains X and Y for ВөвӢҶ and ОҪвӢҶ .

Approximately linear convergence and proof sketches We first follow Carlier (2022); Nutz
(2022); Marino & Gerolin (2020) to build a centered aIPF algorithm in Algorithm 3 with scaled
potential functions ПҶМ„k and ПҲМ„k such that ВөвӢҶ (ПҶМ„k ) = 0. Since the summations of the potentials ПҶвӢҶ and
ПҲвӢҶ are unique by (10), the centering operation doesnвҖҷt change the dual objective but ensures that the
aIPF iterates are uniformly bounded in Lemma 4 with the help of the decomposition
                  вҲҘПҶМ„ вҠ• ПҲМ„вҲҘ2L2 (ВөвӢҶ вҠ—ОҪвӢҶ ) = вҲҘПҶМ„вҲҘ2L2 (ВөвӢҶ ) + вҲҘПҲМ„вҲҘ2L2 (ОҪвӢҶ )   if ВөвӢҶ (ПҶМ„) = 0.
How to ensure centering with perturbed marginals in Algorithm 3 is crucial and one major novelty in
our proof. We next exploit the strong convexity of the exponential function ex associated with the
concave dual. We obtain an auxiliary result regarding the convergence of the dual and the potentials.
Lemma 2 (Convergence of the Dual and Potentials). Let (ПҶМ„k , ПҲМ„k )kвүҘ0 be the iterates of a variant of
Algorithm 2. Given assumptions A1-A4 with small enough marginal perturbations Пө, we have
                      G(ПҶМ„вӢҶ , ПҲМ„вӢҶ ) вҲ’ G(ПҶМ„k , ПҲМ„k ) вүІ (1 вҲ’ eвҲ’24вҲҘcОө вҲҘвҲһ )k + e24вҲҘcОө вҲҘвҲһ Пө,
      вҲҘПҶМ„вӢҶ вҲ’ ПҶМ„k вҲҘL2 (ВөвӢҶ ) + вҲҘПҲМ„вӢҶ вҲ’ ПҲМ„k вҲҘL2 (ОҪвӢҶ ) вүІ e3вҲҘcОө вҲҘвҲһ (1 вҲ’ eвҲ’24вҲҘcОө вҲҘвҲһ )k/2 + e15вҲҘcОө вҲҘвҲһ Пө1/2 .

Since the centering operation doesnвҖҷt change the structure property (10), we are able to analyze the
convergence of the static couplings. Motivated by Theorem 3 of Deligiannidis et al. (2021), we
exploit the structural property (10) to estimate the W1 distance based on its dual formulation.
Theorem 2 (Convergence of Static Couplings). Given assumptions A1-A4 with small marginal
perturbations Пө, the iterates of the couplings (ПҖk )kвүҘ0 in Algorithm 2 satisfy the following result
                  W1 (ПҖk , ПҖвӢҶ ) вүӨ O(e9вҲҘcОө вҲҘвҲһ (1 вҲ’ eвҲ’24вҲҘcОө вҲҘвҲһ )k/2 + e21вҲҘcОө вҲҘвҲһ Пө1/2 ).

Such a result provides the worst-case guarantee on the convergence of the static couplings ПҖk . For
example, to obtain a ПөвӢҶ -W1 distance, we can run в„Ұ(e24вҲҘcОө вҲҘвҲһ (вҲҘcОө вҲҘвҲһ вҲ’ log(ПөвӢҶ вҲ§ 1))) iterations to


                                                       7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


achieve the goal. Recall that cОө = c/Оө (Chen et al., 2023), a large entropic-regularizer Оө may be
needed in practice to yield reasonable performance, which also leads to specific tuning guidance on Оө.
Our proof employs a non-geometric method to show the uniform in time stability, w.r.t. the marginals.
Unlike the elegant approach (Deligiannidis et al., 2021) based on the Hilbert-Birkhoff projective
metric (Chen et al., 2016), ours does not require advanced tools and may be more friendly to readers.
Recall the bridge representation in Eq.(8), we have W1 (ПҖk вҠ— PВөk вӢҶ ,ОҪвӢҶ , ПҖвӢҶ вҠ— PВөвӢҶ вӢҶ ,ОҪвӢҶ ) вүӨ W1 (ПҖk , ПҖвӢҶ ) +
W1 (PВөk вӢҶ ,ОҪвӢҶ , PвӢҶВөвӢҶ ,ОҪвӢҶ ). Assume the same assumptions as in Theorem 2, we arrive at the final result:
Proposition 2 (Convergence of Dynamic Couplings). The iterates of the dynamic couplings (Pk )kвүҘ0
in Algorithm 1 satisfy the following result
      W1 (Pk , PвӢҶ ) вүӨ O(e9вҲҘcОө вҲҘвҲһ (1 вҲ’ eвҲ’24вҲҘcОө вҲҘвҲһ )k/2 + e21вҲҘcОө вҲҘвҲһ Пө1/2 ) + W1 (PВөk вӢҶ ,ОҪвӢҶ , PВөвӢҶ вӢҶ ,ОҪвӢҶ ).

The result paves the way for understanding the general convergence of the dynamic IPF algorithm by
incorporating a proper approximation of the diffusion bridge (Heng et al., 2022).

5     E MPIRICAL S IMULATIONS
5.1    G ENERATION OF 2D SYNTHETIC DATA

We first employ the reflected SB algorithm to generate three synthetic examples: checkerboard and
Gaussian mixtures from a Gaussian prior and spiral from a moon prior. The domains are defined to
be flower, octagon, and heart, where all boundary points are defined to have proper unit-vectors. We
follow Chen et al. (2022b) and adopt a U-net to model (вҶ’ вҲ’
                                                         z Оёt , вҶҗ
                                                                вҲ’
                                                                zПүt ). We chose RVP-SDE as the base
simulator from time 0 to T = 1, where the dynamics are discretized into 100 steps.
Our generated examples are presented in Figure 1 and 4. We see that all the data are generated
smoothly from the prior and the forward and backward process matches with each other elegantly.
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first algorithm (with OT guarantees) that works on custom
domains. Other related work, such as Lou & Ermon (2023), mainly focuses on hypercubes in
computer vision. We also visualize the forward-backward policies вҶҗ    вҲ’
                                                                      zПү       вҶ’
                                                                               вҲ’Оё
                                                                        t and z t in Figure 4. Our
                                                      вҶ’
                                                      вҲ’ Оё
observations reveal that the forward vector fields z t demonstrate substantial nonlinearity when
compared to the linear forward policy in SGMs, and furthermore, the forward vector fields exhibit
pronounced dissimilarity when compared to the backward vector fields вҶҗ   вҲ’
                                                                         zПүt.


    Figure 4: Demo of generative samples (top) and vector fields (bottom) based on Reflected SB.

5.2    G ENERATION OF I MAGE DATA

We test our method on large-scale image datasets using CIFAR-10 and ImageNet 64Г—64. As the
RGB value is between [0, 1], we naturally select the domain as в„Ұ = [0, 1]d , where d = 3 Г— 32 Г— 32


                                                     8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


for the CIFAR-10 task and d = 3 Г— 64 Г— 64 for the ImageNet task. It is known that the SB system
can be initialized with score-based generative models (Chen et al., 2022b) and the warm-up study for
reflected SB is presented in Appendix D.2. We choose RVE-SDE as the prior path measure. The prior
distribution of ОҪвӢҶ is the uniform distribution on в„Ұ. The SDE is discretized into 1000 steps. In both
scenarios, images are generated unconditionally, and the quality of the samples is evaluated using
Frechet Inception Distance (FID) over 50,000 samples. The forward score function is modeled using
U-net structure; the backward score function uses NCSN++ (Song et al., 2021b) for the CIFAR-10
task and ADM (Dhariwal & Nichol, 2022) for the ImageNet task. Details of the experiments are
shown in Appendix D.
We have included baselines for both
                                        CIFAR-10                          Constrained OT  NLL   FID
constrained and unconstrained gener-
                                        MCSN++ (Song et al., 2021b)          No       No  2.99 2.20
ative models and summarized the ex-
perimental results in Table 1. While    DDPM (Ho et al., 2020)               No       No  3.75 3.17
our model may not surpass the state-    SB-FBSDE  (Chen    et al., 2022b)    No       Yes   -   3.01
of-the-art models, the minor improve- Reflected SGM (Lou & Ermon, 2023)      Yes      No  2.68 2.72
ment over the unconstrained SB- Ours                                         Yes      Yes 3.08  2.98
FBSDE (Chen et al., 2022b) under-
scores the effectiveness of the reflec- ImageNet 64Г—64
tion operation. Moreover, the exper- PGMGAN (Armandpour et al., 2021)        No       No    вҖ“  21.73
iments verify the scalability of the
                                        GLIDE (Li et al., 2023)              No       No    вҖ“  29.18
reflected model and the training pro-
cess is consistent with the findings    GRB (Park & Shin, 2022)              No       No    вҖ“  26.57
in Lou & Ermon (2023), where the        Ours                                 Yes      Yes 3.20 23.95
reflection in cube domains is easy
to implement and the generation be- Table 1: Evaluation of generative models on image data.
comes more stable. Sample outputs
are showcased in Figure 5 (including MNIST), with additional figures available in Appendix D.
Notably, our generated samples exhibit diversity and are visually indistinguishable from real data.


Figure 5: Samples via reflected SB on MNIST (left), CIFAR10 (middle), and ImageNet 64 (right).



6   C ONCLUSION
Reflected diffusion models, which are motivated by thresholding techniques, introduce explicit
score-matching loss through reflected Brownian motion. Traditionally, these models are applied
to hypercube-related domains and necessitate specific diffeomorphic mappings for extension to
other domains. To enhance generality with optimal transport guarantees, we introduce the Reflected
SchroМҲdinger Bridge, which employs reflected forward-backward stochastic differential equations
with Neumann and Robin boundary conditions. We establish connections between dynamic and
static IPF algorithms in both primal and dual formulations. Additionally, we provide an approximate
linear convergence analysis of the dual, potential, and couplings to deepen our understanding of the
dynamic IPF algorithm. Empirically, our algorithm can be applied to any smooth domains using
RVE-SDE and RVP-SDE. We evaluate its performance on 2D synthetic examples and standard image
benchmarks, underscoring its competitiveness in constrained generative modeling.


                                                 9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Mohammadreza Armandpour, Ali Sadeghian, Chunyuan Li, and Mingyuan Zhou. Partition-guided
 GANs. In Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2021.

Nicolas Brosse, Alain Durmus, EМҒric Moulines, and Marcelo Pereyra. Sampling from a Log-concave
  Distribution with Compact Support with Proximal Langevin Monte Carlo. In COLT, 2017.
SeМҒbastien Bubeck, Ronen Eldan, and Joseph Lehec. Sampling from a Log-Concave Distribution with
   Projected Langevin Monte Carlo. Discrete Comput Geom, pp. 757вҖ“783, 2018.
Charlotte Bunne, Ya-Ping Hsieh, Marco Cuturi, and Andreas Krause. The SchroМҲdinger Bridge
  between Gaussian Measures has a Closed Form. In AISTATS, 2023.
Kenneth F. Caluya and Abhishek Halder. Reflected SchroМҲdinger Bridge: Density Control with Path
  Constraints. In American Control Conference (ACC), 2021.
Kenneth F. Caluya and Abhishek Halder. Wasserstein Proximal Algorithms for the SchroМҲdinger
  Bridge Problem: Density Control with Nonlinear Drift. IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control,
  67(3):1163вҖ“1178, 2022.
Guillaume Carlier. On the Linear Convergence of the Multi-Marginal Sinkhorn Algorithm. SIAM
 Journal on Optimization, 32:2:10.1137, 2022.
Patrick Cattiaux. Time Reversal of Diffusion Processes with a Boundary Condition. Stochastic
  Processes and their Applications, 28:275вҖ“292, 1988.
Sitan Chen, Sinho Chewi, Jerry Li, Yuanzhi Li, Adil Salim, and Anru R. Zhang. Sampling is as
   Easy as Learning the Score: Theory for Diffusion Models with Minimal Data Assumptions. arXiv
   preprint arXiv:2209.11215v2, 2022a.
Tianrong Chen, Guan-Horng Liu, and Evangelos A. Theodorou. Likelihood Training of SchroМҲdinger
  Bridge using Forward-Backward SDEs Theory. In Proc. of the International Conference on
  Learning Representation (ICLR), 2022b.
Y. Chen, W. Deng, S. Fang, F. Li, N. Yang, Y. Zhang, K. Rasul, S. Zhe, A. Schneider, and Y. Nevmy-
   vaka. Provably Convergent SchroМҲdinger Bridge with Applications to Probabilistic Time Series
   Imputation. In Proc. of the International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2023.
Yongxin Chen and Tryphon Georgiou. Stochastic Bridges of Linear Systems. IEEE Transactions on
  Automatic Control, 61(2), 2016.
Yongxin Chen, Tryphon T. Georgiou, and Michele Pavon. Entropic and Displacement Interpolation:
  a Computational Approach using the Hilbert Metric. SIAM Journal on Applied Mathematics, 2016.
Yongxin Chen, Tryphon T. Georgiou, and Michele Pavon. Stochastic Control Liaisons: Richard
  Sinkhorn Meets Gaspard Monge on a SchroМҲdinger Bridge. SIAM Review, 63(2):249вҖ“313, 2021.
Valentin De Bortoli. Convergence of Denoising Diffusion Models under the Manifold Hypothesis.
  Transactions on Machine Learning Research (TMLR), 2022.
Valentin De Bortoli, James Thornton, Jeremy Heng, and Arnaud Doucet. Diffusion SchroМҲdinger
  Bridge with Applications to Score-Based Generative Modeling. In Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2021.

Valentin De Bortoli, EМҒmile Mathieu, Michael Hutchinson, James Thornton, Yee Whye Teh, and Ar-
  naud Doucet. Riemannian Score-Based Generative Modelling. In Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2022.
G. Deligiannidis, V. De Bortoli, and A. Doucet. Quantitative Uniform Stability of the Iterative
  Proportional Fitting Procedure. Preprint arXiv:2108.08129v2, 2021.
Prafulla Dhariwal and Alex Nichol. Diffusion Models Beat GANs on Image Synthesis. In Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2022.


                                               10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Stephan Eckstein and Marcel Nutz. Convergence Rates for Regularized Optimal Transport via
  Quantization. arXiv:2208.14391, 2022.
Nic Fishman, Leo Klarner, Valentin De Bortoli, Emile Mathieu, and Michael Hutchinson. Diffusion
  Models for Constrained Domains. Transactions on Machine Learning Research, 2023.
Jiequn Han, Arnulf Jentzen, and Weinan E. Solving High-dimensional Partial Differential Equations
   using Deep Learning. PNAS, 2019.
Jeremy Heng, Valentin De Bortoli, Arnaud Doucet, and James Thornton. Simulating Diffusion
  Bridges with Score Matching. In arXiv:2111.07243, 2022.
Martin Heusel, Hubert Ramsauer, Thomas Unterthiner, Bernhard Nessler, and Sepp Hochreiter. Gans
 Trained by a Two Time-scale Update Rule Converge to a Local Nash Equilibrium. Advances in
 neural information processing systems, 30, 2017.
Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models. In Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2020.
Jonathan Ho, William Chan, Chitwan Saharia, Jay Whang, Ruiqi Gao, Alexey Gritsenko, Diederik P.
  Kingma, Ben Poole, Mohammad Norouzi, David J. Fleet, and Tim Salimans. Imagen Video: High
  Definition Video Generation with Diffusion Models. In arXiv:2210.02303, 2022.
Emiel Hoogeboom, VДұМҒctor Garcia Satorras, CleМҒment Vignac, and Max Welling. Equivariant Diffusion
  for Molecule Generation in 3D. In Proc. of the International Conference on Machine Learning
 (ICML), 2022.
Ya-Ping Hsieh, Ali Kavis, Paul Rolland, and Volkan Cevher. Mirrored Langevin Dynamics. In
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2018.
Chin-Wei Huang, Milad Aghajohari, Avishek Joey Bose, Prakash Panangaden, and Aaron Courville.
  Riemannian Diffusion Models. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS),
  2022.
Aapo HyvaМҲrinen. Estimation of Non-normalized Statistical Models by Score Matching. Journal of
  Machine Learning Research, 6(24):695вҖ“709, 2005.
Ioannis Karatzas and Steven E. Shreve. Brownian Motion and Stochastic Calculus. Springer, 1998.
Frederic Koehler, Alexander Heckett, and Andrej Risteski. Statistical Efficiency of Score Matching:
  The View from Isoperimetry. In ICLR, 2023.
Yunbum Kook, Yin Tat Lee, Ruoqi Shen, and Santosh S. Vempala. Sampling with Riemannian
  Hamiltonian Monte Carlo in a Constrained Space. In NeurIPS, 2022.
S. Kullback. Probability Densities with Given Marginals. Ann. Math. Statist., 1968.
Andrew Lamperski. Projected Stochastic Gradient Langevin Algorithms for Constrained Sampling
  and Non-Convex Learning. In Proc. of Conference on Learning Theory (COLT), 2021.
Hugo Lavenant and Filippo Santambrogio. The Flow Map of the FokkerвҖ“Planck Equation Does Not
  Provide Optimal Transport. Applied Mathematics Letters, 133, 2022.
Christian LeМҒonard. Minimization of Energy Functionals Applied to Some Inverse Problems. Applied
  Mathematics and Optimization volume, 44:273вҖ“297, 2001.
Christian LeМҒonard. A Survey of the SchroМҲdinger Problem and Some of its Connections with Optimal
  Transport. Discrete & Continuous Dynamical Systems-A, 34(4):1533вҖ“1574, 2014.
Shuang Li, Yilun Du, Joshua B Tenenbaum, Antonio Torralba, and Igor Mordatch. Composing
  Ensembles of Pre-trained Models via Iterative Consensus. ICLR, 2023.
P. L. Lions and A. S. Sznitman. Stochastic Differential Equations with Reflecting Boundary Condi-
   tions. Communications on Pure and Applied Mathematics, pp. 511вҖ“537, 1984.


                                               11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Xingchao Liu, Lemeng Wu, Mao Ye, and Qiang Liu. Learning Diffusion Bridges on Constrained
  Domains. In Proc. of the International Conference on Learning Representation (ICLR), 2023.
Aaron Lou and Stefano Ermon. Reflected Diffusion Models. In Proc. of the International Conference
  on Machine Learning (ICML), 2023.
Cheng Lu, Yuhao Zhou, Fan Bao, Jianfei Chen, Chongxuan Li, and Jun Zhu. DPM-Solver: A Fast
  ODE Solver for Diffusion Probabilistic Model Sampling in Around 10 Steps. In Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2022.
Jin Ma and Jiongmin Yong. Forward-Backward Stochastic Differential Equations and their Applica-
   tions. Springer, 2007.
S. Di Marino and A. Gerolin. An Optimal Transport Approach for the SchroМҲdinger Bridge Problem
   and Convergence of Sinkhorn Algorithm. Journal of Scientific Computing, 85:2:27вҖ“28, 2020.
Marcel Nutz. Introduction to Entropic Optimal Transport. Lecture Notes, 2022.
Marcel Nutz and Johannes Wiesel. Stability of SchroМҲdinger Potentials and Convergence of SinkhornвҖҷs
 Algorithm. Annals of Probability, 2022.
B. Гҳksendal. Stochastic Differential Equations: An Introduction with Applications. Springer, 2003.
Seung Park and Yong-Goo Shin. Generative Residual Block for Image Generation. Applied Intelli-
  gence, pp. 1вҖ“10, 2022.
Grigorios A. Pavliotis. Stochastic Processes and Applications: Diffusion Processes, the Fokker-Planck
  and Langevin Equations. Springer, 2014.
Michele Pavon, Esteban G. Tabak, and Giulio Trigila. The Data-driven SchroМҲdinger Bridge. Commu-
 nications on Pure and Applied Mathematics, 74:1545вҖ“1573, 2021.
Stefano Peluchetti. Diffusion Bridge Mixture Transports, SchroМҲdinger Bridge Problems and Genera-
  tive Modeling. ArXiv e-prints arXiv:2304.00917v1, 2023.
Gabriel PeyreМҒ and Marco Cuturi. Computational Optimal Transport: With Applications to Data
  Science. Foundations and Trends in Machine Learning, 2019.
L. Ruschendorf. Convergence of the Iterative Proportional Fitting Procedure. Ann. of Statistics, 1995.
Tim Salimans and Jonathan Ho. Progressive Distillation for Fast Sampling of Diffusion Models. In
  Proc. of the International Conference on Learning Representation (ICLR), 2022.
Yuyang Shi, Valentin De Bortoli, Andrew Campbell, and Arnaud Doucet. Diffusion SchroМҲdinger
  Bridge Matching. In arXiv:2303.16852v1, 2023.
A. V. Skorokhod. Stochastic Equations for Diffusion Processes in a Bounded Region. Theory of
  Probability & Its Applications, pp. 264вҖ“274, 1961.
Yang Song, C. Durkan, I. Murray, and Stefano Ermon. Maximum Likelihood Training of Score-Based
  Diffusion Models . In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2021a.
Yang Song, Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Diederik P. Kingma, Abhishek Kumar, Stefano Ermon, and Ben
  Poole. Score-Based Generative Modeling through Stochastic Differential Equations . In Proc. of
  the International Conference on Learning Representation (ICLR), 2021b.
James Thornton, Michael Hutchinson, Emile Mathieu, Valentin De Bortoli, Yee Whye Teh, and
  Arnaud Doucet. Riemannian Diffusion SchroМҲdinger Bridge. arXiv:2207.03024v1, 2022.
Arash Vahdat, Karsten Kreis, and Jan Kautz. Score-based Generative Modeling in Latent Space.
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:11287вҖ“11302, 2021.
Francisco Vargas, Pierre Thodoroff, Austen Lamacraft, and Neil Lawrence. Solving SchroМҲdinger
  Bridges via Maximum Likelihood. Entropy, 23(9):1134, 2021.


                                                 12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


CeМҒdric Villani. Topics in Optimal Transportation, volume 58. American Mathematical Soc., 2003.
Maxime Vono, Daniel Paulin, and Arnaud Doucet. Efficient MCMC Sampling with Dimension-Free
 Convergence Rate using ADMM-type Splitting. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 2022.
R. J. Williams. On Time-Reversal of Reflected Brownian Motions. Part of the Progress in Probability
  and Statistics book series, 1987.


                                                13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A     R ELATED W ORKS

Constrained Sampling Bubeck et al. (2018) studied the convergence of Langevin Monte Carlo
within bounded domains. His work revealed a polynomial sample time for log-concave distributions,
which is later extended to non-convex settings by Lamperski (2021). Furthermore, the exploration
of constrained sampling in challenging scenarios with ill-conditioned and non-smooth distributions
was explored by Kook et al. (2022), who leveraged Hamiltonian Monte Carlo techniques. Other
constrained sampling works include proximal Langevin dynamics (Brosse et al., 2017) and mirrored
Langevin dynamics (Hsieh et al., 2018).

Constrained Generation De Bortoli et al. (2022); Huang et al. (2022) studied the extension of
diffusion models on Riemannian manifolds, and the convergence is further analyzed by De Bortoli
(2022). This groundwork subsequently motivated follow-up research, including implicit score-
matching loss via log-barrier methods and reflected Brownian motion (Fishman et al., 2023) and
SchroМҲdinger bridge (Thornton et al., 2022) on the Riemannian manifold. Alternatively, drawing
inspiration from the popular thresholding technique in real-world diffusion applications, Lou & Ermon
(2023) proposed to train explicit score-matching loss based on reflected Brownian motion, which
demonstrated compelling empirical performance. Liu et al. (2023) employed DoobвҖҷs h-transform to
learn diffusion bridges on various constrained domains. The study of reflected SchroМҲdinger bridge
was initiated by Caluya & Halder (2021) in the control community and has shown remarkable
performance in low-dimensional problems.

Notations в„Ұ is the bounded domain of interest, вҲӮв„Ұ denotes the boundary, and D is the radius of
a ball centered at the origin that covers в„Ұ. вҲҮВ· and вҲҮ denote the divergence and gradient operator
(with respect to x). Оө is the entropic regularizer; Пө controls the perturbation of the marginals.
cОө and c are cost functions in EOT, and cОө = c/Оө. ПҲвӢҶ and ПҶвӢҶ are the SchroМҲdinger potentials;
       вҶ’
       вҲ’
вҲҮ log ПҲ (xt , t) and вҲҮ log вҶҗ вҲ’(x , t) are the forward-backward score functions in reflected FB-SDE.
                             ПҶ   t
D(ВөвӢҶ , ОҪвӢҶ ) вҠӮ C(в„Ұ, [0, T ]) is the path space with marginals ВөвӢҶ (data distribution) at time t = 0 and
ОҪвӢҶ (prior distribution) at t = T , О (ВөвӢҶ , ОҪвӢҶ ) вҠӮ в„Ұ2 is the product space containing couplings with the
first marginal ВөвӢҶ and second marginal ОҪвӢҶ .

B     R EFLECTED F ORWARD -BACKWARD SDE

B.1   F ROM R EFLECTED S CHR OМҲDINGER B RIDGE TO R EFLECTED FB-SDE

We consider the stochastic control of the reflected SBP
                            Z T
                                  1            2
                    inf E           вҲҘu(x, t)вҲҘ2 dt
                    uвҲҲU       0 2
                                                            вҲҡ
                 s.t. dxt = [f (x, t) + g(t)u(x, t)] dt +       2Оөg(t)dwt + n(x)dLt              (17)
                      x0 вҲј ВөвӢҶ , xT вҲј ОҪвӢҶ , xt вҲҲ в„Ұ,

where в„Ұ is the state-space of x and u : в„Ұ Г— [0, T ] вҶ’ Rd is the control variable in the space of
U; f : в„Ұ Г— [0, T ] вҶ’ Rd is the vector field; wt denotes the Brownian motion; The expectation is
evaluated w.r.t the PDF ПҒ(x, t) of (17); Оө is the diffusion term and also the entropic regularizer; L
is the local time supported on {t вҲҲ [0, T ]|xt вҲҲ вҲӮв„Ұ} and forces the particle to go back to в„Ұ. More
precisely, L is a continuous non-decreasing process with L0 = 0 and it increases only when xt hits
the boundary вҲӮв„Ұ, that is,
                                             Z t
                                      Lt =       1{xs вҲҲвҲӮв„Ұ} dLs .                                 (18)
                                             0


The existence and uniqueness of SDE (17) can be addressed through the so-called Skorokhod problem
(Skorokhod, 1961) which amounts to finding the decomposition for any given continuous path
wt вҲҲ C(Rd , [0, T ]), there exists a pair (yt , Lt ) such that
                                           wt = yt + Lt ,


                                                 14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


where yt вҲҲ C(в„Ұ, [0, T ]) and Lt satisfies (18) (Lions & Sznitman, 1984).
Rewrite reflected SBP into a variational form (Chen et al., 2021)
                                     Z TZ
                                             1
                                inf            вҲҘu(x, t)вҲҘ22 ПҒ(x, t)dxdt                           (19)
                               uвҲҲU ,ПҒ 0    в„Ұ 2
                                вҲӮПҒ
                          s.t.      + вҲҮ В· J|xвҲҲв„Ұ = 0, J, n |xвҲҲвҲӮв„Ұ = 0,                             (20)
                                вҲӮt
where J is the probability flux of continuity equation (Pavliotis, 2014) given by
                                     J вүЎ ПҒ(f + gu) вҲ’ Оөg 2 вҲҮПҒ.                                    (21)

Explore the Lagrangian of (19) and incorporate a multiplier: П•(x, t) : в„Ұ Г— [0, T ] вҶ’ R
             Z TZ
                     1               вҲӮПҒ
L(ПҒ, u, П•) =           вҲҘuвҲҘ22 ПҒ + П•      + вҲҮ В· J dxdt                                          (22)
              0   в„Ұ 2                вҲӮt
             Z TZ                                            Z                Z TZ
                       1             вҲӮП•
           =             ПҒвҲҘuвҲҘ22 вҲ’ ПҒ     вҲ’ вҹЁвҲҮП•, Jвҹ© dxdt +         П•ПҒ|Tt=0 dx +          J, n dПғ(x)dt,
              0   в„Ұ    2             вҲӮt                        в„Ұ                0   вҲӮв„Ұ
                                                             |     {z     } |           {z         }
                                                                 constant term      :=0 by Eq.(20)

where the second equation follows by StokesвҖҷ theorem.
Plugging (21) into (22) and ignoring constant terms, we have
                        Z TZ
                                  1            вҲӮП•
          L(ПҒ, u, П•) =              ПҒвҲҘuвҲҘ22 вҲ’ ПҒ     вҲ’ вҲҮП•, ПҒ(f + gu) вҲ’ Оөg 2 вҲҮПҒ dxdt.               (23)
                         0    в„Ұ   2             вҲӮt

The optimal control uвӢҶ follows by taking gradient with respect to u
                                     uвӢҶ (x, t) = g(t)вҲҮП•(x, t).                                   (24)

Plugging uвӢҶ (x, t) into (23) and setting L(ПҒ, uвӢҶ , П•) вүЎ 0, we apply integration by parts and derive
      Z TZ
                 1 2                вҲӮП•
0=вҲ’                ПҒg вҲҘвҲҮП•вҲҘ22 + ПҒ        + ПҒ вҲҮП•, f вҲ’ Оөg 2 вҲҮП•, вҲҮПҒ dxdt
       0    в„Ұ    2                  вҲӮt
      Z TZ                                                            Z TZ
                   1              вҲӮП•
  =вҲ’          ПҒ g 2 вҲҘвҲҮП•вҲҘ22 +           + вҲҮП•, f + Оөg 2 вҲҶП• dxdt +                 Оөg 2 ПҒвҹЁвҲҮП•, nвҹ©dПғ(x)dt.
       0    в„Ұ      2              вҲӮt                                    0    вҲӮв„Ұ


This yields the following constrained HamiltonвҖ“JacobiвҖ“Bellman (HJB) PDE:
                     вҲӮП•        2                   1              2
                        вҲӮt + Оөg вҲҶП• + вҹЁвҲҮП•, f вҹ© = вҲ’ 2 вҲҘg(t)вҲҮП•(x, t)вҲҘ2  in в„Ұ
                       вҹЁвҲҮП•, nвҹ© = 0                                   on вҲӮв„Ұ.

Applying the Cole-Hopf transformation:

                    вҶ’
                    вҲ’                 П•(x, t)                     вҶ’
                                                                  вҲ’
                    ПҲ (x, t) = exp             , П•(x, t) = 2Оө log ПҲ (x, t),                      (25)
                                        2Оө
                 вҶ’
                 вҲ’
then we see that ПҲ satisfies a backward Kolmogorov equation with Neumann boundary condition
                                вҶ’
                                вҲ’
                                        2 вҶ’вҲ’    вҶ’
                                                вҲ’
                         (
                               вҲӮПҲ
                                вҲӮt + Оөg вҲҶ ПҲ + вҹЁвҲҮ ПҲ , f вҹ© = 0    in в„Ұ
                                  вҶ’
                                  вҲ’
                               вҹЁвҲҮ ПҲ , nвҹ© = 0                    on вҲӮв„Ұ.

On the other hand, we set
                                   вҲ’(x, t) = ПҒвӢҶ (x, t)/вҶ’
                                   вҶҗ
                                   ПҶ
                                                       вҲ’
                                                       ПҲ (x, t),                                 (26)


                                                 15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


where ПҒвӢҶ (x, t) is the probability density of Eq.(19) given the optimal control variable uвӢҶ . Then from
ПҒвӢҶ = вҶҗ
     ПҶвҲ’вҶ’
       вҲ’
        ПҲ , Eq.(20) can be further simplified to

                      вӢҶ         вӢҶ          вӢҶ       2    вӢҶ

           0 = вҲӮt ПҒ + вҲҮ В· ПҒ f + gu вҲ’ Оөg вҲҮПҒ

                     вҶҗвҲ’ вҶ’
                        вҲ’           вҶҗ
                                    вҲ’ вҶ’
                                      вҲ’         2
                                                             2  вҶҗвҲ’ вҶ’
                                                                   вҲ’
              = вҲӮt ( ПҶ ПҲ ) + вҲҮ В· ПҶ ПҲ f + g вҲҮП• вҲ’ Оөg вҲҮ( ПҶ ПҲ )

                        вҶ’
                        вҲ’ вҶҗ         вҶ’
                                    вҲ’              вҶ’
                                                   вҲ’                  вҶ’
                                                                      вҲ’               вҲ’вҶ’ вҲ’
              = (вҲӮt ПҶ ) ПҲ + ПҶ (вҲӮt ПҲ ) + вҲҮ В· ПҶ ПҲ f + 2Оөg вҲҮ log ПҲ вҲ’ Оөg 2 вҲҶ(вҶҗ
                     вҶҗвҲ’       вҲ’                 вҶҗвҲ’             2
                                                                                      ПҶ  ПҲ)

                        вҶ’
                        вҲ’
              = В· В· В· = ПҲ вҲӮt вҶҗ вҲ’+вҲҮВ· вҶҗ
                               ПҶ          ПҶвҲ’f вҲ’ Оөg 2 вҲҮвҶҗ вҲ’  ,
                                                        ПҶ
                            вҶ’
                            вҲ’ вҲ’       вҲ’вҲҶвҶ’ вҲ’       вҲ’вҶ’вҲ’        вҶ’
                                                             вҲ’
where we use the identify вҲҶ( ПҲ вҶҗ
                               ПҶ) = вҶҗ ПҶ   ПҲ + вҲҶвҶҗ  ПҶ ПҲ + 2вҹЁвҲҮ ПҲ , вҲҮвҶҗ вҲ’вҹ©. Then we arrive at the
                                                                   ПҶ
forward Kolmogorov equation with the Robin boundary condition
                          вҲӮt вҶҗ
                             вҲ’+вҲҮВ· вҶҗ    вҲ’f вҲ’ Оөg 2 вҲҮвҶҗвҲ’  = 0

                             ПҶ        ПҶ            ПҶ           in в„Ұ
                          вҹЁвҶҗ
                           вҲ’f вҲ’ Оөg 2 вҲҮвҶҗ
                           ПҶ            вҲ’, nвҹ© = 0
                                        ПҶ                     on вҲӮв„Ұ,
where the second boundary condition follows by invoking the StokesвҖҷ theorem for the first equation.
Plugging Eq.(24) and Eq.(25) into Eq.(17), the backward PDE corresponds to the forward SDE
             h                         вҶ’
                                       вҲ’         i    вҲҡ
      dxt = f (xt , t) + 2Оөg(t)2 вҲҮ log ПҲ (xt , t) dt + 2Оөg(t)dwt + n(x)dLt , x0 вҲј ВөвӢҶ .
                                                                       вҶ’
                                                                       вҲ’
Reversing the forward SDE (Williams, 1987; Cattiaux, 1988) with log ПҲ (В·, t) + log вҶҗ
                                                                                   вҲ’(В·, t) =
                                                                                   ПҶ
     вӢҶ
log ПҒ (В·, t) based on Eq.(26), we arrive at the backward SDE
       dx = f (x , t) вҲ’ 2Оөg(t)2 вҲҮ log вҶҗ
                                          вҲ’(x , t)  dt + вҲҡ2Оөg(t)dw + n(x)dL , x вҲј ОҪ .
                                          ПҶ
          t        t                              t                        t            t    T   вӢҶ


Our derivation is in a spirit similar to Caluya & Halder (2021). The difference is that the proof is
derived from the perspective of probability flux and enables us to derive the Neunman and Robin
boundaries more explicitly.
                                           вҶ’
                                           вҲ’
Remark 1. Regarding the scores вҲҮ log ПҲ and вҲҮ log вҶҗ      вҲ’ at t = 0 and T , we follow the standard
                                                        ПҶ
truncation techniques (Ho et al., 2020; Fishman et al., 2023) and fix them to 0. We refer readers to
Appendix C of Song et al. (2021b) and Appendix B of Song et al. (2021a) for more discussions.

B.2   C ONNECTIONS BETWEEN REFLECTED FB-SDE S AND FLOW- BASED MODELS

Similar to Fishman et al. (2023); Lou & Ermon (2023), our flow representation in Eq.(20) together
with (26) naturally yields
Proposition 3 (Probability Flow ODE). Consider the reflected FB-SDEs (6) with Neumann and
Robin boundary conditions. The corresponding probability flow ODE is given by
                                                 вҶ’
                                                 вҲ’
                 dxt = f (xt , t) + Оөg(t)2 вҲҮ log ПҲ (xt , t) вҲ’ вҲҮ log вҶҗ
                                                                    вҲ’(x , t)  dt.
                         h                                                   i
                                                                    ПҶ  t


The result is the same as in Chen et al. (2022b) and provides a stable alternative to compute the
log-likelihood of the data.

C     C ONVERGENCE OF DUAL , POTENTIALS , AND COUPLINGS
Next, we modify Algorithm 2 following the centering method developed in (Carlier, 2022).
The algorithm differs from Algorithm 2 in that an additional centering operation is included in the
updates of ПҶМ„k+1 to ensure ВөвӢҶ (ПҶМ„k+1 ) = 0. Notably, ВөвӢҶ is required for the centering operation to
upper bound the divergence, although it is not directly accessible and no implementation is needed.
The main contribution of the centering operation is that the two coordinates (ПҶМ„, ПҲМ„) become separable
                  вҲҘПҶМ„ вҠ• ПҲМ„вҲҘ2L2 (ВөвӢҶ вҠ—ОҪвӢҶ ) = вҲҘПҶМ„вҲҘ2L2 (ВөвӢҶ ) + вҲҘПҲМ„вҲҘ2L2 (ОҪвӢҶ )   if ВөвӢҶ (ПҶМ„) = 0.           (29)


                                                      16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 3 Centered Sinkhorn. Set ПҶМ„0 := 0. For k вүҘ 0, the iterate follows
                                     Z
                    ПҲМ„k (y) := вҲ’ log    eПҶМ„k (x)вҲ’cОө (x,y) ВөвӢҶ,k (dx)                                           (27)
                                     Zв„Ұ
                 ПҶМ„k+1 (x) := вҲ’ log     eПҲМ„k (y)вҲ’cОө (x,y) ОҪвӢҶ,k (dy) + О»k , where                              (28)
                                      в„Ұ
                               Z       Z
                                              ПҲМ„k (y)вҲ’cОө (x,y)
                         О»k :=    log      e                   ОҪвӢҶ,k (dy) ВөвӢҶ (dx).
                                          в„Ұ       в„Ұ


The coordinate ascent is equivalent to the following updates
                 ПҲМ„k (y) = arg max G(ПҶМ„k , ПҲМ„),         ПҶМ„k (y) =        arg max            G(ПҶМ„, ПҲМ„k ).
                            ПҲМ„вҲҲL1 (ОҪвӢҶ )                             ПҶМ„вҲҲL1 (ВөвӢҶ ):ВөвӢҶ (ПҶМ„)=0


The relation between the SchroМҲdinger potentials (ПҶk , ПҲk ) and centered SchroМҲdinger potentials
(ПҶМ„k , ПҲМ„k ) is characterized as follows
Lemma 3. Denote by (ПҶk , ПҲk ) the Sinkhorn iterates in Algorithm 2. For all k вүҘ 0, ВөвӢҶ (ПҶk ) =
вҲ’(О»0 + В· В· В· + О»kвҲ’1 ). Moreover, we have
                                ПҶМ„k = ПҶk вҲ’ ВөвӢҶ (ПҶk ),          ПҲМ„k = ПҲk + ВөвӢҶ (ПҲk ).
In particular, ПҶМ„k вҠ• ПҲМ„k = ПҶk вҠ• ПҲk and G(ПҶМ„k , ПҲМ„k ) = G(ПҶk , ПҲk ).

Proof     Applying the induction method completes the proof directly.
Recall how ПҲМ„k is defined through the SchroМҲdinger equation
              The second marginal of ПҖ2k (ПҶМ„k , ПҲМ„k ) = eПҶМ„k вҠ•ПҲМ„k вҲ’cОө d(ВөвӢҶ,k вҠ— ОҪвӢҶ,k ) is ОҪвӢҶ,k ,
as in Eq.(14). However, dПҖ2k+1 (ПҶМ„k+1 , ПҲМ„k ) = eПҶМ„k+1 вҠ•ПҲМ„k вҲ’cОө d(ВөвӢҶ,k вҠ— ОҪвӢҶ,k ) fails to yield the first
marginal ВөвӢҶ,k due to the centering constraint.
Next, we show the modified iterates are bounded by the cost function c.
Lemma 4. For every k вүҘ 0, the potentials are bounded by
                                 вҲҘПҶМ„k вҲҘвҲһ вүӨ 2вҲҘcОө вҲҘвҲһ ,          вҲҘПҲМ„k вҲҘвҲһ вүӨ 3вҲҘcОө вҲҘвҲһ .

Proof By вҲҡ    Assumption A1, the transition kernel K(x, y) = eвҲ’cОө (x,y) associated with xt =
f (xt , t)dt + 2Оөg(t)dwt + n(x)dLt is smooth in в„Ұ, hence the cost function is Lipschitz continuous,
which implies the cost function is bounded (denoted by a constant cОө ).
Recall the definition of ПҶМ„k+1 in Algorithm 3, we have вҲҖx1 , x2 вҲҲ в„Ұ,
  ПҶМ„k+1 (x1 ) вҲ’ ПҶМ„k+1 (x2 )
       Z                                         Z
             ПҲМ„k (y)вҲ’cОө (x2 ,y)
 = log     e                    ОҪвӢҶ,k (dy) вҲ’ log      eПҲМ„k (y)вҲ’cОө (x1 ,y) ОҪвӢҶ,k (dy)
         в„Ұ                                         в„Ұ
                                         Z                                         Z
          supyвҲҲв„Ұ |cОө (x1 ,y)вҲ’cОө (x2 ,y)|     ПҲМ„k (y)вҲ’cОө (x1 ,y)
 вүӨ log e                                    e                   ОҪвӢҶ,k (dy) вҲ’ log      eПҲМ„k (y)вҲ’cОө (x1 ,y) ОҪвӢҶ,k (dy)
                                              в„Ұ                                        в„Ұ
 = sup |cОө (x1 , y) вҲ’ cОө (x2 , y)| вүӨ 2вҲҘcОө вҲҘвҲһ .
    yвҲҲв„Ұ


As ВөвӢҶ (ПҶМ„k ) = 0, we have supx ПҶМ„k (x) вүҘ 0 and inf x ПҶМ„k (x) вүӨ 0, hence the above implies вҲҘПҶМ„k вҲҘвҲһ вүӨ
2вҲҘcОө вҲҘвҲһ . The definition of ПҲМ„k in Eq.(27) yields вҲҘПҲМ„k вҲҘвҲһ вүӨ вҲҘПҶМ„k вҲҘвҲһ + вҲҘcОө вҲҘвҲһ вүӨ 3вҲҘcОө вҲҘвҲһ .
The key to the proof is to adopt the strong convexity of the function ex for x вҲҲ [вҲ’Оұ, вҲһ) and some
constant Оұ вҲҲ R,
                                                      eвҲ’Оұ
                       eb вҲ’ ea вүҘ (b вҲ’ a)ea +              |b вҲ’ a|2     for a, b вҲҲ [вҲ’Оұ, вҲһ).                    (30)
                                                       2
We also present two supporting lemmas in order to complete the proof


                                                         17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Lemma 5. Given ПҶ, ПҶвҖІ вҲҲ L2 (ВөвӢҶ ) and ПҲ, ПҲ вҖІ вҲҲ L2 (ОҪвӢҶ ), and define
                                            Z
                     вҲӮ1 G(ПҶ, ПҲ)(x) = 1 вҲ’       eПҶ(x)+ПҲ(y)вҲ’cОө (x,y) ОҪвӢҶ (dy)
                                           Zв„Ұ                                                            (31)
                    вҲӮ2 G(ПҶ, ПҲ)(y) = 1 вҲ’       eПҶ(x)+ПҲ(y)вҲ’cОө (x,y) ВөвӢҶ (dx).
                                                       в„Ұ
                                     вҖІ   вҖІ
If both ПҶ вҠ— ПҲ вҲ’ cОө вүҘ вҲ’Оұ and ПҶ вҠ• ПҲ вҲ’ cОө вүҘ вҲ’Оұ for some Оұ вҲҲ R, we have
                                         Z
               G(ПҶвҖІ , ПҲ вҖІ ) вҲ’ G(ПҶ, ПҲ) вүҘ     вҲӮ1 G(ПҶвҖІ , ПҲ вҖІ )(x)[ПҶвҖІ (x) вҲ’ ПҶ(x)]ВөвӢҶ (dx)
                                         Zв„Ұ
                                       +    вҲӮ2 G(ПҶвҖІ , ПҲ вҖІ )(y)[ПҲ вҖІ (y) вҲ’ ПҲ(y)]ОҪвӢҶ (dy)
                                                   в„Ұ
                                               eвҲ’Оұ
                                             +     вҲҘ(ПҶ вҲ’ ПҶвҖІ ) вҠ• (ПҲ вҲ’ ПҲ вҖІ )вҲҘL2 (ВөвӢҶ вҠ—ОҪвӢҶ ) .
                                                2

Proof     By Eq.(30), we have
        G(ПҶвҖІ , ПҲ вҖІ ) вҲ’ G(ПҶ, ПҲ)
                                         ZZ
                                                                    вҖІ   вҖІ
              вҖІ                  вҖІ
     = ВөвӢҶ (ПҶ вҲ’ ПҶ) + ОҪвӢҶ (ПҲ вҲ’ ПҲ) +                   (eПҶвҠ•ПҲвҲ’cОө вҲ’ eПҶ вҠ•ПҲ вҲ’cОө )d(ВөвӢҶ вҠ— ОҪвӢҶ )
                                              в„Ұ2
                                    ZZ
                                                                 вҖІ     вҖІ
     вүҘ ВөвӢҶ (ПҶвҖІ вҲ’ ПҶ) + ОҪвӢҶ (ПҲ вҖІ вҲ’ ПҲ) +      (ПҶ вҠ• ПҲ вҲ’ ПҶвҖІ вҠ• ПҲ вҖІ )eПҶ вҠ•ПҲ вҲ’cОө d(ВөвӢҶ вҠ— ОҪвӢҶ )
                                      в„Ұ2
                   вҲ’Оұ Z Z
                 e
               +             вҲҘПҶ вҠ• ПҲ вҲ’ ПҶвҖІ вҠ• ПҲ вҖІ вҲҘ22 d(ВөвӢҶ вҠ— ОҪвӢҶ )
                   2      в„Ұ2
       Z                                             Z
                 вҖІ   вҖІ       вҖІ
     =     вҲӮ1 G(ПҶ , ПҲ )(x)[ПҶ (x) вҲ’ ПҶ(x)]ВөвӢҶ (dx) +       вҲӮ2 G(ПҶвҖІ , ПҲ вҖІ )(y)[ПҲ вҖІ (y) вҲ’ ПҲ(y)]ОҪвӢҶ (dy)
          в„Ұ                                                     в„Ұ
           eвҲ’Оұ
         +     вҲҘ(ПҶ вҲ’ ПҶвҖІ ) вҠ• (ПҲ вҲ’ ПҲ вҖІ )вҲҘL2 (ВөвӢҶ вҠ—ОҪвӢҶ ) .
            2

                                    1
Lemma 6. Given a small Пө вүӨ (D+1)       2 , we have


                                        Пғ
   G(ПҶМ„k+1 , ПҲМ„k+1 ) вҲ’ G(ПҶМ„k , ПҲМ„k ) вүҘ      вҲҘПҶМ„k+1 вҲ’ ПҶМ„k вҲҘ2L2 (ВөвӢҶ ) + вҲҘПҲМ„k+1 вҲ’ ПҲМ„k вҲҘ2L2 (ОҪвӢҶ ) вҲ’ O(Пө),
                                         2
where Пғ := eвҲ’6вҲҘcОө вҲҘвҲһ ; the big-O notation mainly depends on volume of the domain в„Ұ.

Proof     We first decompose the LHS as follows
 G(ПҶМ„k+1 , ПҲМ„k+1 ) вҲ’ G(ПҶМ„k , ПҲМ„k ) = G(ПҶМ„k+1 , ПҲМ„k+1 ) вҲ’ G(ПҶМ„k+1 , ПҲМ„k ) + G(ПҶМ„k+1 , ПҲМ„k ) вҲ’ G(ПҶМ„k , ПҲМ„k ) .
                                     |               {z               } |                {z             }
                                                            I                               II


For the estimate of I, by Lemma 5 with Пғ = eвҲ’6вҲҘcОө вҲҘвҲһ , we have
             Z
                                                                     Пғ
         IвүҘ     вҲӮ2 G(ПҶМ„k+1 , ПҲМ„k+1 )(y)[ПҲМ„k+1 (y) вҲ’ ПҲМ„k (y)]ОҪвӢҶ (dy) + вҲҘПҲМ„k вҲ’ ПҲМ„k+1 вҲҘL2 (ОҪвӢҶ ) .
              в„Ұ                                                      2

For the integral above, by the definition of вҲӮ2 G in Eq.(31), we have
                        вҲӮ2 G(ПҶМ„k+1 , ПҲМ„k+1 )(y)ОҪвӢҶ (dy)
                                    Z
                       = ОҪвӢҶ (dy) вҲ’      eПҶМ„k+1 (x)+ПҲМ„k+1 (y)вҲ’cОө (x,y) ВөвӢҶ (dx)ОҪвӢҶ (dy)
                                      в„Ұ                                                                  (32)
                                                            dВөвӢҶ вҠ— dОҪвӢҶ
                                    Z
                       = ОҪвӢҶ (dy) вҲ’      ПҖ2k+2 (dx, В·)                        ,
                                      в„Ұ                dВөвӢҶ,k+1 вҠ— dОҪвӢҶ,k+1
where the last equality follows by the LHS of Eq.(15), the last integral is with respect to x.


                                                           18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Apply Lemma 7 with respect to dВөdВөвӢҶ
                                вӢҶ,k+1
                                      (x)

                              dВөвӢҶ вҠ— dОҪвӢҶ
         Z                                      Z
                                                                             ОҪвӢҶ (dy)
            ПҖ2k+2 (dx, В·)                     вүӨ    1 + O(Пө) ПҖ2k+2 (dx, В·)
          в„Ұ               dВөвӢҶ,k+1 вҠ—  dОҪ вӢҶ,k+1    в„Ұ                        ОҪ вӢҶ,k+1 (dy)
                                                                       ОҪвӢҶ (dy)                                 (33)
                                              вүӨ 1 + O(Пө) ОҪвӢҶ,k+1 (dy)
                                                                     ОҪвӢҶ,k+1 (dy)

                                              = 1 + O(Пө) ОҪвӢҶ (dy),
where the second inequality is derived by the fact that the second marginal of ПҖ2k+2 is ОҪвӢҶ,k+1 in
                                                    dВөвӢҶ вҠ—dОҪвӢҶ
                                R
Eq.(14). Similarly, we can show в„Ұ ПҖ2k+2 (dx, В·) dВөвӢҶ,k+1 вҠ—dОҪвӢҶ,k+1 вүі (1 вҲ’ O(Пө))ОҪвӢҶ (dy).

Combining Eq.(32) and (33), we have
                              |вҲӮ2 G(ПҶМ„k+1 , ПҲМ„k+1 )(y)ОҪвӢҶ (dy)| вүІ ПөОҪвӢҶ (dy).                                     (34)

We now build the lower bound of the integral as follows
                        Z
                           вҲӮ2 G(ПҶМ„k+1 , ПҲМ„k+1 )(y)[ПҲМ„k+1 (y) вҲ’ ПҲМ„k (y)]ОҪвӢҶ (dy)
                         в„Ұ
                           Z
                                                                                                               (35)
                     вүі вҲ’Пө      ПҲМ„k+1 (y) вҲ’ ПҲМ„k (y) ОҪвӢҶ (dy)
                                в„Ұ
                        вүі вҲ’Пө,
where the first inequality follows by Eq.(32) and the second inequality follows by the boundedness of
the potential function in Lemma 4. The above means that I вүҘ Пғ2 вҲҘПҲМ„k вҲ’ ПҲМ„k+1 вҲҘL2 (ВөвӢҶ вҠ—ОҪвӢҶ ) вҲ’ O(Пө). For
the estimate of II, Lemma 5 yields
                Z
                                                                       Пғ
         II вүҘ       вҲӮ1 G(ПҶМ„k+1 , ПҲМ„k )(x)[ПҶМ„k+1 (x) вҲ’ ПҶМ„k (x)]ВөвӢҶ (dx) + вҲҘПҶМ„k вҲ’ ПҶМ„k+1 вҲҘL2 (ВөвӢҶ ) .
                  в„Ұ                                                    2

Recall the definition of ПҶМ„k+1 in Eq.(28) states that в„Ұ eПҲМ„k (y)вҲ’cОө (x,y) ОҪвӢҶ,k (dy) = eвҲ’ПҶМ„k+1 (x)+О»k .
                                                           R
                                   dОҪвӢҶ
Apply Lemma 7 with respect to dОҪ    вӢҶ,k
                                        (y)
                                           Z
                                 ПҶМ„k+1 (x)                                 ОҪвӢҶ (dy)
   вҲӮ1 G(ПҶМ„k+1 , ПҲМ„k )(x) = 1 вҲ’ e              eПҲМ„k (y)вҲ’cОө (x,y) ОҪвӢҶ,k (dy)
                                                                          ОҪвӢҶ,k (dy)
                                           Zв„Ұ
                         вүҘ 1 вҲ’ eПҶМ„k+1 (x)      1 + O(Пө) eПҲМ„k (y)вҲ’cОө (x,y) ОҪвӢҶ,k (dy)

                                            в„Ұ
                                                           Z
                         вүҘ 1 вҲ’ (1 + O(Пө))eО»k вҲ’ O(Пө)            вҲҘyвҲҘ22 eПҶМ„k+1 (x)+ПҲМ„k (y)вҲ’cОө (x,y) ОҪвӢҶ,k (dy)
                                                           |в„Ұ                    {z                      }
                                                                  bounded and non-negative from Lemma 4
                                                 О»k
                         = 1 вҲ’ (1 + O(Пө))e            вҲ’ O(Пө)
                                                 О»k
    вҲӮ1 G(ПҶМ„k+1 , ПҲМ„k )(x) вүӨ 1 + (1 + O(Пө))e           + O(Пө),
which includes a deterministic scalar (independent of x) and a small perturbation (dependent of x
and Пө). Denote R(x, y) = вҲҘyвҲҘ22 eПҶМ„k+1 (x)+ПҲМ„k (y)вҲ’cОө (x,y) , Combining the centering operation with
ВөвӢҶ (ПҶМ„k+1 ) = ВөвӢҶ (ПҶМ„k ) = 0
     Z
         вҲӮ1 G(ПҶМ„k+1 , ПҲМ„k )(x)[ПҶМ„k+1 (x) вҲ’ ПҶМ„k (x)]ВөвӢҶ (dx)
       в„Ұ
                              Z                                Z
    = deterministic scalar В· [ПҶМ„k+1 (x) вҲ’ ПҶМ„k (x)]ВөвӢҶ (dx) +Пө      R(x)[ПҶМ„k+1 (x) вҲ’ ПҶМ„k (x)]ВөвӢҶ (dx)
                              |в„Ұ            {z             }   |в„Ұ              {z                }
                                 :=0 by the centering operation     integrable by the boundedness of R,ПҶМ„k+1 ,ПҲk

   = O(Пө).
Combining the estimates of I and II completes the proof.


                                                        19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C.1     C ONVERGENCE OF D UAL AND P OTENTIALS

Proof of Lemma 2
Part I: Convergence of the Dual
By Lemma 5 with Оұ = 6вҲҘcвҲҘвҲһ and the decomposition in Eq.(29), we have
                 G(ПҶМ„k , ПҲМ„k ) вҲ’ G(ПҶМ„вӢҶ , ПҲМ„вӢҶ )
                  Z
                вүҘ     вҲӮ1 G(ПҶМ„k , ПҲМ„k )(x)[ПҶМ„k (x) вҲ’ ПҶМ„вӢҶ (x)]ВөвӢҶ (dx)
                   Zв„Ұ
                 +     вҲӮ2 G(ПҶМ„k , ПҲМ„k )(y)[ПҲМ„k (y) вҲ’ ПҲМ„вӢҶ (y)]ОҪвӢҶ (dy)                                           (36)
                     в„Ұ
                    Пғ
                 +      вҲҘПҶМ„k вҲ’ ПҶМ„вӢҶ вҲҘ2L2 (ВөвӢҶ ) + вҲҘПҲМ„k вҲ’ ПҲМ„вӢҶ вҲҘ2L2 (ОҪвӢҶ )
                  Z2
                                                                        Пғ
                вүҘ     вҲӮ1 G(ПҶМ„k , ПҲМ„k )(x)[ПҶМ„k (x) вҲ’ ПҶМ„вӢҶ (x)]ВөвӢҶ (dx) + вҲҘПҶМ„k вҲ’ ПҶМ„вӢҶ вҲҘ2L2 (ВөвӢҶ ) вҲ’ O(Пө),
                    в„Ұ                                                   2
where Пғ := eвҲ’6вҲҘcОө вҲҘвҲһ , and the last inequality
                                          R         follows by Eq.(34) and boundedness of ПҲМ„k and
ПҲМ„вӢҶ in Lemma 4. For the first integral, в„Ұ вҲӮ1 G(ПҶМ„k+1 , ПҲМ„k )(x)[ПҶМ„k (x) вҲ’ ПҶМ„вӢҶ (x)]ВөвӢҶ (dx) = O(Пө) be-
cause вҲӮ1 G(ПҶМ„k+1 , ПҲМ„k )(x) includes a deterministic scalar and a small perturbation with ВөвӢҶ (ПҶМ„k (x) =
ВөвӢҶ (ПҶМ„вӢҶ (x)) = 0.
Hence
     Z
               вҲӮ1 G(ПҶМ„k , ПҲМ„k )(x)[ПҶМ„k (x) вҲ’ ПҶМ„вӢҶ (x)]ВөвӢҶ (dx)
          Zв„Ұ
      =        [вҲӮ1 G(ПҶМ„k , ПҲМ„k )(x) вҲ’ вҲӮ1 G(ПҶМ„k+1 , ПҲМ„k )(x)][ПҶМ„k (x) вҲ’ ПҶМ„вӢҶ (x)]ВөвӢҶ (dx) + O(Пө)                  (37)
           в„Ұ
                1                                                   Пғ
      вүҘвҲ’          вҲҘвҲӮ1 G(ПҶМ„k , ПҲМ„k ) вҲ’ вҲӮ1 G(ПҶМ„k+1 , ПҲМ„k )вҲҘ2L2 (ВөвӢҶ ) вҲ’ вҲҘПҶМ„k (x) вҲ’ ПҶМ„вӢҶ (x)вҲҘ2L2 (ВөвӢҶ ) + O(Пө),
               2Пғ                                                   2
where the inequality follows from HoМҲlderвҖҷs inequality and YoungвҖҷs inequality.
Plugging Eq.(37) into Eq.(36), we have
                                                  1
               G(ПҶМ„вӢҶ , ПҲМ„вӢҶ ) вҲ’ G(ПҶМ„k , ПҲМ„k ) вүӨ      вҲҘвҲӮ1 G(ПҶМ„k , ПҲМ„k ) вҲ’ вҲӮ1 G(ПҶМ„k+1 , ПҲМ„k )вҲҘ2L2 (ВөвӢҶ ) + O(Пө).   (38)
                                                 2Пғ

Note that
                                                             Z
      |вҲӮ1 G(ПҶМ„k , ПҲМ„k )(x) вҲ’ вҲӮ1 G(ПҶМ„k+1 , ПҲМ„k )(x)| вүӨ          eПҶМ„k+1 вҠ•ПҲМ„k вҲ’cОө вҲ’ eПҶМ„k вҠ•ПҲМ„k вҲ’cОө ОҪвӢҶ (dy)
                                                            в„Ұ
                                                                    Z
                                                            6вҲҘcОө вҲҘвҲһ                                            (39)
                                                         вүӨe             |ПҶМ„k+1 вҠ• ПҲМ„k вҲ’ ПҶМ„k вҠ• ПҲМ„k |ОҪвӢҶ (dy)
                                                                       в„Ұ
                                                             1
                                                         =     |ПҶМ„k+1 (x) вҲ’ ПҶМ„k (x)|,
                                                             Пғ
where the second inequality follows by Lemma 4 and the exponential function follows a Lipschitz
continuity such that: ea вҲ’ eb вүӨ eM |b вҲ’ a| for a, b вүӨ M ; Пғ := eвҲ’6вҲҘcОө вҲҘвҲһ .
First combining Eq.(38) and (39) and then including Lemma 6, we conclude that
                                                     1
                   G(ПҶМ„вӢҶ , ПҲМ„вӢҶ ) вҲ’ G(ПҶМ„k , ПҲМ„k ) вүӨ      вҲҘПҶМ„k+1 вҲ’ ПҶМ„k вҲҘ2L2 (ВөвӢҶ ) + O(Пө)
                                                   2Пғ 3
                                                    1                                    O(Пө)
                                                  вүӨ 4 G(ПҶМ„k+1 , ПҲМ„k+1 ) вҲ’ G(ПҶМ„k , ПҲМ„k ) + 4 ,
                                                   Пғ                                      Пғ
where the last inequality follows by Пғ вүӨ 1. Further writing вҲҶk = G(ПҶМ„вӢҶ , ПҲМ„вӢҶ ) вҲ’ G(ПҶМ„k , ПҲМ„k ), we have
                                                   1                O(Пө)
                                         вҲҶk вүӨ         (вҲҶk вҲ’ вҲҶk+1 ) + 4 .
                                                   Пғ4                Пғ

                                                             20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


In other words, we can derive the contraction property as follows
            вҲҶk+1 вүӨ (1 вҲ’ Пғ 4 )вҲҶk + O(Пө) вүӨ В· В· В· вүӨ (1 вҲ’ Пғ 4 )k+1 вҲҶ0 + O(e24вҲҘcОө вҲҘвҲһ Пө).
which hereby completes the claim of the theorem for any k вүҘ 1.
Part II: Convergence of the Potentials
For the convergence of the potential function, in spirit to Lemma 6, we obtain
                                              Пғ
      GвӢҶ (ПҶМ„вӢҶ , ПҲМ„вӢҶ ) вҲ’ G(ПҶМ„k , ПҲМ„k ) := вҲҶk вүҘ    вҲҘПҶМ„вӢҶ вҲ’ ПҶМ„k вҲҘ2L2 (ВөвӢҶ ) + вҲҘПҲМ„вӢҶ вҲ’ ПҲМ„k вҲҘ2L2 (ОҪвӢҶ ) вҲ’ O(Пө).
                                              2
We can upper bound the potential as follows
                                                  2       O(Пө)      2
    вҲҘПҶМ„вӢҶ вҲ’ ПҶМ„k вҲҘ2L2 (ВөвӢҶ ) + вҲҘПҲМ„вӢҶ вҲ’ ПҲМ„k вҲҘ2L2 (ОҪвӢҶ ) вүӨ  вҲҶk +       вүӨ (1 вҲ’ Пғ 4 )k вҲҶ0 + O(e30вҲҘcОө вҲҘвҲһ Пө).
                                                  Пғ         Пғ       Пғ
                                                     вҲҡ
Further applying (|a| + |b|)2 вүӨ 2a2 + 2b2 and c2 + d2 вүӨ |c| + |d|, we have
                                                       r
                                                         4
         вҲҘПҶМ„вӢҶ вҲ’ ПҶМ„k вҲҘL2 (ВөвӢҶ ) + вҲҘПҲМ„вӢҶ вҲ’ ПҲМ„k вҲҘL2 (ОҪвӢҶ ) вүӨ     (1 вҲ’ Пғ 4 )k+1 вҲҶ0 + O(e15вҲҘcОө вҲҘвҲһ Пө1/2 )
                                                         Пғ                                        (40)
                                                                              k
                                                              вүІ e3вҲҘcОө вҲҘвҲһ ОІОө2 + e15вҲҘcОө вҲҘвҲһ Пө1/2 ,
where ОІОө = 1 вҲ’ Пғ 4 = 1 вҲ’ eвҲ’24вҲҘcОө вҲҘвҲһ .

C.2    C ONVERGENCE OF THE S TATIC C OUPLINGS

Proof of Theorem 2
Recall from the bounded potential in Lemma 4, we have
                    eПҶМ„вӢҶ вҠ•ПҲМ„вӢҶ вҲ’cОө вҲ’ eПҶМ„k вҠ•ПҲМ„k вҲ’cОө вүӨ e6вҲҘcОө вҲҘвҲһ |ПҶМ„вӢҶ вҲ’ ПҶk | + |ПҲМ„вӢҶ вҲ’ ПҲМ„k | .

                                                                                                         (41)

Following  Theorem 3 of Deligiannidis et al. (2021), we define a class of 1-Lipschitz functions
Lip1 = F |F (x0 , y0 ) вҲ’ F (x1 , y1 )| вүӨ вҲҘx1 вҲ’ x0 вҲҘ2 + вҲҘy1 вҲ’ y0 вҲҘ2 . Since the structural property
(10) allows to represent ПҖвӢҶ using (ПҶвӢҶ + a) вҠ• (ПҲвӢҶ вҲ’ a) for any a. For any F вҲҲ Lip1 , we have
           ZZ                                          ZZ
                       ПҶМ„вӢҶ вҠ•ПҲМ„вӢҶ вҲ’cОө
                    Fe               d(ВөвӢҶ вҠ— ОҪвӢҶ ) вҲ’              F eПҶМ„k вҠ•ПҲМ„k вҲ’cОө d(ВөвӢҶ,k вҠ— ОҪвӢҶ,k )
              XГ—Y                                           XГ—Y
            ZZ                                          ZZ
                         ПҶМ„вӢҶ вҠ•ПҲМ„вӢҶ вҲ’cОө
          вүӨ          Fe                d(ВөвӢҶ вҠ— ОҪвӢҶ ) вҲ’              F eПҶМ„k вҠ•ПҲМ„k вҲ’cОө d(ВөвӢҶ вҠ— ОҪвӢҶ )
                XГ—Y                                          XГ—Y
                    ZZ                                           ZZ
                                   ПҶМ„k вҠ•ПҲМ„k вҲ’cОө
                 +             Fe               d(ВөвӢҶ вҠ— ОҪвӢҶ ) вҲ’             F eПҶМ„k вҠ•ПҲМ„k вҲ’cОө d(ВөвӢҶ,k вҠ— ОҪвӢҶ,k )
                       XГ—Y                                          XГ—Y
            ZZ
                           ПҶМ„вӢҶ вҠ•ПҲМ„вӢҶ вҲ’cОө      ПҶМ„k вҠ•ПҲМ„k вҲ’cОө
          вүӨ          F |e               вҲ’e                | d(ВөвӢҶ вҠ— ОҪвӢҶ )
                XГ—Y    |                {z               }
                                     by Eq.(41)
                      ZZ
                  +              F eПҶМ„k вҠ•ПҲМ„k вҲ’cОө d(ВөвӢҶ вҠ— |ОҪвӢҶ вҲ’ ОҪвӢҶ,k | + |ВөвӢҶ вҲ’ ВөвӢҶ,k | вҠ— ОҪвӢҶ,k )
                           XГ—Y

         вүІ e9вҲҘcОө вҲҘвҲһ ОІ k/2 + e21вҲҘcОө вҲҘвҲһ Пө1/2 ,
where the last inequality is mainly derived from the first term in the second inequality by combining
(40) and (41); the second term in the second inequality can be upper bounded by Lemma 7.
Recall the definition of the duality of the 1-Wasserstein distance, we have
                               ZZ
       W1 (ПҖk , ПҖвӢҶ ) = sup              F eПҶМ„вӢҶ вҠ•ПҲМ„вӢҶ вҲ’cОө d(ВөвӢҶ вҠ— ОҪвӢҶ )
                                  XГ—Y
                                              ZZ
                                           вҲ’            F eПҶМ„k вҠ•ПҲМ„k вҲ’cОө d(ВөвӢҶ,k вҠ— ОҪвӢҶ,k ) : F вҲҲ Lip1
                                                             XГ—Y
                                 9вҲҘcОө вҲҘвҲһ       k/2        21вҲҘcОө вҲҘвҲһ 1/2
                       вүӨ O(e               ОІ         +e          Пө       ).


                                                               21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C.3     AUXILIARY R ESULTS

Lemma 7. Given probability densities ПҒ(x) = eвҲ’U (x) /Z and ПҒe(x) = eвҲ’U (x) /Z e defined on в„Ұ, where
                                                                        e

в„Ұ is a bounded domain that contains в„Ұ and в„Ұ, Z and Z are the normalizing constants. For small
                                                       e
              1
enough Пө вүІ (D+1) 2 , where D is the radius of a centered ball covering в„Ұ, we have


                                  ПҒ(x)                         ПҒe(x)
                  1 вҲ’ O(Пө) вүӨ            вүӨ 1 + O(Пө), 1 вҲ’ O(Пө) вүӨ       вүӨ 1 + O(Пө).                    (42)
                                  ПҒe(x)                        ПҒ(x)

Proof
From the approximation assumption A4: вҲҘвҲҮU
                                        e (x) вҲ’ вҲҮU (x)вҲҘ2 вүӨ Пө(1 + вҲҘxвҲҘ2 ).
Moreover, U satisfies the smoothness assumption A3. Note that for any x, y вҲҲ в„Ұ
                          Z 1                       Z 1
                              d
       U (x) вҲ’ U (y) =          U (tx + (1 вҲ’ t)y) =     вҹЁx вҲ’ y, вҲҮU (tx + (1 вҲ’ t)y)вҹ©dt.
                           0 dt                      0


Moreover, there exist x0 such that U (x0 ) = U
                                             e (x0 ) since ПҒ and ПҒe are probability densities. It follows
                                       Z 1
                  |Ue (x) вҲ’ U (x)| =       вҹЁx вҲ’ x0 , вҲҮU e (xМҮt ) вҲ’ вҲҮU (xМҮt )вҹ©dt
                                              0
                                         Z 1
                                     вүӨ            вҲҘx вҲ’ x0 вҲҘ2 В· вҲҮU
                                                                e (xМҮt ) вҲ’ вҲҮU (xМҮt ) dt
                                                                                     2
                                          0
                                     вүӨ Пө(вҲҘxвҲҘ2 + вҲҘx0 вҲҘ2 )(1 + вҲҘxвҲҘ2 ) вүІ Пө(D + 1)2 ,
where xМҮt = tx + (1 вҲ’ t)x0 is a line from x0 to x.
For the normalizing constant, we have
                       Z                                    Z
            |Z
             e вҲ’ Z| вүӨ      eвҲ’U (x) eвҲ’U (x)+U (x) вҲ’ 1 dx вүІ Пө   eвҲ’U (x) Пө(D + 1)2 dx,
                                      e

                           в„Ұ                                          в„Ұ
                                                           a
where the last inequality follows by Eq.(C.3) and e вүӨ 1 + 2a for a вҲҲ [0, 1]. We deduce
                                  ПҒ(x)    e (x) вҲ’ U (x) + log Z вүӨ O(Пө).
                                                              e
                            log         = U
                                  ПҒe(x)                       Z


                                                ПҒ) вүӨ O(Пө) and KL(e
Notably, the above lemma also implies that KL(ПҒвҲҘe                ПҒвҲҘПҒ) вүӨ O(Пө).

C.4     C ONNECTIONS BETWEEN DUAL OPTIMIZATION AND PROJECTIONS

To see why (12b) holds. We first denote the second marginal of dПҖ(ПҶk , ПҲk ) := eПҶk вҠ•ПҲk dG
by ОҪ вҖІ and then proceed to show ОҪ вҖІ = ОҪвӢҶ (Nutz, 2022). Recall that G is concave and ПҲk =
arg maxПҲвҲҲL1 (ОҪвӢҶ ) G(ПҶk , ПҲ), it suffices to show that given fixed ПҶk вҲҲ L1 (ВөвӢҶ ), ПҲk вҲҲ L1 (ОҪвӢҶ ), a
constant О· and bounded measurable function ОҙПҲ : Rd вҶ’ R, the maximality of G(ПҶk , ПҲk ) implies
                                                   ZZ
             d
        0=         G(ПҶk , ПҲk + О·ОҙПҲ ) = ОҪвӢҶ (ОҙПҲ ) вҲ’         ОҙПҲ eПҶk вҠ•ПҲk dG = ОҪвӢҶ (ОҙПҲ ) вҲ’ ОҪ вҖІ (ОҙПҲ ).
            dО· О·=0                                    в„Ұ 2


Hence ОҪ вҖІ = ОҪвӢҶ . Similarly, we can show (12a).

C.5     C ONNECTIONS BETWEEN S TATIC P RIMAL IPF (9) AND S TATIC D UAL IPF (13)

It suffices to show the equivalence between ПҖ2k = arg minПҖвҲҲО (В·,ОҪвӢҶ ) KL(ПҖвҲҘПҖ2kвҲ’1 ) and ПҲk (y) =
вҲ’ log в„Ұ eПҶk (x)вҲ’cОө (x,y) ВөвӢҶ (dx).
       R

For any ПҖ2k вҲҲ О (В·, ОҪвӢҶ ), we invoke the disintegration of measures and obtain ПҖ2k = K? вҠ— ОҪвӢҶ . In
addition, we have ПҖ2kвҲ’1 = K вҠ— ОҪ вҖІ . Now we can formulate
                               KL(ПҖвҲҘПҖ2kвҲ’1 ) = KL(ОҪвӢҶ вҲҘОҪ вҖІ ) + KL(K? вҲҘK).


                                                        22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


The conditional probability of ПҖ2kвҲ’1 given y is a normalized probability such that
                    dПҖ2kвҲ’1
                   dВөвӢҶ вҠ—ОҪвӢҶ      dK             eПҶk вҠ•ПҲkвҲ’1 вҲ’cОө       eПҶk вҲ’cОө
                R dПҖ2kвҲ’1      =     (x, y) = R ПҶ вҠ•ПҲ вҲ’cОө        = R ПҶ вҲ’c     .
                                dВөвӢҶ           e k   kвҲ’1    dВөвӢҶ    e k Оө dВөвӢҶ
                  dВөвӢҶ вҠ—ОҪвӢҶ dВөвӢҶ


The minimizer is achieved by setting K? = K, namely ПҖ2k = K вҠ— ОҪ. It follows that
                        dПҖ2k       d(K вҠ— ОҪвӢҶ )      eПҶk вҲ’cОө
                                 =             = R ПҶ вҲ’c     := eПҶk вҠ•ПҲk вҲ’cОө .
                     d(ВөвӢҶ вҠ— ОҪвӢҶ )   d(ВөвӢҶ вҠ— ОҪвӢҶ )    e k Оө dВөвӢҶ

In other words, we have ПҲk (y) = вҲ’ log в„Ұ eПҶk (x)вҲ’cОө (x,y) ВөвӢҶ (dx), which verifies the connections.
                                      R


D     E XPERIMENTAL D ETAILS
Reflection Implementations Lou & Ermon (2023) already gave a nice tutorial on the implementa-
tion of hypercube-related domains with image applications. For extensions to general domains, we
provide our solutions in Algorithm 4. The crucial component is a Domain Checker to verify if a point
is inside or outside of a domain, and it appears to be quite computationally expensive. To solve this
problem, we propose two solutions :
1) If there exists a computationally efficient conformal map that transforms a manifold into simple
shapes, such as a sphere or square, we can apply simple rules to conclude if a proposal is inside a
domain.
2) If the first solution is expensive, we can cache the domain through a fine-grid mesh {Xi,j,В·В·В· }i,j,В·В·В· .
Then, we approximate the condition via
                           min Distance(xМғkвҲ’1 , {Xi,j,В·В·В· }i,j,В·В·В· ) вүӨ threshold.
                          i,j,В·В·В·

With the parallelism in Torch or JAX, the above calculation can be quite efficient. Nevertheless, a
finer grid leads to a higher accuracy but also induces more computations. We can also expect the
curse of dimensionality in ultra-high-dimensional problems and simpler domains are more preferred
in such cases. Moreover, if xk+1 вҲҲ   / в„Ұ in extreme cases, one may consider ad-hoc rules with an
error that decreases as we anneal the learning rate. Other elegant solutions include slowing down the
process near the boundary or warping the geometry with a Riemannian metric (Fishman et al., 2023).

Algorithm 4 Practical Reflection Operator
  Simulate a proposal xМғk+1 via an SDE given xk вҲҲ в„Ұ.
  if Domain Checker: xМғk+1 вҲҲ в„Ұ then
     Set xk+1 = xМғk+1
  else
     Search (binary) the boundary xМҮk+1 вҲҲ вҲӮв„Ұ, where xМҮk+1 = О·xk + (1 вҲ’ О·)xМғk+1 for О· вҲҲ (0, 1).
     Compute ОҪ = xМғk+1 вҲ’ xМҮk+1 and the unit normal vector n associated with xМҮk+1 .
     Set xk+1 = xМҮk+1 + ОҪ вҲ’ 2вҹЁОҪ, nвҹ©n.
  end if


D.1     D OMAINS OF 2D S YNTHETIC DATA

We consider input t вҲҲ [0, 1] and output (x, y) вҲҲ R2 . The normal vector can be derived accordingly.
Flower (petals p = 5 and move out length m = 3)
                       r = sin(2ПҖpt) + m,      x = r cos(2ПҖt),      y = r sin(2ПҖt).

Heart
           x = 16 sin(2ПҖt)3 ,       y = 13 cos(2ПҖt) вҲ’ 5 cos(4ПҖt) вҲ’ 2 cos(6ПҖt) вҲ’ cos(8ПҖt).
Octagon (c + 1 edges (Xi , Yi )ci=0 with (Xc , Yc ) = (X0 , Y0 ))
      r = ct вҲ’ вҢҠctвҢӢ;    x = (1 вҲ’ r) В· XвҢҠctвҢӢ + r В· XвҢҠctвҢӢ+1 ;      y = (1 вҲ’ r) В· YвҢҠctвҢӢ + r В· YвҢҠctвҢӢ+1 .


                                                    23
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 2: Densities using (relected) Langevin diffusion with a practical running time and infinite time.

 SDE      Practical Time      Infinite Time   SDE             Practical Time             Infinite Time
 VP      Approx. Gaussian     Gaussian        RVP        Approx. Truncated Gaussian   Truncated Gaussian
 VE      Approx. Gaussian     Uniform         RVE        Approx. Truncated Uniform    Truncated Uniform



D.2    H OW TO INITIALIZE : WARM - UP S TUDY

Consider a Langevin diffusion (LD) and a reflected Langevin (RLD) with score functions S1 and S2 :
                       LD :     dxt = S1 (xt )dt + dwt ,                   xt вҲҲ Rd
                      RLD :     dxt = S2 (xt )dt + dwt + n(x)dLt ,         xt вҲҲ в„Ұ.

LD converges to Вө1 вҲқ eS1 (x) and RLD converges to Вө2 вҲқ eS2 (x) 1xвҲҲв„Ұ (Bubeck et al., 2018;
Lamperski, 2021) as t вҶ’ вҲһ. In other words, inheriting the score function S1 from LD to RLD (by
setting S1 = S2 ) yields the desired invariant distribution Вө1 1xвҲҲв„Ұ .
Denote by RVP (or RVE) the VP-SDE (or VE-SDE) in reflected SB. One can easily show in Table
2 that VP (or RVP) converges approximately to a (or truncated) Gaussian prior within a practical
training time, which implies an unconstrained VP-SDE diffusion model is a good warm-up candidate
for reflected SB. Empirically, we are able to verify this fact through 2D synthetic data.
However, this may not be the case for VE because it converges to a uniform measure in Rd but only
obtains an approximate Gaussian in a short time. By contrast, RVE converges to the invariant uniform
distribution much faster because it doesnвҖҷt need to fully explore Rd . This implies initializing the
score function from VE-based diffusion models for reflected SB may not be a good choice. Instead,
we use RVE-based diffusion models (Lou & Ermon, 2023) as the warm-up.

D.3    G ENERATION OF I MAGE DATA

Datasets. Both CIFAR-10 and ImageNet 64Г—64 are obtained from public resources. All RGB values
are between [0, 1]. The domain is в„Ұ = [0, 1]d , where d = 3 Г— 32 Г— 32 for the CIFAR-10 task,
d = 3 Г— 64 Г— 64 for the ImageNet task, d = 1 Г— 32 Г— 32 for the MNIST task.
SDE. We use reflected VESDE for the reference process due to its simplicity (Lou & Ermon, 2023),
and it helps with facilitating the warmup training. The SDE is discretized into 1000 steps. The
initial and the terminal scale of the diffusion are Пғmin = 0.01 and Пғmax = 5 respectively. The prior
reference is set as the uniform distribution on в„Ұ.
Training. The alternate training Algorithm 1 can be accelerated with proper initialization, and the
pre-training of the backward score model is critical for successfully training the model. At the
warmup phase, the forward score is set as zero and only the backward score model is trained by
inheriting the setup in the reflected SGM (Lou & Ermon, 2023). The learning rate is 10вҲ’5 . To
improve the training efficiency and stabilize the full path-based training target in Algorithm 1, We use
Exponential Moving Average (EMA) in the training with the decay rate of 0.99 (HyvaМҲrinen, 2005;
Vahdat et al., 2021; Lou & Ermon, 2023).
Neural networks. As the high accuracy inference task relies more on the backward score model than
the forward score model, the backward process is equipped with more advanced and larger structure.
The backward score function uses NCSN++ (Song et al., 2021b) for the CIFAR-10 task and ADM
(Dhariwal & Nichol, 2022) for the ImageNet task. The NCSN++ network has 107M parameters. The
ADM network has 295M parameters. For MNIST, a smaller U-Net structure with 1.3M parameters
(2 attention heads per attention layer, 1 residual block per downsample, 32 base channels) is used for
both forward and backward processes. Many previous studies have verified the success of these neural
networks in the diffusion based generative tasks (Song et al., 2021b; Lou & Ermon, 2023; Chen et al.,
2022b). The forward score function is modeled using a simpler U-Net with 62M parameters.
Inference. In both CIFAR-10 and ImageNet 64Г—64 tasks, images are generated unconditionally, and
the quality of the samples is evaluated using Frechet Inception Distance (FID) over 50,000 samples
(Heusel et al., 2017; Song et al., 2021b). In MNIST, the the quality of the samples is evaluated using


                                                    24
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Negative Log-Likelihood (NLL). Predictor-Corrector using reflected Langevin dynamics is used to
further improve the result which does not require any change of the model structure (Song et al.,
2021b; Chen et al., 2022b; Lou & Ermon, 2023; Bubeck et al., 2018).
                                                        вҲҡ
                    xвҖІt = reflection xt + Пғt s(t, xt ) + 2Пғt Оө , Оө вҲј N (0, I)
                                                                            2
                                 1 вҶ’                                      2rSNR  g 2 вҲҘОөвҲҘ2
                   s(t, xt ) =    [вҲ’
                                   z Оё (t, xt ) + вҶҗ
                                                  вҲ’
                                                  zПүt (t, xt )],   Пғt =
                                 g t                                       вҲҘs(t, xt )вҲҘ2

where вҶ’
      вҲ’
      z Оёt , вҶҗ
             вҲ’
             zПүt are the backward and forward score functions as in Algorithm 1.

The likelihood of the diffusion model follows the probabilistic flow neural ODE (Song et al., 2021b;
Chen et al., 2022b; Lou & Ermon, 2023)
                                            1
                         dxt = f (xt , t) вҲ’ g(t)2 s(t, xt ) dt := fЛң(xt , t)dt

                                            2
                                                        Z T
                          log p0 (x0 ) = log pT (xT ) +      вҲҮ В· fЛң(xt , t)dt
                                                               0


                    Figure 6: Generated samples via reflected SB on MNIST.


                                                      25
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                 Figure 7: Generated samples via reflected SB on CIFAR-10.


                                             26
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                  Figure 8: Generated samples via reflected SB on ImageNet-64.


D.4   G ENERATION IN THE S IMPLEX D OMAIN

Alongside the irregular domains illustrated in Figure 2 and the hypercube for image generation,
we implement the method on the high-dimensional projected simplex using a similar approach   as
described in Lou & Ermon (2023). A d-projected simplex is defined as вҲҶВҜ d := {x вҲҲ Rd : P xi вүӨ
                                                                                        i
1, xi вүҘ 0}.
The data is created by collecting the image classification scores of Inception v3 from the last softmax
layer with 1008 dimension. All the data fit into the projected simplex вҲҶ  ВҜ 1008 . The Inception model
is loaded from a pretrained checkpoint* , and the classification task is performed on the 64 Г— 64
Imagenet validation dataset of 50,000 images. Similar to Lou & Ermon (2023), the diffusion path is
constrained within the projected simplex using the stick breaking method as follows:
                                                     d
                                                     Y
                                    [f (x)]i = xi        (1 вҲ’ xj )
                                                    j=i+1


   * https://github.com/mseitzer/pytorch-fid/releases/download/fid_weights


                                                  27
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


The corresponding inverse mapping is,
                                                          yi
                                    [f вҲ’1 (y)]i =        Pd
                                                    1вҲ’    j=i+1 yj

In every diffusion step, we first use the reflection operator to limit the data within hypercube, then
apply the above stick breaking method to constrain the data within the projected simplex. The neural
network of the score function is composed of 6 dense layers with 512 latent nodes.
The results are shown in Figure 8. We compare the generated distribution of the most likely classes.
The category index is in the same order of the pre-trained modelвҖҷs output. The last plot in Figure
8 compares the cumulative distribution of the ground truth and generated distribution, providing a
cleaner view of the comparison. The curve closely follows the diagonal in the CDF comparison,
signifying a strong alignment between the true data distribution and the distribution derived from the
generative model.


                                Figure 9: Data generation in simplex.


D.5    O PTIMAL T RANSPORT H ELPS R EDUCE NFE S

To demonstrate the effectiveness of OT in reducing the number of function evaluations (NFEs), we
study generations based on different NFEs (10, 20, 80) and compare the reflected SchroМҲdinger bridge
with reflected diffusion (implicit) (Fishman et al., 2023). We use the same setup (e.g. implicit training
loss with the same training budget) to be consistent except that reflected SB uses a well-optimized
forward network вҶ’   вҲ’
                    z Оёt to train the backward network вҶҗвҲ’zПүt while reflected diffusion can be viewed as
                                          вҶ’
                                          вҲ’ Оё
the first stage of SB training by fixing z t вүЎ 0.
We observe in Figure 10 that in the regime of NFE=20, both reflected diffusion (implicit) and reflected
SB demonstrate remarkably similar generation performance. Despite the inherent compromise in
sample quality with smaller NFEs, our investigation revealed that a well-optimized вҶ’ вҲ’
                                                                                     z Оёt significantly
                        вҶҗ
                        вҲ’ Пү                                вҶ’
                                                           вҲ’  Оё
contributes to training z t compared to the baseline with z t вүЎ 0, leading to an improved sample
quality even in cases where NFE is set to 10 and 12.


Figure 10: Reflected SchroМҲdinger bridge v.s. reflected diffusion (implicit) based on different NFEs.

                                                    28
