Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Q UANTIFYING THE S ENSITIVITY OF I NVERSE R EIN -
FORCEMENT L EARNING TO M ISSPECIFICATION

 Joar Skalse & Alessandro Abate
 Department of Computer Science
 Oxford University
 {joar.skalse,aabate}@cs.ox.ac.uk



                                              A BSTRACT

         Inverse reinforcement learning (IRL) aims to infer an agent’s preferences (repre-
         sented as a reward function R) from their behaviour (represented as a policy π). To
         do this, we need a behavioural model of how π relates to R. In the current litera-
         ture, the most common behavioural models are optimality, Boltzmann-rationality,
         and causal entropy maximisation. However, the true relationship between a hu-
         man’s preferences and their behaviour is much more complex than any of these
         behavioural models. This means that the behavioural models are misspecified,
         which raises the concern that they may lead to systematic errors if applied to real
         data. In this paper, we analyse how sensitive the IRL problem is to misspecifica-
         tion of the behavioural model. Specifically, we provide necessary and sufficient
         conditions that completely characterise how the observed data may differ from the
         assumed behavioural model without incurring an error above a given threshold. In
         addition to this, we also characterise the conditions under which a behavioural
         model is robust to small perturbations of the observed policy, and we analyse how
         robust many behavioural models are to misspecification of their parameter values
         (such as e.g. the discount rate). Our analysis suggests that the IRL problem is
         highly sensitive to misspecification, in the sense that very mild misspecification
         can lead to very large errors in the inferred reward function.



1    I NTRODUCTION

Inverse reinforcement learning (IRL) is a subfield of machine learning that aims to develop tech-
niques for inferring an agent’s preferences based on their actions in a sequential decision-making
problem (Ng & Russell, 2000). There are many motivations for IRL. One motivation is to use it as
a tool for imitation learning, where the objective is to replicate the behaviour of an expert in some
task (e.g. Hussein et al., 2017). In this context, it is not essential that the inferred preferences reflect
the actual intentions of the expert, as long as they improve the imitation learning process. Another
motivation for IRL is to use it as a tool for preference elicitation, where the objective is to under-
stand an agent’s goals or desires (e.g. Hadfield-Menell et al., 2016). In this context, it is of central
importance that the inferred preferences reflect the actual preferences of the observed agent. In this
paper, we are primarily concerned with this second motivation.
An IRL algorithm must make assumptions about how the preferences of the observed agent relate to
its behaviour. Specifically, in IRL, preferences are typically modelled as a reward function R, and
behaviour is typically modelled as a policy π. An IRL algorithm must therefore have a behavioural
model that describes how π is computed from R; by inverting this model, R can then be deduced
based on π. In the current literature, the most common behavioural models are optimality, Boltzmann
rationality, or causal entropy maximisation. These behavioural models essentially assume that the
observed agent behaves in a way that is (noisily) optimal according to its preferences.
One of the central difficulties in IRL is that the true relationship between a person’s preferences and
their actions in general is incredibly complex. This means that it typically is very difficult to specify
a behavioural model that is perfectly accurate. For example, optimality, Boltzmann-rationality, and
causal entropy maximisation are all very simple models that clearly do not capture all the nuances


                                                     1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


of human behaviour.1 This means that these behavioural models are misspecified, which raises the
concern that they might systematically lead to flawed inferences if applied to real data.
In this paper, we study how robust IRL is to misspecification of the behavioural model. If an IRL
algorithm that assumes a particular behavioural model is shown data from an agent whose behaviour
violates the assumptions behind this model, then will the inferred reward function still be close to the
true reward function? We will analyse this question mathematically, and provide several quantitative
answers. In particular, we provide necessary and sufficient conditions that completely characterise
what types of misspecification a wide class of behavioural models will tolerate. In addition to
this, we also study two specific types of misspecification in more detail (namely, perturbation of
the observed policy, and misspecification of the parameters in the behavioural model) and provide
additional results that describe how they affect the quality of the inferred reward. Our analysis is
highly general – it applies to the three behavioural models that are most common in the current IRL
literature, but is also directly applicable to a much wider class of models.
The motivation behind this paper is to contribute towards a theoretically principled understanding
of when IRL methods are applicable to the problem of preference elicitation. Human behaviour is
very complex, and while we can create behavioural models that are more accurate, it will never be
realistically possible to create a behavioural model that is totally free from misspecification. It is
therefore crucial to have an understanding of how robust the IRL problem is to misspecification,
and whether a small amount of misspecification leads to a proportionally small error in the inferred
reward function. Our work aims to further our understanding of these question.


1.1   R ELATED W ORK

There are two previous papers that analyse how robust the IRL problem is to misspecified be-
havioural models; Hong et al. (2022) and Skalse & Abate (2023). Our work is more complete
than these earlier works in several important respects. To start with, our problem setup is both more
realistic, and more general. In particular, in order to quantify how robust IRL is to misspecification,
we first need a way to formalise what it means for two reward functions to be “close”. Skalse &
Abate (2023) formalise this in terms of equivalence relations, under which two reward functions
are either equivalent or not. As such, their analysis is somewhat blunt, and is unable to distinguish
between small errors and large errors in the inferred reward. Hong et al. (2022) instead use the
ℓ2 -distance between the reward functions. However, this choice is also problematic, because two
reward functions can be very dissimilar even though they have a small ℓ2 -distance, and vice versa
(cf. Section 2.2). By contrast, our analysis is carried out in terms of specially selected metrics on the
space of all reward functions, which are backed by strong theoretical guarantees. Moreover, Hong
et al. (2022) assume that there is a unique reward function that maximises fit to the training data,
but this is violated in most real-world cases (Ng & Russell, 2000; Dvijotham & Todorov, 2010; Cao
et al., 2021; Kim et al., 2021; Skalse et al., 2022; Schlaginhaufen & Kamgarpour, 2023). In addition
to this, many of their results also assume “strong log-concavity”, which is a rather opaque condi-
tion that is left mostly unexamined. Indeed, Hong et al. (2022) explicitly do not answer if strong
log-concavity should be expected to hold under typical circumstances. Both Skalse & Abate (2023)
and Hong et al. (2022) recognise these issues as limitations that should be lifted in future work. The
analysis we carry out in this paper is not subject to any of these limitations. Moreover, in addition
to being based on a more sound problem formulation, our paper also contains several novel results
that are not analogous to any results derived by Skalse & Abate (2023) or Hong et al. (2022).
There are also earlier papers that study some specific types of misspecification in IRL. In particular,
Freedman et al. (2020) study the effects of misspecified choice sets in IRL, and show that such
misspecification in some cases can be catastrophic, and Viano et al. (2021) study the effects of
misspecified environment dynamics, and propose an algorithm for reducing this effect. By contrast,
we present a broader analysis that covers all forms of misspecification, within a single framework.
Also relevant is the work by Armstrong & Mindermann (2018), who show that it is impossible to
simultaneously learn a reward function and a behavioural model from a single data set, given an
inductive bias towards joint simplicity.

   1
     Indeed, there are detectable differences between data collected from human subjects and data synthesised
using these standard behavioural models, see Orsini et al. (2021).


                                                     2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


1.2       P RELIMINARIES

A Markov Decision Processes (MDP) is a tuple (S, A, τ, µ0 , R, γ) where S is a set of states, A
is a set of actions, τ : S×A → ∆(S) is a transition function, µ0 ∈ ∆(S) is an initial state
distribution, R : S×A×S → R is a reward function, and γ ∈ (0, 1) is a discount rate. Here ∆(X)
denotes the set of all probability distributions over X. In this paper, we assume that S and A are
finite, and that all states are reachable under τ and µ0 . A policy is a function π : S → ∆(A). A
trajectory ξ = ⟨s0 , a0 , s1 , a1 . . . ⟩ is a possible path inPan MDP. The return function G gives the
                                                                 ∞
cumulative discounted reward of a trajectory, G(ξ) = t=0 γ t R(st , at , st+1 ), and the evaluation
function J gives the expected trajectory return given a policy, J(π) = Eξ∼π [G(ξ)]. A policy
maximising J is an optimal policy. The value function V π : S → R of a policy encodes the
expected future discounted reward from each state when following that policy, and the Q-function
is Qπ (s, a) = E [R(s, a, S ′ ) + γV π (S ′ )]. Q⋆ and V ⋆ denote the optimal Q- and value-function.
An IRL algorithm needs a behavioural model that describes how the observed policy π relates to the
underlying reward function R. In the current IRL literature, the most common models are optimal-
ity, where it is assumed that π is optimal under R (e.g. Ng & Russell, 2000), Boltzmann-rationality,
                                                ⋆
where it is assumed that P(π(s) = a) ∝ eβQ (s,a) , where β is a temperature parameter (e.g. Ra-
machandran & Amir, 2007), and maximal causal entropy      P(MCE),  where it is assumed that π max-
                                                            ∞
imises the causal entropy objective, which is given by E[ t=0 γ t (R(St , At , St+1 ) + αH(π(St )))],
where α is a weight and H is the Shannon entropy function (e.g. Ziebart, 2010).
Two reward functions R1 , R2 are said to differ by potential shaping (with γ) if there is a function
Φ : S → R such that R2 (s, a, s′ ) = R1 (s, a, s′ ) + γΦ(s′ ) − Φ(s) (Ng et al., 1999), by S ′ -
redistribution (with τ ) if ES ′ ∼τ (s,a) [R1 (s, a, S ′ )] = ES ′ ∼τ (s,a) [R2 (s, a, S ′ )] (Skalse et al., 2022),
and by positive linear scaling if there is a positive constant c such that R2 = c · R1 .
Given a set X, a pseudometric on X is any function d : X × X → R that satisfies the conditions that
d(x, x) = 0, d(x, y) ≥ 0, d(x, y) = d(y, x), and d(x, z) ≤ d(x, y) + d(y, z), for all x, y, z ∈ X. A
metric additionally satisfies that if d(x, y) = 0 then x = y.
If a reward function R satisfies that J(π1 ) = J(π2 ) for all π1 and π2 , then we say that R is trivial.
All constant reward functions are trivial, but there are always non-constant trivial rewards as well.2


2       T HEORETICAL F RAMEWORK

In this section, we will introduce the theoretical definitions and machinery that we will later use to
analyse how robust the IRL problem is to different forms of misspecification.

2.1       D EFINING M ISSPECIFICATION ROBUSTNESS

Before we can derive formal results about what types of misspecification different IRL algorithms
are robust to, we first need to construct an abstract model of the IRL problem. First of all, assume
that we have a fixed set of states S and a fixed set of actions A, that R is the set of all reward
functions R : S×A×S → R, and that Π is the set of all policies π : S → ∆(A). We say that a
behavioural model is a function f : R → Π, i.e. a function that takes a reward function and returns
a policy. For example, the function that, given R, returns the Boltzmann-rational policy of R under
transition function τ , discount γ, and temperature β, is an example of a behavioural model. Using
this, we can now model the IRL learning problem as follows: first, we assume that there is a true
underlying reward function R⋆ , and that the training data is generated by a behavioural model g, so
that the learning algorithm observes the policy π given by g(R⋆ ). Moreover, we assume that an IRL
algorithm L has a model f of how the observed policy π relates to R⋆ , where f is also a behavioural
model, such that L converges to a reward function Rh which satisfies f (Rh ) = π = g(R⋆ ). If
f ̸= g, then f is misspecified, and otherwise f is correctly specified.
For convenience, if f (R1 ) = f (R2 ) whenever R1 and R2 differ by potential shaping, then we say
that f is invariant to potential shaping, and similarly for S ′ -redistribution and positive linear scaling.

    2
        These are given by applying potential shaping and S ′ -redistribution to a constant reward function.


                                                           3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


In many contexts, we have prior information about R⋆ , beyond the information provided by g(R⋆ ).
For example, we may know that R⋆ is defined in terms of some sparse state features, or we may
know that it only depends on the states, and so on. To model this, we give our definitions relative
to an arbitrary set of reward functions R̂ ⊆ R. We then assume that the true reward function R⋆
is contained in R̂, and that the learning algorithm L will learn a reward function Rh that is also
contained in R̂. Unless otherwise stated, our results apply for any choice of R̂ (including R̂ = R).
Intuitively speaking, we want to say that a behavioural model f is robust to misspecification with g if
a learning algorithm that is based on f is guaranteed to learn a reward function that is “close” to the
true reward function if it is trained on data generated from g. To make this statement formal, we need
a definition of what it means for two reward functions to be “close”. In this paper, we assume that
this is defined in terms of some pseudometric dR on R. In Section 2.2, we discuss how to choose
this pseudometric. Unless otherwise stated, our results apply for any choice of pseudometric. Note
also that while dR of course may be a proper metric, we allow it to be a pseudometric since we may
want to consider distinct reward functions to be equivalent. Using this, we can now give our formal
definition of misspecification robustness:
Definition 1. Given a set of reward functions R̂ ⊆ R, a pseudometric dR on R̂, and two behavioural
models f, g : R̂ → Π, we say that f is ϵ-robust to misspecification with g if each of the following
conditions are satisfied:

      1. If f (R1 ) = g(R2 ) then dR (R1 , R2 ) ≤ ϵ, for all R1 , R2 ∈ R̂.

      2. If f (R1 ) = f (R2 ) then dR (R1 , R2 ) ≤ ϵ, for all R1 , R2 ∈ R̂.

      3. Im(g) ⊆ Im(f ) on R̂.

      4. There exists R1 , R2 ∈ R̂ such that f (R1 ) ̸= g(R2 ).

Before moving on, let us explain each of these conditions intuitively. The first condition is saying
that any learning algorithm L based on f is guaranteed to learn a reward function that has a distance
of at most ϵ to the true reward function when trained on data generated from g; this is the core
property of misspecification robustness. Similarly, the second condition is saying that any learning
algorithm L based on f is guaranteed to learn a reward function that has a distance of at most ϵ to the
true reward function when there is no misspecification; this condition is included to rule out certain
pathological edge cases. The third condition is effectively saying that L can never observe a policy
that is impossible according to its model. Depending on how L behaves, it may in some cases be
possible to drop this condition, but we include it to make our analysis as general as possible. The
fourth condition is simply saying that f and g are distinct on R̂ (otherwise f is not misspecified!).
More extensive discussion of Definition 1, including more subtle issues, is given in Appendix A.
We are particularly interested in the three behavioural models that are most common in the current
IRL literature, and so we will use special notation for these models. Given a transition function τ
and a discount parameter γ, let bτ,γ,β : R → Π be the function that returns the Boltzmann-rational
policy of R with temperature β, and let cτ,γ,α : R → Π be the function that returns the MCE policy
of R with weight α. Similarly, let oτ,γ : R → Π be the function that returns the optimal policy of R
that takes all optimal actions with equal probability.

2.2   R EWARD F UNCTION M ETRICS

We wish to obtain results that describe how different the learnt reward function Rh may be compared
to the underlying true reward function R⋆ , given different forms of misspecification. To do this, we
need a way to quantify the difference between Rh and R⋆ , in the form of a pseudometric dR on R.
However, finding an appropriate choice of dR is not straightforward. For example, suppose we sim-
ply let dR (Rh , R⋆ ) = ||Rh − R⋆ ||2 . In that case, we would have that dR (Rh , R⋆ ) can be arbitrarily
large, even if Rh and R⋆ have the same ordering of policies, and similarly, that dR (Rh , R⋆ ) can be
arbitrarily small, even if Rh and R⋆ have the opposite ordering of policies.3 This means that the
ℓ2 -distance between Rh and R⋆ does not quantify their qualitative difference in a useful way.
    3
      To see this, let R be any nontrivial reward function. Then for any positive c, we have that R and cR have
the same ordering of policies, but by making c large, we can make ||R − cR||2 arbitrarily large. Similarly, for


                                                      4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Intuitively, we want a pseudometric dR with the property that dR (Rh , R⋆ ) is small if (and only if)
it would be safe to optimise Rh instead of R⋆ . As we have just argued, the ℓ2 -norm does not satisfy
this condition. Instead, we will use a STARC-metric, introduced by Skalse et al. (2023):
Definition 2. Let τ be a transition function and γ be a discount factor. Given a reward function
R, let Vτ,γ (R) be the set of all reward functions that differ from R by potential shaping (with γ)
and S ′ -redistribution (with τ ). Let cSTARC
                                        τ,γ     : R → R be the function where cSTARC  τ,γ    (R) returns
the element of Vτ,γ (R) that has the smallest ℓ2 -norm.4 Moreover, let sSTARC  τ,γ    :  R  →   R be the
                   STARC           STARC         STARC                STARC                   STARC
function where sτ,γ      (R) = cτ,γ      (R)/||cτ,γ      (R)||2 if ||cτ,γ    (R)||2 > 0, and cτ,γ   (R)
otherwise. Finally, let dSTARC
                          τ,γ     : R × R   → [0, 1] be the function   given by
                      dSTARC
                       τ,γ   (R1 , R2 ) = 0.5 · ||sSTARC
                                                   τ,γ   (R1 ) − sSTARC
                                                                  τ,γ   (R2 )||2 .

There is extensive justification for measuring the distance between reward functions in terms of
dSTARC
 τ,γ     . However, because the full justification is quite long, and because this justification is not
essential to understand most of our results, we have decided to provide it in Appendix B, instead of
the main text. Appendix B also contains a less formal, more intuitive explanation of Definition 2.
For now, it is sufficient to know that dSTARC
                                        τ,γ     (R1 , R2 ) = 0 if and only if R1 and R2 induce the
same ordering of policies under τ and γ. Moreover, while some of our results are given in terms of
dSTARC
 τ,γ     , we also have many results that apply for any choice of pseudometric on R. This will be
clearly stated in each theorem.
Another prominent pseudometric on R is EPIC, proposed by Gleave et al. (2021). Appendix C puts
forward reasons to not use EPIC for the kind of analysis that we undertake this paper.

2.3   BACKGROUND R ESULTS

In this section, we give a few important results from earlier works that we will rely on throughout
this paper, and which will also be helpful for contextualising our results. First, it is useful to know
under what conditions two reward functions have the same ordering of policies:
Proposition 1. (S, A, τ, µ0 , R1 , γ) and (S, A, τ, µ0 , R2 , γ) have the same ordering of policies if
and only if R1 and R2 differ by potential shaping (with γ), S ′ -redistribution (with τ ), and positive
linear scaling.
For a proof of Proposition 1, see Skalse & Abate (2023) (their Theorem 2.6). Also recall that
dSTARC
 τ,γ    (R1 , R2 ) = 0 if and only if R1 and R2 induce the same ordering of policies. Next, it is also
useful to know under what conditions f (R1 ) = f (R2 ) when f is the Boltzmann-rational model or
the maximal causal entropy model:
Proposition 2. For any τ , γ, and β, we have that bτ,γ,β and cτ,γ,α are invariant to potential shaping
(with γ) and S ′ -redistribution (with τ ), and no other transformations.
For a proof of Proposition 2, see Skalse et al. (2022) (their Theorem 3.3). Note that Propositions 1
and 2 together imply that any learning algorithm L that is based on either the Boltzmann-rational
model or the MCE-model is guaranteed to learn a reward function Rh that has the same ordering of
policies as the true reward function R⋆ when there is no misspecification.

3     M ISSPECIFICATION ROBUSTNESS
In this section, we provide our main results about the misspecification robustness of various be-
havioural models, including the behavioural models that are most common in the IRL literature.
Section 3.1 is quite dense, but 3.2 and 3.3 both provide more intuitive takeaways.

3.1   N ECESSARY AND S UFFICIENT C ONDITIONS

Given a behavioural model f , it is desirable to have necessary and sufficient conditions that com-
pletely characterise when f is robust to misspecification with g. Surprisingly, our first result shows
any positive ϵ, we have that ϵR and −ϵR have the opposite ordering of policies. However, by making ϵ small,
we can make ||ϵR − (−ϵR)||2 arbitrarily small.
   4
     Vτ,γ (R) is an affine subspace of R, so there is a unique element of Vτ,γ (R) that minimises the ℓ2 -norm.


                                                      5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


that if f (R1 ) = f (R2 ) =⇒ dR (R1 , R2 ) = 0, then we can derive such necessary and sufficient
conditions in a relatively straightforward way:
Theorem 1. Let R̂ be a set of reward functions, let f : R̂ → Π be a behavioural model, and let dR
be a pseudometric on R̂. Assume that f (R1 ) = f (R2 ) =⇒ dR (R1 , R2 ) = 0 for all R1 , R2 ∈ R̂.
Then f is ϵ-robust to misspecification with g (as defined by dR ) if and only if g = f ◦ t for some
t : R̂ → R̂ such that dR (R, t(R)) ≤ ϵ for all R ∈ R̂, and such that f ̸= g.
Recall that dSTARC
              τ,γ    (R1 , R2 ) = 0 if and only if R1 and R2 induce the same ordering of policies.
Thus, if our reward metric is dSTARC
                                τ,γ     , then Theorem 1 applies to any behavioural model f for which
f (R1 ) = f (R2 ) implies that R1 and R2 have the same policy ordering. Moreover, also recall that
both the Boltzmann-rational model and the MCE model satisfy this condition (Propositions 1 and
2). Thus, if we can find the set Tϵ of all transformations t : R̂ → R̂ such that dR (R, t(R)) ≤ ϵ, then
we can get the set of all behavioural models g to which f is ϵ-robust to misspecification by simply
composing f with each element of Tϵ . We next derive Tϵ :
Proposition 3. A transformation t : R → R satisfies that dSTARC   τ,γ      (R, t(R)) ≤ ϵ for all R ∈ R if
and only if t can be expressed as t1 ◦ · · · ◦ tn−1 ◦ tn ◦ tn+1 ◦ · · · ◦ tm for some n and m where
                       ||R − tn (R)||2 ≤ ||cSTARC
                                            τ,γ   (R)||2 · sin(2 arcsin(ϵ/2))
for all R, and for all i ̸= n and all R, we have that R and ti (R) differ by potential shaping (with
γ), S ′ -redistribution (with τ ), or positive linear scaling.
The statement of Proposition 3 is quite terse, so let us briefly unpack it. First of all, dSTARC
                                                                                              τ,γ    is
invariant to any transformation that preserves the policy ordering of the reward function, and these
transformations are exactly those that can be expressed as a combination of potential shaping, S ′ -
redistribution, and positive linear scaling. As such, we can apply an arbitrary number of such
transformations. Moreover, we can also transform R in any way that does not change the stan-
dardised reward function sSTARC
                            τ,γ    (R) by more than ϵ; this is equivalent to the stated condition on
tn . Note that sin(2 arcsin(ϵ/2)) ≈ ϵ for small ϵ, so the right-hand side is approximately equal to
ϵ · ||cSTARC
       τ,γ   (R)||2 . However, also note that ||cSTARC
                                                 τ,γ   (R)||2 ≤ ||R||2 . Intuitively speaking, a reward
transformation satisfies the conditions given in Proposition 3 if it never changes the policy order of
the reward function by a large amount.
Using this, we can now state necessary and sufficient conditions that completely characterise all
types of misspecification that the Boltzmann-rational model and the MCE model will tolerate:
Corollary 1. Let R̂ be a set of reward functions, τ be a transition function, γ a discount factor, β a
temperature parameter, and α a weight parameter. Let Tˆϵ be the set of all functions t : R → R that
satisfy Proposition 3, and additionally satisfy that t(R) ∈ R̂ for all R ∈ R̂. Then bτ,γ,β : R̂ → Π
is ϵ-robust to misspecification with g (as defined by dSTARC
                                                         τ,γ     ) if and only if g = bτ,γ,β ◦ t for some
t ∈ Tˆϵ such that bτ,γ,β ̸= g, and cτ,γ,α : R̂ → Π is ϵ-robust to misspecification with g (as defined
by dSTARC
     τ,γ    ) if and only if g = cτ,γ,α ◦ t for some t ∈ Tˆϵ such that cτ,γ,α ̸= g.
In principle, Corollary 1 completely describes the misspecification robustness of the Boltzmann-
rational model and of the MCE model (for any R̂). However, the statement of Corollary 1 is rather
opaque, and difficult to interpret qualitatively. For this reason, we will in the subsequent sections
examine a few important special types of misspecification, and analyse them individually.
We should also briefly comment on the fact that Corollary 1 does not cover oτ,γ , i.e. the optimality
model. The reason for this is that, unless |S| = 1 and |A| = 2, there are reward functions R1 , R2
such that oτ,γ (R1 ) = oτ,γ (R2 ), but dSTARC
                                        τ,γ   (R1 , R2 ) > 0. This ought to be intuitive: two reward
functions can have the same optimal policies, but have different policy orderings. This means that
Theorem 1 does not apply to oτ,γ when dR = dSTARC
                                                τ,γ      . Moreover:
Proposition 4. Unless |S| = 1 and |A| = 2, then for any τ and any γ there exists an E > 0 such
that for all ϵ < E, there is no behavioural model g such that oτ,γ is ϵ-robust to misspecification with
g (as defined by dSTARC
                  τ,γ     ).
This is simply a consequence of the fact that the second condition of Definition 1 will be violated
for any ϵ that is sufficiently small. An analogous result will hold for any behavioural model f and
any pseudometric dR for which f (R1 ) = f (R2 ) =⇒  ̸    dR (R1 , R2 ) = 0.


                                                   6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


3.2    P ERTURBATION ROBUSTNESS

It is interesting to know whether or not a behavioural model f is robust to misspecification with
any behavioural model g that is “close” to f . But what does it mean for f and g to be “close”?
One option is to say that f and g are close if they always produce similar policies. In this section,
we will explore under what conditions f is robust to such misspecification, and provide necessary
and sufficient conditions. Our results are given relative to a pseudometric dΠ on Π. For example,
dΠ (π1 , π2 ) may be the ℓ2 -distance between π1 and π2 , or it may be the KL divergence between
their trajectory distributions, or it may be the ℓ2 -distance between their occupancy measures, etc. As
usual, our results apply for any choice of dΠ unless otherwise stated. We can now define a notion of
a perturbation and a notion of perturbation robustness:
Definition 3. Let R̂ be a set of reward functions, let f, g : R̂ → Π be two behavioural models, and
let dΠ be a pseudometric on Π. Then g is a δ-perturbation of f if g ̸= f and for all R ∈ R̂ we have
that dΠ (f (R), g(R)) ≤ δ.
Definition 4. Let R̂ be a set of reward functions, let f : R̂ → Π be a behavioural model, let dR be
a pseudometric on R̂, and let dΠ be a pseudometric on Π. Then f is ϵ-robust to δ-perturbation if f
is ϵ-robust to misspecification with g (as defined by dR ) for any behavioural model g : R̂ → Π that
is a δ-perturbation of f (as defined by dΠ ) with Im(g) ⊆ Im(f ).

A δ-perturbation of f simply is any function that is similar to f on all inputs, and f is ϵ-robust to
δ-perturbation if a small perturbation of the observed policy leads to a small error in the inferred
reward function. It would be desirable for a behavioural model to be robust in this sense. To start
with, this captures any form of misspecification that always leads to a small change in the final
policy. Moreover, in practice, we can often not observe the exact policy of the demonstrator, and
must instead approximate it from a number of samples. In this case, we should also expect to infer
a policy that is a perturbation of the true policy. Before moving on, we need one more definition:
Definition 5. Let R̂ be a set of reward functions, let f : R̂ → Π be a behavioural model, let
dR be a pseudometric on R̂, and let dΠ be a pseudometric on Π. Then f is ϵ/δ-separating if
dR (R1 , R2 ) > ϵ =⇒ dΠ (f (R1 ), f (R2 )) > δ for all R1 , R2 ∈ R̂.

Intuitively speaking, f is ϵ/δ-separating if reward functions that are far apart, are sent to policies
that are far apart.5 Using this, we can now state our main result for this section:
Theorem 2. Let R̂ be a set of reward functions, let f : R̂ → Π be a behavioural model, let dR be
a pseudometric on R̂, and let dΠ be a pseudometric on Π. Then f is ϵ-robust to δ-perturbation (as
defined by dR and dΠ ) if and only if f is ϵ/δ-separating (as defined by dR and dΠ ).

We have thus obtained necessary and sufficient conditions that describe when a behavioural model
is robust to perturbations — namely, it has to be the case that this behavioural model sends reward
functions that are far apart, to policies that are far apart. This ought to be quite intuitive; if two
policies are close, then perturbations may lead us to conflate them. To be sure that the learnt reward
function is close to the true reward function, we therefore need it to be the case that policies that
are close always correspond to reward functions that are close (or, conversely, that reward functions
which are far apart correspond to policies which are far apart).
Our next question is, of course, whether or not the standard behavioural models are ϵ/δ-separating.
Surprisingly, we will show that this is not the case, when the distance between reward functions is
measured using dSTARC
                 τ,γ     , and the policy metric dΠ is similar to Euclidean distance. Moreover, we
only need very mild assumptions about the behavioural model to obtain this result:
Theorem 3. Let dR be dSTARC  τ,γ      , and let dΠ be a pseudometric on Π which satisfies the condition
that for all δ there exists a δ ′ such that if ||π1 −π2 ||2 < δ ′ then dΠ (π1 , π2 ) < δ. Let c be any positive
constant, and let R̂ be a set of reward functions such that if ||R||2 = c then R ∈ R̂. Let f : R̂ → Π
be a behavioural model that is continuous. Then f is not ϵ/δ-separating for any ϵ < 1 or δ > 0.
     5
       Note that this definition is not saying that reward functions which are close must be sent to policies which
are close. In other words, f being ϵ/δ-separating is not a continuity condition. It is also not a local property of
f , but rather, a global property. It is, however, a continuity condition on the inverse of f .


                                                        7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


This theorem is telling us several things at once. To make things easy, we can begin by noting that
we may let R̂ = R, and that we may assume that dΠ simply is the ℓ2 -norm, i.e. dΠ (π1 , π2 ) =
||π1 − π2 ||2 . Theorem 3 is then telling us that no continuous behavioural model is ϵ/δ-separating
for any ϵ or δ (and therefore, by Theorem 2, also not ϵ-robust to δ-perturbation for any ϵ or δ). Note
that the Boltzmann-rational model and the maximal causal entropy model (i.e. bτ,γ,β and cτ,γ,α )
both are continuous, and hence subject to Theorem 3. The condition given on dΠ in Theorem 3 is
simply a generalisation, that covers other policy-metrics than the ℓ2 -norm.6 Similarly, the condition
on R̂ is also a generalisation to certain restricted reward spaces. We give a more in-depth, intuitive
interpretation of Theorem 3, and an explanation of why it is true, in Appendix D.

3.3    M ISSPECIFIED PARAMETERS

A behavioural model is typically defined relative to some parameters. For example, the Boltzmann-
rational model is defined relative to a temperature parameter β and a discount parameter γ, as well
as the transition dynamics τ . Moreover, determining the exact values of these parameters ex post
facto can often be quite difficult. For example, there is a sizeable literature that attempts to estimate
the rate at which humans discount future reward, and there is a fairly large range in the estimates
that this literature produces (e.g. Percoco & Nijkamp, 2009). It is therefore interesting to know to
what extent a behavioural model is robust to misspecification of its parameters. If π is Boltzmann-
rational for discount parameter γ1 , but an IRL algorithm interprets it as being Boltzmann-rational
for discount parameter γ2 , where γ1 ≈ γ2 , then are we still guaranteed to learn a reward function
that is close to the true reward function? These are the questions that we will study in this section.
We will first consider the case when the discount parameter, γ, is misspecified. Say that a transition
function τ is trivial if for all states s and all actions a1 , a2 , we have that τ (s, a1 ) = τ (s, a2 ). We
now have the following rather surprising result:
Theorem 4. If fγ : R → Π is invariant to potential shaping with γ, and γ1 ̸= γ2 , then fγ1 is not
ϵ-robust to misspecification with fγ2 under dSTARC
                                             τ,γ3  for any non-trivial τ , any γ3 , and any ϵ < 0.5.

Note that Theorem 4 permits that γ3 = γ1 or γ3 = γ2 . Of course, any interesting environment will
have a non-trivial transition function, so this requirement is very mild. Moreover, a dSTARC
                                                                                       τ,γ     -distance
of 0.5 is very large; this corresponds to the case where the reward functions are nearly orthogonal.
This means that Theorem 4 is saying that if a behavioural model f is invariant to potential shaping,
then it is not robust to any misspecification of the discount parameter. Note that this holds even
if γ1 and γ2 are arbitrarily close! Moreover, optimal policies, Boltzmann-rational policies, and
MCE policies are all invariant to potential shaping, and hence oτ,γ , bτ,γ,β , and cτ,γ,α are subject to
Theorem 4. In general, we should expect any behavioural model that uses exponential discounting
to be invariant to potential shaping, and so Theorem 4 will apply very widely.
We will next consider the case when the transition function, τ , is misspecified. Here, we similarly
find that a very wide class of behavioural models are non-robust to any amount of misspecification:
Theorem 5. If fτ : R → Π is invariant to S ′ -redistribution with τ , and τ1 ̸= τ2 , then fτ1 is not
ϵ-robust to misspecification with fτ2 under dSTARC
                                             τ3 ,γ for any τ3 , any γ, and any ϵ < 0.5.

Note that Theorem 5 permits that τ3 = τ1 or τ3 = τ2 . Thus, Theorem 5 is saying that if a behavioural
model f is invariant to S ′ -redistribution, then it is not robust to any degree of misspecification of
τ (even if τ1 and τ2 are arbitrarily close). Moreover, optimal policies, Boltzmann-rational policies,
and maximal causal entropy policies, are all invariant to S ′ -redistribution, and hence oτ,γ , bτ,γ,β ,
and cτ,γ,α are subject to Theorem 5. Indeed, since S ′ -redistribution does not change the expected
value of any policy, we should expect almost all sensible behavioural models to be invariant to
S ′ -redistribution. As such, Theorem 5 will also apply very widely.
Theorem 4 and 5 show that a very wide range of behavioural models in principle are highly sensi-
tive to arbitrarily small misspecification of two of their core parameters. To make this result more
accessible and easier to understand, we have included two examples in Appendix E that explain the
intuition behind these two theorems.
   6
    Note that while Theorem 3 uses a “special” pseudometric on R, in the form of dSTARC
                                                                                      τ,γ    , we do not need to
use a special (pseudo)metric on Π, because for policies, ℓ2 does capture the relevant notion of similarity.


                                                       8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Before moving on, we also want to note that the Boltzmann-rational model is robust to arbitrary
misspecification of the temperature parameter, β, and that the maximal causal entropy model is
robust to arbitrary misspecification of the weight parameter, α. This was shown by Skalse & Abate
(2023), in their Theorems 3.2 and 3.4. Specifically, we have that for any τ and γ, any ϵ ≥ 0, and
any β1 , β2 , α1 , α2 , we have that bτ,γ,β1 is ϵ-robust to misspecification with bτ,γ,β2 , and that cτ,γ,α1
is ϵ-robust to misspecification with cτ,γ,α2 , as defined by dSTARC
                                                                τ,γ    . For a detailed description of how
to connect the results of Skalse & Abate (2023) to ours, see Appendix G.


4    D ISCUSSION


We have quantified how robust IRL is to misspecification of the behavioural model. We first pro-
vided necessary and sufficient conditions that fully describe what types of misspecification many
behavioural models will tolerate. In principle, these conditions give a complete answer to how tol-
erant a given behavioural model is to any given type of misspecification. However, these conditions
are rather opaque, and difficult to interpret. Therefore, we have also separately provided necessary
and sufficient conditions that characterise when a behavioural model is robust to perturbation, and
we have analysed how robust many behavioural models are to misspecification of the discount factor
γ or the environment dynamics τ . Our analysis suggests that the IRL problem is highly sensitive to
many plausible forms of misspecification. In particular, a very wide class of behavioural models are
unable to guarantee robust inference under arbitrarily small perturbations of the observed policy, or
under arbitrarily small misspecification of γ or τ .
Our results present a serious challenge to IRL in the context of preference elicitation. The relation-
ship between human preferences and human behaviour is very complex, and while it is certainly
possible to create increasingly accurate models of human behaviour, it will never be realistically
possible to create a model that is completely free from all forms of misspecification. Therefore, if
IRL is unable to guarantee accurate inferences under even mild misspecification of the behavioural
model, as our results suggest, then we should expect it to be very difficult (and perhaps even pro-
hibitively difficult) to guarantee that IRL reliably will produce accurate inferences in real-world
situations. This in turn means that IRL should be used cautiously, and that the learned reward func-
tions should be carefully examined and evaluated (as done by e.g. Michaud et al., 2020; Jenner
& Gleave, 2022). It also means that we need IRL algorithms that are specifically designed to be
more robust under misspecification, such as e.g. that proposed by Viano et al. (2021). It may also
be fruitful to combine IRL with other data sources, as done by e.g. Ibarz et al. (2018), or consider
policy optimisation algorithms that assume that the reward function may be misspecified, as done
by e.g. Krakovna et al. (2018; 2020); Turner et al. (2020); Griffin et al. (2022).
We also need more extensive investigations into the issue of how robust IRL is to misspecification,
and there are several ways that our analysis can be extended. First of all, it may in some cases be
possible to mitigate some of our negative results if R is restricted. For example, Theorem 4 and
5 rely on the fact that we for any reward R1 can find a reward R2 such that R1 and R2 differ by
potential shaping or S ′ -redistribution for a given choice of γ and τ , but such that R1 and R2 have
a large STARC-distance for other choices of γ and τ . We may thus be able to circumvent these
results by restricting R̂ in a way that removes all such reward pairs. However, this is of course not
straightforward, not least because we need to ensure that the true reward in fact is contained in R̂.
Moreover, some of our results rely on the fact that we use STARC-metrics to quantify the difference
between reward functions. While there are compelling theoretical justifications for doing so (cf.
Appendix B and C), there may be other relevant options. STARC-metrics are quite strong, and we
may be able to derive weaker guarantees using other forms of reward metrics. Furthermore, it may
also be fruitful to modify Definition 1, for example by making it more probabilistic, or generalising
it in other ways. This topic is discussed in Appendix A. Finally, our analysis can also be extended
to other types of behavioural models and other types of misspecification. For example, are policies
that use (e.g.) hyperbolic discounting subject to a result that is analogous to Theorem 4? Such
investigations also present an interesting direction for future work.


                                                     9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Stuart Armstrong and Sören Mindermann. Occam’s razor is insufficient to infer the preferences of
  irrational agents. In Proceedings of the 32nd International Conference on Neural Information
  Processing Systems, volume 31, pp. 5603–5614, Montréal, Canada, 2018. Curran Associates,
  Inc., Red Hook, NY, USA.
Haoyang Cao, Samuel N. Cohen, and Lukasz Szpruch. Identifiability in inverse reinforcement learn-
  ing. arXiv preprint, arXiv:2106.03498 [cs.LG], 2021.
Krishnamurthy Dvijotham and Emanuel Todorov. Inverse optimal control with linearly-solvable
  MDPs. In Proceedings of the 27th International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 335–342,
  Haifa, Israel, June 2010. Omnipress, Madison, Wisconsin, USA.
Rachel Freedman, Rohin Shah, and Anca Dragan. Choice set misspecification in reward inference.
  In IJCAI-PRICAI-20 Workshop on Artificial Intelligence Safety, 2020. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.
  2101.07691. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2101.07691.
Adam Gleave, Michael D Dennis, Shane Legg, Stuart Russell, and Jan Leike. Quantifying differ-
  ences in reward functions. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021. URL
  https://openreview.net/forum?id=LwEQnp6CYev.
Charlie Griffin, Joar Max Viktor Skalse, Lewis Hammond, and Alessandro Abate. All’s well that
  ends well: Avoiding side effects with distance-impact penalties. In NeurIPS ML Safety Workshop,
  2022. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=3tgegVVh2j6.
Dylan Hadfield-Menell, Stuart J Russell, Pieter Abbeel, and Anca Dragan. Cooperative in-
  verse reinforcement learning. In D. Lee, M. Sugiyama, U. Luxburg, I. Guyon, and R. Gar-
  nett (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 29. Curran Asso-
  ciates, Inc., 2016. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2016/file/
  c3395dd46c34fa7fd8d729d8cf88b7a8-Paper.pdf.
Joey Hong, Kush Bhatia, and Anca Dragan. On the sensitivity of reward inference to misspecified
  human models, 2022.
Ahmed Hussein, Mohamed Medhat Gaber, Eyad Elyan, and Chrisina Jayne. Imitation learning:
  A survey of learning methods. ACM Comput. Surv., 50(2), 4 2017. ISSN 0360-0300. doi:
  10.1145/3054912. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3054912.
Borja Ibarz, Jan Leike, Tobias Pohlen, Geoffrey Irving, Shane Legg, and Dario Amodei. Reward
  learning from human preferences and demonstrations in Atari. In Proceedings of the 32nd In-
  ternational Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 31, pp. 8022–8034,
  Montréal, Canada, 2018. Curran Associates, Inc., Red Hook, NY, USA.
Erik Jenner and Adam Gleave. Preprocessing reward functions for interpretability, 2022.
Kuno Kim, Shivam Garg, Kirankumar Shiragur, and Stefano Ermon. Reward identification in in-
  verse reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on Machine
  Learning, volume 139 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 5496–5505, Virtual,
  July 2021. PMLR.
Victoria Krakovna, Laurent Orseau, Ramana Kumar, Miljan Martic, and Shane Legg. Penalizing
  side effects using stepwise relative reachability, 2018. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
  1806.01186.
Victoria Krakovna, Laurent Orseau, Richard Ngo, Miljan Martic, and Shane Legg. Avoiding side
  effects by considering future tasks, 2020. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2010.07877.
Eric J. Michaud, Adam Gleave, and Stuart Russell. Understanding learned reward functions, 2020.
Andrew Y Ng and Stuart Russell. Algorithms for inverse reinforcement learning. In Proceedings
  of the Seventeenth International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 1, pp. 663–670, Stan-
  ford, California, USA, 2000. Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc.

                                               10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Andrew Y Ng, Daishi Harada, and Stuart Russell. Policy invariance under reward transformations:
  Theory and application to reward shaping. In Proceedings of the Sixteenth International Con-
  ference on Machine Learning, pp. 278–287, Bled, Slovenia, 1999. Morgan Kaufmann Publishers
  Inc.
Manu Orsini, Anton Raichuk, Léonard Hussenot, Damien Vincent, Robert Dadashi, Sertan Girgin,
 Matthieu Geist, Olivier Bachem, Olivier Pietquin, and Marcin Andrychowicz. What matters for
 adversarial imitation learning? arXiv preprint, arXiv:2106.00672 [cs.LG], 2021. To appear in
 Proceedings of the 35th International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems,
 2021.
Marco Percoco and Peter Nijkamp. Estimating individual rates of discount: a meta-analysis. Applied
 Economics Letters, 16:1235 – 1239, 2009. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/
 CorpusID:154901975.
Deepak Ramachandran and Eyal Amir. Bayesian inverse reinforcement learning. In Proceedings
  of the 20th International Joint Conference on Artifical Intelligence, pp. 2586–2591, Hyderabad,
  India, 2007. Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc.
Andreas Schlaginhaufen and Maryam Kamgarpour. Identifiability and generalizability in con-
  strained inverse reinforcement learning, 2023.
Joar Skalse and Alessandro Abate. Misspecification in inverse reinforcement learning, 2023.
Joar Skalse, Matthew Farrugia-Roberts, Stuart Russell, Alessandro Abate, and Adam Gleave. In-
  variance in policy optimisation and partial identifiability in reward learning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2203.07475, 2022.
Joar Skalse, Lucy Farnik, Sumeet Ramesh Motwani, Erik Jenner, Adam Gleave, and Alessandro
  Abate. Starc: A general framework for quantifying differences between reward functions, 2023.
Alex Turner, Neale Ratzlaff, and Prasad Tadepalli. Avoiding side effects in complex envi-
  ronments. In H. Larochelle, M. Ranzato, R. Hadsell, M.F. Balcan, and H. Lin (eds.), Ad-
  vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 33, pp. 21406–21415. Curran As-
  sociates, Inc., 2020. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2020/file/
  f50a6c02a3fc5a3a5d4d9391f05f3efc-Paper.pdf.
Luca Viano, Yu-Ting Huang, Parameswaran Kamalaruban, Adrian Weller, and Volkan Cevher. Ro-
  bust inverse reinforcement learning under transition dynamics mismatch. In A. Beygelzimer,
  Y. Dauphin, P. Liang, and J. Wortman Vaughan (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Process-
  ing Systems, 2021. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=t8HduwpoQQv.
Blake Wulfe, Logan Michael Ellis, Jean Mercat, Rowan Thomas McAllister, and Adrien Gaidon.
  Dynamics-aware comparison of learned reward functions. In International Conference on Learn-
  ing Representations, 2022. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=CALFyKVs87.
Brian D Ziebart. Modeling Purposeful Adaptive Behavior with the Principle of Maximum Causal
  Entropy. PhD thesis, Carnegie Mellon University, 2010.


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A     M OTIVATING O UR D EFINITION OF M ISSPECIFICATION ROBUSTNESS
In this section, we provide further discussion and motivation for our formalisation of misspecifica-
tion robustness, given in Definition 1, beyond the discussion we give in Section 2.1.

A.1   A DDITIONAL C OMMENTS O N THE C ONDITIONS F OR M ISSPECIFICATION ROBUSTNESS

In this section, we make a few additional comments on some of the four conditions in Definition 1.
In particular, while the first condition ought to be reasonably clear, we have further comments on
each of the remaining three conditions.
Condition 2 says that for all R1 , R2 ∈ R̂, if f (R1 ) = f (R2 ) then dR (R1 , R2 ) ≤ ϵ. In other words,
any learning algorithm L based on f is guaranteed to learn a reward function that has a distance
of at most ϵ to the true reward function when trained on data generated by f , i.e. when there is
no misspecification. It may not be immediately obvious why this assumption is included, since we
assume that the data is generated by g, where f ̸= g. To see this, suppose R̂ = {R1 , R2 , R3 , R4 }
where dR (R1 , R2 ) < ϵ, dR (R3 , R4 ) < ϵ, and dR (R2 , R3 ) ≫ ϵ, and let f, g : R̂ → Π be two
behavioural models where f (R1 ) = π1 , f (R2 ) = f (R3 ) = π2 , f (R4 ) = π3 , and g(R1 ) =
g(R2 ) = π1 , g(R3 ) = g(R4 ) = π3 . This is illustrated in the diagram below:


In this case, we have that f (R2 ) = f (R3 ), but dR (R2 , R3 ) ≫ ϵ. As such, f violates condition 2 in
Definition 1; a learning algorithm L based on f is not guaranteed to learn a reward function that has
distance at most ϵ to the true reward function when there is no misspecification, because f cannot
distinguish between R2 and R3 , which have a large distance. However, if f (R) = g(R′ ), it does in
this case follow that dR (R, R′ ) ≤ ϵ. In other words, if the training data is coming from g, then a
learning algorithm L based on f is guaranteed to learn a reward function that has distance at most
ϵ to the true reward function. As such, we could define misspecification robustness in such a way
that f would be considered to be robust to misspecification with g in this case. However, this seems
unsatisfactory, because g essentially has to be carefully designed specifically to avoid certain blind
spots in f . In other words, while condition 1 in Definition 1 is met, it is only met spuriously. To rule
out these kinds of edge cases, we have therefore included the condition that for all R1 , R2 ∈ R̂, if
f (R1 ) = f (R2 ), then it must be that dR (R1 , R2 ) ≤ ϵ.
Condition 3 says that there for all R1 ∈ R̂ exists an R2 ∈ R̂ such that f (R2 ) = g(R1 ). Stated
differently, the image of g on R̂ is a subset of the image of f on R̂. The reason for why this
assumption is necessary is to ensure that the learning algorithm can never observer data that is
impossible according to its assumed model. For example, suppose f maps each reward function to
a deterministic policy; in that case, the learning algorithm L will assume that the observed policy
must be deterministic. What happens if such an algorithm is given data from a nondeterministic
policy? This is undefined, absent further details about L, because L cannot possibly find a reward
function that fits the training data under its assumed model. Since we do not want to make any strong
assumptions about L, it therefore seems reasonable to say that if f always produces a deterministic
policy, and g sometimes produces nondeterministic policies, then f is not robust to misspecification
with g. More generally, it has to be the case that any policy that could be produced by g, can be


                                                   12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


explained under f . This is encompassed by the condition that there for all R1 ∈ R̂ exists an R2 ∈ R̂
such that f (R2 ) = g(R1 ). Of course, in many cases we may have that Im(f ) = Π, i.e. that f can
produce any policy, and in that case this condition is vacuous.
Condition 4 says that there exists R1 , R2 ∈ R̂ such that f (R1 ) ̸= f (R2 ); in other words, that f ̸= g
on R̂. This condition is not strictly necessary – from a mathematical standpoint, very little would
change if we were to simply remove it from Definition 1. Indeed, the only effect that this condition
has on the results in this paper is that Theorem 1 and Corollary 1 add the condition that f ̸= g, and
that f ̸= g is part of the definition of δ-perturbations (Definition 3). Rather, the reason for including
the assumption that f ̸= g is purely to make Definition 1 more intuitive. If f = g, then f is not
misspecified, and it would seem odd to say that “f is ϵ-robust to misspecification with itself”. As
such, there is no deeper significance to this condition besides making our terminology more clear.


A.2    O N THE A SSUMPTION T HAT B EHAVIOURAL M ODELS A RE F UNCTIONS

Here, we will comment on the fact that behavioural models are assumed to be functions; i.e., we
assume that a behavioural model associate each reward function R with a unique policy π. This
is true for the Boltzmann-rational model and the maximal causal entropy model, but it may not be
a natural assumption in all cases. For example, there may in general be more than one optimal
policy. Thus, an optimal agent could associate some reward functions R with multiple policies π.
This particular example is not too problematic, because the set of all optimal policies still form a
convex set. As such, it is natural to assume that an optimal agent would take all optimal actions
with equal probability, which is what we have done in the definition of oτ,γ .7 However, we could
imagine alternative criteria which would associate some rewards with multiple policies, and where
there may not be any canonical way to select a single policy among them. Such criteria may then
not straightforwardly translate into a functional behavioural model.
There are several ways to handle such cases within our framework. First of all, we may simply
assume that the observed agent still has some fixed method for breaking ties between policies that it
considers to be equivalent (as we do for oτ,γ ). In that case, we still ultimately end up with a function
from R to Π, in which case our framework can be applied without modification. We expect this
approach to be satisfactory in most cases.
It is worth noting that this approach does not necessarily require us to actually know how the ob-
served agent breaks ties between equivalent policies. To see this, let G : R → P(Π) be a function
that associates each reward function with a set of policies. We can then say that a behavioural model
g : R → Π implements G if g(R) ∈ G(R) for all R ∈ R. Using this definition, we could then say
that f : R → Π is robust to misspecification with G : R → P(Π) if f is robust to misspecification
with each g that implements G, where f being robust to misspecification with g is defined as in
Definition 1. In other words, we assume that the observed agent has a fixed method for breaking ties
between policies in G, but without making any assumptions about what this method is. Using that
definition, our framework can then be applied without modification.
An alternative approach could be to generalise the definition of behavioural models to allow them to
return a set of policies, i.e. f : R → P(Π). Most of our results can be extended to cover this case
in a mostly straightforward manner. However, this approach is somewhat unsatisfactory, because
we would then assume that the learning algorithm L gets to observe all policies in the set f (R⋆ ).
However, in reality, it seems more realistic to assume that L only gets to observe a single element of
f (R⋆ ), unless perhaps L gets data from multiple similar agents acting in the same environment.


A.3    O N R ESTRICTED S PACES OF R EWARD F UNCTIONS

Our definitions are given relative to a set of reward functions R̂, which in general may be any subset
of R. It may not be immediately obvious why this is necessary, and so we will say a few words
about that issue here.

    7
      Note also that this is equivalent to assuming that an optimal agent would take all optimal actions with
positive probability, but that the exact probability that it associates with each action does not convey any further
information about R.


                                                        13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


First of all, we should note that we always allow R̂ = R. This means that the introduction of
R̂ makes our analysis strictly more general, in the sense that we always can assume that R̂ is
unrestricted. In other words, nothing is lost by giving our definitions and theorem statements relative
to a set of reward functions R̂, instead of the set of all reward functions.
Moreover, there are many cases where it is interesting to restrict R. To start with, we use reward
functions with type signature S × A × S → R, but it is quite common to use reward functions with a
different type signature, such as for example S × A → R or S → R. We can ensure that our analysis
covers these settings as well, by noting that we can allow R̂ to be equal to {R ∈ R | ∀s, a, s1 , s2 :
R(s, a, s1 ) = R(s, a, s2 )}, or {R ∈ R | ∀s, a1 , a2 , s1 , s2 : R(s, a1 , s1 ) = R(s, a2 , s2 )}, and so on.
As such, by using a (potentially restricted) set of rewards R̂, we can make sure that our results do
not depend on these design choices.
Additionally, there are many cases where we may have prior information about the underlying true
reward function R⋆ , over and above the information provided by the observed policy. For example,
we may know that the reward function cannot depend on certain features of the environment, or
we may know that it only depends on the state of the environment at the end of an episode, and
so on. This information may come from expert knowledge, or from auxiliary data sources, etc. In
these cases, it makes sense to restrict R̂ to the set of all reward functions that are viable in light of
this prior knowledge. Moreover, restricted reward sets also allow us to handle the case where this
information is given in the form of a Bayesian prior, see Appendix A.4.
Another reason for restricting R is that Definition 1 is existential, in the sense that a single coun-
terexample in principle is enough to prevent f from being ϵ-robust to misspecification with g, even
if f (R1 ) = g(R2 ) implies dR (R1 , R2 ) ≤ ϵ for “most” R1 and R2 , etc. As such, even if f is not
ϵ-robust to misspecification with g, it could in theory still be the case that a learning algorithm L
based on f is guaranteed to learn a reward function Rh that is close to the true reward function R⋆
for most choices of R⋆ . We can rule out this possibility by restricting R̂ in a way that excludes
gerrymandered counter-examples.
As such, by giving our definitions relative to a set of reward functions R̂, we make our analysis more
versatile and more general.

A.4    O N M AKING THE A NALYSIS M ORE P ROBABILISTIC

The formalisation of misspecification robustness in Definition 1 is essentially a worst-case analysis,
in the sense that it requires each condition to hold for all reward functions. For example, a single
pair of rewards R1 , R2 with f (R1 ) = g(R2 ) and dR (R1 , R2 ) > ϵ is enough to make it so that
f is not ϵ-robust to misspecification with g, even if f (R1 ) = g(R2 ) implies dR (R1 , R2 ) ≤ ϵ for
“most” reward functions. This makes sense if we do not want to make any assumptions about the
true reward function R⋆ , or about the inductive bias of the learning algorithm. However, in certain
cases, we may know that R⋆ is sampled from a particular distribution D over R. In those cases, it
may be more relevant to know whether dR (R⋆ , Rh ) ≤ ϵ with high probability.
To make this more formal, we may assume that we have two behavioural models f, g : R → Π and
a distribution D over R, that R⋆ is sampled from D, and that the learning algorithm L observes the
policy π = g(R⋆ ). We then assume that L returns the reward function Rh such that f (Rh ) = π, and
that L selects among all such reward functions using some (potentially nondeterministic) inductive
bias. We then want to know if dR (R⋆ , Rh ) ≤ ϵ with probability at least 1 − δ, for some δ and ϵ.
Our framework can, to an extent, be used to study this setting as well. In particular, suppose we pick
a set R̂ of “likely” reward functions such that PR∼D (R ∈ R̂) ≥ 1 − δ, and such that the learning
algorithm L will return a reward function Rh ∈ R̂ if there exists a reward function Rh ∈ R̂ such
that f (Rh ) = g(R⋆ ). Then if f is ϵ-robust to misspecification with g on R̂, we have that L will
learn a reward function Rh such that dR (R⋆ , Rh ) ≤ ϵ with probability at least 1 − δ.
So, for example, suppose R̂ is the set of all reward functions that have “low complexity”, for some
complexity measure and complexity threshold. The above argument then informally tells us that if
the true reward function is likely to have low complexity, and if L will attempt to fit a low-complexity
reward function to its training data, then the learnt reward function will be close to the true reward


                                                     14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


function with high probability, as long as f is ϵ-robust to misspecification with g on the set of all
low-complexity reward functions.
Thus, while Definition 1 gives us a worst-case formalisation of misspecification robustness, it is
relatively straightforward to carry out a more probabilistic analysis within the same framework.

B    E XPLAINING AND M OTIVATING STARC-M ETRICS

In this section, we will explain Definition 2, and provide the theoretical justification for measuring
the difference between reward functions using dSTARC
                                                 τ,γ    .
Let us first walk through the definition of dSTARC
                                               τ,γ     , and explain each of the steps. Intuitively speak-
ing, we want to consider R1 and R2 to be equivalent if (and only if) they induce the same ordering of
policies. Moreover, also recall that R1 and R2 have the same ordering of policies if and only if they
differ by potential shaping, S ′ -redistribution, and positive linear scaling (see Proposition 1). For this
reason, dSTARC
          τ,γ    first standardises each reward function in a way that maps all equivalent rewards to
a single representative in their respective equivalence class, before measuring their difference.
To do this, we first use cSTARC
                             τ,γ     to map all rewards that differ by potential shaping and S ′ -
redistribution to a single representative. Note that for all R, the set of all rewards that differ from
R by potential shaping and S ′ -redistribution forms an affine subspace. This means that there is a
well-defined “smallest” element of each such equivalence class, which is the reward function that
cSTARC
 τ,γ     returns. It is also worth noting that cSTARC
                                                 τ,γ     is an orthogonal linear transformation, that
maps R to an |S|(|A| − 1)-dimensional linear subspace of R.
After this, we normalise the resulting reward functions, by dividing them by their ℓ2 -norm. This
collapses positive linear scaling, which now means that sSTARC
                                                         τ,γ    (R1 ) = sSTARC
                                                                          τ,γ    (R2 ) if and only if
R1 and R2 have the same ordering of policies. We then measure the distance between the resulting
reward functions, and multiply this distance by 0.5 to ensure that the resulting value is between 0
and 1. For more details, see Skalse et al. (2023).
To get an intuitive sense of how dSTARC
                                     τ,γ    behaves, first note that dSTARC
                                                                       τ,γ    is a pseudometric on R.
                                            STARC
Moreover, as we have already alluded to, dτ,γ       (R1 , R2 ) = 0 if and only if R1 and R2 induce the
same ordering of policies under τ and γ. In addition to this, we also have that dSTARC
                                                                                    τ,γ  (R1 , R2 ) = 1
if and only if R1 and R2 induce the opposite ordering of policies under τ and γ. Furthermore, if R0
is trivial and R is non-trivial, then we have that dSTARC
                                                    τ,γ    (R, R0 ) = 0.5. More generally, if R1 and
                                           STARC
R2 are approximately orthogonal, then dτ,γ        (R1 , R2 ) ≈ 0.5. As such, dSTARC
                                                                                 τ,γ    gives each pair
of reward functions R1 , R2 a distance between 0 and 1, where a distance close to 0 means that R1
and R2 have approximately the same policy order, a distance close to 1 means that they have ap-
proximately the opposite policy order, and a distance close to 0.5 means that they are approximately
orthogonal. Almost all reward functions have a distance close to 0.5.
In addition to this, dSTARC
                      τ,γ   induces an upper bound on worst-case regret. Specifically:
Definition 6. A pseudometric d on R is sound if there exists a positive constant U , such that for
any reward functions R1 and R2 , if two policies π1 and π2 satisfy that J2 (π2 ) ≥ J2 (π1 ), then
                   J1 (π1 ) − J1 (π2 ) ≤ U · (max J1 (π) − min J1 (π)) · d(R1 , R2 ).
                                                π              π

Proposition 5.   dSTARC
                  τ,γ   is sound.

For a proof of Proposition 5, see Skalse et al. (2023). Before moving on, let us briefly unpack
Definition 6. J1 (π1 ) − J1 (π2 ) is the regret, as measured by R1 , of using policy π2 instead of π1 .
Division by maxπ J1 (π) − minπ J1 (π) normalises this quantity to lie between 0 and 1 (though the
term is put on the right-hand side of the inequality, instead of being used as a denominator, in order
to avoid division by zero when R1 is trivial. The condition that J2 (π2 ) ≥ J2 (π1 ) says that R2
prefers π2 over π1 . Taken together, this means that a pseudometric d on R is sound if d(R1 , R2 )
gives an upper bound on the (normalised) maximal regret that could be incurred under R1 if an
arbitrary policy π1 is optimised to another policy π2 according to R2 . Note that we, as a special
case, may assume that π1 is optimal under R1 , and that π2 is optimal under R2 . Since dSTARCτ,γ    is
sound, it induces such a bound.


                                                    15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


In addition to this, dSTARC
                      τ,γ     also induces a lower bound on worst-case regret. It may not be immedi-
ately obvious why this property is desirable. To see why this is the case, note that if a pseudometric
d on R does not induce a lower bound on worst-case regret, then there are reward functions that have
a low regret, but large distance under d. This would in turn mean that d is not tight, and that it should
be possible to find a better way to measure the distance between reward functions. If a pseudometric
induces a lower bound on regret, then these kinds of cases are ruled out. When a pseudometric has
this property, we say that it is complete:
Definition 7. A pseudometric d on R is complete if there exists a positive constant L, such that for
any reward functions R1 and R2 , there exists two policies π1 and π2 such that J2 (π2 ) ≥ J2 (π1 ) and
                   J1 (π1 ) − J1 (π2 ) ≥ L · (max J1 (π) − min J1 (π)) · d(R1 , R2 ),
                                               π              π

and moreover, if R1 and R2 have the same policy order then d(R1 , R2 ) = 0.
Proposition 6. dSTARC
                 τ,γ    is complete.

Note that if R1 and R2 have the same policy order and maxπ J1 (π) − minπ J1 (π) > 0, then
d(R1 , R2 ) = 0; the last condition ensures that this also holds when maxπ J1 (π) − minπ J1 (π) = 0.
Intuitively, if d is sound, then a small d is sufficient for low regret, and if d is complete, then a small
d is necessary for low regret. Soundness implies the absence of false positives, and completeness
the absence of false negatives. As per Proposition 6, we have that dSTARC  τ,γ      is complete, and hence
tight. For a proof, see Skalse et al. (2023).
Moreover, if a pseudometric is both sound and complete, then this implies that it, in a certain sense,
is unique. Specifically:
Proposition 7. If two pseudometrics d1 , d2 on R are both sound and complete, then d1 and d2 are
bilipschitz equivalent.

For a proof, see Skalse et al. (2023). Note that this means that any pseudometric on R that is both
sound and complete must be bilipschitz equivalent to dSTARC
                                                         τ,γ     . As such, dSTARC
                                                                             τ,γ    is a canonical pseu-
                                             STARC
dometric on R, in the sense that a small dτ,γ       -distance is both necessary and sufficient for low
worst-case regret, and that any other pseudometric on R with this property also must be equivalent
to dSTARC
    τ,γ    . Therefore, we think it is justified to regard dSTARC
                                                             τ,γ     as the “right” way to quantify the
difference between reward functions.
Recent literature has proposed other pseudometrics for quantifying the difference between reward
functions, namely EPIC (Gleave et al., 2021) and DARD (Wulfe et al., 2022). However, these do
not enjoy the same strong theoretical guarantees as dSTARC
                                                      τ,γ    . In particular, they are neither sound
nor complete in the sense of dSTARC
                              τ,γ   . For more details, see Skalse et al. (2023).

C    W HY N OT U SE EPIC?
Many of our results are invariant to the choice of pseudometric on R, but when we do have to pick
a particular metric, we use dSTARC
                                τ,γ    . Another prominent pseudometric on R is EPIC, which was
first proposed by Gleave et al. (2021), and has since become the most widely used pseudometric
on R (as judged by the number of citations at the time of writing). So why are we not using EPIC
in this paper? There is a simple reason for this, namely that EPIC is sensitive to S ′ -redistribution.
Specifically, for any reward function R and any δ ∈ (0, 1] there exists two reward functions R1 ,
R2 such that R, R1 , and R2 differ by S ′ -redistribution, but such that the EPIC-distance between
R1 and R2 is 1 − δ. In other words, starting from an arbitrary reward function R and using only
S ′ -redistribution, we can find reward functions whose EPIC-distance is arbitrarily close to 1.
This is problematic, because essentially any behavioural model of interest is invariant to S ′ -
redistribution (including oτ,γ , bτ,γ,β , and cτ,γ,α ). This means that any such model will violate con-
dition 2 in Definition 1 for all ϵ < 1 when dR is the EPIC pseudometric. Moreover, this also means
that if f is ϵ-robust to misspecification with g (as defined by the EPIC distance), and g is invariant
to S ′ -redistribution, then it must be the case that ϵ ≥ 0.5 (c.f. Lemma 1). Since an EPIC-distance of
0.5 is very large, such results are essentially vacuous. In other words, the EPIC-pseudometric is too
loose, and cannot be used to derive any non-trivial results within the setting that we are concerned
with in this paper.


                                                    16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


In addition to this, dSTARC
                      τ,γ   also yields stronger theoretical guarantees than EPIC; see Appendix B
and Skalse et al. (2023).

D    W HY A RE C ONTINUOUS M ODELS N OT ROBUST TO P ERTURBATIONS ?

In this section, we give a more in-depth interpretation and explanation of Theorem 3.
Intuitively speaking, the fundamental reason that Theorem 3 holds is because there is a mismatch
between ℓ2 -distance and STARC-distance. In particular, if f is continuous, then it must send reward
functions that are close under the ℓ2 -norm to policies that are close under the ℓ2 -norm. However,
there are reward functions that are close under the ℓ2 -norm but have a large STARC distance. Hence,
if f is continuous then it will send some reward functions that are far apart under dSTARC
                                                                                      τ,γ    (but close
under ℓ2 ) to policies which are close (under ℓ2 ), which in turn means that f is not ϵ/δ-separating.
To see this, let R be an arbitrary non-trivial reward function, and let ϵ be any positive constant. We
then have that ϵ · R and −ϵ · R have the opposite policy ordering, which means that dSTARC   τ,γ    (ϵ ·
R, −ϵ · R) = 1. However, by making ϵ small enough, we can ensure that the ℓ2 -distance between
ϵ · R and −ϵ · R is arbitrarily small, and hence that dΠ (ϵ · R, −ϵ · R) < δ. Thus, we have two reward
functions that have a large STARC-distance that are sent to policies that are close.
This example is not too concerning by itself, because it only demonstrates that we may run into
trouble for reward functions that are very close to 0, and we may expect such reward functions to be
unlikely (both in the sense that the observed agent is unlikely to have such a reward function, and in
the sense that the inductive bias of the learning algorithm is unlikely to generate such a hypothesis).
It would therefore be natural to restrict R̂ in some way, for example by imposing a minimum size on
the ℓ2 -norm of all considered reward functions, or by supposing that they are normalised. However,
Theorem 3 tells us that this will not work either: as long as there is some positive constant c such
that if ||R||2 = c then R ∈ R̂, then we can always find reward functions R1 , R2 such that their
ℓ2 -distance is small but dSTARC
                           τ,γ    (R1 , R2 ) is large. Theorem 3 thus applies very widely.

E    W HY I S IRL S ENSITIVE TO M ISSPECIFIED PARAMETERS ?

In this section, we give a more in-depth explanation of Theorems 4 and 5.
To start with, the reason that Theorem 4 is true is that we for any reward function R1 can find
a reward function R2 such that R1 and R2 differ by potential shaping with γ1 , but such that R1
and R2 have a different policy ordering under γ2 (when γ1 ̸= γ2 ). To see this, consider a simple
environment with three states s0 , s1 , s2 , where s0 is the initial state, and where the agent can choose
to either go directly from s0 to s2 , or choose to first visit state s1 :


                                                 s2

                                                          −x


                                                               s1


                                                          γ1 · x

                                      start      s0


Let R1 be any reward function over this environment, and let R2 be the reward function that we get
if we take R1 and increase the reward of going from s0 to s1 by γ1 · x, and decrease the reward of


                                                   17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


going from s1 to s2 by x. Now, the policy order under discounting with γ1 is completely unchanged.
At s1 , the value of every action is changed by the same amount, and so there is no reason to change
action. Similarly, at s0 , the value of going to s1 is changed by γ1 · x − γ1 · x = 0, and so there
is likewise no reason to change action. This transformation corresponds to potential shaping where
Φ(s1 ) = x and Φ(s0 ) = Φ(s2 ) = 0. Therefore, if f : R → Π is invariant to potential shaping with
γ1 , then f (R1 ) = f (R2 ).
However, if we discount with γ2 , then R1 and R2 have a different policy order. In particular, the
value of going from s0 to s1 is changed by γ1 · x − γ2 · x = (γ1 − γ2 ) · x ̸= 0. Thus, if the
optimal action under R1 at s0 is to go to s1 , then by making x sufficiently large or sufficiently small
(depending on whether γ1 > γ2 , or vice versa), then we can create a reward function R2 for which
the optimal action instead is to go to s2 , and vice versa.
Thus, in this environment, for every reward function R1 and every γ1 , γ2 such that γ1 ̸= γ2 , we can
find a reward function R2 such that R1 and R2 differ by potential shaping with γ1 , but such that they
have a different ordering of policies when we discount with γ2 . This in turn means that we cannot
be robust to misspecification of γ; if the observed policy is computed using γ2 , then there are reward
functions that would lead to the same observed policy (and which hence cannot be distinguished by
the learning process) but which nonetheless are a large distance from each other as evaluated by γ1 .
This issue is present as long as γ1 ̸= γ2 , and so the degree of misspecification does not matter.
This is the basic mechanism behind Theorem 4, although this theorem additionally shows that the
dynamic which we describe above shows up for any non-trivial transition function. Intuitively speak-
ing, we can use potential shaping to move reward around in the MDP (so that the agent receives a
larger immediate reward at the cost of a lower reward later, or vice versa). However, because of
the discounting, later rewards must be made larger than immediate rewards. If the discount values
do not match, then this “compensation” will also not match, leading to a distortion of the policy
ordering. Indeed, we can make it so that this distortion dominates the rest of the reward function.
For the full details, see the proof of Theorem 4.
As for Theorem 4, this theorem is similarly true because we for any reward function R1 can find a
reward function R2 such that R1 and R2 differ by S ′ -redistribution with τ1 , but such that R1 and
R2 have a different policy ordering under τ2 (when τ1 ̸= τ2 ). To see this, suppose we have an MDP
with (at least) three states s0 , s1 , s2 , and that taking action a in state s0 under transition function τ1
takes you to state s1 with probability p, and s2 with probability 1 − p. Similarly, taking action a in
state s0 under transition function τ2 takes you to state s1 with probability q, and s2 with probability
1 − q, where p ̸= q.

                                      s1                            s2


                                           p, q                1 − p, 1 − q
                                           start     s0


Let R1 be any reward function, and X any real number. Now note that we, regardless of the values
of R1 and X, can find values of R2 (s0 , a, s1 ) and R2 (s0 , a, s2 ) such that

       p · R2 (s0 , a, s1 ) + (1 − p) · R2 (s0 , a, s2 ) = p · R1 (s0 , a, s1 ) + (1 − p) · R1 (s0 , a, s2 )

and such that q · R2 (s0 , a, s1 ) + (1 − q) · R2 (s0 , a, s2 ) = X.
Note that this means that ES ′ ∼τ1 (s0 ,a) [R2 (s0 , a, S ′ )] = ES ′ ∼τ1 (s0 ,a) [R1 (s0 , a, S ′ )], and that
ES ′ ∼τ2 (s0 ,a) [R2 (s0 , a, S ′ )] = X. Note also that X was selected arbitrarily. In other words, the
fact that R1 and R2 differ by S ′ -redistribution under τ1 , leaves the expectation of R2 under τ2 com-
pletely unconstrained for all transitions where τ1 ̸= τ2 . If τ1 ̸= τ2 for all states, then the policy
order of R2 under τ2 can be literally any possible policy ordering. This in turn means that we cannot
be robust to misspecification of τ ; if the observed policy is computed using τ2 , then there are reward
functions that would lead to the same observed policy (and which hence cannot be distinguished by
the learning process) but which nonetheless have an arbitrarily large distance under τ1 .


                                                        18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


It is also important to note that Theorem 4 does not require that τ1 ̸= τ2 for all states; indeed, it
is enough for them to differ at just a single transition s, a. Using the same strategy as above, we
can find two reward functions R1 and R2 such that R1 and R2 differ by S ′ -redistribution under τ1 ,
but such that under τ2 , the value of a given policy π under R1 depends primarily on visiting s, a as
many times as possible, but the value of π under R2 depends primarily on visiting s, a as few times
as possible. For the full details, see the proof of Theorem 4.
We can also give a somewhat less artificial example, to make this point more intuitive. Consider
a simple N × N gridworld environment. We assume that the agent has four actions, up, down,
left, and right. We assume that τ1 is deterministic, so that if the agent takes action up, then it
moves one step up, etc. Moreover, we assume that τ2 is slippery, so that if the agent takes action
up, then it moves up, up-left, and up-right with equal probability, and that if it takes action right,
then it moves right, up-right, and down-right with equal probability, etc. For simplicity, we will also
assume that the environment has a “PacMan-like” border, so that if the agent moves up from the top
of the environment, then it ends up at the bottom, etc.8


Now suppose that R1 and R2 reward each transition depending on how the agent moves, according
to the following schemas:

                          0                                                    0

          −1                            1                            −3                      3


 −1                                            1                 1                                −1


          −1                            1                            1                      −1

                          0                                                    0

                         R1                                                   R2

These two reward functions are identical under τ2 , and give the agent 1 reward for going right, −1
for going left, and 0 for going up or down. However, under τ1 , they are opposites; R1 rewards the
agent for going right, and R2 rewards the agent for going left. Thus, if we observe a policy computed
under τ2 , then we will not be able to distinguish between R1 and R2 , even though they have a large
distance under τ1 . Similar issues will occur given any discrepancy between τ1 and τ2 .
   8
       In other words, the environment is shaped like a torus.


                                                         19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


F     P ROOFS

Here, we will provide the proofs of all our theorems and other theoretical results. The proofs are
split up in three sections, mirroring the three subsections in Section 3.

F.1   N ECESSARY AND S UFFICIENT C ONDITIONS

Theorem 1. Let R̂ be a set of reward functions, let f : R̂ → Π be a behavioural model, and let dR
be a pseudometric on R̂. Suppose that f (R1 ) = f (R2 ) =⇒ dR (R1 , R2 ) = 0 for all R1 , R2 ∈ R̂.
Then f is ϵ-robust to misspecification with g (as defined by dR ) if and only if g = f ◦ t for some
t : R̂ → R̂ such that dR (R, t(R)) ≤ ϵ for all R ∈ R̂, and such that f ̸= g.


Proof. For the first direction, let t : R̂ → R̂ be a transformation such that dR (R, t(R)) ≤ ϵ for all
R ∈ R̂, and let g = f ◦ t. To show that f is ϵ-robust to misspecification with g, we need to show
that:

      1. For all R1 , R2 ∈ R̂, if f (R1 ) = g(R2 ) then dR (R1 , R2 ) ≤ ϵ.

      2. For all R1 , R2 ∈ R̂, if f (R1 ) = f (R2 ) then dR (R1 , R2 ) ≤ ϵ.

      3. For all R1 ∈ R̂ there exists an R2 ∈ R̂ such that f (R2 ) = g(R1 ).

      4. There exists R1 , R2 ∈ R̂ such that f (R1 ) ̸= g(R2 ).

For the first condition, suppose f (R1 ) = g(R2 ), which implies that f (R1 ) = f ◦ t(R2 ). By
assumption, we have that if f (R) = f (R′ ), then dR (R, R′ ) = 0. This implies that dR (R1 , t(R2 )) =
0. Moreover, we have that dR (R, t(R)) ≤ ϵ for all R; this implies that dR (R2 , t(R2 )) ≤ ϵ. By
the triangle inequality, we then have that dR (R1 , R2 ) ≤ 0 + ϵ = ϵ. Since R1 and R2 were chosen
arbitrarily, this means that condition 1 holds. For condition 2, note that we by assumption have that
if f (R1 ) = f (R2 ), then dR (R1 , R2 ) = 0. Since 0 ≤ ϵ, this implies that condition 2 holds. For
condition 3, let R1 be any reward function, and let R2 = t(R1 ). Now f (R2 ) = g(R1 ). Since R1
was chosen arbitrarily, this means that condition 3 is satisfied. Condition 4 is satisfied by direct
assumption. We have thus shown that if g = f ◦ t for some t : R̂ → R̂ such that dR (R, t(R)) ≤ ϵ
for all R ∈ R̂ and such that f ̸= g, then f is ϵ-robust to misspecification with g (as defined by dR ).
For the other direction, let f be ϵ-robust to misspecification with g (as defined by dR ). For each
y ∈ Im(g), let Ry ∈ R̂ be some reward function such that f (Ry ) = y; since Im(g) ⊆ Im(f ), such
an Ry ∈ R̂ always exists. Now let t be the function that maps each R ∈ R̂ to Rg(R) . Since by
construction g(R) = f (Rg(R) ), and since f is ϵ-robust to misspecification with g on R̂, we have
that dR (R, Rg(R) ) ≤ ϵ. Since by construction t(R) = Rg(R) , this means that dR (R, t(R)) ≤ ϵ.
Thus t : R̂ → R̂ satisfies the condition that dR (R, t(R)) ≤ ϵ. Moreover, since f is ϵ-robust to
misspecification with g, we have that f ̸= g. Finally, note that g = f ◦ t. This completes the proof
of the other direction, which means that we are done.

Proposition 3. A transformation t : R → R satisfies that dSTARC  τ,γ       (R, t(R)) ≤ ϵ for all R ∈ R if
and only if t can be expressed as t1 ◦ · · · ◦ tn−1 ◦ tn ◦ tn+1 ◦ · · · ◦ tm for some n and m where

                       ||R − tn (R)||2 ≤ ||cSTARC
                                            τ,γ   (R)||2 · sin(2 arcsin(ϵ/2))

for all R, and for all i ̸= n and all R, we have that R and ti (R) differ by potential shaping (with
γ), S ′ -redistribution (with τ ), or positive linear scaling.

Proof. For the first direction, suppose dSTARC
                                         τ,γ    (R, t(R)) ≤ ϵ for all R ∈ R, and let R be an
arbitrarily selected reward function. We will show that it is possible to navigate from R to t(R)
using the described transformations.


                                                   20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Recall that dSTARC
             τ,γ     (R1 , R2 ) is computed by first applying cSTARC
                                                               τ,γ      to both R1 and R2 , then normal-
ising the resulting vectors, and finally measuring their ℓ -distance. This means that sSTARC
                                                           2
                                                                                        τ,γ      (R) and
                                                                    ′
sSTARC
 τ,γ    (t(R))   can be placed   in the following diagram, where  ϵ   ≤ ϵ:


Now, elementary trigonometry tells us that θ = 2 arcsin(ϵ′ /2). Moreover, suppose we extend
sSTARC
 τ,γ   (R) to make the triangle a right triangle, as follows:


Here elementary trigonometry again tells us that x/(1 + y) = sin(2 arcsin(ϵ′ /2)), or that x =
(1 + y) sin(2 arcsin(ϵ′ /2)). This means that we can go from R to t(R) as follows:


      1. Apply cSTARC
                  τ,γ    . Since R and cSTARC
                                          τ,γ   (R) differ by potential shaping and S ′ -redistribution,
         this transformation can be expressed as a combination of potential shaping and S ′ -
         redistribution. Call the resulting vector R′ .

      2. Normalise R′ , so that its magnitude is 1. This transformation is an instance of positive
         linear scaling. Call the resulting vector R′′ .

      3. Scale R′′ until it forms a right triangle with sSTARC
                                                            τ,γ    (t(R)). This transformation is an
         instance of positive linear scaling. Call the resulting vector R′′′ .


                                                  21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


      4. Move from R′′′ to sSTARC
                              τ,γ       (t(R)). This will move R′′′ by (1 + y) sin(2 arcsin(ϵ′ /2)),
         where (1 + y) = ||R ||2 . Moreover, since R′′′ is in the image of cSTARC
                                ′′′
                                                                                           τ,γ   , we have
         that R′′′ = cSTARC
                      τ,γ    (R  ′′′
                                     ), and so ||R ′′′
                                                       ||2 =  ||cSTARC
                                                                 τ,γ   (R ′′′
                                                                              )||2 . This means that R′′′ is
                      STARC     ′′′                        ′              ′
         moved by ||cτ,γ     (R )||2 · sin(2 arcsin(ϵ /2)). Since ϵ ≤ ϵ ≤ π/2, this means that
            ′′′
         ||R − sτ,γSTARC
                         (t(R))||2 ≤ ||cSTARC
                                           τ,γ    (R′′′ )||2 · sin(2 arcsin(ϵ/2)).

      5. Move from sSTARC
                       τ,γ  (t(R)) to cSTARC
                                        τ,γ     (t(R)). Since sSTARC
                                                                τ,γ    (t(R)) is simply a normalised
         version of cSTARC
                     τ,γ   (t(R)), this is an instance of positive linear scaling.

      6. Move from cSTARC
                      τ,γ     (t(R)) to t(R). Since t(R) and cSTARC
                                                                τ,γ   (t(R)) differ by potential shap-
                  ′
         ing and S -redistribution, this transformation can be expressed as a combination of potential
         shaping and S ′ -redistribution.


Thus, for an arbitrary reward function R, we can find a series of transformations that fit the given
description. This completes the first direction.
For the other direction, suppose t can be expressed as t1 ◦ · · · ◦ tn−1 ◦ tn ◦ tn+1 ◦ · · · ◦ tm where

                        ||R − tn (R)||2 ≤ ||cSTARC
                                             τ,γ   (R)||2 · sin(2 arcsin(ϵ/2))

for all R, and for all i ̸= n and all R, we have that R and ti (R) differ by potential shaping (with γ),
S ′ -redistribution (with τ ), or positive linear scaling.
Recall that dSTARC
             τ,γ     is invariant to potential shaping (with γ), S ′ -redistribution (with τ ), and positive
linear scaling; this means that dSTARC
                                  τ,γ    (R, ti (R)) = 0 for i ̸= n.
For tn , recall that cSTARC
                       τ,γ    is a linear orthogonal projection; this means that ||cSTARC τ,γ    (R1 ) −
 STARC                                                                STARC
cτ,γ     (R2 )||2 ≤ ||R1 − R2 ||2 . As such, if ||R − tn (R)||2 ≤ ||cτ,γ     (R)||2 · sin(2 arcsin(ϵ/2)),
then ||cSTARC
        τ,γ     (R) − cSTARC
                       τ,γ   (tn (R))||2 ≤ ||cSTARC
                                                 τ,γ   (R)||2 · sin(2 arcsin(ϵ/2)) as well. Consider the
following diagram:


Now cSTARC
     τ,γ    (tn (R)) is located within circle in the diagram above. The vector within this circle that
maximises the distance to cSTARC
                           τ,γ    (R) after normalisation lies on the tangent of the circle:


                                                    22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Elementary trigonometry now tells us that
                                      ||cSTARC
                                         τ,γ   (R)||2 · sin(2 arcsin(ϵ/2))
                           sin(θ) =                                        ,
                                                ||cSTARC
                                                   τ,γ    (R)||2
which gives that θ = 2 arcsin(ϵ/2). From this, we have that δ = ϵ, and so dSTARC
                                                                           τ,γ   (R, t(R)) ≤ ϵ.
This completes the other direction, and hence the proof.
Corollary 1. Let R̂ be a set of reward functions, τ be a transition function, γ a discount factor,
β a temperature parameter, and α a weight parameter. Moreover, let Tˆϵ be the set of all functions
t : R → R that satisfy Proposition 3, and additionally satisfy that t(R) ∈ R̂ for all R ∈ R̂.
Then bτ,γ,β : R̂ → Π is ϵ-robust to misspecification with g (as defined by dSTARCτ,γ    ) if and only if
                              ˆ
g = bτ,γ,β ◦ t for some t ∈ Tϵ , and cτ,γ,α : R̂ → Π is ϵ-robust to misspecification with g (as defined
by dSTARC
    τ,γ    ) if and only if g = cτ,γ,α ◦ t for some t ∈ Tˆϵ .

Proof. Immediate from Theorem 1 and Proposition 3.
Proposition 4. Unless |S| = 1 and |A| = 2, then for any τ and any γ there exists an E > 0 such
that for all ϵ < E, there is no behavioural model g such that oτ,γ is ϵ-robust to misspecification with
g (as defined by dSTARC
                  τ,γ     ).

Proof. We will first show that unless |S| = 1 and |A| = 2, there exists reward functions R1 , R2
and an E > 0 such that oτ,γ (R1 ) = oτ,γ (R2 ), but dSTARC
                                                      τ,γ   (R1 , R2 ) = E. In particular, note that if
|S| ≥ 2 or |A| ≥ 3, then there exists uncountably many reward functions that do not have the same
ordering of policies. Moreover, also note that Im(oτ,γ ) is finite. By the pigeonhole principle, this
means that there must exist a policy π ∈ Im(oτ,γ ) and reward functions R1 , R2 such that oτ,γ (R1 ) =
oτ,γ (R2 ) = π, and such that R1 and R2 do not have the same ordering of policies. Moreover, recall
that dSTARC
      τ,γ    (R1 , R2 ) = 0 if and only if R1 and R2 have the same ordering of policies. Thus, unless
|S| = 1 and |A| = 2, there exists reward functions R1 , R2 such that oτ,γ (R1 ) = oτ,γ (R2 ), but
dSTARC
 τ,γ     (R1 , R2 ) = E > 0. Thus oτ,γ violates condition 2 of Definition 1 for all ϵ < E.

F.2   P ERTURBATION ROBUSTNESS

Theorem 2. Let R̂ be a set of reward functions, let f : R̂ → Π be a behavioural model, let dR be
a pseudometric on R̂, and let dΠ be a pseudometric on Π. Then f is ϵ-robust to δ-perturbation (as
defined by dR and dΠ ) if and only if f is ϵ/δ-separating (as defined by dR and dΠ ).

Proof. For the first direction, suppose f is ϵ/δ-separating, and let g be a δ-perturbation of f with
Im(g) ⊆ Im(f ). We will show that f and g satisfy the conditions of Definition 1. For the first


                                                  23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


condition, let R1 , R2 be two arbitrary reward functions in R̂ such that f (R1 ) = g(R2 ). Since g is
a δ-perturbation of f , we have that dΠ (g(R2 ), f (R2 )) ≤ δ. Since f (R1 ) = g(R2 ), straightforward
substitution thus gives us that dΠ (f (R1 ), f (R2 )) ≤ δ. Since f is ϵ/δ-separating, this means that
dR (R1 , R2 ) ≤ ϵ. Since R1 and R2 were chosen arbitrarily, this means that if f (R1 ) = g(R2 )
then dR (R1 , R2 ) ≤ ϵ. Thus, the first condition of Definition 1 holds. For the second condition,
note that if f (R1 ) = f (R2 ), then dΠ (f (R1 ), f (R2 )) = 0 ≤ δ. Since f is ϵ/δ-separating, this
means that dR (R1 , R2 ) ≤ ϵ, which means that the second condition is satisfied as well. The third
condition is satisfied, since we assume that Im(g) ⊆ Im(f ), and the fourth condition is satisfied by
the definition of δ-perturbations. This means that f and g satisfy all the conditions of Definition 1,
and thus f is ϵ-robust to misspecification with g. Since g was chosen arbitrarily, this means that f is
ϵ-robust to misspecification with any δ-perturbation g such that Im(g) ⊆ Im(f ). Thus f is ϵ-robust
to δ-perturbation.
For the second direction, suppose f is not ϵ/δ-separating. This means that there exist R1 , R2 ∈ R̂
such that dR (R1 , R2 ) > ϵ and dΠ (f (R1 ), f (R2 )) ≤ δ. Now let g : R̂ → R̂ be the behavioural
model where g(R1 ) = f (R2 ), g(R2 ) = f (R1 ), and g(R) = f (R) for all R ̸∈ {R1 , R2 }. Now g is
a δ-perturbation of f . However, f is not ϵ-robust to misspecification with g, since g(R1 ) = f (R2 ),
but dR (R1 , R2 ) > ϵ. Thus, if f is not ϵ/δ-separating then f is not ϵ-robust to δ-perturbation, which
in turn means that if f is ϵ-robust to δ-perturbation, then f is must be ϵ/δ-separating.

Theorem 3. Let dR be dSTARC τ,γ    , and let dΠ be a pseudometric on Π which satisfies the condition
that for all δ1 there exists a δ2 such that if ||π1 − π2 ||2 < δ2 then dΠ (π1 , π2 ) < δ1 . Let c be any
positive constant, and let R̂ be a set of reward functions such that if ||R||2 = c then R ∈ R̂. Let
f : R̂ → Π be continuous. Then f is not ϵ/δ-separating for any ϵ < 1 or δ > 0.

Proof. Let R be a non-trivial reward function that is orthogonal to all trivial reward functions. Since
the set of all trivial reward functions form a linear subspace, such a reward function R exists. Note
that R must not necessarily be contained in R̂.
We now have that for any positive constant ϵ, it is the case that ϵR and −ϵR have the opposite
ordering of policies, and thus dSTARC
                                  τ,γ   (ϵR, −ϵR) = 1. Next, let RΦ be some potential-shaping
reward function such that ||ϵR + RΦ ||2 = c. Since potential shaping does not change the ordering of
policies, we have that ϵR+RΦ and ϵR+RΦ must have the opposite ordering of policies as well, and
so dSTARC
    τ,γ    (ϵR+RΦ , −ϵR+RΦ ) = 1. Moreover, since RΦ is trivial, we have that both ϵR and −ϵR
are orthogonal to RΦ , and so || − ϵR + RΦ ||2 = c as well. Since ||ϵR + RΦ ||2 = ||ϵR + RΦ ||2 = c,
we have that both ϵR + RΦ and −ϵR + RΦ are contained in R̂.
Let δ1 be any positive constant. By assumption, there exists a δ2 such that if ||π1 − π2 ||2 < δ2 then
dΠ (π1 , π2 ) < δ1 . Moreover, since f is continuous, there exists an ϵ1 such that if ||R1 − R2 ||2 < ϵ1 ,
then ||f (R1 ) − f (R2 )||2 < δ2 . Next, note that by making ϵ sufficiently small, we can ensure that
the ℓ2 -distance between ϵR + RΦ and ϵR + RΦ is arbitrarily small (and, in particular, less than ϵ1 ).
Thus, for any positive δ there exist reward functions ϵR + RΦ and −ϵR + RΦ that are both contained
in R̂, such that dΠ (f (ϵR+RΦ ), f (−ϵR+RΦ )) < δ, and such that dSTARC
                                                                   τ,γ   (ϵR+RΦ , −ϵR+RΦ ) =
1. Thus f is not ϵ/δ-separating for any δ > 0 and any ϵ < 1.

F.3   M ISSPECIFIED PARAMETERS

Lemma 1. Let R̂ be a set of reward functions, let f, g : R̂ → Π be two behavioural models, and
let dR be a pseudometric on R̂. Suppose f is ϵ-robust to misspecification with g (as defined by dR ).
Then if g(R1 ) = g(R2 ), we have that dR (R1 , R2 ) ≤ 2ϵ.


Proof. Let f, g : R̂ → R̂ be two behavioural models, and suppose f is ϵ-robust to misspecification
with g. Let R1 , R2 ∈ R̂ be any two reward functions such that g(R1 ) = g(R2 ). From condition 3 in
Definition 1, we have that there must be a reward function R3 such that f (R3 ) = g(R1 ) = g(R2 ).
From condition 1 in Definition 1, we have that dR (R3 , R1 ) ≤ ϵ and dR (R3 , R2 ) ≤ ϵ. The triangle
inequality then implies that dR (R1 , R2 ) ≤ 2ϵ.


                                                   24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Lemma 2. If fγ : R → Π is invariant to potential shaping with γ, then for all τ and all γ1 , γ2
such that γ1 ̸= γ2 and τ is non-trivial, then there exists a reward function R† such that fγ1 (R) =
fγ1 (R + αR† ) for all R ∈ R and all α ∈ R.

Proof. Analogous to the proof of Lemma A.18 in Skalse & Abate (2023).
Lemma 3. If fτ : R → Π is invariant to S ′ -redistribution with τ , then for all γ and all τ1 , τ2
such that τ1 ̸= τ2 , there exists a reward function R† that is non-trivial under τ2 and γ, such that
fτ1 (R) = fτ1 (R + αR† ) for all R ∈ R and all α ∈ R.

Proof. Since fτ1 is invariant to S ′ -redistribution with τ1 , we have that fτ1 (R1 ) = fτ1 (R2 ) for any
two reward functions R1 , R2 such that
                        ES ′ ∼τ1 (s,a) [R1 (s, a, S ′ )] = ES ′ ∼τ1 (s,a) [R2 (s, a, S ′ )] .
Note that R1 and R2 satisfy this condition if and only if
                                  ES ′ ∼τ1 (s,a) [(R2 − R1 )(s, a, S ′ )] = 0.
That is to say, if R′ is a reward function such that ES ′ ∼τ1 (s,a) [R′ (s, a, S ′ )] = 0, then fτ1 (R) =
fτ1 (R + R′ ) for all R. Next, note that the set of all such reward functions R′ form a linear subspace
of R, with |S||A|(|S| − 1) dimensions. We will show that this subspace contains reward functions
that are non-trivial under γ and τ2 .
Since τ1 ̸= τ2 , we have that there exists a state s and action a such that τ1 (s, a) ̸= τ2 (s, a).
Let R† be a reward function that is 0 everywhere, except that ES ′ ∼τ1 (s,a) [R′ (s, a, S ′ )] =
0, and ES ′ ∼τ2 (s,a) [R′ (s, a, S ′ )] = 1. Note that there is always a solution to this sys-
tem of linear equations. In particular, the values of R† (s, a, s′ ) for each transition s, a, s′
form a |S|-dimensional vector space. The set of all values for these variables that satisfy
ES ′ ∼τ1 (s,a) [R′ (s, a, S ′ )] = 0 form an (|S| − 1)-dimensional linear subspace, and the set of all
values that satisfy ES ′ ∼τ2 (s,a) [R′ (s, a, S ′ )] = 1 form an (|S| − 1)-dimensional     affine subspace.
                                                                                            (s, a) = s′ ) =
                                                                                 P
These   two   sets  must   intersect, unless they   are parallel. However, since  s ′ P(τ1
                        ′                                                                 †
P
   s′ P(τ2 (s, a) = s ) = 1, they cannot be parallel. Thus, such a reward function R must exist.

It is clear that R† is non-trivial under γ and τ2 . To spell it out; since all states are reachable under
τ2 and µ0 , there exists a policy π that visits state s with positive probability. Let π1 and π2 be
two policies that are identical to π everywhere, except that π1 takes action a with probability 1 in
                                                                       †
state s, and  π2 takes action
                             a with probability 0 in state s. Then J (π1 ) >     J † (π2 ). Moreover, since
ES ′ ∼τ1 (s,a) R (s, a, S ) = 0 for all s and a, we have that R and R+αR differ by S ′ -redistribution
                 †       ′                                                   †

(with τ1 ) for all reward functions R ∈ R and all scalars α ∈ R. Thus fτ1 (R) = fτ1 (R + αR† ).
Thus, if fτ : R → Π is invariant to S ′ -redistribution with τ , then for all γ and all τ1 , τ2 such that
τ1 ̸= τ2 , there exists a reward function R† that is non-trivial under τ2 and γ, such that fτ1 (R) =
fτ1 (R + αR† ) for all R ∈ R and all α ∈ R.
Theorem 4. If fγ : R → Π is invariant to potential shaping with γ, and γ1 ̸= γ2 , then fγ1 is not
ϵ-robust to misspecification with fγ2 under dSTARC
                                             τ,γ3  for any non-trivial τ , any γ3 , and any ϵ < 0.5.

Proof. If γ1 ̸= γ2 , then either γ1 ̸= γ3 or γ2 ̸= γ3 .
If γ1 ̸= γ3 , then Lemma 2 implies that there exists a reward function R† that is non-trivial under
τ and γ3 , such that fγ1 (R) = fγ1 (R + αR† ) for all R ∈ R and all α ∈ R. This means that
fγ1 (R† ) = fγ1 (−R† ) and dSTARC
                            τ,γ3  (R† , −R† ) = 1. Thus fγ1 violates condition 2 of Definition 1 for
all ϵ < 1.
If γ2 ̸= γ3 , then Lemma 2 implies that there exists a reward function R† that is non-trivial under
τ and γ3 , such that fγ2 (R) = fγ2 (R + αR† ) for all R ∈ R and all α ∈ R. This means that
fγ2 (R† ) = fγ2 (−R† ) and dSTARC
                              τ,γ3   (R† , −R† ) = 1. Then Lemma 1 implies that there can be no f
that is ϵ-robust to misspecification with fγ2 (as defined by dSTARC
                                                              τ,γ3  ) for any ϵ < 0.5.
Theorem 5. If fτ : R → Π is invariant to S ′ -redistribution with τ , and τ1 ̸= τ2 , then fτ1 is not
ϵ-robust to misspecification with fτ2 under dSTARC
                                             τ3 ,γ for any τ3 , any γ, and any ϵ < 0.5.


                                                        25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Proof. If τ1 ̸= τ2 , then either τ1 ̸= τ3 or τ2 ̸= τ3 .
If τ1 ̸= τ3 , then Lemma 3 implies that there exists a reward function R† that is non-trivial under
τ3 and γ, such that fτ1 (R) = fτ1 (R + αR† ) for all R ∈ R and all α ∈ R. This means that
fτ1 (R† ) = fτ1 (−R† ) and dSTARC
                            τ3 ,γ (R† , −R† ) = 1. Thus fτ1 violates condition 2 of Definition 1 for
all ϵ < 1.
If τ2 ̸= τ3 , then Lemma 3 implies that there exists a reward function R† that is non-trivial under
τ3 and γ, such that fτ2 (R) = fτ2 (R + αR† ) for all R ∈ R and all α ∈ R. This means that
fτ2 (R† ) = fτ2 (−R† ) and dSTARC
                              τ3 ,γ  (R† , −R† ) = 1. Then Lemma 1 implies that there can be no f
that is ϵ-robust to misspecification with fτ2 (as defined by dSTARC
                                                              τ3 ,γ ) for any ϵ < 0.5.

G    C ONNECTING O UR A NALYSIS T O E ARLIER P ROPOSALS
In this section, we will explain how to connect the results of Skalse & Abate (2023) to our results
in a rigorous way. Skalse & Abate (2023) assume that we have a partition P on R, which of course
corresponds to an equivalence relation ≡P , and say that two reward functions R1 , R2 should be
considered to be “close” if R1 ≡P R2 . Like us, they consider functions f, g : R → Π that take a
reward function and return a policy. They then say that f is “P -robust to misspecification with g” if
each of the following conditions hold:

      1. f (R1 ) = g(R2 ) =⇒ R1 ≡P R2 .
      2. f (R1 ) = f (R2 ) =⇒ R1 ≡P R2 .
      3. For all R1 there exists an R2 such that f (R2 ) = g(R1 ).
      4. f ̸= g.

Note that this definition is analogous to Definition 1, except that an equivalence relation P plays the
role that a pseudometric dR does in our framework. Next, note that we for any pseudometric dR can
define an equivalence relation ≡P such that R1 ≡P R2 if and only if dR (R1 , R2 ) = 0. In that case,
we would have that f is P -robust to misspecification with g (in the terminology of Skalse & Abate,
2023) if and only if f is 0-robust to misspecification with g (as evaluated by dR ) in our terminology
(i.e. Definition 1). Moreover, if f is 0-robust to misspecification with g, then it of course follows
that f is ϵ-robust to misspecification with g for all ϵ ≥ 0. In this way, their results can be expressed
within our more general framework.
Next, also recall that dSTARC
                        τ,γ    (R1 , R2 ) = 0 if and only if R1 and R2 induce the same ordering of
policies (under τ and γ). Skalse & Abate (2023) use “ORDM ” to denote this equivalence relation.
Thus, if f is ORDM -robust to misspecification with g (as defined by Skalse & Abate, 2023) then
f is ϵ-robust to misspecification with g (as evaluated by dSTARC
                                                           τ,γ   ) for all ϵ ≥ 0.


                                                     26
