Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C ONFORMAL L ANGUAGE M ODELING
 Victor Quach1,∗         Adam Fisch1,∗     Tal Schuster2

 Adam Yala3,4       Jae Ho Sohn4      Tommi Jaakkola1         Regina Barzilay1
 1                  2                     3                  4
     CSAIL, MIT         Google Research       UC Berkeley        UCSF



                                               A BSTRACT
          In this paper, we propose a novel approach to conformal prediction for language
          models (LMs) in which we produce prediction sets with performance guarantees.
          LM responses are typically sampled from a predicted distribution over the large,
          combinatorial output space of language. Translating this to conformal prediction,
          we calibrate a stopping rule for sampling LM outputs that get added to a growing
          set of candidates until we are confident that the set covers at least one acceptable
          response. Since some samples may be low-quality, we also simultaneously calibrate
          a rejection rule for removing candidates from the output set to reduce noise.
          Similar to conformal prediction, we can prove that the final output set obeys certain
          desirable distribution-free guarantees. Within these sets of candidate responses,
          we also show that we can also identify subsets of individual components—such
          as phrases or sentences—that are each independently correct (e.g., that are not
          “hallucinations”), again with guarantees. Our method can be applied to any LM
          API that supports sampling. Furthermore, we empirically demonstrate that we can
          achieve many desired coverage levels within a limited number of total samples
          when applying our method to multiple tasks in open-domain question answering,
          text summarization, and radiology report generation using different LM variants.


1     I NTRODUCTION
Language models (LMs) have emerged as powerful tools for solving natural language processing
(NLP) tasks. Given an input prompt, LMs generate a response from some predicted distribution over
output text sequences. For modern models, these generations are often coherent and contextually
relevant. At the same time, these generations can still contain mistakes, and lack certain aspects of
robustness and reliability in terms of providing accurate, trustworthy predictions (Jones and Steinhardt,
2022; Krishna et al., 2021; Lin et al., 2022a; Mallen et al., 2022; Srivastava et al., 2022; Wang et al.,
2023). Unfortunately, quantifying the uncertainty in LM outputs has remained a major challenge.
Conformal prediction is a popular model-agnostic and distribution-free method for creating prediction
sets that contain the correct answers with high probability (Angelopoulos et al., 2023; 2021a;b; Bates
et al., 2020; Lei et al., 2018; Romano et al., 2019; Vovk et al., 2005). Applying conformal prediction
to generative models such as LMs, however, is challenging due to (a) the unbounded nature of their
output space (i.e., all possible text sequences), and (b) the limited available (tractable) mechanisms
for exploring all possible predictions. In particular, LMs can typically only approximately search
or sample candidate responses. Furthermore, while several possible responses might be acceptable
(e.g., correct or factual), small differences can result in abrupt changes in coherence or meaning.
In this paper, we propose an extension of conformal prediction that is tailored specifically to generative
LMs. We only assume that the (potentially black-box) LM that is given to us can be used to sample
diverse output sequences, together with their evaluated model likelihoods (i.e., the output token
sequence logits). Like conformal prediction, our method offers a rigorous coverage guarantee by
constructing prediction sets that, in our case, provably contain at least one acceptable response with
high probability. Unlike conformal prediction, however, we do not enumerate the entire output space
(which is impossible). Instead, we derive a calibrated stopping rule for sampling different outputs
from the LM that get added to a growing output set of candidates, until we are confident that the
     * Equal contribution. AF is now at Google DeepMind. Correspondence to adamfisch15@gmail.com.


                                                    1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 1: Our conformal procedure samples candidate outputs from some blackbox LM until a
stopping rule is reached. Each sample is added to the output conformal set if it meets both a minimum
estimated quality and a diversity criterion. The procedure is calibrated to stop when at least one
candidate y from the conformal set is admissible (A(y) = 1) with high probability. In this example,
samples y1 and y2 are in-admissible because they hallucinate the presence of “edema” (in orange) and
“hilar congestion” (in magenta), respectively. The minimal output set includes y3 , which is admissible.


output set is sufficient. Since not all samples from the LM may be high quality (e.g., some may be
redundant, incoherent, or have lower confidence), we also simultaneously calibrate a rejection rule for
removing candidates from the output set—while still ensuring that our coverage bound is not violated.
This gives the benefit of making our output sets not only accurate, but also precise (i.e., small).
To more concretely describe the exact type of guarantee that we provide, suppose we have been given
a calibration set Dcal = (Xi , Ai ) ∈ X × A, i = 1, . . . , n of independent and identically distributed
(i.i.d.) prompts and “admission” functions (see also (Fisch et al., 2021a)). Here, Ai is a binary random
function that measures whether or not a generation y ∈ Y for prompt Xi is “good enough” (i.e.,
Ai (y) = 1). Note that randomness in Ai can come from implicit random covariates—such as relying
on a random annotated reference, Yiref , to compare the candidate y to. Figure 1 illustrates a setting
where Xi is an X-ray to automatically analyze and produce a report for, while Ai extracts individual
findings from each generated report and checks if they correspond to those given by an expert
radiologist. Let Xtest be a new i.i.d. test prompt. Using Dcal to guide our choice of hyper-parameters
λ ∈ Λ, for any ϵ, δ ∈ (0, 1), our goal is to generate a set of samples Cλ (Xtest ) ⊆ 2Y that satisfies

                   P P ∃y ∈ Cλ (Xtest ) : Atest (y) = 1 | Dcal ≥ 1 − ϵ ≥ 1 − δ.                       (1)

The outer and inner probabilities are over the draws of Dcal and (Xtest , Atest ), respectively. ϵ is our
error tolerance, while δ controls for the sensitivity of our algorithm with respect to calibration data.
While Eq. (1) stipulates the existence of at least one “acceptable” generation in Cλ (Xtest ), it does not
tell us much about individual responses, y ∈ Cλ (Xtest ). Additionally, longer generations are often
composed of multiple statements. In our radiology setting, a report may contain multiple findings,
such as “Cardiomegaly is moderate. There is mild pulmonary interstitial edema.” We futher identify
a subset of confident components that would independently be categorized as being correct (given an-
other admission function Actest , this time operating over generation fragments). For example, we might
predict that “Cardiomegaly is moderate.” is correct, but perhaps not “There is mild pulmonary inter-
stitial edema.” This can not only be useful in catching incorrect statements, but can also help identify
independently correct parts of a larger generation, even when the overall quality of the full generation
is poor. Like Eq. (1), we calibrate this process such that it gives accurate results with high probability.
Contributions. In summary, our main results are as follows:

• We bridge the gap between conformal prediction and LMs by calibrating the sampling of output
  sets, rather than enumerating and selecting candidate responses directly from the output space;
• We extend multi-label conformal prediction to identify confident components of long generations;
• Though limitations apply, we demonstrate valid risk control on multiple diverse tasks with different
  LMs, while still retaining meaningful output sets that are efficient and precise compared to baselines.


                                                    2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


2    R ELATED WORK
Conformal prediction and risk control. Our work adds to the rich collection of tools for uncertainty
estimation and risk control for machine learning algorithms (Angelopoulos et al., 2023; 2021a;
Barber et al., 2021; Bates et al., 2020; Fisch et al., 2022; Gupta et al., 2020; Lei et al., 2013; 2018;
Vovk, 2002; Vovk et al., 2015; 2017, inter alia). These techniques were previously extended and
applied in the language domain to classification with finitely-many classes (Fisch et al., 2021a;b;
Jones and Steinhardt, 2022), to token-level predictions (Dey et al., 2022; Ravfogel et al., 2023), and
to reliably accelerate LMs (Laufer-Goldshtein et al., 2023; Schuster et al., 2021b; 2022b). Here,
we address the emerging challenge of providing reliable prediction sets for unbounded, free-text
generation—which previous methods are unequipped for. The distribution-free, finite-sample
performance guarantees that we derive are similar to those given by prediction sets or regression
intervals in standard conformal prediction (Angelopoulos et al., 2023; Papadopoulos et al., 2002;
Vovk et al., 2005), but with slightly relaxed “correctness” criterions (Cauchois et al., 2022; Fisch et al.,
2021a). In particular, we build on the groundwork set by Angelopoulos et al. (2021a), which provides
a general methodology for calibrating any risk function that is controllable via some low-dimensional
hyper-parameter configuration. We extend their framework to handle sampling-based algorithms that
can effectively be used for LMs, and that, critically, do not require enumerating the full output space
(which is intractable in our case). Most relevant to our work in LMs, other recent approaches have
built on conformal principles to construct confidence intervals for generative diffusion models over
images (Horwitz and Hoshen, 2022; Teneggi et al., 2023). These methods do not directly translate
to LMs, however, as they only provide non-combinatorial confidence intervals at the pixel-level.
Uncertainty estimation in LMs. As the use of LMs in-the-wild quickly grows, there is increasing
interest in obtaining and expressing meaningful confidence estimates for each output. Recent studies
show that the logits of out-of-the-box LMs tend to exhibit overconfidence, even when wrong (Desai
and Durrett, 2020; Kadavath et al., 2022; Miao et al., 2021; Vasconcelos et al., 2023). Recent
alignment techniques degrade this even further (Kadavath et al., 2022; OpenAI, 2023). Most current
mitigation approaches focus on introducing linguistic cues (Lin et al., 2022b; Zhou et al., 2023) or
post-hoc logit calibration (Jiang et al., 2021; Kadavath et al., 2022; Mielke et al., 2022; Zablotskaia
et al., 2023). In this work, we develop similar techniques to improve the output of the underlying
LM. Our methods are model agnostic and provide rigorous guarantees. Our conformal component
selection (§4.4) also relates to recent self-consistency work that builds on the empirical observation
that repeated similar samples are more likely to be correct (Mitchell et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2023),
and cross-sample entailment can approximate uncertainty (Kuhn et al., 2023). Unlike previous
work that uses a fixed number of re-samples and compares full outputs, we (a) introduce a dynamic
stopping rule to reduce the number of samples, (b) extend this concept to semantically compare
sub-components of long text outputs, and (c) conformalize the process to provide formal guarantees.
Reliable generation. It is common practice to post-hoc apply classifiers and filters on top of LM
generations for various quality goals such as preventing toxicity (Gehman et al., 2020; Rauh et al.,
2022; Welbl et al., 2021), verifying grounding against sources (Bohnet et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2023;
Yue et al., 2023), or re-ranking the set of decoded outputs (Jiang et al., 2022). Our work provides
a systematic and reliable approach for filtering or flagging poor-quality outputs—both at a full
generation and component level—and can also readily incorporate additional signal from auxiliary
classifiers. For example, we demonstrate in our experiments using off-the-shelf natural language
inference (NLI) models (Bowman et al., 2015; Khot et al., 2018; Schuster et al., 2021a; Thorne et al.,
2018; Williams et al., 2018; Zhang et al., 2019) to help guide the selection of individual, confident
components in text summarization (i.e., sentences that are fully entailed by the larger text (Fabbri
et al., 2022; Honovich et al., 2022; Laban et al., 2022; Schuster et al., 2022a)).

3    BACKGROUND
We begin with a review of conformal prediction and risk control (see also (Angelopoulos and Bates,
2022)). We use upper-case letters (X) to denote random variables; lower-case letters (x) to denote
constants, and script letters (X ) to denote sets, unless otherwise specified. Proofs are in Appendix D.
Given a new example x, for every candidate label y ∈ Y standard conformal prediction either accepts
or rejects the null hypothesis that the pairing (x, y) is correct. The test statistic for this test is a
nonconformity measure, M((x, y), D), where D is a dataset of labeled examples. Informally, a


                                                     3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


lower value of M reflects that point (x, y) “conforms” to D, whereas a higher value of M reflects
that (x, y) does not. For example, a practical choice for M could be the model-based negative log
likelihood, − log pθ (y|x), where θ are parameters fit to D. Split conformal prediction (Papadopoulos,
2008) uses a separate training set Dtrain to learn a fixed M that is not modified during calibration
or prediction. To construct a prediction set for the new test point x, the conformal classifier outputs
all y for which the null hypothesis (that pairing (x, y) is correct) is not rejected. This is achieved by
comparing the scores of the test candidate pairs to the scores computed over n calibration examples.
Theorem 3.1 (Split conformal prediction (Papadopoulos, 2008; Vovk et al., 2005)). Let (Xi , Yi ),
i = 1, . . . , n + 1 be exchangeable random variables. Let random variable Vi = M(Xi , Yi ) be the
nonconformity score of (Xi , Yi ), where M is fixed. For ϵ ∈ (0, 1), define the prediction (based on
the first n examples) at x ∈ X as

                      Cϵ (x) := y ∈ Y : M(x, y) ≤ Quantile(1 − ϵ; V1:n ∪ {∞})                     (2)
Then P(Yn+1 ∈ Cϵ (Xn+1 )) ≥ 1 − ϵ.

Note that the coverage expressed in Theorem 3.1 is marginal over the draw of calibration and test
data. The recent Learn Then Test (LTT) framework of Angelopoulos et al. (2021a) extends conformal
prediction to control the expectation of any loss function (conditional on the draw of calibration data)
by reframing hyper-parameter selection as a multiple hypothesis testing problem.
Specifically, let L : Λ → R be any random function using a hyper-parameter configuration λ in some
space Λ. For example, we might have L(λ) := ℓ(X, Y ; λ) for some fixed loss function ℓ with random
inputs (X, Y ). Unlike conformal prediction, however, λ can be multi-dimensional (e.g., consist of
multiple thresholds). Let Li , i = 1, . . . , n be an i.i.d. calibration set Dcal of random functions, and
Ltest a random test function. Let ϵ ∈ R be a tolerance for the test risk, E[Ltest (λ)] ≤ ϵ. LTT then iden-
tifies a random (depending on Dcal ) subset of parameters, Λvalid ⊆ Λ, with the goal of guaranteeing

                            P     sup E[Ltest (λ) | Dcal ] ≤ ϵ ≥ 1 − δ,                                 (3)
                                  λ∈Λvalid

where the outer probability is over the draw of Dcal , and the inner expectation is over draws of
Ltest . This then implies that any λ ∈ Λvalid can be selected to control the risk of Ltest . In short,
this is achieved by associating the null hypothesis Hλ : E[Ltest (λ)] > ϵ to each λ ∈ Λ. For each null
hypothesis, we then use the calibration set to compute a super-uniform p-value pλ using concentration
inequalities. Any multiple testing algorithm T (pλ : λ ∈ Λ) that controls the family-wise error rate
(FWER) can then be used to identify the subset of non-rejected λ, i.e., Λvalid .1 Note that it is possible
that Λvalid = ∅, in the case that we fail to identify any statistically valid solutions (and the desired
risk may not even be achievable with any λ). In this situation, we set λ = null, and either reject
the task, or provide a trivial solution (e.g., a classifier that provides all possible labels Y).
Theorem 3.2 (Learn Then Test (Angelopoulos et al., 2021a)). Suppose pλ is super-uniform under
Hλ for all λ. Let T be any FWER-controlling algorithm at level δ. Then Λvalid satisfies Eq. (3).

Defining Cλ (x) := {y ∈ Y : M(x, y) ≤ λ}, Λ ⊂ R, and L(λ) := 1{Y ̸∈ Cλ (X)} recovers a crite-
rion similar to that of conformal prediction (though not marginal over Dcal ). Unfortunately, in either
instantiation (LTT vs. conformal prediction) iterating over y ∈ Y is intractable for LMs, regardless
of whatever calibration technique is ultimately used. Instead, in §4, we introduce our method for
generating uncertainty sets by casting λ as a configuration of a sampling algorithm, rather than a filter
on the output space Y. We then show that this randomized algorithm can still be calibrated with LTT.

4    C ONFORMAL LANGUAGE MODELING
We now introduce our method for generating uncertainty sets for LMs. At a high level, our procedure
consists of three main steps to sample and return an collection of plausible output predictions:

1. Sample. A new candidate response y is sampled from our language model.

   1
     A FWER-controlling algorithm at level δ is any procedure that accepts or rejects null hypotheses Hλ , while
ensuring that the probability of falsely rejecting any Hλ , ∀λ ∈ Λ, is less than δ.


                                                       4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 1 Conformal sampling with rejection
Definitions: x is an input prompt, F is our set-based confidence function, S is our text similarity
function, Q is our sample quality estimator, λ is our threshold configuration, and kmax is our sampling
budget. pθ (y | x) is the conditional output distribution defined by our language model.
 1: function SAMPLE(x, F, S, Q, λ, kmax )
 2:     Cλ ← {}                                                             ▷ Initialize an empty output set.
 3:     for k = 1, 2, . . . , kmax do
 4:         yk ← y ∼ pθ (y | x).                                                   ▷ Sample a new response.
 5:         if Q(x, yk ) < λ2 then                               ▷ Reject if its estimated quality is too low.
 6:             continue
 7:         if max{S(yk , yj ) : yj ∈ Cλ } > λ1 then           ▷ Reject if it is too similar to other samples.
 8:             continue
 9:         Cλ = Cλ ∪ {yk }.                                      ▷ Add the new response to the output set.
10:         if F(Cλ ) ≥ λ3 then                                 ▷ Check if we are confident enough to stop.
11:             break
12:     return Cλ

2. Accept or reject. The sample y is added to the growing output set, as long as it is diverse (e.g.,
   maximum overlap with any other element is ≤ λ1 ) and confident (e.g., the LM likelihood is ≥ λ2 ).
3. Stop or repeat. Using a set-based scoring function, we check if the confidence in the current set
   is ≥ λ3 . If it is, then we stop and return the current set. Otherwise we return to Step 1.

λ = (λ1 , λ2 , λ3 ) is a configuration that we calibrate to find a valid setting, λ̂ = (λ̂1 , λ̂2 , λ̂3 ), that
controls the risk of our output sets. In the following, we more carefully define our setting and notation
(§4.1), and then describe our sampling (§4.2) and calibration algorithms (§4.3). Then, in §4.4, we
provide an additional extension for highlighting confident generation components—i.e., subsections
of our full generations that are independently likely to be correct, even if the full generation is not.

4.1   F ORMAL SETTING AND NOTATION

Let V be an alphabet (a non-empty, finite set of tokens S      such as {“a”, “b”, “c”, . . .}) from which
                                                                ∞
all possible output strings, y, are composed, i.e. Y := n=0 V n . We assume that we are given
a generative model pθ (y | x) that defines a conditional probability distribution given some input
prompt x ∈ X which we can sample from to obtain output strings, y ∼ pθ (y | x). Following Fisch
et al. (2021a), for every input prompt x, we also further assume access to some “admission” function
A : Y → {0, 1} that is used to measure the acceptability of a given sample y. Intuitively, A tells us if
an output is “good enough”. We explore different tasks and admission functions in our experiments in
§5. See Appendix A for an extended discussion of this setting and its assumptions. Given a sampled
calibration set Dcal , our goal is then to derive a configurable algorithm with input parameters λ ∈ Λ
for constructing a prediction Cλ that we can calibrate to satisfy Eq. (1). In the framework of LTT
(refer to §3), this is equivalent to defining Li (λ) = 1{∄y ∈ Cλ (Xi ) : Ai (y) = 1}, and using Dcal to
find a value λ̂ such that E[Ltest (λ̂)] ≤ ϵ, with probability at least 1 − δ over the draw of Dcal .

4.2   C ONFORMAL SAMPLING WITH REJECTION

Let F : 2Y → R be a set-based function that, for any set C ∈ 2Y , gives a set confidence score for the
event 1{∃y ∈ C : A(y) = 1}. F should not depend on Dcal . Furthermore, let S : Y × Y → R be a
text-based similarity function (e.g., BLEU or ROUGE) that we use to detect duplicates and preserve
diversity in C, and Q : X × Y → R an input-conditional text-based measure of an individual
response’s quality—such as the LM’s likelihood function, pθ (y | x). We define and test different
instances of these functions in §5.2. We then adopt a sampling-based procedure that grows an output
set, C1 ⊆ C2 ⊆ . . . ⊆ Ck−1 , by repeatedly taking samples yk ∼ pθ (y | x), and updating
                          
                          Ck−1 ∪ {yk }          if max{S(yk , yj ) : yj ∈ Ck−1 } ≤ λ1
                  Ck :=                          and Q(x, yk ) ≥ λ2 ,                                      (4)
                           Ck−1                  otherwise.
                          


                                                      5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


until the confidence after k samples, F(Ck ), is ≥ λ3 (or some sampling budget kmax is reached).
As an intuitive, but toy, example, suppose we modeled yk ∼ pθ (y | x), k = 1, 2, . . . as a Bernoulli
process, where each yk has the same probability of success p that we assume (albeit unrealistically)
that we know. For Xtest , “success” is determined by the admission function, Atest . The confidence
that our current set Ck contains at least one admissible answer (without rejection) then follows a ge-
ometric distribution, Geo(p): all that remains is to compute the minimum number of samples to take
such that Eq. (1) is satisfied. This is achieved by taking F(Ck ) = k and λ3 = ⌈log(ϵ)/ log(1 − p)⌉.
Of course, in reality we do not know the probability of success p for test examples. Furthermore, the
samples yk are not independent, and since we are also able to observe their values, better strategies
may exist to conditionally estimate A(yk ) = 1. Therefore, we allow F to be any set-based function—
that we also pair with similarity function S, and sample quality function Q, for handling rejections.
Pseudocode is given in Algorithm 1. We derive, calibrate, and test different variations of F, S, and Q
in §5 and §6, respectively. Using λ = (λ1 , λ2 , λ3 ), we write Cλ (Xtest ) to denote the final output set.

4.3   C ALIBRATION WITH L EARN T HEN T EST

Let Λ be a finite set of configurations. For example, if searching for a value of λ = (λ1 , λ2 , λ3 ) ∈
[0, 1]3 , we might consider the evenly-spaced set Λ = { κi : i = 1, . . . , κ}3 for some finite κ ∈ N. For
each λ ∈ Λ, LTT then requires computing a valid p-value pλ , where pλ is a super-uniform random
variable under Hλ . Here, we can obtain valid p-values from the empirical risk on Dcal ,
                          n
             bn (λ) := 1
                         X
             R               Li (λ),      where Li (λ) = 1 ∄y ∈ Cλ (Xi ) : Ai (y) = 1 ,                (5)
                       n i=1

Lemma 4.1 (Binomial tail bound p-values). Let R bn (λ) be the empirical risk in Eq. (5), and let
Binom(n, ϵ) denote a binomial random variable with sample size n and success probability ϵ. Then
                                  pBT
                                   λ := P(Binom(n, ϵ) ≤ nRn (λ))
                                                         b                                             (6)
is a valid p-value for Hλ : E[Ltest (λ)] > ϵ.

When paired with any FWER-controlling algorithm T at level δ, we obtain the set Λvalid ⊆ Λ by
selecting all configurations for hypotheses Hλ that are rejected by T (pBT      λ : λ ∈ Λ). If Λvalid is
empty, then we abstain (i.e., return null). Otherwise, we are free to use any configuration in Λvalid .
We then select the one that empirically minimizes a weighted combination of the average final set
size (after rejection) as well as the relative number of “excess” samples taken from our model (i.e.,
how many extra samples our algorithm takes after the first admissible answer has already been
surfaced, proportional to the total number of samples). Specifically, let Sλ (x) be the total number
of samples taken, S ∗ (x) be the oracle sample index j of the first admissible generation (where
A(yj ) = 1), and Cλ (x) be the final prediction set. Then, reusing Dcal , we take
                                       n
                                                               [Sλ (Xi ) − S ∗ (Xi )]+

                                   1X
                    λ̂ = argmin             ρ1 |Cλ (Xi )| + ρ2                                       (7)
                         λ∈Λvalid n i=1                              Sλ (Xi )

where ρ1 , ρ2 ∈ R≥0 are hyper-parameters and [·]+ ≜ max(·, 0). We choose ρ1 = ρ2 = 0.5. As a con-
sequence of LTT, the chosen λ̂ (which is a random variable that depends on Dcal ) is risk-controlling.

Theorem 4.2 (Sampling-based LTT). Let λ̂ be defined according to Eq. (7). Then the prediction
Cλ̂ (Xtest ) computed by Algorithm 1 satisfies Eq. (1).

Remark 4.3. Given a finite kmax , Algorithm 1 is guaranteed to terminate. Smaller kmax will, however,
shrink the range of achievable ϵ (i.e., with λ̂ ̸= null). See Appendix C for additional discussion.

To efficiently search and test the higher dimensional λ = (λ1 , λ2 , λ3 ), we use the Pareto Testing proce-
dure from Laufer-Goldshtein et al. (2023). Pareto Testing exploits structure in Λ by first using a propor-
tion of Dcal to find Λ’s Pareto-optimal frontier, and then iteratively validates promising configurations
using Fixed Sequence Testing (Holm, 1979) on the remaining calibration data. See Appendix E.


                                                    6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 2 Conformal component selection
Definitions: Cλ is a prediction set, E is an algorithm for splitting candidates y into components, F c
is a confidence estimator for individual components, γ is our threshold configuration.
  1: function SELECT(Cλ , E, F c , γ)
  2:     Cγinner ← {}                                                       ▷ Initialize an empty output set.
  3:     for y ∈ Cλ do                                                        ▷ Iterate over full predictions.
  4:          for e ∈ E(y) do                                         ▷ Iterate over individual components.
  5:              if F c (e) ≥ γ then
  6:                   Cγinner ← Cγinner ∪ {e}                   ▷ Keep only high-confidence components.
                    inner
  7:     return Cγ

4.4   C ONFORMAL SELECTION OF INDIVIDUAL COMPONENTS

A caveat of language generation is that LM responses can be verbose, and composed of multiple
components. We consider a “component” to be a logically defined subpart of a larger response,
such as a series of phrases or propositions. For example, a radiology report like “The heart is mildly
enlarged. The lungs are clear.” can be broken down into two findings: “The heart is mildly enlarged.”
and “The lungs are clear.” While Theorem 4.2 guarantees that complete, admissible generations do
exist within our prediction sets, we cannot use it to make statements about the relative reliability of
individual components within each response contained within that prediction set. Let E : Y → 2Y be
a deterministic function that takes a text string and breaks it down into components. We implement
E to be a simple sentence splitter. For every input x, we assume access to some component-based
admission function Ac : Y → {0, 1} that is used to judge individual components for correctness.
For example, Ac may check if e is entailed by another component e′ ∈ E(y ref ), where y ref is a
human reference. Let F c : Y → R be a function that, for component e ∈ Y, gives a confidence
score for the event Ac (e) = 1. We then define the subset of components Cγinner ⊆ 2Y as
                                         n         [                      o
                           Cγinner (x) := e ∈           E(y) : F c (e) ≥ γ .                        (8)
                                                  y∈Cλ (x)

Using Dcal , we seek to calibrate γ ∈ Γ, such that for test pair (Xtest , Actest ) and α, δ ∈ (0, 1),

                P P Actest (e) = 1, ∀e ∈ Cγinner (Xtest ) | Dcal ≥ 1 − α ≥ 1 − δ.                         (9)

The outer and inner probabilities are over the draws of Dcal and (Xtest , Actest ), respectively. The new
parameter α can be interpreted as the maximum rate of making any false positive predictions in which
we select a component that is not in fact acceptable. Like Cλ , we calibrate Cγinner using LTT, but seek
to make Cγinner as large as possible, in order to maximize recall of correct components. Concretely, let
Lci (γ) = 1{∃e ∈ Cγinner : Aci (e) = 0} and let Γvalid be the set of non-rejected configurations found
by LTT (again using binomial tail p-values). During calibration we define Cγinner (Xi ) using an upper
bound to Cλ (Xi ), by simply taking the first kmax samples, {y1 , . . . , ykmax }. This will allow us to
conveniently decouple component calibration from set calibration. We then use the configuration that
empirically maximizes the average number of confident components (where we again reuse Dcal ):
                                                          n
                                                    1X
                                      γ̂ = argmax         |Cγ (Xi )|.                                    (10)
                                           γ∈Γvalid n i=1

Proposition 4.4 (Component-based LTT). Let γ̂ be defined according to Eq. (10), where Cγ (Xi ) uses
Cλ (Xi ) ≡ {y1 , . . . , ykmax } during calibration. Then the prediction set of components, Cγ̂ (Xtest )
computed by Algorithm 2 paired with any Cλ at test time with supx |Cλ (x)| ≤ kmax satisfies Eq. (9).

By the union bound, Eq. (1) and Eq. (9) hold simultaneously with probability 1 − 2δ.

5     E XPERIMENTAL SETUP
In this section, we briefly describe our experimental setup, including tasks, scoring functions, and
metrics. We set kmax = 20 for all experiments. See Appendix F for additional task and model details.


                                                      7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


5.1       TASKS

Radiology report generation. As motivated in §1, we apply our method to chest X-ray radiology
report generation using the MIMIC-CXR (Johnson et al., 2019) dataset. For our LM, we fine-tune an
encoder-decoder architecture based on a pretrained ViT (Dosovitskiy et al., 2021) image encoder and
a GPT2-small (Radford et al., 2019) text decoder. To judge admission, we use the popular Clinical
Efficacy metric (Liu et al., 2019; Nicolson et al., 2022) to check if the 14 labels predicted by an
auxiliary CheXbert (Smit et al., 2020) model on the generated report exactly match the labels predicted
by the same CheXbert model for a reference report from a radiologist. Similarly, a component (here
a sentence including a finding) is defined to be admissible if it has a ROUGE-L (Lin, 2004) score
≥ 0.4 (picked empirically), when compared to any component directly extracted from the reference.
News summarization. We also apply our method to news article text summarization using the
CNN/DM (Hermann et al., 2015) dataset. For our LM, we finetune a T5-XL (Raffel et al., 2020)
model. We define a candidate generation to be admissible if it has a ROUGE-L score ≥ 0.35, when
compared to all available reference summaries from human annotators. Like MIMIX-CXR, we
define a component to be admissible if it has a ROUGE-L score ≥ 0.4 when compared to components
extracted from human summaries. These thresholds are picked through manual validation.
Open-domain question answering. Finally, we apply our method to open-domain QA using the
TriviaQA (Joshi et al., 2017) dataset. Here we sample answers from LLaMA-13B (Touvron et al.,
2023) in the few-shot setting (k = 32), without any additional fine-tuning. Since answers are limited
to one or few tokens, a candidate output generation is acceptable only if it exactly matches an annotated
reference answer (after removing articles, casing, and punctuation). Furthermore, since the expected
answers are short and fairly atomic, we do not evaluate component-level confidence for this dataset.

5.2       S CORING FUNCTIONS

Our method can support different quality functions Q, similarity functions S, and set scoring functions
F. We show that a straightforward approach is to simply use transformations on the model likelihoods
(from token logits). We define Q(x, y) = pθ (y | x) using the likelihood function of the base LM,
with length-normalization (Wu et al., 2016). We use ROUGE-L for S. For F, we experiment with:
• F IRST-K. As a baseline, we score a set by its size, FFIRST- K (C) = |C|, and do not use rejection. This
  corresponds to the number of samples taken, and follows the intuition from our toy example in §4.2.
• F IRST-K+ REJECT. This variant uses our duplicate rejection component (§4.2), but like F IRST-K,
  scores a set by the total number of samples taken so far (where the number of samples is now ≥ |C|).
• M AX . The FM AX scoring function stems from the intuition that a set is only as good as its best
  element, and defines FM AX (C) = max{Q(y) : y ∈ C}.
                                                                             P
• S UM . Alternatively, we also use the sum of item-level scores: FS UM (C) = y∈C Q(y).

5.3       M ETRICS

Our main motivation is to produce valid confidence sets that are also precise. To reflect this, we
measure both the loss of our sets (which is guaranteed to satisfy our prescribed limits), as well as both
(a) the relative number of “excess” samples taken from our model (including rejected samples, see
also Eq. (7)), and (b) the ultimate output size of the prediction set (after rejection). Both metrics are
important, as over-sampling wastes computation (or expensive API calls), while large output sets can
be unwieldy to use and overall less helpful as an uncertainty quantification tool. We measure results
and compute the normalized2 AUC over the range of achievable ϵ or α (using a fixed δ = 0.05),
excluding trivial values (e.g., that a policy that always returns the first generation would satisfy).

6       E XPERIMENTAL RESULTS
We now present our main results. In all plots, solid lines give the mean over 100 trials and shaded re-
gions show +/− the standard deviation. Additional experimental results are reported in Appendix G.

    2                                             1
                                                       Rb
        Specifically, we compute AUC(f ; a, b) = b−a   a
                                                            f (ϵ)dϵ, where [a, b] is the range of evaluated ϵ (or α).


                                                        8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


         (a) MIMIC-CXR                       (b) CNN/DM                        (c) TriviaQA

Figure 2: Conformal sampling results for Cλ a function of ϵ. We report the loss, relative excess
samples, and overall size (normalized by kmax ). We also report the AUC over achieved/non-trivial ϵ.
Validity of conformal sampling with rejection. We demonstrate in Figure 2 that our conformal sam-
pling approach matches our theory in practice, as the average set loss often matches but never exceeds
the target risk level. Methods that have access to the model logits (M AX, S UM, F IRST-K- REJECT)
are close to, but still below, the diagonal line, indicating that they are valid, but not conservative.
Prediction efficiency. The likelihood-based approaches outperform the uniform F IRST-K baseline
across all three tasks. For example, as Figure 2c shows, the AUC of expected set size of M AX and S UM
are both less than half the AUC of F IRST-K in the QA task. In tasks with longer output texts, F IRST-K
produces competitive set sizes across all achievable ϵ. However, on the relative number of excess
samples metric, the M AX scoring function largely outperforms S UM and F IRST-K. F IRST-K+ REJECT
achieves similar size efficiency to the other rejection algorithms, but still lacks sampling efficiency.
Individual components. We evaluate two scoring functions F c for conformal component selection.
S PAN - LOGITS extracts the likelihood of a component using the base language model. However, as
that likelihood is also conditioned on previous context, it may underestimate the score of a correct
component that follows an incorrect component. We therefore also test an application-specific
C LASSIFIER to assign a conformity score to each component. We compare to a R ANDOM baseline
which attributes a random score to any (x, e) pair. Figure G.1 shows that by modeling components
independently, we produce better (larger) sets. We include additional results in Appendix G and H.

7   C ONCLUSION
Reliably using language models (LMs) in real-world tasks inevitably requires meaningful uncertainty
quantification. In this paper, we introduced an approach to conformal prediction that allows a user
to sample prediction sets from generative LMs with infinite, combinatorial output spaces, while
retaining desirable statistical guarantees. Our method bridges the gap between standard conformal
prediction and LM inference by calibrating a stopping rule for an algorithm that iteratively grows
an output prediction set by sampling new generations (with rejection). Moreover, we can separately
identify confident answer subcomponents. This can help users better understand the quality of long
responses, which often include both correct and incorrect aspects. Empirically, we demonstrated that
we can obtain efficient prediction sets, both in terms of size and total required samples.


                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT
Code is available at https://github.com/Varal7/conformal-language-modeling.
The codebase includes implementations of Algorithms 1 and 2, pre-processing code for our tasks,
and functions for computing the metrics and producing all our plots and tables. In Section 5 and Ap-
pendix F we describe in detail all the datasets, language models, and scoring and admission functions
we used, with references to downloading the public data and models, and all our hyper-parameters.

R EFERENCES
Anastasios N. Angelopoulos and Stephen Bates. A gentle introduction to conformal prediction and
  distribution-free uncertainty quantification, 2022.

Anastasios N. Angelopoulos, Stephen Bates, Adam Fisch, Lihua Lei, and Tal Schuster. Conformal
  risk control, 2023.

Anastasios Nikolas Angelopoulos, Stephen Bates, Emmanuel J. Candès, Michael I. Jordan, and Lihua
  Lei. Learn then test: Calibrating predictive algorithms to achieve risk control. ArXiv preprint:
  2110.01052, 2021a.

Anastasios Nikolas Angelopoulos, Stephen Bates, Jitendra Malik, and Michael I. Jordan. Uncertainty
  sets for image classifiers using conformal prediction. In International Conference on Learning
  Representations (ICLR), 2021b.

Rina Foygel Barber, Emmanuel J Candes, Aaditya Ramdas, and Ryan J Tibshirani. Predictive
  inference with the jackknife+. The Annals of Statistics, 49(1):486–507, 2021.

Stephen Bates, Anastasios Nikolas Angelopoulos, Lihua Lei, Jitendra Malik, and Michael I. Jordan.
  Distribution free, risk controlling prediction sets. ArXiv preprint: 2101.02703, 2020.

Bernd Bohnet, Vinh Q. Tran, Pat Verga, Roee Aharoni, Daniel Andor, Livio Baldini Soares, Massimil-
  iano Ciaramita, Jacob Eisenstein, Kuzman Ganchev, Jonathan Herzig, Kai Hui, Tom Kwiatkowski,
  Ji Ma, Jianmo Ni, Lierni Sestorain Saralegui, Tal Schuster, William W. Cohen, Michael Collins,
  Dipanjan Das, Donald Metzler, Slav Petrov, and Kellie Webster. Attributed question answering:
  Evaluation and modeling for attributed large language models, 2023.

Samuel R. Bowman, Gabor Angeli, Christopher Potts, and Christopher D. Manning. A large
  annotated corpus for learning natural language inference. In Proceedings of the 2015 Conference on
  Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 632–642, Lisbon, Portugal, September
  2015. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/D15-1075. URL https:
  //aclanthology.org/D15-1075.

Maxime Cauchois, Suyash Gupta, Alnur Ali, and John Duchi. Predictive inference with weak
 supervision, 2022.

Shrey Desai and Greg Durrett. Calibration of pre-trained transformers. In Proceedings of the 2020
  Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), pages 295–302,
  Online, November 2020. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2020.
  emnlp-main.21. URL https://aclanthology.org/2020.emnlp-main.21.

Neil Dey, Jing Ding, Jack Ferrell, Carolina Kapper, Maxwell Lovig, Emiliano Planchon, and
  Jonathan P. Williams. Conformal prediction for text infilling and part-of-speech prediction. The
  New England Journal of Statistics in Data Science, 1(1):69–83, 2022. ISSN 2693-7166. doi:
 10.51387/22-NEJSDS8.

Alexey Dosovitskiy, Lucas Beyer, Alexander Kolesnikov, Dirk Weissenborn, Xiaohua Zhai, Thomas
  Unterthiner, Mostafa Dehghani, Matthias Minderer, Georg Heigold, Sylvain Gelly, Jakob Uszkoreit,
  and Neil Houlsby. An image is worth 16x16 words: Transformers for image recognition at scale,
  2021.


                                                10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Alexander Fabbri, Chien-Sheng Wu, Wenhao Liu, and Caiming Xiong. QAFactEval: Improved QA-
  based factual consistency evaluation for summarization. In Proceedings of the 2022 Conference of
  the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language
  Technologies, pages 2587–2601, Seattle, United States, July 2022. Association for Computational
  Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2022.naacl-main.187. URL https://aclanthology.org/
  2022.naacl-main.187.

Adam Fisch, Tal Schuster, Tommi Jaakkola, and Regina Barzilay. Efficient conformal prediction
 via cascaded inference with expanded admission. In International Conference on Learning
 Representations (ICLR), 2021a.

Adam Fisch, Tal Schuster, Tommi Jaakkola, and Regina Barzilay. Few-shot conformal prediction
 with auxiliary tasks. In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2021b.

Adam Fisch, Tal Schuster, Tommi Jaakkola, and Regina Barzilay. Conformal prediction sets with
  limited false positives. In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2022.

Samuel Gehman, Suchin Gururangan, Maarten Sap, Yejin Choi, and Noah A. Smith. RealTox-
  icityPrompts: Evaluating neural toxic degeneration in language models. In Findings of the
  Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2020, pages 3356–3369, Online, November
  2020. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2020.findings-emnlp.301.
  URL https://aclanthology.org/2020.findings-emnlp.301.

Chirag Gupta, Aleksandr Podkopaev, and Aaditya Ramdas. Distribution-free binary classification:
  prediction sets, confidence intervals and calibration. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems (NeurIPS), 2020.

Karl Moritz Hermann, Tomas Kocisky, Edward Grefenstette, Lasse Espeholt, Will Kay, Mustafa Su-
  leyman, and Phil Blunsom. Teaching machines to read and comprehend. In C. Cortes, N. Lawrence,
  D. Lee, M. Sugiyama, and R. Garnett, editors, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  volume 28. Curran Associates, Inc., 2015. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/
  paper/2015/file/afdec7005cc9f14302cd0474fd0f3c96-Paper.pdf.

Sture Holm. A simple sequentially rejective multiple test procedure. Scandinavian journal of
  statistics, pages 65–70, 1979.

Ari Holtzman, Jan Buys, Li Du, Maxwell Forbes, and Yejin Choi. The curious case of neural text
  degeneration. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2020.

Or Honovich, Roee Aharoni, Jonathan Herzig, Hagai Taitelbaum, Doron Kukliansy, Vered Cohen,
  Thomas Scialom, Idan Szpektor, Avinatan Hassidim, and Yossi Matias. TRUE: Re-evaluating
  factual consistency evaluation. In Proceedings of the Second DialDoc Workshop on Document-
  grounded Dialogue and Conversational Question Answering, pages 161–175, Dublin, Ireland,
  May 2022. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2022.dialdoc-1.19. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/2022.dialdoc-1.19.

Eliahu Horwitz and Yedid Hoshen. Conffusion: Confidence intervals for diffusion models. 2022.

Dongfu Jiang, Bill Yuchen Lin, and Xiang Ren. Pairreranker: Pairwise reranking for natural language
  generation, 2022.

Zhengbao Jiang, Jun Araki, Haibo Ding, and Graham Neubig. How can we know when language
  models know? on the calibration of language models for question answering. Transactions of the
  Association for Computational Linguistics, 9:962–977, 2021. doi: 10.1162/tacl_a_00407. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/2021.tacl-1.57.

Alistair EW Johnson, Tom J Pollard, Nathaniel R Greenbaum, Matthew P Lungren, Chih-ying Deng,
  Yifan Peng, Zhiyong Lu, Roger G Mark, Seth J Berkowitz, and Steven Horng. Mimic-cxr-jpg, a
  large publicly available database of labeled chest radiographs. arXiv preprint arXiv:1901.07042,
  2019.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Erik Jones and Jacob Steinhardt. Capturing failures of large language models via human cognitive
  biases. In Alice H. Oh, Alekh Agarwal, Danielle Belgrave, and Kyunghyun Cho, editors, Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022. URL https://openreview.net/forum?
  id=fcO9Cgn-X-R.
Mandar Joshi, Eunsol Choi, Daniel S. Weld, and Luke Zettlemoyer. Triviaqa: A large scale distantly
 supervised challenge dataset for reading comprehension, 2017.
Saurav Kadavath, Tom Conerly, Amanda Askell, Tom Henighan, Dawn Drain, Ethan Perez, Nicholas
  Schiefer, Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Nova DasSarma, Eli Tran-Johnson, Scott Johnston, Sheer El-Showk,
  Andy Jones, Nelson Elhage, Tristan Hume, Anna Chen, Yuntao Bai, Sam Bowman, Stanislav Fort,
  Deep Ganguli, Danny Hernandez, Josh Jacobson, Jackson Kernion, Shauna Kravec, Liane Lovitt,
  Kamal Ndousse, Catherine Olsson, Sam Ringer, Dario Amodei, Tom Brown, Jack Clark, Nicholas
  Joseph, Ben Mann, Sam McCandlish, Chris Olah, and Jared Kaplan. Language models (mostly)
  know what they know. 2022.
Tushar Khot, Ashish Sabharwal, and Peter Clark. Scitail: A textual entailment dataset from science
  question answering. In AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 2018.
Kalpesh Krishna, Aurko Roy, and Mohit Iyyer. Hurdles to progress in long-form question answering.
  In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for
  Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, pages 4940–4957, Online, June
  2021. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2021.naacl-main.393. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/2021.naacl-main.393.
Lorenz Kuhn, Yarin Gal, and Sebastian Farquhar. Semantic uncertainty: Linguistic invariances
  for uncertainty estimation in natural language generation. In The Eleventh International Confer-
  ence on Learning Representations, 2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
  VD-AYtP0dve.
Philippe Laban, Tobias Schnabel, Paul N. Bennett, and Marti A. Hearst. SummaC: Re-visiting
  NLI-based models for inconsistency detection in summarization. Transactions of the Association
  for Computational Linguistics, 10:163–177, 2022. doi: 10.1162/tacl_a_00453. URL https:
  //aclanthology.org/2022.tacl-1.10.
Bracha Laufer-Goldshtein, Adam Fisch, Regina Barzilay, and Tommi S. Jaakkola. Efficiently
  controlling multiple risks with pareto testing. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=cyg2YXn_BqF.
Jing Lei, James Robins, and Larry Wasserman. Distribution-free prediction sets. Journal of the
   American Statistical Association, 108(501):278–287, 2013.
Jing Lei, Max G’Sell, Alessandro Rinaldo, Ryan J. Tibshirani, and Larry Wasserman. Distribution-
   free predictive inference for regression. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 113(523):
   1094–1111, 2018.
Chin-Yew Lin. ROUGE: A package for automatic evaluation of summaries. In Text Summariza-
  tion Branches Out, pages 74–81, Barcelona, Spain, July 2004. Association for Computational
  Linguistics. URL https://aclanthology.org/W04-1013.
Stephanie Lin, Jacob Hilton, and Owain Evans. TruthfulQA: Measuring how models mimic
  human falsehoods. In Proceedings of the 60th Annual Meeting of the Association for Com-
  putational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 3214–3252, Dublin, Ireland, May
  2022a. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2022.acl-long.229. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/2022.acl-long.229.
Stephanie C. Lin, Jacob Hilton, and Owain Evans. Teaching models to express their uncertainty in
  words. ArXiv, abs/2205.14334, 2022b.
Guanxiong Liu, Tzu-Ming Harry Hsu, Matthew McDermott, Willie Boag, Wei-Hung Weng, Peter
  Szolovits, and Marzyeh Ghassemi. Clinically accurate chest x-ray report generation. In Machine
 Learning for Healthcare Conference, pages 249–269. PMLR, 2019.


                                                 12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Nelson F. Liu, Tianyi Zhang, and Percy Liang. Evaluating verifiability in generative search engines,
  2023.
Alex Mallen, Akari Asai, Victor Zhong, Rajarshi Das, Hannaneh Hajishirzi, and Daniel Khashabi.
  When not to trust language models: Investigating effectiveness and limitations of parametric and
  non-parametric memories. arXiv preprint, 2022.
Mengqi Miao, Fandong Meng, Yijin Liu, Xiao-Hua Zhou, and Jie Zhou. Prevent the language model
 from being overconfident in neural machine translation. 2021.
Sabrina J. Mielke, Arthur Szlam, Emily Dinan, and Y-Lan Boureau. Reducing conversational agents’
  overconfidence through linguistic calibration. Transactions of the Association for Computational
  Linguistics, 10:857–872, 2022. doi: 10.1162/tacl_a_00494. URL https://aclanthology.
  org/2022.tacl-1.50.
Eric Mitchell, Joseph Noh, Siyan Li, Will Armstrong, Ananth Agarwal, Patrick Liu, Chelsea Finn,
  and Christopher Manning. Enhancing self-consistency and performance of pre-trained language
  models through natural language inference. In Proceedings of the 2022 Conference on Empirical
  Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 1754–1768, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates,
  December 2022. Association for Computational Linguistics. URL https://aclanthology.
  org/2022.emnlp-main.115.
Yasuhide Miura, Yuhao Zhang, Emily Bao Tsai, Curtis P. Langlotz, and Dan Jurafsky. Improving
  factual completeness and consistency of image-to-text radiology report generation, 2021.
Aaron Nicolson, Jason Dowling, and Bevan Koopman. Improving chest x-ray report generation by
  leveraging warm-starting, 2022.
OpenAI. Gpt-4 technical report. 2023.
Harris Papadopoulos. Inductive conformal prediction: Theory and application to neural networks. In
  Tools in Artificial Intelligence, chapter 18. IntechOpen, Rijeka, 2008.
Harris Papadopoulos, Kostas Proedrou, Volodya Vovk, and Alex Gammerman. Inductive confidence
  machines for regression. In European Conference on Machine Learning, pages 345–356. Springer,
  2002.
Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, Ilya Sutskever, et al. Language
  models are unsupervised multitask learners. OpenAI blog, 1(8):9, 2019.
Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Katherine Lee, Sharan Narang, Michael Matena, Yanqi
  Zhou, Wei Li, and Peter J. Liu. Exploring the limits of transfer learning with a unified text-to-text
  transformer. 2020.
Maribeth Rauh, John Mellor, Jonathan Uesato, Po-Sen Huang, Johannes Welbl, Laura Weidinger,
 Sumanth Dathathri, Amelia Glaese, Geoffrey Irving, Iason Gabriel, William Isaac, and Lisa Anne
 Hendricks. Characteristics of harmful text: Towards rigorous benchmarking of language models,
 2022.
Shauli Ravfogel, Yoav Goldberg, and Jacob Goldberger. Conformal nucleus sampling. 2023.
Yaniv Romano, Evan Patterson, and Emmanuel Candès. Conformalized quantile regression. In
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2019.
Tal Schuster, Adam Fisch, and Regina Barzilay. Get your vitamin C! robust fact verification with
  contrastive evidence. In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference of the North American Chapter of
  the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, pages 624–643,
  Online, June 2021a. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2021.naacl-main.
  52. URL https://aclanthology.org/2021.naacl-main.52.
Tal Schuster, Adam Fisch, Tommi Jaakkola, and Regina Barzilay. Consistent accelerated inference
  via confident adaptive transformers. In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference on Empirical Methods
  in Natural Language Processing, pages 4962–4979, Online and Punta Cana, Dominican Republic,
  November 2021b. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2021.emnlp-main.
  406. URL https://aclanthology.org/2021.emnlp-main.406.


                                                  13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Tal Schuster, Sihao Chen, Senaka Buthpitiya, Alex Fabrikant, and Donald Metzler. Stretch-
  ing sentence-pair NLI models to reason over long documents and clusters. In Findings of
  the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2022, pages 394–412, Abu Dhabi,
  United Arab Emirates, December 2022a. Association for Computational Linguistics. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/2022.findings-emnlp.28.
Tal Schuster, Adam Fisch, Jai Gupta, Mostafa Dehghani, Dara Bahri, Vinh Q. Tran, Yi Tay, and Don-
  ald Metzler. Confident adaptive language modeling. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 2022b. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=uLYc4L3C81A.
Abigail See, Peter J. Liu, and Christopher D. Manning. Get to the point: Summarization with
  pointer-generator networks. CoRR, abs/1704.04368, 2017. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/
 1704.04368.
Noam Shazeer and Mitchell Stern. Adafactor: Adaptive learning rates with sublinear memory cost,
  2018.
Akshay Smit, Saahil Jain, Pranav Rajpurkar, Anuj Pareek, Andrew Y. Ng, and Matthew P. Lungren.
  Chexbert: Combining automatic labelers and expert annotations for accurate radiology report
  labeling using bert, 2020.
Aarohi Srivastava, Abhinav Rastogi, Abhishek Rao, Abu Awal Md Shoeb, Abubakar Abid, Adam
  Fisch, Adam R. Brown, Adam Santoro, Aditya Gupta, Adrià Garriga-Alonso, and et al. Beyond
  the imitation game: Quantifying and extrapolating the capabilities of language models, 2022.
Jacopo Teneggi, Matthew Tivnan, J. Webster Stayman, and Jeremias Sulam. How to trust your
  diffusion model: A convex optimization approach to conformal risk control. ArXiv, abs/2302.03791,
  2023.
James Thorne, Andreas Vlachos, Christos Christodoulopoulos, and Arpit Mittal. FEVER: a large-
  scale dataset for fact extraction and VERification. In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference of the
  North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language
  Technologies, Volume 1 (Long Papers), pages 809–819, New Orleans, Louisiana, June 2018.
  Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/N18-1074. URL https://
  aclanthology.org/N18-1074.
Hugo Touvron, Thibaut Lavril, Gautier Izacard, Xavier Martinet, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Timothée
  Lacroix, Baptiste Rozière, Naman Goyal, Eric Hambro, Faisal Azhar, Aurelien Rodriguez, Armand
 Joulin, Edouard Grave, and Guillaume Lample. Llama: Open and efficient foundation language
  models, 2023.
Helena Vasconcelos, Gagan Bansal, Adam Fourney, Q. Vera Liao, and Jennifer Wortman Vaughan.
  Generation probabilities are not enough: Exploring the effectiveness of uncertainty highlighting in
  ai-powered code completions. 2023.
Vladimir Vovk. On-line confidence machines are well-calibrated. In The 43rd Annual IEEE
  Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science., 2002.
Vladimir Vovk, Alex Gammerman, and Glenn Shafer. Algorithmic Learning in a Random World.
  Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2005.
Vladimir Vovk, Ivan Petej, and Valentina Fedorova. Large-scale probabilistic predictors with and
  without guarantees of validity. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS),
  2015.
Vladimir Vovk, Jieli Shen, Valery Manokhin, and Min-ge Xie. Nonparametric predictive distribu-
  tions based on conformal prediction. In Proceedings of the Sixth Workshop on Conformal and
  Probabilistic Prediction and Applications, 2017.
Xuezhi Wang, Jason Wei, Dale Schuurmans, Quoc V Le, Ed H. Chi, Sharan Narang, Aakanksha
  Chowdhery, and Denny Zhou. Self-consistency improves chain of thought reasoning in language
  models. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023. URL
  https://openreview.net/forum?id=1PL1NIMMrw.


                                                14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Johannes Welbl, Amelia Glaese, Jonathan Uesato, Sumanth Dathathri, John F. J. Mellor, Lisa Anne
  Hendricks, Kirsty Anderson, Pushmeet Kohli, Ben Coppin, and Po-Sen Huang. Challenges in
  detoxifying language models. ArXiv, abs/2109.07445, 2021.

Adina Williams, Nikita Nangia, and Samuel Bowman. A broad-coverage challenge corpus
  for sentence understanding through inference. In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference of
  the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Lan-
  guage Technologies, Volume 1 (Long Papers), pages 1112–1122, New Orleans, Louisiana,
 June 2018. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/N18-1101. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/N18-1101.

Thomas Wolf, Lysandre Debut, Victor Sanh, Julien Chaumond, Clement Delangue, Anthony Moi,
  Pierric Cistac, Tim Rault, R’emi Louf, Morgan Funtowicz, and Jamie Brew. Huggingface’s
  transformers: State-of-the-art natural language processing. ArXiv preprint: 1910.03771, 2019.

Yonghui Wu, Mike Schuster, Zhifeng Chen, Quoc V Le, Mohammad Norouzi, Wolfgang Macherey,
  Maxim Krikun, Yuan Cao, Qin Gao, Klaus Macherey, et al. Google’s neural machine translation sys-
  tem: Bridging the gap between human and machine translation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1609.08144,
  2016.

Xiang Yue, Boshi Wang, Kai Zhang, Ziru Chen, Yu Su, and Huan Sun. Automatic evaluation of
  attribution by large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.06311, 2023.

Polina Zablotskaia, Du Phan, Joshua Maynez, Shashi Narayan, Jie Ren, and Jeremiah Liu. On uncer-
  tainty calibration and selective generation in probabilistic neural summarization: A benchmark
  study. 2023.

Yuan Zhang, Jason Baldridge, and Luheng He. PAWS: Paraphrase adversaries from word scrambling.
  In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for
  Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers),
  pages 1298–1308, Minneapolis, Minnesota, June 2019. Association for Computational Linguistics.
  doi: 10.18653/v1/N19-1131. URL https://aclanthology.org/N19-1131.

Kaitlyn Zhou, Dan Jurafsky, and Tatsunori Hashimoto. Navigating the grey area: Expressions of
  overconfidence and uncertainty in language models. ArXiv, abs/2302.13439, 2023.


A    A SSUMPTIONS
For clarity, we provide some additional discussion on our assumptions, and their implications.
Assumption 1. Input prompts x are i.i.d. for both calibration and testing.

The inputs to our LM are considered to be randomly sampled from some fixed distribution. This
is a reasonable assumption for many standard scenarios, such as the ones that we explore in our
experiments, i.e.: questions for question answering, articles for summarization, and X-rays for
radiology report generation. Importantly, however, this does not include multi-turn dialogue where
successive prompts are dependent, or when there is distribution shift between calibration and testing.
Additional modifications can be done to extend our calibration procedure to handle certain types
of distribution shift (e.g., by defining new p-values that remain super-uniform under the target
distribution using weighting), although we do not evaluate this direction in this work.
Assumption 2. We can sample y ∼ pθ (y | x) using a language model API that accesses pθ .

No other assumptions are placed on the LM itself or its sampling process. That said, two additional
LM qualities also affect the performance of our method in practice:

Q1. There exists a good response that is expressible by the LM, i.e., ∃y ∈ V ∗ s.t. A(y) = 1. This
    simply is to say that all inputs are not impossible to answer appropriately.
Q2. The LM places high enough probability mass on good responses such that good responses are
    sampled within a tractable number of calls sufficiently often (i.e., 1 − ϵ fraction of the time).


                                                 15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Without qualities Q1 and Q2, some settings of kmax and ϵ may be unachievable, and our algorithm
will fail to return a risk-controlling configuration. Nevertheless, this does not affect the validity of
our algorithm; it only affects its application. See Appendix C for a discussion on kmax .
Assumption 3. The admission function A is a good proxy for assessing generation quality.

Our guarantees are based on bounding the expected value of A on future outputs. For this to be
meaningful, A(y) = 1 should reflect that y is a good sample. In our experiments, we manually design
A by using similarity metrics that compare possible responses to human references. For example, in
our radiology report generation task, x is the X-ray, y is the report, and pθ (y | x) is our image-to-text
LM. Given y and a “ground truth” report y ∗ written by a radiologist (from the MIMIC-CXR dataset),
we use the popular Clinical Efficacy metric (Liu et al., 2019; Nicolson et al., 2022) as a proxy for
“admissibility”, where we check if all of the 14 labels predicted by an auxiliary CheXbert (Smit et al.,
2020) model given y exactly match the labels predicted by the same CheXbert model given y ∗ .
The admission function is flexible, however, and need not be automatic. For example, the most
reliable admission function is to directly use real users to assess whether a generated sample is
acceptable or not (or the majority vote of one or more human annotators, when given clear, consistent
guidelines). Such a user-based calibration set would be ideal, but also often costly to obtain.
When automatic admission functions are needed, here we show that it is also sufficient to only
require access to a conservative admission function, Ā : V ∗ → {0, 1}, where ∀y ∈ V ∗ we have
Ā(y) ≤ A(y). For instance, Ā might measure exact match on a word-for-word basis between y and
y ∗ , instead of accounting for differences in dictation. We show that λ̂ remains valid with respect to the
“true” (but inaccessible) Atest if conservative admission functions Āi were used during calibration.
Corollary A.1 (Conservative sampling-based LTT). Suppose that over Dcal we let Li (λ) = 1{∄y ∈
Cλ (Xi ) : Āi (y) = 1} where Ā(y) ≤ A(y), ∀y ∈ V ∗ . Then Cλ̂ (Xtest ) still satisfies Eq. (1).

Proof. The following proof is analogous to that of Propostion 4.4. Let
                                    L̄(λ) = 1{∄y ∈ Cλ (x) : Ā = 1}                                   (11)
              ∗
For all y ∈ V , we have Ātest (y) = 1 =⇒ Atest (y) = 1, which implies that L̄(λ) ≥ L(λ) for all λ.
This implies that for any choice of Dcal

                                E[L̄test (λ̂) | Dcal ] ≥ E[Ltest (λ̂) | Dcal ].                       (12)

Applying Theorem 4.2 gives that the left hand side is ≤ ϵ w.p. ≥ 1 − δ.

B    L IMITATIONS
Our work aims to provide rigorous, yet useful, uncertainty estimates for language models. This has
important implications for the safety and reliability of deployed models that make decisions with
real consequences. At the same time, definite limitations do exist for the algorithms presented here,
in particular (a) the assumption of i.i.d. data, (b) an appropriate admission function A, and (c) having
resulting Cλ that are not too large or expensive to obtain (e.g., requiring many samples). In the same
vein, if kmax , the maximum number of samples drawn, is too low, then many levels of ϵ will be
unattainable, and the method will fail to find a valid configuration (it will return null). Finally, it is
important to emphasize that the guarantees presented here are probabilistic in nature—and also do not
necessarily hold when conditioned on a particular type of input. While setting δ and ϵ to low values is
possible and decreases the changes of failures, it will also make the algorithm more conservative and
potentially less useful. The admission function A also requires careful construction. Nevertheless,
these results can be improved by (a) plugging in better language models, (b) using higher signal con-
fidence metrics (e.g., as opposed to raw logits), and (c) obtaining larger samples Dcal for calibration.

C    E FFECTS OF TRUNCATED SAMPLING (kmax )
To be useful, it is critical to ensure that our sampling algorithm terminates in a reasonable number
of steps. For this reason, we use kmax as a hard stop on the total number of samples we take from
pθ (y | x). Naturally, this also effects the achievable coverage that we can guarantee, as certain LMs


                                                     16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


may require more than kmax samples to get a correct response for certain input examples. For each
kmax there is therefore a band of achievable (non-trivial) ϵ, that ranges from the error rate at first-1
to the error rate at first-kmax (where first-k denotes the strategy of always taking the first k samples
for a fixed k). In our experiments, we set kmax = 20, although the best practice is to empirically
choose kmax using a development set along with an idea for how many samples one is willing to
take in the worst case, which is primarily determined by the one’s computational budget.

D      P ROOFS
D.1    P ROOF OF L EMMA 4.1

Proof. Let X = Binom(n, ϵ) and Y = nR̂n (λ), which also has distribution Binom(n, ϵ′ ), for some
unknown success probability ϵ′ , as Li ’s are binary. We write FX (x) and FY (y) to denote the CDFs of
X and Y , respectively. Under the null hypothesis Hλ : E[Ltest (λ)] > ϵ (or equivalently, Hλ : ϵ′ > ϵ),
Y stochastically dominates X, i.e., FX (u) ≥ FY (u), ∀u. Let Z = pBT   λ = FX (Y ). Then
                                        P(Z ≤ z) = P(FX (Y ) ≤ z)                                       (13)
                                                 ≤ P(FY (Y ) ≤ z)                                       (14)
                                                     = P(Y ≤ FY−1 (z))                                  (15)
                                                     = FY FY−1 (z)                                      (16)
                                                     = z.                                               (17)
Therefore since pBT
                 λ is super-uniform, it is a valid p-value.


D.2    P ROOF OF T HEOREM 4.2

Proof. Since sampling is performed independently for each (i.i.d.) input prompt Xi and admission
function Ai , the set losses Li (λ) are also i.i.d. According to Lemma 4.1, pBT
                                                                             λ is super-uniform under
Hλ : E[Ltest (λ)] > ϵ. Given T , a FWER-controlling algorithm at level δ, we can apply Theorem 3.2
to identify Λvalid such that

                             P      sup E[Ltest (λ) | Dcal ] ≤ ϵ ≥ 1 − δ.                        (18)
                                   λ∈Λvalid


i.e.

              P      inf      P ∃y ∈ Cλ (Xtest ) : Atest (y) = 1 | Dcal ≥ 1 − ϵ ≥ 1 − δ.                (19)
                   λ∈Λvalid


Therefore, Equation 1 holds for any λ ∈ Λvalid . In particular, it holds for selecting λ̂ by Eq. (7).

D.3    P ROOF OF P ROPOSITION 4.4

Proof. Let
                                               (        ykmax                    )
                                                          [
                                  L̄c (γ) = 1 ∃e ∈              yi : Ac (e) = 0                         (20)
                                                         i=1


Since Cλ (x) ⊆ {y1 , . . . , ykmax } for any λ by definition, we have L̄c (γ) ≥ Lc (γ) for all γ. This
implies that for any draw of Dcal ,

                                  E[L̄ctest (γ̂) | Dcal ] ≥ E[Lctest (γ̂) | Dcal ].                     (21)

Similar to the proof of Theorem 4.2, since L̄c (γ) is also binary, we can use Lemma 4.1 to show that
pBT
 γ is a valid p-value, and apply LTT to show that the left hand side is ≤ α w.p. ≥ 1 − δ.


                                                        17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E    PARETO TESTING
We briefly review the Pareto Testing method for configuration selection, but refer the reader to
Laufer-Goldshtein et al. (2023) for full details. Pareto Testing is a computationally and statistically
efficient procedure that improves Fixed Sequence Testing (Holm, 1979), a common FWER-controlling
procedure, by optimizing the ordering of configurations to test. The method consists of two stages:
Stage 1: Constructing the Pareto frontier
First we solve an unconstrained, multi-objective optimization problem in order to recover an approxi-
mate set of Pareto-optimal configurations, i.e., settings for which no other configuration exists that is
uniformly better in all respects. Some of these objectives are meant to eventually be constrained (e.g.,
controlled to be ≤ ϵ), while others are meant to be optimized (e.g., find the smallest set).
Specifically, suppose that there are c objectives we seek to control and k objectives that we seek
to optimize. In our setting, c = 1 (we would like to control coverage) and k = 1 (we would like
to minimize a weighted combination of the number of samples and the set size per Eq. (7)). Let
Λ ≜ Λ1 ×...×Λm (here m = 3) be a multi-dimensional configuration space, and let q(λ) : Λ → Rc+k
be a map from λ to the values of the objective functions (both constrained and unconstrained), i.e.,
                                          h                           i
                                 q(λ) = Q̂opt1  (λ), . . . , Q̂opt
                                                               c+k (λ)                          (22)

where Q̂opti is the empirical average of the objective evaluated over a split of data, Dopt (e.g., the
empirical coverage). Generally speaking, there is typically no single value of λ that minimizes all
objectives simultaneously. Instead, we find the Pareto frontier of all points that are not dominated
(i.e., there exists another λ′ ∈ Λ that is better in all respects):
                         Λpar = {λ ∈ Λ : {λ′ ∈ Λ : λ′ ≺ λ, λ′ ̸= λ } = ∅}.                           (23)
Λpar then represents a set of configurations with optimal trade-offs (at least, according to the empirical
values computed over Dopt ). Let [α1 , . . . , αc ] be a list of our target constraints for the first c
constrained objectives. We then sort Λpar by estimated p-values
                                  popt (λ, α) = max p(Q̂opt
                                                        i (λ); αi ),                                 (24)
                                                1≤i≤c

which we compute over Dopt (the same used to find the Pareto frontier, but separate from testing data).
Different p-values can be used, see Angelopoulos et al. (2021a). Intuitively, this defines a sequence
of configurations that are Pareto-optimal, ordered by the likelihood of them being able to satisfy all of
our constraints. Since in this work we only have one constraint (coverage), this reduces to finding the
sequence of Pareto-optimal configurations ordered from most to least likely to result in valid coverage.
Stage 2: Fixed sequence testing
The second stage is simple. Given the sequence of configurations identified in Stage 1, Stage 2
applies Fixed Sequence Testing. Concretely, given calibration data Dcal , we sequentially test each
configuration by checking if the maximum p-value for constrained objectives is greater than δ, i.e.,
                                pcal (λ, α) = max p(Q̂cal
                                                      i (λ); αi ) ≥ δ,                               (25)
                                              1≤i≤c

and stopping at the first configuration for which this inequality holds. The set of evaluated λ for
which Eq. (25) does not hold is then taken to be Λvalid . It can be shown that this procedure is
FWER-controlling at level δ, and often powerful, as the constructed sequence of λ generally allows
for identifying a Λvalid with high-recall (i.e., we recover many of the valid configurations).

F    A DDITIONAL EXPERIMENTAL DETAILS
In this section, we provide additional details regarding the experiments conducted for the three tasks
discussed in Section 5. Our code will be released after the review process.


                                                   18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


F.1   R ADIOLOGY REPORT GENERATION

Dataset For the radiology report generation experiment, we utilized the labeled MIMIC-CXR and
MIMIC-CXR-JPG datasets (Johnson et al., 2019). The MIMIC-CXR dataset can be accessed at
https://physionet.org/content/mimic-cxr/2.0.0/ under the PhysioNet Credentialed Health Data License
1.5.0. Similarly, the MIMIC-CXR-JPG dataset is available at https://physionet.org/content/mimic-
cxr-jpg/2.0.0/ under the same license.
We start with the standard splits prescribed in MIMIC-CXR-JPG. However, we further divide the
training set into a train set and a dev set using a 0.9/0.1 ratio. The train set is used for training the
model, using the validation set for early stopping. We then exclusively use the dev set for conformal
prediction experiments. Subsequently, we filtered the dataset to include only anterior to posterior
(AP) or posterior to anterior (PA) views and retained only one image per report. Furthermore, we
removed examples where the report did not start with the phrase “FINAL REPORT” as these reports
often contained a summary of the findings at the beginning, inadvertently leaking the answer we
aimed to generate with the model. Table F.1 provides an overview of the resulting dataset.

                   Split                    Train         Dev    Validation      Test
                   Number of Images        176,078      19,658     1,594        2,799
                   Number of Studies       176,078      19,658     1,594        2,799
                   Number of Patients       54,482       6,053      463          286

Table F.1: Dataset statistics for preprocessed MIMIC-CXR. The splits and preprocessing scripts are
available within our code release. The train and validation split is used for to train the encoder-deocder
model with early stopping. The dev set is used for conformal prediction. The test set is unused.


Each image was resized and cropped to a resolution of 224x224. Following prior methodology (Miura
et al., 2021), we split each report into a prompt part and a findings part (which may also contain the
impressions section) by identifying one of the following phrases: “FINDINGS AND IMPRESSION”,
“FINDINGS” or “IMPRESSION”.


Model The image encoder used in our experiment was a Vision Transformer (ViT) model
pretrained on ImageNet-21k at a resolution of 224x224.               Specifically, we utilized the
google/vit-base-patch16-224-in21k model available in the Transformers library (Wolf
et al., 2019). The text decoder was a GPT2-small model (gpt2 on HuggingFace). We trained the
model with a batch size of 128 distributed over 8 GPUs, resulting in a batch size of 16 per GPU. The
AdamW optimizer was employed with β1 = 0.9, β2 = 0.999, and ϵ = 10−8 . The learning rate was
set to 5 × 10−5 . The training process consisted of 10 epochs, and the total training time on 8 RTX
A6000 GPUs was approximately 11 hours.


Generations Candidate reports were sampled from the model using default arguments from the
Transformers library, i.e. top_k = 50, top_p = 1.0 and temperature = 1. Each generated report is
then evaluated using a trained CheXbert model (Smit et al., 2020). The CheXbert model is available
at https://stanfordmedicine.box.com/ under the Stanford Academic Software License. The CheXbert
model labels each report for 14 conditions, assigning one of the following labels: “Blank,” “Positive,”
“Negative,” or “Uncertain.”
To determine the admission of a candidate report, we compare it with a reference (human) report
from the MIMIC dataset. If the candidate report matches all 14 labels of the reference report, the
admission function returns 1; otherwise, it returns 0.


Components We define a component as a sentence delimited by a period. The component-level
admission function is defined based on how well a sentence“almost matches” one of the reference
sentences. Two sentences are considered to “almost match” if their ROUGE score is above 0.4. If a
sentence almost matches a reference sentence, the component-level admission function returns 1;
otherwise, it returns 0.


                                                   19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Answer these questions

Q: Which American-born Sinclair won the Nobel Prize for Literature in 1930?
A: Sinclair Lewis
Q: Where in England was Dame Judi Dench born?
A: York
Q: In which decade did Billboard magazine first publish and American hit chart?
A: 30s
Q: From which country did Angola achieve independence in 1975?
A: Portugal
Q: Which city does David Soul come from?
A: Chicago
Q: Who won Super Bowl XX?
A: Chicago Bears
Q: Which was the first European country to abolish capital punishment?
A: Norway
Q: In which country did he widespread use of ISDN begin in 1988?
A: Japan
Q: What is Bruce Willis’ real first name?
A: Walter
Q: Which William wrote the novel Lord Of The Flies?
A: Golding
Q: Which innovation for the car was developed by Prince Henry of Prussia in 1911?
A: Windshield wipers
Q: How is musician William Lee Conley better known?
A: Big Bill Broonzy
Q: How is Joan Molinsky better known?
A: Joan Rivers
...

Figure F.1: Truncated replication of the prompt used to generate answer on the TriviaQA dev set.
The actual prompt contains 32 question-answer pairs.



F.2   O PEN - DOMAIN QUESTION ANSWERING

We use the TriviaQA (Joshi et al., 2017) dataset available at https://nlp.cs.washington.edu/triviaqa/
under the Apache License Version 2.0. To generate candidate responses, we used LLaMA-13B
(Touvron et al., 2023). We considered the closed-book setting, where the model does not have access
to supporting text for answering the questions. We performed experiments in the few-shot setting by
providing 32 example question-answer pairs sampled from the training set. A truncated prompt used
for generating answers on the TriviaQA dev set is reproduced as an illustration in Figure F.1. Please
note that the actual prompt used in the experiment contains 32 question-answer pairs.
For generating answers in the open-domain question answering task, we use the default Transformers
parameters reported in the previous section. We extract an answer by considering the text until the
first line break, comma, or period is encountered. We then normalize the answers: this involves con-
verting the generated answers to lowercase, removing articles, punctuation, and duplicate whitespace.
Generated answers are then compared using the exact match metric: an answer is considered correct
only if it matches the provided answer exactly.

F.3   N EWS SUMMARIZATION

We use the CNN/DM dataset (Hermann et al., 2015; See et al., 2017) that includes news articles
from CNN and the Daily Mail paired with their human written summaries, and is available at
https://github.com/abisee/cnn-dailymail under MIT License. We use the standard train set for
finetuning, the validation set for selecting the best checkpoint, and the test set for all reported
conformal experiments.
We use a T5 1.1 XL model, which includes roughly 3B parameters, and was further pretrained for
100k steps with a multilayer objective (Schuster et al., 2022b). We finetune the model on the train set
for 200k steps with a batch size of 128 using 64 TPUv4 chips for approximately 40 hours. We use


                                                  20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


the Adafactor (Shazeer and Stern, 2018) optimizer with a deacy rate of 0.8, initial learning rate of
0.001 and 1k warm-up steps.
To generate candidate responses, we use Nucleus sampling (Holtzman et al., 2020) with top-p set to
0.95, temperature 0.7, and maximum output length set to 256 tokens.
To get the response components we use a simple sentence spliter and treat each sentence as a compo-
nent. As a classifier for evaluating the correctness of each component, we use an independent T5 XXL
model trained on a mixture of NLI datasets (Honovich et al., 2022; Schuster et al., 2022a). Specifi-
cally, we leverage the model used in the TRUE benchmark (Honovich et al., 2022) and is available at
https://huggingface.co/google/t5_xxl_true_nli_mixture. This model was trained on SNLI (Bowman
et al., 2015), MNLI (Williams et al., 2018), FEVER (Thorne et al., 2018), SciTail (Khot et al., 2018),
PAWS (Zhang et al., 2019), and VitaminC (Schuster et al., 2021a) to make a binary prediction of
whether an hypothesis sentence is entailed by the given premise (in three-way datasets, the neutral
class was merged with the negative class). We query the model with each component as the hypothesis,
and the source summary as the premise, and measure the log-probability of predicting “entailment”.

F.4   DATASET DETAILS


               Dataset      Standard split       Size                Purpose
                                Train          176,078      Train the generative model
                                Dev∗           19,658        Calibration experiments
               MIMIC
                              Validation        1,594             Early stopping
                                 Test           2,799                 Unused
                                Train          138,384     Prompt LLaMA (32 samples)
              TriviaQA        Validation       18,669        Calibration experiments
                                 Test          17,210                 Unused
                                Train          287,113      Train the generative model
              CNN/DM          Validation       13,368             Early stopping
                                 Test          11,490        Calibration experiments

Table F.2: We use the standard splits of each dataset and reserve unseen data for our calibration exper-
iments. The only exception is for MIMIC where validation and test data are too small, so we reserve
a subset of the official train set as unseen data for calibration. The asterisk marks that exception.



                                Dataset           Split            Size
                                MIMIC        Calibration train    2,000
                                             Calibration val      2,000
                                             Calibration test    15,658
                               TriviaQA      Calibration train    2,000
                                             Calibration val      2,000
                                             Calibration test    14,669
                               CNNDM         Calibration train    2,000
                                             Calibration val      2,000
                                             Calibration test     7,490

                       Table F.3: Additional splits for calibration experiments


For each dataset, we use the standard splits as shown in Figure F.2 and further split the data reserved
for calibration experiments, as described in Figure F.3. The calibration “val” set was used in our
earlier experiments to compare scoring functions. Some scoring functions required training (e.g.
Platt scaling) and we used an additional calibration “train” set for that purpose. For final evaluation,
we used the calibration “test” set to run 100 trials. For each trial, the calibration test data was split
as follows: 10% is used to compute the Pareto frontier, 20% is used for Fixed Sequence Testing.
The remaining 70% is used to measure test metrics (validity and efficacy).


                                                   21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                   (a) MIMIC-CXR                                  (b) CNN/DM
Figure G.1: Conformal component selection results for Cγinner as a function of α. We report the
number of components in Cγinner , which we want to maximize. We also report the AUC over α.


                   (a) MIMIC-CXR                                  (b) CNN/DM
Figure G.2: Component selection results for Cγinner as a function of α. First row: validity curves.
Second row: recall achieved by Cγinner , which we want to maximize. We also report the AUC over α.



F.5   L ENGTH - NORMALIZATION

For all tasks, we apply length-normalization (Wu et al., 2016) to the model logits, i.e. we compute:

                                                   log pθ (yk |x)
                                 Q(x, yk ) = exp
                                                       lp(yk )

where
                                                 (5 + |y|)0.6
                                       lp(y) =                .
                                                  (5 + 1)0.6

                                                 22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


G    A DDITIONAL RESULTS
We describe another metric useful to characterize the effectiveness of the components identified by
our component selection method.
Given an input x and a component set Cγ inner (x), we compute the recall by counting the number
of reference sentences that “almost match” at least one element in Cγ inner (x). We then divide this
count by the total number of reference sentences for that particular example. This gives us a measure
of how much of the human reference is covered by the selected components. To obtain the expected
recall, we average the recall values over all examples. The expected recall is reported in Figure G.2.
In particular, we observe that component sets generated using scoring functions based on an auxiliary
C LASSIFIER outperform uncertainty measures based solely on the span logits provided by the model.

H    Q UALITATIVE RESULTS
We present qualitative results for radiology report generation
                                                     P         and news summarization. In this section,
we use the S UM method and consider FS UM (C) = y∈C Q(y). The choice of α and ϵ is reported in
Table H.7. We use 30% of the dev dataset (chosen uniformly at random) to determine λ̂ as described
in §4.3, and reserve the remaining 70% of the dataset for qualitative inspection. The corresponding
values of λ̂ and γ are reported in Table H.7. Notably, the method produces λ2 = −∞ for the
CNN/DM task, indicating that individual summaries are not rejected based on their quality but only
for redundancy reasons.
In Figure H.1, an X-ray example is shown, depicting left basilar opacities while the rest of the X-ray
appears normal. Table H.1 indicates that our method terminates the generation process after producing
three samples. The third generation correctly identifies “apical scarring”; however, it mistakenly
attributes it to the right lung instead of the left lung. This highlights a limitation of using CheXbert as
the basis for the admission function, as its label granularity does not differentiate between left and
right. Our component selection method accurately identifies several sentences that align with the
reference report. These sentences are displayed in bold. Notably, our method avoids emphasizing
low-confidence findings such as “right apical scarring” and instead focuses on the absence of an acute
cardiopulmonary process.
A more challenging example is described in Figure H.2. The report mentions an enlarged heart, signs
of cardiomegaly, and edema. Samples 4 and 5 correctly capture these findings but are considered
incorrect due to the inclusion of “effusion.” The conformal selection of components chooses not to
highlight any sentences since none of them meet the confidence threshold defined by ϵ.
In Tables H.3–H.6, we illustrate how our method continues sampling candidate summaries until the
produced set is deemed acceptable. Specifically, Table H.3 demonstrates that the component selection
process highlights the main idea while excluding minor ideas, which exist in multiple variations.
Table H.4 exemplifies that the method stops after Sample 9, not because Sample 9 has the highest
score, but because the sum of the scores collectively exceeds the target threshold of λ3 = 1.02.
Indeed, as shown in Table H.5, a higher individual score does not necessarily imply that a generation
is more acceptable than one with a lower score. Finally, Table H.6 reveals a model failure, where the
scores indicate high confidence in Sample 2, but the proposed generations are missing some main
ideas from the reference summary.


                                                    23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


     AP and lateral views of the chest. Streaky biapical and left basilar opacities are most
     compatible with scarring. The lungs are clear of confluent consolidation. There is no effu-
     sion. Cardiomediastinal silhouette is within normal limits. No acute osseous abnormalities
     detected. IMPRESSION: No definite acute cardiopulmonary process.
          Figure H.1: Chest X-ray and reference radiology report for study id 55663120


Table H.1: Example prediction sets for study id 55663120, at α = 0.7, ϵ = 0.7. Bolded sentences
are sentences that are chosen by the component selection process. Here we see that several phrases
common to all generations, such as “AP and lateral views of the chest”, are high confidence (and also
correct). The finding about the cardiomediastinal silhouette is also confident. A completely correct
generation, however, is not achieved until the third sample (after which the algorithm stopped).

                Text                                                               Score       Label
 Sample 1       AP upright and lateral views of the chest provided. There          1.45e-05    False
                is chronic left lower lobe atelectasis. There is no focal con-
                solidation concerning for pneumonia. No large effusion
                or pneumothorax. The cardiomediastinal silhouette is
                normal. Imaged osseous structures are notable for a mild
                compression deformity of an upper lumbar vertebral body.
                Degenerative change is seen in the right acromioclavicular
                joint. IMPRESSION: No acute intrathoracic process.
 Sample 2       AP and lateral views of the chest. Diffusely calcified pleu-       1.98e-05    False
                ral plaques are identified bilaterally suggesting prior asbestos
                exposure. There is no pleural effusion. The cardiomediasti-
                nal silhouette is within normal limits. No acute osseous
                abnormalities detected. Surgical clips project over the up-
                per abdomen. IMPRESSION: No definite acute cardiopul-
                monary process.
 Sample 3       AP and lateral views of the chest. There is right apical           5.36e-03    True
                scarring. Elsewhere, the lungs are clear. The cardiomedi-
                astinal silhouette is within normal limits. Atherosclerotic
                calcifications noted at the aortic knob. No acute osseous
                abnormality detected. IMPRESSION: No acute cardiopul-
                monary process.


                                                 24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


     In comparison with the study of ___, there is continued enlargement of the cardiac silhouette
     with increasing fullness and indistinctness of central pulmonary vessels, consistent with
     worsening pulmonary edema. Mild asymmetry at the left base could represent developing
     aspiration or even infectious
          Figure H.2: Chest X-ray and reference radiology report for study id 55770135

Table H.2: Example prediction sets for study id 55770135, at α = 0.7, ϵ = 0.7. No sentences are
selected by the component selection process. As a symptom of low component confidence, most
generations have low overlap in exact phrasing and findings. In this case, the sampling process failed
to produce a correct response (though the probability of this happening overall is ≤ 0.3).

                 Text                                                             Score          Label
 Sample 1        In comparison with the study of ___, there is little overall     1.96e-05       False
                 change. Again there is enlargement of the cardiac silhou-
                 ette with elevated pulmonary venous pressure and bilateral
                 opacification is consistent with developing pulmonary edema
                 or pneumonia in the appropriate clinical setting. The naso-
                 gastric tube again extends at least to the lower body of the
                 stomach, where it crosses the lower margin of the image.
 Sample 2        Compared to chest radiographs ___ through ___. Moder-            7.10e-08       False
                 ate pulmonary edema is exaggerated due to the low lung
                 volumes, but is new, including mild interstitial edema and
                 engorgement of the mediastinal veins. Mediastinal veins are
                 still engorged, but not large. Pleural effusions are presumed,
                 but not large. Indwelling right subclavian line ends in the
                 low SVC.
 Sample 3        Compared to chest radiographs ___ through ___. Moder-            2.42e-07       False
                 ate pulmonary edema is improving, although heart remains
                 moderately enlarged and mediastinal veins are substantially
                 dilated due to volume status. Bilateral pleural effusions are
                 presumed, but not large. No pneumothorax. NOTIFICA-
                 TION: I discussed the findings with the referring physician
                 by telephone on ___ at 3:08 PM.
 Sample 4        Compared to chest radiographs ___ through ___. Moderate          2.35e-04       False
                 to severe pulmonary edema has worsened. Moderate car-
                 diomegaly is chronically large, exaggerated by lower lung
                 volumes. Pleural effusions are small if any. No pneumotho-
                 rax.
 Sample 5        No previous images. The cardiac silhouette is enlarged and       4.69e-04       False
                 there is some indistinctness of pulmonary vessels consistent
                 with mild elevation of pulmonary venous pressure. In view
                 of the prominence of the pulmonary vasculature, it would be
                 difficult to unequivocally exclude superimposed pneumonia,
                 especially in the absence of a lateral view.


                                                  25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table H.3: Example prediction sets for example from CNN/DM dataset, at α = 0.3, ϵ = 0.7. Bolded
sentences are sentences that are selected by the component selection process. Missing sample indices
represent samples that were rejected. Here we can observe that component selection highlights the
main idea, while excluding minor details, which are lower confidence. A fully correct sample is not
obtained until the 19th draw.

                Text                                                             Score        Label
 Ref            Debris from boat to be dried, inspected and taken to landfill.
                The debris contained fish normally found in Japanese waters.
                The earthquake and tsunami hit Japan in March 2011.
 Sample 1       Section of boat believed to be from 2011 Japan tsunami is        3.62e-01     False
                found off Oregon coast . Biologists say the environmental
                threat is small .
 Sample 2       Ship debris found off Oregon coast is suspected to be            2.63e-01     False
                from 2011 Japan tsunami . Biologists say the invasive
                species threat is small .
 Sample 3       Ship fragment found off Oregon coast . It’s suspected to be      1.71e-01     False
                from 2011 Japan tsunami . Yellowtail jack fish were found
                inside the boat .
 Sample 7       Ship debris found off Oregon coast may be from 2011              2.76e-01     False
                Japan tsunami . Yellowtail jack fish were found inside the
                vessel .
 Sample 12      Ship debris found off Oregon coast and towed to harbor .         1.22e-01     False
                Biologists say it poses no threat to the environment .
 Sample 13      Section of boat found off Oregon coast suspected to be           2.63e-01     False
                from 2011 Japan tsunami . Biologists say the boat fragment
                will be taken to a landfill . Yellowtail jack fish, normally
                found in Japanese waters, will be taken to an aquarium .
 Sample 16      Section of boat found off Oregon coast may be from 2011          3.62e-01     False
                Japan tsunami . Biologists say the environmental threat is
                small .
 Sample 19      Section of boat found off Oregon coast suspected to be           1.40e-01     True
                from 2011 Japan tsunami . Biologists say the environmen-
                tal threat posed by the boat is small .


                                                26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table H.4: Example prediction sets for example from CNN/DM dataset, at α = 0.3, ϵ = 0.7. Bolded
sentences are sentences that are selected by the component selection process. Of note is how this
example demonstrates that the method stops after Sample 9, not because Sample 9 has the highest
score, but because the sum of the scores collectively exceeds the target threshold of λ3 = 1.02.

                Text                                                              Score      Label
 Ref            Jordan Ibe showed off the impressive dance move on his
                Instagram. The Liverpool star has broken into the first team
                during this campaign. Ibe is currently on the sidelines after
                suffering a knee injury. CLICK HERE for all the latest
                Liverpool news.
 Sample 1       Jordon Ibe has been a key player for Liverpool this season .      2.63e-01   True
                The 19-year-old winger has been sidelined with a knee injury
                . Ibe has been performing the moonwalk while recovering
                from the injury . He posted a video on Instagram of him
                performing the move . Liverpool face Newcastle in their
                next Premier League game .
 Sample 2       Jordon Ibe has been a key player for Liverpool this season .      1.60e-01   False
                The 19-year-old winger has been sidelined with a knee injury
                . Ibe took to Instagram to show off his skills performing
                the moonwalk .
 Sample 3       Jordon Ibe has been a key player for Liverpool this season .      2.63e-01   True
                The 19-year-old is currently out with a knee injury . But Ibe
                showed off some impressive moves on his Instagram account
                . The Liverpool winger posted a video of him performing
                the moonwalk .
 Sample 5       Jordon Ibe has been a key player for Liverpool this season        2.27e-01   True
                . The 19-year-old took to Instagram to show off his dance
                moves . Ibe is currently out with a knee injury but is expected
                to return in the next few weeks .
 Sample 7       Jordon Ibe has been a key player for Liverpool this season        3.89e-01   True
                . The 19-year-old took to Instagram to show off his moves .
                He posted a video of him performing the moonwalk . Ibe
                is currently out with a knee injury but is expected to return
                soon .
 Sample 8       Jordon Ibe has broken into the Liverpool first team this season   3.89e-01   True
                . The 19-year-old took to Instagram to show off his skills
                performing the moonwalk . Liverpool face Newcastle in
                their next Premier League game .
 Sample 9       Jordon Ibe posted a video on Instagram of him perform-            2.92e-01   False
                ing the moonwalk . The Liverpool winger is currently out
                with a knee injury . But Ibe is expected to return in the next
                few weeks . Liverpool face Newcastle in the Premier League
                on Sunday .


                                                 27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table H.5: Example prediction sets for example from CNN/DM dataset, at α = 0.3, ϵ = 0.7. No
sentences are selected by the component selection process. Here we can also see that a higher
individual score does not necessarily imply that a generation is more acceptable than one with a lower
score, which highlights why set calibration is critical. Note that this example also highlights a case in
which a finer-grained component splitter might be useful: though no complete sentence is confident,
certain topics, like “hormone therapy” appear to be.

                 Text                                                              Score           Label
 Ref             Craig Lister, 54, from Watford, is on hormone therapy for
                 prostate cancer. This starves cancer cells by reducing levels
                 of testosterone in the body. One side-effect is hot flushes: ’I
                 have about ten to 12 flushes a day’
 Sample 1        Hormone therapy for prostate cancer starves cancer cells          5.11e-01        True
                 by reducing levels of testosterone in the body - and has the
                 side-effect of hot flushes . It can’t cure the cancer, but can
                 help keep it under control . The majority of prostate cancers
                 rely on the hormone to grow . Lowering the amount in the
                 body means it’s less able to spread .
 Sample 2        Hormone therapy is usually given in the form of regular           9.10e-01        False
                 injections or implants . It can’t cure the cancer, but can help
                 keep it under control . The majority of prostate cancers rely
                 on the hormone to grow . Lowering the amount in the body
                 means it’s less able to spread .



Table H.6: Example prediction sets for example from CNN/DM dataset, at α = 0.3, ϵ = 0.7. Bolded
sentences are sentences that are selected by the component selection process. This example reveals a
model failure, where the scores indicate high confidence in Sample 2, but the proposed generations
are missing some main ideas from the reference summary.

                 Text                                                              Score           Label
 Ref             Independent Commission for Reform in Cycling (CIRC) con-
                 cluded that the UCI colluded with Lance Armstrong to cover
                 up allegations. Hein Verbruggen was criticised as events
                 occurred under his leadership. Verbruggen has revealed he is
                 having the report analysed by lawyers.
 Sample 1        Hein Verbruggen is unhappy with the CIRC report ver-              5.18e-01        False
                 dict . The former head of international cycling has sent
                 the report to lawyers . Verbruggen claims the report is a
                 ’character assassination’
 Sample 2        Hein Verbruggen is unhappy with the CIRC report ver-              6.67e-01        False
                 dict . The former head of international cycling has sent
                 the report to lawyers . Verbruggen says he is having the
                 report analysed by Swiss lawyers .



 Table H.7: Choice of ϵ, α and corresponding λ, γ for qualitative results presented in Appendix H.

                      Dataset                       MIMIC-CXR         CNN/DM
                      α                                  0.7              0.3
                      ϵ                                  0.7              0.7
                      λ1 (similarity)                  7.37e-1         8.67e-1
                      λ2 (quality)                    2.47e-10           −∞
                      λ3 (set score)                   2.82e-4           1.02
                      γ (component threshold)          2.04e-1         9.88e-1



                                                   28
