Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


T HEORETICAL H ARDNESS AND T RACTABILITY OF
POMDP S IN RL WITH PARTIAL O NLINE S TATE I N -
FORMATION

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                              A BSTRACT

         Partially observable Markov decision processes (POMDPs) have been widely ap-
         plied to capture many real-world applications. However, existing theoretical re-
         sults have shown that learning in general POMDPs could be intractable, where
         the main challenge lies in the lack of latent state information. A key fundamental
         question here is how much online state information (OSI) is sufficient to achieve
         tractability. In this paper, we establish a lower bound that reveals a surprising
         hardness result: unless we have full OSI, we need an exponentially scaling sam-
         ple complexity to obtain an ϵ-optimal policy solution for POMDPs. Nonetheless,
         inspired by the key insights in our lower bound design, we find that there exist im-
         portant tractable classes of POMDPs even with only partial OSI. In particular, for
         two novel classes of POMDPs with partial OSI, we provide new algorithms that
         are proved to be near-optimal by establishing new regret upper and lower bounds.


1    I NTRODUCTION
Partially observable Markov decision processes (POMDPs) model reinforcement learning (RL) sys-
tems, where an agent interacts with the environment sequentially without observing the latent state.
In these systems, the agent only has access to a noisy observation randomly generated by the latent
state via an emission probability distribution. The goal of the agent is to achieve a large expected
cumulative reward. POMDPs generalize the classic (fully observable) MDPs, and have been ap-
plied to capture many real-world applications. For example, an AI-trained robot often receives
only noisy observations of the environment from its sensors due to sensory noise (Akkaya et al.,
2019); autonomous cars typically do not have a global view of traffic conditions due to their lim-
ited reception (Levinson et al., 2011). Similar scenarios can occur in games (Berner et al., 2019),
healthcare (Hauskrecht & Fraser, 2000), recommendation systems (Li et al., 2010), economic sys-
tems (Zheng et al., 2020), and so forth.
Existing information-theoretical results have shown that learning in general POMDPs is intractable
and PSPACE-complete (Papadimitriou & Tsitsiklis, 1987; Mundhenk et al., 2000; Vlassis et al.,
2012; Krishnamurthy et al., 2016). This is in contrast to classic MDPs, where many efficient algo-
rithms have been developed, e.g., Azar et al. (2017); Jin et al. (2018); Agarwal et al. (2019); Jin et al.
(2020); Ayoub et al. (2020); Xie et al. (2020); Foster et al. (2021); Jin et al. (2022); Bai et al. (2019);
Cai et al. (2020), among others. The challenge of POMDPs mainly lies in the lack of latent state
information, such that the Markov property that simplifies classic MDPs does not hold any more.
Despite the intractability in general POMDPs, recent studies have identified some tractable classes
of POMDPs, for which efficient algorithms with polynomial dependency (on the number of ac-
tions A, number of states S and episode length H) can be developed, e.g., m-step decodable
POMDPs (Efroni et al., 2022), reactive POMDPs (Jiang et al., 2017), POMDPs with block
MDPs (Zhang et al., 2022) or latent MDPs (Kwon et al., 2021), and POMDPs with reachabil-
ity (Xiong et al., 2022) or observability (Golowich et al., 2022). Due to page limits, we relegate more
discussions about related work in Appendix A. One prominent tractable class is identified based on
weakly revealing conditions (Liu et al., 2022; 2023) or predictive state representations (Chen et al.,
2022a; Zhong et al., 2022). However, these conditions may not hold in practical cases, e.g., resource
allocation (Sinclair et al., 2023; Lee et al., 2023) and robotics (Pinto et al., 2018; Lee et al., 2023).


                                                    1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Moreover, the regret obtained there can be arbitrarily large if the emission probability differences of
different underlying states are small.
To circumvent the dependency and strong assumptions on the emission probability measure, recent
work has exploited hindsight state information (Sinclair et al., 2023; Lee et al., 2023), where full
state information is revealed only at the end of each episode. This line of work is motivated by
the fact that, although the precise information about the true underlying state is not available before
the agent takes an action, some information may become available in hindsight. However, these
studies have assumed full hindsight state information. Thus, a natural question one may ask is: what
would happen if the state information was not fully revealed at the end of the episode? In fact, this
can happen often in practice. For example, in classic wireless channel scheduling formulated by
POMDPs (Zhao et al., 2007; Chen et al., 2008; Ouyang et al., 2015), only the feedback about the
scheduled or sensed channels will be available to the users; in autonomous driving Levinson et al.
(2011); Pinto et al. (2018); Jennings & Figliozzi (2019), only the condition of the located or probed
path will be known to the car. Further, it can be trivially shown (based on the existing lower bounds
in Krishnamurthy et al. (2016); Liu et al. (2022)) that such a situation becomes intractable.
This thus motivates us to investigate the value of partial (i.e., not full) state information inside (i.e.,
not at the end of) the episode. We call this partial “Online State Information” (OSI). In order to
model such partial OSI more concretely, we provide a novel formulation. Specifically, we consider
vector-structured states Jin et al. (2020); Agarwal et al. (2019); Ayoub et al. (2020), which are moti-
vated by the aforementioned practical examples. In other words, the state is given by a d-dimension
vector with each element representing an abstract feature, such as the feedback about a wireless
channel Zhao et al. (2007) and the condition of a path in autonomous driving Jennings & Figliozzi
(2019). Partial OSI means that at each step of an episode, a subset of d˜ (1 ≤ d˜ < d) elements in the
state-vector will be revealed to the agent after her query. Note that such a model allows the agent
to actively query partial OSI for different elements at different times. This prevents the trivial case,
where one state-element cannot be known throughout the process (so that the problem becomes
equivalent to a POMDP problem with that specific unknown state-element being the hidden state).
Therefore, the key fundamental open questions are:

  With such partial OSI, can POMDPs be tractable/learnable? If not, are there any specific
               classes of POMDPs that can be tractable under partial OSI?

Our Contributions: In this paper, we study the important problem of POMDPs with partial OSI
and provide in-depth answers to the above key open questions.
First, we establish a lower bound in Theorem 1 that reveals a surprising hardness result: unless we
                                                                               H
have full OSI, we need an exponentially scaling sample complexity of Ω̃( Aϵ2 ) to find an ϵ-optimal
policy for POMDPs, where A and H are the number of actions and episode length, respectively.
This result indicates a sharp gap between POMDPs with partial OSI and those with full OSI or full
hindsight state information (Lee et al., 2023). This may seem somewhat counter-intuitive, because
by combining multiple partial OSI from different steps, one may construct full information of a state,
and thus enjoy similar performance as that with full OSI. In fact, in Sec. 3, we design a hard instance
with special state representations and transitions, under which partial OSI at each step and even a
combination of partial OSI from different steps are not sufficient to achieve an ϵ-optimal solution
with polynomial complexity.
Nonetheless, inspired by the key insights in our design of the hard instance for establishing the lower
bound, we identify two intriguing tractable classes of POMDPs with only partial OSI.
Second, inspired by our state-transition design for the lower bound, in Sec. 4 we identify a novel
tractable class of POMDPs with partial OSI, where the transitions of the sub-states (i.e., elements) in
the state-vector are independent of each other. This class is motivated by many practical examples
ranging from wireless scheduling (Zhao et al., 2007; Chen et al., 2008; Ouyang et al., 2015) to
Martian rock-sampling (Levinson et al., 2011) and autonomous driving (Pinto et al., 2018; Jennings
& Figliozzi, 2019). We provide two new near-optimal algorithms for this class. The regrets of
both algorithms achieve a polynomial dependency on all parameters (please see Theorem 2 and
Theorem 6). In addition, the regret of our second algorithm for the case with d˜ > 1 shows that
the regret can be further reduced as d˜ increases. To achieve such results, our algorithm design
includes important novel ideas to determine (i) which partial OSI is more informative, and (ii) the


                                                    2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                                                                                                      𝑖#𝑘
                                                                                                                                                     𝜙𝑖#𝑘 𝑠!"         $ ℎ & '𝜙 #𝑘 𝑠!"
                                                                                                                                                                𝑜!!" ~𝕆
                                                                                                                                                        ℎ              !      𝑖∉𝑖
                                                                                                                                                                                ℎ

                                                                                      𝜙𝑖!𝑘 𝑠#$
          𝑜!" ~𝕆!   * #𝑠!"                                                                  ℎ

                                                                                                                                                     𝑖*ℎ𝑘
                                                                                                                                                                                     "
                                                                                                                                                                     𝑎!"         ℙ! 𝑠!() '𝑠!" , 𝑎!"
                                                                                     𝑖#ℎ𝑘
                             𝑎!"                      "
                                                  ℙ! 𝑠!#$ #𝑠!" , 𝑎!"                             𝑎#$                  $
                                                                                                                  ℙ# 𝑠#'( &𝑠#$ , 𝑎#$
                                                                                                                                               𝑠!"                                                     "
                                                                                                                                                                                                      𝑠!()
                                                                               𝑠#$                                                      $
                                                                                                                                       𝑠#'(                          𝑟! 𝜙𝑖#𝑘 𝑠!" , 𝑎!"
    𝑠!"                                                                 "
                                                                       𝑠!#$                                                                                                 ℎ

                                   𝑟! 𝑜!" , 𝑎!"                                                    𝑟# 𝜙𝑖!𝑘 𝑠#$ , 𝑎#$
                                                                                                         ℎ
                                                                                                                                              (c) The POMDP with partial OSI
          (a) The general POMDP.                                              (b) The POMDP with partial OSI.                                 and partial noisy observations.

Figure 1: A sketch of one step in different classes of POMDPs: the squares represent the feedback
of the partial OSI actively queried by the agent, and/or the (partial) noisy observations


action policy that relies on the queried partial OSI at each step. These also require new technical
developments in the regret analysis (see Appendix E and Appendix F).
Third, inspired by our state-representation design for the lower bound, in Sec. 5 we identify another
novel tractable class of POMDPs with partial OSI, where additional noisy observations for the sub-
states in the state-vector that are not actively queried are available. We provide a new algorithm with
a near-optimal regret in Theorem 3. Our regret analysis involves a non-trivial generalization of
the observable operator method (Jaeger, 2000; Liu et al., 2022) to handle the case with partial OSI
of different sub-states that are actively queried by the agent. In addition, we provide a new regret
lower-bound in Theorem 4 that demonstrates the near-optimality of the regret that we achieve.

2         P ROBLEM F ORMULATION
In this section, we first introduce the general episodic partially observable Markov decision process
(POMDP) for clarity, which is intractable in the worst case. Then, we introduce the POMDP setting
with partial online state information (OSI) that we study in this paper.

2.1         T HE G ENERAL E PISODIC POMDP
Episodic POMDPs are usually modelled by a tuple M = (S, A, O, H, ∆1 , P, O, r) (Liu et al., 2022;
2023; Chen et al., 2022a;b; Cai et al., 2022), where S, A and O denote the state space with S states,
the action space with A actions and the observation space with O observations, respectively; H
denotes the number of steps in an episode; ∆1 : S → [0, 1] denotes a probability measure supported
on the state space S and determines the randomness of the initial state at the beginning of an episode;
P = {Ph : S × S × A → [0, 1]}H−1                                                 H
                                     h=1 and O = {Oh : O × S → [0, 1]}h=1 denote the unknown
transition and emission probability measures, respectively; and r = {rh : O × A → [0, 1]}H            h=1
denotes the known reward function. Specifically, an online agent interacts with the environment in
K episodes. At each step h = 1, ..., H of an episode, the agent receives a noisy observation okh that
is generated according to the emission probability Oh (·|skh ), where skh is the unknown true latent
state. Next, the agent takes an action akh and receives the reward rh (okh , akh ). Then, the environment
transits to the next state skh+1 , which is drawn according to the transition probability Ph (·|skh , akh ).
The goal of the agent is to find a near-optimal policy that achieves an expected cumulative reward
close to that of the optimal policy. Please see Fig. 1a for a sketch of one step. Due to the lack of
latent state information, the observation is non-Markovian and the policy needs to maintain memory.

2.2         T HE E PISODIC POMDP WITH PARTIAL OSI
As discussed in Sec. 1, we make the first effort to investigate the impact of partial OSI on POMDPs
in this paper. We provide a formulation for studying POMDPs with partial OSI. Specifically, we
consider the vector-structured states (Jin et al., 2020; Ayoub et al., 2020; Agarwal et al., 2019).
Each state s is represented by a d-dimension feature vector ϕ(s)⃗    = [ϕ1 (s), ..., ϕd (s)]T ∈ S̃d , where
                                                                    ⃗
S̃ is the universal set of the values for each element/sub-state in ϕ(s), and [·]T denotes the transpose
of a vector. We use |S̃| to denote the cardinality of the set S̃. Then, at each step h = 1, ..., H of an
episode k = 1, ..., K, the agent interacts with the environment as follows (please see Fig. 1b for a
sketch of one step of the POMDP with partial OSI):
(Step-i) The agent actively queries a subset of d˜ (where 1 ≤ d˜ < d) sub-states (let îkh denote the
indices of these queried sub-states); (Step-ii) the partial OSI, i.e., the precise information of the


                                                                                                             3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


queried sub-states {ϕi (s)}{i∈îk } , is revealed to the agent; (Step-iii) the agent takes an action akh and
                                           h

receives the reward rh (ϕîk (skh ), akh ), where the reward rh : S̃ × A → [0, 1] is a function of the
                           h

partial OSI and S̃ ≜ {ϕ (s) : |î| = d,    ˜ s ∈ S} is the sub-state space for any union of d˜ sub-states.;
                                î
(Step-iv) the environment transits to the next state skh+1 .
This model is motivated by various practical scenarios, e.g., wireless scheduling (Chen et al., 2008;
Ouyang et al., 2015), autonomous driving (Levinson et al., 2011; Pinto et al., 2018; Jennings &
Figliozzi, 2019), robotics (Akkaya et al., 2019; Lee et al., 2023; Silver & Veness, 2010) and health-
care (Hauskrecht & Fraser, 2000). Below, we elaborate on two important motivating examples.
Motivating example 1: In an autonomous delivery system (Jennings & Figliozzi, 2019), in order to
deliver the product to the destination, a robot explores multiple paths and chooses one path at each
intersection. Here, each sub-state ϕi (s) of s represents the condition, e.g., traffic intensity, of one
path. At each step, the robot agent first actively queries and observes the condition of several paths,
i.e., the partial OSI. However, due to delay requirements, unknown dynamics in the environment,
and occlusion, the precise conditions of other paths may not be available to the robot. Then, she
chooses one path to follow, i.e., the action that will incur a reward.
Motivating example 2: Consider a cognitive MAC (medium access control) system (Ouyang et al.,
2015), where a secondary user, i.e., an agent, wishes to search for spectrum-access opportunities.
Here, the state s characterizes the conditions of multiple channels available for an agent to use. Sub-
state ϕi (s) represents the condition, e.g., busy or idle, of the i-th channel. At each step, the agent
first probes the conditions of a number of channels. After this query, the conditions of the sensed
channels will be observed, i.e., the partial OSI. However, due to energy constraints and latency
requirements, the agent cannot sense all the channels. Then, she transfers the packets using one
channel, i.e., the action that will incur a reward.

2.3       P ERFORMANCE M ETRIC
In POMDPs with partial OSI, at each step h of episode k, the feedback revealed to the agent is
Φkh = (ϕîk (sk1 ), ak1 , ..., ϕîk (skh−1 ), akh−1 ). We use Φ̂h to denote the feedback space of Φkh before
              1                      h−1

the partial OSI for step h is revealed, and use Φ̃h = {Φ̂h ∪ {ϕîh (sh )}îh } to denote the feedback
space after the partial OSI for step h has been revealed. Then, the query îkh is made according to a
query policy πq,h k
                     ∈ {πq,h : Φ̂h → ∆                ˜ which maps from Φ̂h to a conditional probability
                                            ˆ h ({î}|d)},
          ˆ         ˜
measure ∆h ({î}|d) supported on the query space {î : |î| = d}.         ˜ Next, after receiving the partial
           k                k
OSI ϕîk (sh ), the action ah is taken according to an action policy1 πa,h      k
                                                                                    ∈ {πa,h : Φ̃h → ∆ ˜ h (A)},
       h

which maps from Φ̃h to a probability measure ∆            ˜ h (A) supported on the action space A. We use
                 πk
                                           PH
the V -value V       ≜ E{πqk ,πak ,P,∆1 } [ h=1 rh (ϕîk (skh ), akh )] to denote the expected total reward in
                                                          h
episode k by following πqk = {πq,h    k
                                          }H            k       k     H             k     k    k
                                           h=1 and πa = {πa,h }h=1 , where π = (πq , πa ). We take the
regret as the performance metric, which is the difference between the expected cumulative reward
using the online joint policies π 1:K and that of using the optimal policy, i.e.,
                                           1:K          PK h                k
                                                                              i
                                    Reg π (K) ≜ k=1 V ∗ − V π ,                                             (1)

where V ∗ ≜ supπ V π denotes the expected total reward of the optimal policy in an episode. The
goal of the online agent is to find a policy that achieves a sub-linear regret with respect to K. Hence,
the main challenge and new difficulty here is how to design the query policy πq , such that an action
policy πa can also be intelligently developed to achieve a near-optimal regret.

3       P ERILS OF NOT H AVING F ULL OSI: A N EW L OWER B OUND
In this section, we answer the long-standing open question: whether POMDPs with online state
information are tractable without full OSI? In Theorem 1 below, we establish a lower bound that
reveals a surprising hardness result: unless we have full OSI, we need an exponential sample com-
plexity to find an ϵ-optimal policy for POMDPs, where a policy π is ϵ-optimal if V π ≥ V ∗ − ϵ.
    1
        Recall that ϕîk (skh ) ∈ Φ̃h . Thus, the action policy πa,h
                                                                 k                                             k
                                                                     relies on the output of the query policy πq,h .
                      h


                                                             4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                     𝑥#                                                                              1
           𝜙 𝑠 4   = 𝑥                                                                    𝑟! = Ber
                      "                          𝑎(1), 𝑎(2)            𝑎(1), 𝑎(2)                    2



                     𝑥!                                                                              1
           𝜙 𝑠 3   = 𝑥                                                                    𝑟! = Ber
                      $                          𝑎(1), 𝑎(2)            𝑎(1), 𝑎(2)                    2

                                           𝑎 1                   𝑎 2
                                𝑎(2)                                                                 1
                     𝑥#
           𝜙 𝑠 2   = 𝑥                                                                    𝑟! = Ber     +𝜀
                      $                              𝑎 2                    𝑎 1                      2

                                           𝑎 1                   𝑎 2
                     𝑥!                                                                              1
           𝜙 𝑠 1   = 𝑥                                                                    𝑟! = Ber     +𝜀
                      "         𝑎 1                  𝑎 2                    𝑎 1                      2

                          ℎ=1           ℎ=2                    ℎ=3                  ℎ=4


Figure 2: A hard instance for developing the lower bound in POMDPs with only partial OSI. States
s(1), s(2), s(3) and s(4) are represented by solid circles, dashed circles, solid squares and dashed
squares, respectively. Ber(1/2) represents the Bernoulli distribution with mean 1/2


Theorem 1. (Intractability for not having full OSI) For POMDPs with only partial online state
information introduced in Sec. 2.2, there exists hard instances, such that with a probability p ≥ 1/3,
any algorithm needs at least Ω(AH /ϵ2 ) samples to find an ϵ-optimal policy.

Theorem 1 demonstrates the hardness of POMDPs without full OSI: a polynomially scaling sample
complexity Poly(A, H, S, K) is impossible. The result in Theorem 1 may seem counter-intuitive,
because by combining multiple partial OSI collected from different steps, one may construct full ob-
servations and then enjoy similar performance as that with full OSI. Below, we design an important
hard instance and provide our key proof ideas of Theorem 1, which shows why this is not true.
Remark 1. The intractability result in Theorem 1 still holds even if in addition to partial OSI, there
exist noisy observations (please see our discussion in Sec. 5). This is because we can construct a
hard instance directly based on the one that we construct in this section, while letting the emission
probabilities of the additional noisy observations to be exactly the same for all underlying states,
such that the additional observations do not provide any useful statistical information.
3.1 O UR K EY P ROOF I DEAS FOR T HEOREM 1
For simplicity, we focus on the simpler case with d = 2 and d˜ = 1, which makes it easier to
understand our key proof ideas. Please see Appendix C for the complete proof. The important parts
in our proof are to design special state representations and transitions, such that partial OSI cannot
help the learner to improve her statistical knowledge about the true underlying state. Towards this
end, we construct a hard instance with four states, i.e., s(1), s(2), s(3) and s(4) (see Fig. 2).
Idea I (Special state representations): Our first key idea is to construct special state representa-
tions, such that by only observing d˜ = 1 sub-state, it is still impossible for the learner to infer the
                                        ⃗
true latent state. Specifically, we let ϕ(s(1))                  ⃗
                                                 = [x1 , x2 ]T , ϕ(s(2))                 ⃗
                                                                         = [x3 , x4 ]T , ϕ(s(3)) = [x1 , x4 ]T
     ⃗                   T
and ϕ(s(4)) = [x3 , x2 ] , where x1 , ..., x4 are sub-states (see Fig. 2).
We introduce the high-level reason for constructing the state representations in this way. Let us
consider states s(1) and s(2) as a group of states, and we call it group a. Similarly, we call states
s(3) and s(4) group b. Under our construction of the state representation, each state in group a (i.e.,
s(1) and s(2)) must contain a same sub-state as that in each state of group b (i.e., s(3) and s(4)).
For example, the first sub-states of both state s(1) and state s(3) are x1 . This means that, by only
querying ϕ1 (s) = x1 , the learner cannot know whether she is in a state from group a or group b. As
another example, the second sub-states of both state s(1) and state s(4) are x2 . This means that, by
only querying ϕ2 (s) = x2 , the learner cannot know whether she is in a state from group a or group
b. As a result, if (i) there is only one specific action sequence that guarantees the learner to be in
group a, and (ii) group a generates a larger reward, then intuitively the learner has to constantly keep
trying all exponential number of possible action sequences to figure this out with high probability.
However, as we mentioned before, another question still remains: whether a combination of the
partial OSI from different steps would be enough? To answer this question, we construct special state
transitions using our idea II below. Together with the state representation that we construct above,
this state transition causes difficulty for the learner, even when multiple partial OSI are combined.


                                                           5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Idea II (Special state transitions): Our second key idea is to construct special state transitions,
such that even by combining the partial OSI from different steps, it is still impossible for the learner
to infer the true latent state. Specifically, in each episode, the learner starts from state s1 = s(1)
(see Fig. 2). At step h = 1, (i) if action a(1) is chosen, the state will transition to s(1) and s(2) with
the same probability (wsp); (ii) if action a(2) is chosen, the state will transition to s(3) and s(4)
wsp. At step h = 2, (i) if action a(1) is chosen, both states s(1) and s(2) will transition to s(3) and
s(4) wsp; (ii) if action a(2) is chosen, they will transition to s(1) and s(2) wsp. At step h = 3, (i) if
action a(1) is chosen, states s(1) and s(2) will transition to s(1) and s(2) wsp; (ii) if action a(2) is
chosen, they will transition to s(3) and s(4) wsp. For states s(3) and s(4) at step h = 2 and h = 3,
no matter which action is chosen, the states will transition to s(3) and s(4) wsp.
Then, together with the state representation that we constructed, even when the partial OSI about
the first and second sub-states from different steps are combined, such a construction for the state
transition still prevents the learner from knowing which group of states she is in. For example, at
step h = 1 of two episodes, the learner can keep taking action a(1) and query the first and second
sub-states one-by-one. Then, the partial OSI at step h = 2 could be ϕ1 (sk2 ) = x1 (i.e., the first
sub-state of s(1)) and ϕ2 (sk+1
                              2   ) = x4 (i.e., the second sub-state of s(2)). However, note that the
first and second sub-states of s(3) are also x1 and x4 . Thus, such a combination of partial OSI (i.e.,
ϕ1 (sk2 ) = x1 and ϕ2 (sk+1
                        2   ) = x4 ) is not powerful enough for the learner to distinguish whether she
is visiting s(1) and s(2) or she is simply visiting s(3). Similar issues occurs at other steps.
Idea III (Special reward functions): Up to here, we can see that only with partial OSI, the learner
cannot improve her statistical knowledge about the true underlying states. Thus, she can only rely on
the statistical relation between the sequence of actions that is chosen and the reward that is received.
Hence, to create difficulties, we let (i) the rewards rh at steps h = 1, 2, 3 are all 0; (ii) if the final
state is in group b, i.e., s(3) or s(4), the reward at step h = 4 follows Bernoulli distribution with
mean 21 ; (iii) if the final state is in group a, i.e., s(1) or s(2), the reward at step h = 4 follows
Bernoulli distribution with a slightly higher mean equal to 21 + ϵ. In this way, the optimal policy will
take action sequence (a(1), a(2), a(1)) for all episodes, so that she can remain in group a and enjoy
a larger expected total reward in every episode equal to 21 + ϵ. In contrast, the online learner has to
try every possible sequence of actions to figure out which sequence provides larger reward with high
probability. Since there are AH number of possible action sequences, according to the Hoeffding’s
inequality, we can show that the sample complexity for achieving an ϵ-optimal policy is Ω(AH /ϵ2 ).

4    O PTIMALITY UNDER PARTIAL OSI AND I NDEPENDENT S UB -S TATES
While learning in the world of general POMDPs with partial OSI is intractable, inspired by the key
insights in our lower-bound design, we identify two rich classes of POMDPs with partial OSI that
are tractable, for which we provide new near-optimal algorithms. We leave other potential learnable
classes as future work. The tractable class that we study in this section is as follows.
Class 1. (POMDPs with partial OSI and independent sub-states) At each step, (step-i) the agent
actively selects sub-states îkh to query, and receives the partial OSI {ϕi (skh )}{i∈îk } ; (step-ii) The
                                                                                          h
agent takes the action akh and receives the reward rh (ϕîk (skh ), akh ); (step-iii) the next state skh+1
                                                      Qd h
is drawn according to probability Ph (·|skh , akh ) = i=1 Ph,i (ϕi (·)|ϕi (skh ), akh ), where the product
form indicates that the sub-states have independent transition kernels.

This class is motivated by many important practical applications. For example, in classic wireless
channel scheduling Zhao et al. (2007); Chen et al. (2008); Ouyang et al. (2015), the condition of
each channel could change independently; and in Martian RockSampling (Silver & Veness, 2010) or
autonomous driving Pinto et al. (2018); Jennings & Figliozzi (2019), the condition of each potential
rock or path could also change independently. Notably, as we state in Proposition 1, without the
partial OSI in step-i of Class 1, even learning under independent sub-states could still be intractable.
Proposition 1. (Intractability if not having partial OSI) There exist POMDPs with independent
sub-states, such that learning an ϵ-optimal policy necessarily requires Ω̃(AH /ϵ2 ) samples.
Remark 2. By replacing partial OSI with noisy observations under certain conditions, POMDPs
with independent sub-states could be decoupled into paralleled sub-POMDPs, which may be solved
using existing methods. In contrast, the query of the agent for partial OSI in Class 1 couples poten-
tial sub-POMDPs together, such that existing solutions do not apply or result in poor performance.


                                                    6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 1 Optimistic-Pessimistic Two-Layer Learning (OP-TLL)
  for k = 1 : K do
    Step 1: update the weights wk (i) and probabilities pk (i) according to Eq. (2).
    for h = 1 : H do
       Step-2: choose a sub-state ikh according to probability pk (i) and query partial OSI ϕikh (skh ).
       Step-3: take an action akh that maximizes the updated Q-value function in Eq. (3).
    end for
  end for


For Class 1, we develop two new near-optimal algorithm. Due to page limits, we focus on the
simpler case with d˜ = 1 in this section, and introduce our results for the more challenging case with
d˜ > 1 in Appendix F. Our new algorithm when d˜ = 1 is called Optimistic-Pessimistic Two-Layer
Learning (OP-TLL). Please see Algorithm 1. At each step h, the optimal policy queries a sub-state i
according to a fixed distribution p, and receives the partial OSI for this queried sub-state. Then, she
takes an action according to ϕi (sh ). We note that the new challenge here is: how to utilize partial
OSI to avoid the intractability issue shown in Proposition 1 and achieve optimality? To address this
question, our OP-TLL algorithm contains two critical learning layers that involve our two new ideas,
and obtains a near-optimal regret.
Idea-I (Update the query policy pessimistically): This pessimism is because the query policy
updated in “Step-1” of Algorithm 1 affects the choice of action akh in Step-3, which requires com-
plete state information for V -value estimation. As a result of this, the relation between the regret
and model misspecification error Jin et al. (2020) indicates a linear-in-K regret if the estimation
error due to query is not sufficiently considered. Thus, although the state-transition and reward are
stochastic, the query needs to be made sufficiently conservatively. Specifically, at the beginning of
each episode k, OP-TLL updates the query policy as follows,
                                    η1            k−1
                                                      (ϕi (sk−1 ),ak−1
                                         PH                                                           k
                                            h=1 r̂h                    )                  (1−η1 )w (i)
       wk (i) = wk−1 (i) · e dpk−1 (i)                      h      h
                                                                           , and pk (i) = P d
                                                                                                 wk (i′ )
                                                                                                          + ηd1 ,   (2)
                                                                                              i′ =1


where the estimated reward r̂hk−1 (ϕi (sk−1    k−1                k−1    k−1
                                         h ), ah ) = rh (ϕi (sh ), ah ), if i = ih ; and
                                                                                          k
  k−1      k−1    k−1
r̂h (ϕi (sh ), ah ) = 0, otherwise. Note that this is a new variant of the importance sampling
method, where the new development lies in estimating the reward by exploiting partial OSI. More-
over, η1 is a key parameter that determines how pessimistic the algorithm is. For example, with a
                           η1        H
                                         r̂ k−1 (ϕi (sk−1 ),ak−1 )
                             P
smaller η1 , the term e dpk−1 (i) h=1 h     h     h
                                                      increases more slowly. As a result, the weight
 k
w (i) increases more slowly, and thus the algorithm behaves more pessimistically. In “Step-2”, OP-
                                                                                k
TLL chooses the query according to probability pk (i), where the first term Pd w (i)
                                                                                  wk (i′ )
                                                                                           captures the
                                                                                              i′ =1
query importance of sub-state i among all sub-states.
Idea-II (Update the action policy optimistically): The intuition for this optimism is to minimize
the bias in reward estimates, which is critical because the query policy updated in Step-1 relies on
the estimated reward. Specifically, in “Step-3”, OP-TLL takes an action that maximizes the Q-value
function following the optimism-in-face-of-uncertainty principle (the new challenge here is how to
design the bonus term to address the impact of partial OSI),
                                                                      q
    Qkh (ϕi (s), a) = min{rh (ϕi (s), a) + [Pkh Vh+1
                                                 k
                                                     ](ϕi (s), a) + O( H 2 /Nhk (ϕi (s), a)), H}, (3)
                                   Nhk (ϕi (s),a,ϕi (s′ ))
where Pkh (ϕi (s′ )|ϕi (s), a) =      Nhk (ϕi (s),a)
                                                           is the estimated transition kernel, Nhk (ϕi (s), a) and
Nhk (ϕi (s), a, ϕi (s′ )) are the number of times (ϕi (s), a) and (ϕi (s), a, ϕî (s′ )) have been visited at
step h up to episode k, respectively, and Vhk (ϕi (s)) = maxa Qkh (ϕi (s), a) is the estimated V -value.
Theorem 2. (Regret) For POMDPs with partial OSI (d˜ = 1) and independent sub-states, with
probability
   q        1 − δ for any δ ∈ (0, 1), the regret of our OP-TLL algorithm with parameter η1 =
      d ln d
O(    H 2 K ) can be upper-bounded as follows,

                                                      √
                                                                        2
                           OP-TLL                     3     2 2
                     Reg            (K) ≤ Õ AH |S̃| d K ln(AH |S̃|K/δ)     .                                       (4)


                                                           7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 2 Optimistic Maximum Likelihood Estimation with Partial OSI (OMLE-POSI)
    Initialization: Θ0 = {θ ∈ Θ : min{h,î} σS̃ (Õîh ) ≥ α}.
    for k = 1 : K do
                                             ˆ ∆
      Step-1: estimate the models θ̂ ≜ (P̂, Õ, ˆ 1 ) (including partial emission model) according to
                (                                                                             )
                           k−1         τ
                                                               k−1         τ
         Θk = θ̂ ∈ Θ0 :        log Pθ̂π (Γτ ) ≥                    log PPπ′ ,Õ′ ,∆′ (Γτ ) − β ∩ Θ0 . (5)
                           P                                    P
                                                      max
                              τ =1                    (P′ ,Õ′ ,∆′1 )∈Θ0 τ =1            1


                                                                              PH
      Step-2: update the joint policy π k ≜ arg maxπ:θ̂∈Θk E{πq ,πa ,∆1 ,θ̂} [ h=1 rh (ϕîk (skh ), akh )].
                                                                                          h
      for h = 1 : H do
                                                 k                                             k
         Step-3: query the partial OSI {ϕi (sh )}{i∈îk } according to the query policy πq,h       , collect
                                                        h
                                     k                            k                                      k
         partial noisy observation õh , and then take an action ah according to the action policy πa,h     .
      end for
    end for


Theorem 2 shows that OP-TLL achieves   √ a regret that (i) depends polynomially in all parameters A,
H, |S̃|, d and K, and (ii) depends on K, which is tight. To the best of our knowledge, this is the
first such near-optimal result for POMDPs with partial OSI. Similar to algorithm design, the main
difficulty in the proof is how to capture the mutual impact between the query and action policies.
Due to page limits, please see Appendix E for details and Appendix F for the case when d˜ > 1.

5     O PTIMALITY UNDER PARTIAL OSI AND PARTIAL N OISY O BSERVATIONS
In this section, we identify another tractable class (i.e., Class 2 below) of POMDPs with partial OSI,
and provide a new near-optimal algorithm. Please see Fig. 1c for a sketch of one step in this class.
Class 2. (POMDPs with partial OSI and partial noisy observations) At each step, (step-i) the
agent actively selects sub-states îkh to query, and receives the partial OSI {ϕi (skh )}{i∈îk } ; (step-ii)
                                                                                              h

the agent receives the partial noisy observation õkh for the other d− d˜ sub-states that are not   queried,
                                                                            îk

        k                                                                               k
where õh is generated according to the partial emission probability Õh · {ϕi (sh )}{i∈/ îk } . The
                                                                              h
                                                                                                           h
                                             d−d̃
partial emission matrix Õîh ∈ RO×|S̃|     satisfies the partially revealing condition: there exists a
                                                                                                ˜
constant α > 0, such that σS̃ (Õh ) ≥ α for any sub-states î and step h, where S̃ = |S̃|d−d and σS̃ (·)
                                 î

denotes the S̃-th largest singular value of a matrix. Namely, min{h,î} σS̃ (Õîh ) ≥ α holds; (step-iii)
the agent takes an action akh and receives the reward rh (ϕîk (skh ), akh ); (step-iv) the next state skh+1
                                                               h
is drawn according to the joint transition probability Ph (·|skh , akh ).

We note that in classic POMDPs (Chen et al., 2022a; Liu et al., 2022; 2023), the noisy observa-
tion is independent of the decisions of the agent. In contrast, in Class 2, at each step, the par-
tial noisy observation õkh depends on the query îkh of the agent. This new dependency results in
new non-trivial challenges in both the algorithm design and regret analysis. For clarity, we use
Γkh ≜ {îk1 , ϕîk (sk1 ), õk1 , ak1 , ..., îkh−1 , ϕîk (skh−1 ), õkh−1 , akh−1 } to denote the feedback (including
                1                              h−1

both the partial OSI Φkh and partial noisy observations õk1:h−1 ) in this case.
Remark 3. The partially revealing condition in step-ii of Class 2 is milder than the weakly revealing
condition in Liu et al. (2022) that requires minh σS (Oh ) ≥ α, where S = |S̃|d is the total number
of states and Oh is the emission matrix that we introduced in Sec. 2.1. This is because for an m × n
matrix A and an m × (n − l) sub-matrix B of A, we have that σi+l (A) ≤ σi (B) Horn et al. (1994).
Remark 4. Without the partially revealing condition in step-ii of Class 2, POMDPs with partial OSI
are still intractable in the worst case. This can be shown by letting the partial emission probability
Õîh of each î be the same for all possible sub-states {ϕi (s)}i∈/ î , and then we can show that learning
an ϵ-optimal policy in POMDPs with partial OSI still necessarily requires Ω̃(AH /ϵ2 ) samples.


                                                          8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


For Class 2, we develop a new near-optimal algorithms (see Algorithm 2), called Optimistic Max-
imum Likelihood Estimation with Partial OSI (OMLE-POSI). Recall that the new challenges here
are: (i) the partial noisy observation õkh depends on the query îkh of the agent; (ii) the performance of
                      k
the action policy πa,h   depends on both the observation õkh and query îkh . Our algorithm is inspired
by the idea of OMLE, but extends it to elegantly address the non-trivial joint query policy and action
policy optimization. Specifically, OMLE-POSI (in Algorithm 2) differs from OMLE in two aspects.
First, in “Step-1”, OMLE-POSI only collects partial noisy observations õk1:H , which relies on the
queries  îk1:H determined in Step-2. Due to this new relation, in Eq. (5) we design a new bonus term
                           ˜
β = O (|S̃|2d A + |S̃|d−d O) ln(|S̃|d AOHK) which depends on the size of the non-queried sub-
                  ˜
state space |S̃|d−d , and OMLE-POSI only estimates partial emission model Õ. Second, note that in
the joint optimization of “Step-2”, the action policy πa is inherently a function of the query policy
πq , since the action akh taken according to πa,h
                                                k
                                                    relies on the observation õkh , which further depends
on the query îkh made according to πq,h
                                       k
                                          . Due to page limits, please see Appendix G for more details.
Theorem 3. (Regret) For POMDPs with the partial OSI and partially revealing condition, with
probability 1 − δ, when |S̃| > (d/d)˜ 2 , the regret of OMLE-POSI can be upper-bounded as follows,
                                                         q
                                                ˜                               ˜
             Reg OMLE-POSI (K) ≤ Õ |S̃|2d−d OAH 4 K(|S̃|2d A + |S̃|(d−d)/2          O)/α2 .           (6)
                                                                            √
Theorem 3 above shows that (i) the regret of OMLE-POSI depends on K, which is tight; (ii) the
regret depends polynomially on A and H; and (iii) the regret further decreases exponentially as d˜
increases. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first such near-optimal result for POMDPs with
partial OSI. Recall that partial OSI affects both the MLE and policy optimization. Thus, the main
difficulty in the proof of Theorem 3 is how to capture such new effects. Indeed, directly applying
existing observable operator method (OOM) Jaeger (2000); Liu et al. (2022) will result in a regret
that does not decrease with d.˜ Please see Appendix G for our new analytical ideas and the proof.
Theorem 4. (Lower bound) For POMDPs with the partial online state information and partially
revealing condition, the regret of any algorithm π can be lower-bounded as follows,
                                                   √               √
                                Reg π (K) ≥ Ω̃       AH · |S̃|d/2 · K .                                (7)
Theorem 4 indicates that the dependency on |S̃|d/2 in the regret of OMLE-POSI is necessary.
Our key proof idea in Appendix H is to construct a new special state transition, such that even
with partial OSI, all combinations of sub-states ϕi (s) must be explored to achieve a sub-linear
regret.
    √ We conjecture √   that a stronger
                                        lower bound depending on the query capability would be
                  ˜
               (d−d)/2
Ω̃    AH · |S̃|        · K/α , and leave this as a future open question.

6    D ISCUSSION AND C ONCLUSION
It is worthwhile to draw connection of our POMDP setting with the standard POMDP and general
decision making problem. First, our POMDP setting can be placed under the general decision-
making setting (Foster et al., 2021; Chen et al., 2022b; Foster et al., 2023). However, directly
instantiating their result to our Classes 1 and 2 will result in worse regret upper bounds than our
results here, which exploit our special problem structure such as the dependency of the action policy
πa on the query policy πq for developing more refined bounds. Second, our POMDP setting cannot
be placed under the standard POMDP setting (Liu et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2022a), mainly due to
the special sequential structure of the query, observation, action, and reward in our process. More
detailed discussion is provided in Appendix B.
To conclude, this paper answers a fundamental open question: how much online state information
(OSI) is sufficient to achieve tractability in POMDPs? Specifically, we establish a lower bound that
reveals a surprising hardness result: unless we have full OSI, we need an exponential complexity
to obtain an ϵ-optimal policy for POMDPs. Nonetheless, we identify two novel tractable classes of
POMDPs with only partial OSI, which are important in practice. For these two classes, we provide
three new RL algorithms, which are shown to be near-optimal by establishing new regret upper and
lower bounds. There are several interesting future work. For example, it would be interesting to
study the value of partial OSI in more general POMDPs, e.g., with continuous state spaces (Cai
et al., 2022; Liu et al., 2023). Second, the regret upper and lower bounds that we achieved can be
further tightened, e.g., improve the dependency on d and O using ideas from Chen et al. (2023).


                                                    9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Alekh Agarwal, Nan Jiang, Sham M Kakade, and Wen Sun. Reinforcement learning: Theory and
  algorithms. CS Dept., UW Seattle, Seattle, WA, USA, Tech. Rep, pp. 10–4, 2019.
Ilge Akkaya, Marcin Andrychowicz, Maciek Chociej, Mateusz Litwin, Bob McGrew, Arthur Petron,
   Alex Paino, Matthias Plappert, Glenn Powell, Raphael Ribas, et al. Solving rubik’s cube with a
   robot hand. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.07113, 2019.
Karl Johan Åström. Optimal control of markov processes with incomplete state information. Journal
  of mathematical analysis and applications, 10(1):174–205, 1965.
Alex Ayoub, Zeyu Jia, Csaba Szepesvari, Mengdi Wang, and Lin Yang. Model-based reinforcement
  learning with value-targeted regression. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
  463–474. PMLR, 2020.
Mohammad Gheshlaghi Azar, Ian Osband, and Rémi Munos. Minimax regret bounds for reinforce-
 ment learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 263–272. PMLR, 2017.
Yu Bai, Tengyang Xie, Nan Jiang, and Yu-Xiang Wang. Provably efficient q-learning with low
  switching cost. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019.
Christopher Berner, Greg Brockman, Brooke Chan, Vicki Cheung, Przemysław Debiak, Christy
  Dennison, David Farhi, Quirin Fischer, Shariq Hashme, Chris Hesse, et al. Dota 2 with large
  scale deep reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.06680, 2019.
Qi Cai, Zhuoran Yang, Chi Jin, and Zhaoran Wang. Provably efficient exploration in policy opti-
  mization. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 1283–1294. PMLR, 2020.
Qi Cai, Zhuoran Yang, and Zhaoran Wang. Reinforcement learning from partial observation: Linear
  function approximation with provable sample efficiency. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning, pp. 2485–2522. PMLR, 2022.
Fan Chen, Yu Bai, and Song Mei. Partially observable rl with b-stability: Unified structural condition
  and sharp sample-efficient algorithms. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2022a.
Fan Chen, Song Mei, and Yu Bai. Unified algorithms for rl with decision-estimation coefficients:
  No-regret, pac, and reward-free learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.11745, 2022b.
Fan Chen, Huan Wang, Caiming Xiong, Song Mei, and Yu Bai. Lower bounds for learning in
  revealing pomdps. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.01333, 2023.
Yunxia Chen, Qing Zhao, and Ananthram Swami. Joint design and separation principle for oppor-
  tunistic spectrum access in the presence of sensing errors. IEEE Transactions on Information
  Theory, 54(5):2053–2071, 2008.
Yonathan Efroni, Chi Jin, Akshay Krishnamurthy, and Sobhan Miryoosefi. Provable reinforcement
  learning with a short-term memory. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 5832–
  5850. PMLR, 2022.
Dylan J Foster, Sham M Kakade, Jian Qian, and Alexander Rakhlin. The statistical complexity of
  interactive decision making. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.13487, 2021.
Dylan J Foster, Noah Golowich, and Yanjun Han. Tight guarantees for interactive decision making
  with the decision-estimation coefficient. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.08215, 2023.
Noah Golowich, Ankur Moitra, and Dhruv Rohatgi. Planning in observable pomdps in quasipoly-
  nomial time. arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.04735, 2022.
Milos Hauskrecht. Value-function approximations for partially observable markov decision pro-
 cesses. Journal of artificial intelligence research, 13:33–94, 2000.
Milos Hauskrecht and Hamish Fraser. Planning treatment of ischemic heart disease with partially
 observable markov decision processes. Artificial intelligence in medicine, 18(3):221–244, 2000.


                                                 10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Roger A Horn, Roger A Horn, and Charles R Johnson. Topics in matrix analysis. Cambridge
  university press, 1994.
Herbert Jaeger. Observable operator models for discrete stochastic time series. Neural computation,
  12(6):1371–1398, 2000.
Dylan Jennings and Miguel Figliozzi. Study of sidewalk autonomous delivery robots and their
  potential impacts on freight efficiency and travel. Transportation Research Record, 2673(6):317–
  326, 2019.
Nan Jiang, Akshay Krishnamurthy, Alekh Agarwal, John Langford, and Robert E Schapire. Con-
  textual decision processes with low bellman rank are pac-learnable. In International Conference
  on Machine Learning, pp. 1704–1713. PMLR, 2017.
Chi Jin, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Sebastien Bubeck, and Michael I Jordan. Is Q-learning provably effi-
  cient? Advances in neural information processing systems, 31, 2018.
Chi Jin, Zhuoran Yang, Zhaoran Wang, and Michael I Jordan. Provably efficient reinforcement
  learning with linear function approximation. In Conference on Learning Theory, pp. 2137–2143.
  PMLR, 2020.
Chi Jin, Qinghua Liu, Yuanhao Wang, and Tiancheng Yu. V-Learning–A simple, efficient, decen-
  tralized algorithm for multiagent RL. In ICLR 2022 Workshop on Gamification and Multiagent
  Solutions, 2022.
Leslie Pack Kaelbling, Michael L Littman, and Anthony R Cassandra. Planning and acting in
  partially observable stochastic domains. Artificial intelligence, 101(1-2):99–134, 1998.
Akshay Krishnamurthy, Alekh Agarwal, and John Langford. PAC reinforcement learning with rich
  observations. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 29, 2016.
Jeongyeol Kwon, Yonathan Efroni, Constantine Caramanis, and Shie Mannor. Rl for latent mdps:
  Regret guarantees and a lower bound. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:
  24523–24534, 2021.
Jonathan Lee, Alekh Agarwal, Christoph Dann, and Tong Zhang. Learning in pomdps is sample-
  efficient with hindsight observability. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
  18733–18773. PMLR, 2023.
Jesse Levinson, Jake Askeland, Jan Becker, Jennifer Dolson, David Held, Soeren Kammel, J Zico
  Kolter, Dirk Langer, Oliver Pink, Vaughan Pratt, et al. Towards fully autonomous driving: Sys-
  tems and algorithms. In 2011 IEEE intelligent vehicles symposium (IV), pp. 163–168. IEEE,
  2011.
Lihong Li, Wei Chu, John Langford, and Robert E Schapire. A contextual-bandit approach to
  personalized news article recommendation. In Proceedings of the 19th international conference
  on World wide web, pp. 661–670, 2010.
Qinghua Liu, Alan Chung, Csaba Szepesvári, and Chi Jin. When is partially observable reinforce-
  ment learning not scary? In Conference on Learning Theory, pp. 5175–5220. PMLR, 2022.
Qinghua Liu, Praneeth Netrapalli, Csaba Szepesvari, and Chi Jin. Optimistic mle: A generic model-
  based algorithm for partially observable sequential decision making. In Proceedings of the 55th
  Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, pp. 363–376, 2023.
Martin Mundhenk, Judy Goldsmith, Christopher Lusena, and Eric Allender. Complexity of finite-
 horizon Markov decision process problems. Journal of the ACM (JACM), 47(4):681–720, 2000.
Wenzhuo Ouyang, Sugumar Murugesan, Atilla Eryilmaz, and Ness B Shroff. Exploiting channel
 memory for joint estimation and scheduling in downlink networks—a whittle’s indexability anal-
 ysis. IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 61(4):1702–1719, 2015.
Christos H Papadimitriou and John N Tsitsiklis. The complexity of Markov decision processes.
  Mathematics of operations research, 12(3):441–450, 1987.

                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Lerrel Pinto, Marcin Andrychowicz, Peter Welinder, Wojciech Zaremba, and Pieter Abbeel. Asym-
  metric actor critic for image-based robot learning. In 14th Robotics: Science and Systems, RSS
  2018. MIT Press Journals, 2018.
David Silver and Joel Veness. Monte-carlo planning in large pomdps. Advances in neural informa-
  tion processing systems, 23, 2010.
Sean R Sinclair, Felipe Vieira Frujeri, Ching-An Cheng, Luke Marshall, Hugo De Oliveira Barbalho,
  Jingling Li, Jennifer Neville, Ishai Menache, and Adith Swaminathan. Hindsight learning for
  mdps with exogenous inputs. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 31877–
  31914. PMLR, 2023.
Richard D Smallwood and Edward J Sondik. The optimal control of partially observable markov
  processes over a finite horizon. Operations research, 21(5):1071–1088, 1973.
Edward J Sondik. The optimal control of partially observable markov processes over the infinite
  horizon: Discounted costs. Operations research, 26(2):282–304, 1978.
Nikos Vlassis, Michael L Littman, and David Barber. On the computational complexity of stochastic
  controller optimization in POMDPs. ACM Transactions on Computation Theory (TOCT), 4(4):
  1–8, 2012.
Qiaomin Xie, Yudong Chen, Zhaoran Wang, and Zhuoran Yang. Learning zero-sum simultaneous-
  move markov games using function approximation and correlated equilibrium. In Conference on
  learning theory, pp. 3674–3682. PMLR, 2020.
Yi Xiong, Ningyuan Chen, Xuefeng Gao, and Xiang Zhou. Sublinear regret for learning pomdps.
  Production and Operations Management, 31(9):3491–3504, 2022.
Xuezhou Zhang, Yuda Song, Masatoshi Uehara, Mengdi Wang, Alekh Agarwal, and Wen Sun.
  Efficient reinforcement learning in block mdps: A model-free representation learning approach.
  In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 26517–26547. PMLR, 2022.
Qing Zhao, Lang Tong, Ananthram Swami, and Yunxia Chen. Decentralized cognitive mac for op-
  portunistic spectrum access in ad hoc networks: A pomdp framework. IEEE Journal on selected
  areas in communications, 25(3):589–600, 2007.
Stephan Zheng, Alexander Trott, Sunil Srinivasa, Nikhil Naik, Melvin Gruesbeck, David C Parkes,
  and Richard Socher. The AI economist: Improving equality and productivity with AI-driven tax
  policies. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.13332, 2020.
Han Zhong, Wei Xiong, Sirui Zheng, Liwei Wang, Zhaoran Wang, Zhuoran Yang, and Tong
  Zhang. A posterior sampling framework for interactive decision making. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2211.01962, 2022.


                                               12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


N OTATIONS
For the convenience of readers, we summarize the notations in Table 1.

                                             Table 1: Notations

                 S                                                     state space
                A                                                     action space
                O                                                 observation space
                 S                                                 number of states
                A                                                 number of actions
                O                                              number of observations
                H                                         number of steps in each episode
                K                                                number of episodes
               ∆1                                         initial state probability measure
                 P                                      state transition probability measure
                O                                           emission probability measure
                 r                                                  reward function
                 d                                 dimension of the feature vector of each state
             ϕi (s)                                            i-th sub-state of state s
                 S̃                                                   sub-state set
               |·|                                              the cardinality of a set
                 d˜                         query capability: number of sub-states that can be queried
                îkh                                      indices of the queried sub-states
               Φkh                     feedback before the partial OSI for step h of episode k is revealed
                     ˜
           ˆ h ({î}|d)
           ∆                       conditional probability measure supported on the query space {î : |î| = d}  ˜
             ˜
            ∆h (A)                             probability measure supported on the action space A
              Φ̂h                      feedback space of Φkh before the partial OSI for step h is revealed
              Φ̃h                       feedback space after the partial OSI for step h has been revealed
                k
             πq,h                                       query policy for step h in episode k
                k
             πa,h                                      action policy for step h in episode k
              πhk                              joint query-and-action policy for step h in episode k
                  k
             Vπ                                            V-value of the joint policy π k
               1:K
        Reg π (K)                                      regret of the online joint policy π 1:K
    Pkh (ϕi (s′ )|ϕi (s), a)                               the estimated transition kernel
        Nhk (ϕi (s), a)               number of times (ϕi (s), a) has been visited at step h up to episode k
    Nh (ϕi (s), a, ϕi (s′ ))
      k
                                   number of times (ϕi (s), a, ϕî (s′ )) has been visited at step h up to episode k
              õkh                    partial noisy observation for the d − d˜ sub-states that are not queried
    îk

 Õhh · {ϕi (skh )}{i∈/ îk }                                partial emission probability
                            h
                Γkh              feedback in Class 2, including both the partial OSI and partial noisy observations
                 k
               rh,i                 the reward value rh (ϕi (skh ), akh ) of the i-th sub-state at step h of episode k
                k−1
              r̂h                                   the estimated reward at step h of episode k
                 θ                                                joint problem model
                        d
          Ōî ∈ RO×|S̃|                                augmented partial emission matrix


A         M ORE R ELATED W ORK ON POMDP S
Theoretical studies on partially observable Markov decision processes (POMDPs) have had a long
history Jaeger (2000); Åström (1965); Smallwood & Sondik (1973); Sondik (1978); Kaelbling et al.
(1998); Hauskrecht (2000). For example, Åström (1965) studied limitations of dynamic program-
ming in solving POMDPs. Smallwood & Sondik (1973) studied properties of the optimal control
policy and the optimal payoff function in a finite-state discrete POMDP problem. Sondik (1978)
studied implementable approximation solutions for stationary policies in POMDPs. Kaelbling et al.


                                                     13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


(1998) studied properties of the finite-memory controller in a POMDP problem motivated by robotic
navigation. However, these studies did not provide the performance guarantee on the regret or the
tractability.
Recently, there has been a significant progress on performance-guaranteed reinforcement learning
algorithms for POMDPs. For example, Efroni et al. (2022) studied m-step decodable POMDPs,
where there is a specific one-to-one mapping from the noisy observation in a history of m-steps
(i.e., from step h − m + 1 to step h) to the current true underlying state; Jiang et al. (2017) stud-
ied reactive POMDPs, where the optimal value/action at each step is assumed to be independent
of any past (i.e., any step before the current step h) decisions and feedback; Zhang et al. (2022)
studied POMDPs with block MDPs, where each underlying state can be directly learned based on
the noisy observation; Kwon et al. (2021) studied POMDPs with latent MDPs, where an unknown
MDP model is selected by the environment at the beginning of each episode, and is executed for
the episode; Xiong et al. (2022) studied POMDPs with reachability, where the critical exploration
is not handled; Golowich et al. (2022) studied POMDPs with γ-observability, where γ characterizes
how different the emission probabilities are for different states; Chen et al. (2022a); Zhong et al.
(2022) studied predictive state representations, where the probability of each near-term future obser-
vations is a weighted linear combination of the probability of a special subset of observations; Liu
et al. (2022; 2023) studied m-step weakly-revealing POMDPs, where the current state can be statis-
tically decoded based on m-step near-term future observations; and Foster et al. (2021); Chen et al.
(2022b); Foster et al. (2023) studied general decision making with structured observations, which
includes POMDPs as a special case. However, these results typically rely on various assumptions
on the emission model or the underlying states, which may not always hold in practice.
To circumvent the dependency and sometimes strong assumptions on the emission probability dis-
tribution, Sinclair et al. (2023); Lee et al. (2023) studied the benefit of hindsight state information.
Specifically, Sinclair et al. (2023) studied POMDPs with exogenous inputs, where the state transi-
tion function and reward function are parameterized by an exogenous input. This exogenous input
will be known after the action is taken, i.e., in hindsight. Lee et al. (2023) studied POMDPs with
full observability, where the unknown underlying state will be revealed to the agent at the end of
each episode, i.e. full hindsight state information. Thus, these recent work studying POMDPs with
hindsight state information typically assume full hindsight state information or full observability,
which is usually difficult to obtain in practice.


B     C OMPARISON WITH THE S TANDARD POMDP S ETTING AND C OMPARISON
      B ETWEEN C LASS 1 AND C LASS 2

In this section, we provide comparisons with the standard POMDP setting. In addition, we provide
a comparison between the identified Class 1 and Class 2.

B.1    C OMPARE WITH THE S TANDARD POMDP S ETTING

Our POMDP setting with partial OSI cannot be placed under the standard POMDP setting (Liu et al.,
2022; Chen et al., 2022a). Recall that in our setting, at each step, the partial noisy observation õkh
depends on the query îkh of the agent, whereas standard POMDP does not allow the observation to
depend on the action of the same time step. One may resolve this issue by letting the observation
at step h be oh = (ϕîh (sh ), õh ) and letting the action be Ah = (ah , îh+1 ), so that îh becomes the
action taken in the previous time step h − 1 and hence the observation oh can depend on such an
action îh . However, there is still a major issue here. In our process, after taking ah , the agent receives
the reward rh , and then takes the query îh+1 (which depends on rh ). In contrast, the above argument
of Ah = (ah , îh+1 ) requires taking action ah and îh+1 simultaneously, which is not consistent with
our setting.
Moreover, we conjecture that a lower bound depending on the revealing condition α could be de-
veloped. However, note that the development of the regret lower bound (which depends on α) and
the development of the regret lower bound in our paper require two different state transitions. In
particular, a very special sub-state transition is needed in our case for making partial OSI not useful
for the learning agent. We leave this as an interesting future work.


                                                     14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B.2    T HE C OMPARISON B ETWEEN C LASS 1 AND C LASS 2

We note that each of two classes, i.e., Class 1 and Class 2, becomes learnable due to different natures
in their transition model structures, and hence requires very different algorithm designs to handle
these specialities. Below we highlight the two key differences between Class 1 and Class 2 that
make it difficult to unify the approaches for them. The first difference is the structure of the state
transition kernel P. In Class 1, the state transition probability is assumed to be Ph (·|skh , akh ) =
Qd                       k     k
   i=1 Ph,i (ϕi (·)|ϕi (sh ), ah ). That is, it is the product of independent transition kernels of sub-
states. In contrast, in Class 2, we do not need such a requirement. The second difference is the
additional noisy observation õ. In Class 1, in addition to the partial OSI, the agent receives the partial
noisy observation õkh for the d − d˜ sub-states                 queried, where õkh is generated according
                                                    that are not
                                         îk

to the partial emission probability Õhh · {ϕi (skh )}{i∈/ îk } . Moreover, the partial emission matrix
                                                             h
                d−d̃
Õîh ∈ RO×|S̃|      is assumed to satisfy the partially revealing condition: there exists a constant
                                                                                       ˜
α > 0, such that σS̃ (Õîh ) ≥ α for any sub-states î and step h, where S̃ = |S̃|d−d and σS̃ (·) denotes
the S̃-th largest singular value of a matrix. Namely, min{h,î} σS̃ (Õîh ) ≥ α holds. In contrast, Class 1
does not require any additional noisy observation õ at all.


C     P ROOF OF T HEOREM 1

                                                                                ˜
In this section, we provide the complete proof for Theorem 1 with general d and d.


Proof. As we discussed in Sec. 3, to prove Theorem 1, the most important parts are to construct
special state representations, state transitions, and reward functions, such that partial online state
information (OSI) cannot help the learner to improve her statistical knowledge about the true under-
lying state. As a result, the learner can only rely on the relation between the action sequence and
reward to learn the optimal policy. Therefore, if we carefully construct the reward function for the
optimal and sub-optimal action sequences, we should be able to guarantee that only after enough
(i.e., exponential number of) episodes, can the learner figure out the ϵ-optimal policy, i.e., the one
that determines which probability distribution over the action sequences conditioned on the noisy
observation is the best with high probability. Towards this end, we construct a hard instance with 2d
states, i.e., s(1), s(2), ..., s(2d). For ease of elaboration, we start from the case when d˜ = 1, which
is ready and easy to be extended to the cases with d˜ > 1 as we discuss at the end of the proof.


C.1    O UR I DEAS FOR C ONSTRUCTING THE S TATE R EPRESENTATION

Our key idea is to construct a special state representation, such that by observing only d˜ sub-states,
it is still difficult or impossible for the learner to infer the true underlying state. Specifically, the first
d states s(1), s(2), ..., s(d) are represented as follows,
                                                                        
                                                                   x1
                                                                 x2                      
                                                                 
                                                                    ..                  x1
                                  xd+1
                                                               
               x1
                                                                 .                x2 
                                 xd+2                    xδ−2 
                                                                                    . 
              x2                x                                                 . 
    ⃗
    ϕ(s(1)) =       , ⃗
                       ϕ(s(2)) =     3   , ..., ⃗
                                                ϕ(s(δ)) =  x        , ..., ⃗
                                                                           ϕ(s(d)) =  .  . (8)
              ... 
                                                                 
                                
                                  . 
                                                          d+δ−1 
                                                                                      xd−2 
                                                                                           
                                  ..                     x
                                                             d+δ
                                                                  
                                                                  
              xd                                           xδ+1                    x2d−1 
                                   xd
                                                                                        x2d
                                                                 
                                                           . 
                                                           .. 
                                                             xd


                                                      15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


The last d states s(d + 1), s(d + 2), ..., s(2d) are represented as follows
                                                                              x1
                                                                                       
                                                 
                                                   x1
                                                                            .. 
                         
                          xd+1
                                                                            . 
                                                  x
                                                  d+2                     xδ−1 
                                                                                 
                          x2                    x 
           ⃗
           ϕ(s(d + 1)) =       ⃗                3         ⃗              xd+δ  ,
                          ...  , ϕ(s(d + 2)) =  .  , ..., ϕ(s(d + δ)) = 
                                                                                 
                                                  ..                      xδ+1 
                                                                                 
                           xd                                                . 
                                                   xd                        .. 
                                                                                            xd
                                                                                        x1
                                                                                          
                                                                                       x2 
                                                                                       . 
                                                                            ⃗
                                                                       ..., ϕ(s(2d))   ..  .
                                                                                     =               (9)
                                                                                           
                                                                                      x 
                                                                                            d−1
                                                                                            x2d
                                                        ⃗
That is, we first let the state-vector of state s(1) be ϕ(s(1)) = [x1 , x2 , ..., xd ]T . Then,

       • The representation of each of the states s(2), s(3) ..., s(d) differs from the representation of
         state s(1) by two and only two values. Precisely, the differences between the representation
         of the state x(δ) and the representation of state x(1) are the (δ − 1)-th element and the δ-th
         element in the state vector, where 1 < δ ≤ d. As shown in Eq. (8), we let the new values of
         the (δ − 1)-th element and the δ-th element in the state vector of s(δ) be xd+δ−1 and xd+δ ,
         respectively.
       • The representation of each of the states s(d + 1), ..., s(2d) differ from the representation
         of state s(1) by exactly one value. Precisely, the difference between the representation of
         the state x(d + δ) and the representation of state x(1) is the (d + δ)-th element, where
         1 ≤ δ ≤ d. As shown in Eq. (9), we let the new value of the (d + δ)-th element in the state
         vector of s(d + δ) be xd+δ .

Next, we introduce the high-level reasons for constructing the state representations in this way. For
ease of elaboration, let us consider states s(1), s(2), ..., x(d) as a group of states, and we call it
group a. Similarly, we consider states s(d + 1), s(d + 2), ..., x(2d) as another group of states, and
we call it group b.
There are two important properties of our construction of the state representation. The first property
is that, each state in group a (i.e., s(1), s(2), ..., s(d)) must contain at least one same sub-state as
that in each state of group b (i.e., s(d + 1), s(d + 2), ..., s(2d)). For example, the first sub-states
of state s(1) from group a and states s(d + 2), ..., s(2d) from group b are all x1 . This means that,
by only receiving the partial online state information ϕ1 (s) = x1 , the learner is not able to know
whether she is in a state from group a or group b. As another example, the second sub-states of
state s(1) from group a and states s(d + 1), s(d + 3), ..., s(2d) from group b are x2 . This means
that, by only receiving the partial online state information ϕ2 (s) = x2 , the learner is also not able to
know whether she is in a state from group a or group b. As a result, if (i) there is only one specific
action sequence that guarantees the learner to be in group a, and (ii) group a incurs a larger reward,
then intuitively the learner has to constantly keep trying all exponential number of possible action
sequences to figure this (only choosing that unknown specific action sequence generates a larger
expected reward) out with high probability.
The second property is that any combination of the sub-states of any state from one group must
exist in some states from another group. For example, the sub-state sequence in state s(1) (from
group a) is x1 , x2 , ..., xd . The same combination of sub-states can be collected by receiving the first
sub-state of state s(d + 2) (from group b), and the second to the last sub-states of state s(d + 1)
(from group b). As another example, the sub-state sequence in state s(d + 1) (from group b) is
xd+1 , x2 , ..., xd . The same combination of sub-states can be collected by receiving the first sub-
state of state s(2) (from group a) and the second to the last sub-states of state s(1) (from group a).
This property is key to guarantee that the combination of partial OSI from different times still does
not help the learner to improve her statistical knowledge about the true underlying state. Please see
our more detailed discussions below.


                                                      16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Similar to the simple case when d = 2, another question still remains: whether a combination of the
partial online state information collected from different times is enough to learn the true underlying
states efficiently? To answer this question, we construct a special state transition using our second
idea below. Together with the second property of the state representation that we construct above,
this special state transition causes learning-difficulty for the learner, even when multiple partial OSI
from different times are combined.

C.2    O UR I DEAS FOR C ONSTRUCTING THE S UB - STATE T RANSITION

Our key idea here is to construct a special state transition, such that even by combining the partial
OSI about different sub-states from different times together, it is still difficult for the learner to infer
the true underlying state. Specifically, the state transition probabilities at step h = 1 are as follows,

                                        1/d, if s2 ∈ {s(1), s(2), ..., s(d)};
               P1 (s2 |s(1), a(1)) =                                                                    (10)
                                        0,      if s2 ∈ {s(d + 1), s(d + 2), ..., s(2d)};

                                              0,   if s2 ∈ {s(1), s(2), ..., s(d)};
                P1 (s2 |s(1), a(2)) =                                                                  (11)
                                              1/d, if s2 ∈ {s(d + 1), s(d + 2), ..., s(2d)}.
The state transition probabilities at step h = 2 are as follows,

                                0,      if s3 ∈ {s(1), s(2), ..., s(d)} and for all s2 ;
         P2 (s3 |s2 , a(1)) =                                                                          (12)
                                1/d, if s3 ∈ {s(d + 1), s(d + 2), ..., s(2d)} and for all s2 ;

                                if s3 ∈ {s(1), s(2), ..., s(d)} and s2 ∈ {s(1), s(2), ..., s(d)};
                     
                      1/d,
                     
                       0,       if s3 ∈ {s(1), s(2), ..., s(d)} and s2 ∈ {s(d + 1), s(d + 2), ..., s(2d)};
                     
P2 (s3 |s2 , a(2)) =
                     
                      0,       if s3 ∈ {s(d + 1), s(d + 2), ..., s(2d)} and s2 ∈ {s(1), s(2), ..., s(d)},
                     
                       1/d,     if s3 ∈ {s(d + 1), s(d + 2), ..., s(2d)} and s2 ∈ {s(d + 1), ..., s(2d)}.
                                                                                                       (13)
The state transition probabilities at step h = 3 are as follows,
                      1/d, if s4 ∈ {s(1), s(2), ..., s(d)} and s3 ∈ {s(1), s(2), ..., s(d)};
                     
                     
                     
                      0,     if s4 ∈ {s(1), s(2), ..., s(d)} and s3 ∈ {s(d + 1), s(d + 2), ..., s(2d)};
                     
P3 (s4 |s3 , a(1)) =
                     
                     0,     if s4 ∈ {s(d + 1), s(d + 2), ..., s(2d)} and s3 ∈ {s(1), s(2), ..., s(d)},
                     
                      1/d, if s4 ∈ {s(d + 1), s(d + 2), ..., s(2d)} and s3 ∈ {s(d + 1), ..., s(2d)}.
                                                                                                    (14)

                                    0,   if s3 ∈ {s(1), s(2), ..., s(d)} and for all s3 ;
         P3 (s4 |s3 , a(2)) =                                                                          (15)
                                    1/d, if s4 ∈ {s(d + 1), s(d + 2), ..., s(2d)} and for all s3 .
That is, in each episode, the learner starts from state s1 = s(1), i.e.,

                                                  1, if s1 = s(1);
                                    ∆1 (s1 ) =                                                         (16)
                                                  0, otherwise.
Then, for step h = 1 to step h = 3, we let

       • At step h = 1, (i) if action a(1) is chosen, the state s1 will transition to s(1), s(2), ..., s(d)
         from group a with the same probability; (ii) if action a(2) is chosen, the state will transition
         to s(d + 1), s(d + 2), ..., s(2d) with the same probability.
       • At step h = 2, (i) if action a(1) is chosen, all states s(1), s(2), ..., s(d) from group a will
         transition to states s(d + 1), s(d + 2), ..., s(2d) from group b with the same probability; all
         states s(d + 1), s(d + 2), ..., s(2d) from group b will transition to states s(d + 1), s(d + 2),
         ..., s(2d) from group b with the same probability; (ii) if action a(2) is chosen, all states
         s(1), s(2), ..., s(d) from group a will transition to states s(1), s(2), ..., s(d) from group a
         with the same probability; all states s(d+1), s(d+2), ..., s(2d) from group b will transition
         to states s(d + 1), s(d + 2), ..., s(2d) from group b with the same probability.


                                                        17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


       • At step h = 3, (i) if action a(1) is chosen, all states s(1), s(2), ..., s(d) from group a will
         transition to states s(1), s(2), ..., s(d) from group a with the same probability; all states
         s(d + 1), s(d + 2), ..., s(2d) from group b will transition to states s(d + 1), s(d + 2),
         ..., s(2d) from group b with the same probability; (ii) if action a(2) is chosen, all states
         s(1), s(2), ..., s(d) from group a will transition to states s(d + 1), s(d + 2), ..., s(2d) from
         group b with the same probability; all states s(d + 1), s(d + 2), ..., s(2d) from group b will
         transition to states s(d + 1), s(d + 2), ..., s(2d) from group b with the same probability.

       • Note that for all states s(d + 1), s(d + 2), ..., s(2d) from group b, at step h = 2 and h = 3,
         no matter which action is chosen, they will transition to s(d + 1), s(d + 2), ..., s(2d) from
         group b with the same probability.

Then, together with the state representations that we construct before, even when the partial OSI
about different sub-states from different times are combined together, such a construction for the
state transition still prevents the learner from knowing which group of states she is in. For example,
at step h = 1 of d consecutive episodes, the learner can keep taking action a(1) and query the first
sub-state to the last sub-state one-by-one. Then, the partial OSI at step h = 2 could be ϕ1 (sk2 ) =
xd+1 (i.e., the first sub-state of s(2)), ϕ2 (sk+1
                                                2   ) = x2 (i.e., the second sub-state of s(1)), ϕ2 (sk+2
                                                                                                      2   )=
                                                  k+d
x3 (i.e., the third sub-state of s(2), ..., ϕ2 (s2 ) = xd (i.e., the last sub-state of s(2). However, note
that the sub-states of s(d + 1) are also xd+1 , x2 , ..., xd . Thus, such a combination of partial OSI,
i.e.,

                         ϕ1 (sk2 ) = xd+1 , ϕ2 (sk+1
                                                 2   ) = x2 , ..., ϕ2 (sk+d
                                                                        2   ) = xd ,                   (17)

is not powerful enough for the learner to distinguish whether she is visiting states s(1) and s(2) from
group a or she is simply visiting state s(d + 1) from group b. It is not difficult to see that similar
issues occur at other steps.

C.3    O UR I DEAS FOR C ONSTRUCTING THE R EWARD F UNCTION

Up to here, we can see that only with partial OSI, the learner cannot improve her statistical knowl-
edge about the true underlying states. Thus, she can only rely on the statistical relation between the
sequence of actions that is chosen and the reward that is received. Hence, finally we construct the
reward as follows.

       • The rewards rh at steps h = 1, h = 2 and h = 3 are all 0;

       • If the final state at step h = 4 is in group b, i.e., s(d + 1), s(d + 2), ..., s(2d), the reward at
         step h = 4 follows Bernoulli distribution with mean 21 ;

       • If the final state at step h = 4 is in group a, i.e., s(1), s(2), ..., s(d), the reward at step
         h = 4 follows Bernoulli distribution with a slightly higher mean equal to 21 + ϵ.

In this way, the optimal policy will take action sequence

                                   a∗1 = a(1), a∗2 = a(2), a∗3 = a(1),                                 (18)

for all episodes, so that she can stay in group a and enjoy a larger expected total reward in ev-
ery episode equal to 21 + ϵ. Note that the optimal action sequence (a(1), a(2), a(1)) in Eq. (18)
is simply because of the specific constructions that we introduce above. This optimal action se-
quence could easily be changed to any other action sequence (a∗1 , a∗2 , a∗3 ), e.g., (a(1), a(1), a(1)) or
(a(2), a(2), a(2)). The key idea is that there exists one and only one action sequence that generates
larger reward at the end of each episode.
Note that the online learner has no idea about which state or group she is in, and partial OSI cannot
provide any help for distinguishing the true underlying states and groups. Thus, in sharp contrast
to the optimal policy, the online learner has to try every possible sequence of actions to figure out
which sequence of actions provides a larger reward with high probability.


                                                     18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C.4   O UR I DEAS FOR L OWER - BOUNDING THE F INAL R EGRET

Since there are AH−1 number of possible action sequences, according to the Hoeffding’s inequality,
we can show that the sample complexity for achieving an ϵ-optimal policy is Ω(AH /ϵ2 ). Precisely,
based on the reasons from Appendix C.1, Appendix C.2 and Appendix C.3, this hard instance is
equivalent to finding the best arm in a multi-armed bandit problem by using the random reward
feedback, where each arm corresponds to an action sequence. For this part, similar to the KL-
divergence analysis in the bandit learning, we can consider an equivalent instance of the multi-armed
bandit problem with AH−1 number of arms as follows:

       • The reward of one arm i∗ , i.e., the optimal arm, is generated according to the Bernoulli
         distribution with mean 12 + ϵ, while the reward of all other AH−1 − 1 arms, i.e., the sub-
         optimal arms, are generated according to the Bernoulli distribution with slightly smaller
         mean 12 .
       • In addition, the optimal arm i∗ is chosen uniformly randomly by the environment.
       • Note that at each time k, the algorithm chooses one arm based on the past reward feedback
         Γk−1 = {0, 1}k−1 .

We use Pi∗ (K) to denote the probability that the online algorithm π chooses the optimal arm i∗ in
this instance, i.e.,
                                    Pi∗ (K) = P r{iπ (K) = i∗ }.                                 (19)
Thus, in the following, we focus on upper-bounding the expected probability of choosing the optimal
arm i∗ by any online algorithm π, where the expectation is taken with respect to the randomness
of the feedback and the randomness of the optimal arm i∗ . To prove this, we can use Pinsker’s
inequality and Hoeffding’s inequality. Specifically, first, we use P0 (K) to denote the probability
that the online algorithm π chooses the optimal arm i∗ in a fictitious case, where the reward of all
arms are generated according to the same Bernoulli distribution with mean 12 . In such a fictitious
case, each arm (including arm i∗ ) performs equally, and thus could be chosen arbitrarily. Next,
we prove that the difference between the probability Pi∗ (K) of choosing the optimal arm i∗ in the
               q construct above and the probability P0 (K) in the fictitious instance can be upper-
instance that we
bounded by 21 E0 [N ] log 1−4ϵ
                             1
                                2 , where E0 [N ] is the expected number of times choosing the arm

i∗ when the reward of all arms follows the same distribution.
First, according to the total variation distance and Pinsker’s inequality, we have
                                                                 r
                                                                   1
                      |Pi∗ (K) − P0 (K)| ≤ ∥Pi∗ − P0 ∥TV ≤            KL(Pi∗ ∥P0 ).               (20)
                                                                   2
Next, based on the definition of the KL-divergence and the chain rule, we have
                         K
                        X         X                           1        1/2      1       1/2
      KL(Pi∗ ∥P0 ) =                        P0 ({0, 1}k−1 )     log(         ) + log(         )
                                          ∗
                                                              2      1/2 − ϵ    2     1/2 + ϵ
                       k=1 {0,1} k−1 k
                                   :a =i
                                      X K
                       1        1
                   =     log               P0 (ak = i∗ ),                                 (21)
                       2     1 − 4ϵ2
                                       k=1
                                   PK
where the sum of the probabilities k=1 P0 (ak = i∗ ) is equal to the expected number of times
choosing the optimal arm i . Moreover, since the optimal arm i∗ is chosen uniformly randomly
                           ∗

among all arms, by combining Eq. (20) and Eq. (21), we have that the expected probability of
choosing the optimal arm i∗ can be upper-bounded as follows,
                                                      "r                      #
                                                 1                       1
                 Ei∗ [Pi∗ (K)] ≤ Ei∗ [P0 (K)] + Ei∗       E0 [N ] log           .         (22)
                                                 2                    1 − 4ϵ2
Then, according to Jensen’s inequality, from Eq. (22), we have
                                                  r
                                          1     1                        1
                     Ei∗ [Pi∗ (K)] ≤ H−1 +          Ei∗ [E0 [N ]] log         .                  (23)
                                      A         2                     1 − 4ϵ2


                                                 19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                K            1
Finally, since Ei∗ [E0 [N ]] = AH−1 and log 1−x ≤ 2x for all x ≤ 12 , from Eq. (23), we have that
                         H
whenever K ≤ O( Aϵ2 ),
                                                            2
                                          Ei∗ [Pi∗ (K)] ≤     ,                                    (24)
                                                            3
              p
for all ϵ ≤       1/8.
Furthermore, when d˜ > 1, the same line of proof can be easily generalized to prove the correspond-
ing dependency in the sample complexity lower bound, i.e., we can still use the similar construction
of state representations and state transitions, just by guaranteeing that any d˜ combination of sub-
states in group a must exist in group b, and vice versa. To avoid too much repetition, we take the
case with d = 3, d˜ = 2 as an example. In this case, we consider 8 states, i.e., s(1), ..., s(8). Then,
we let
                           x1                 x1                x5                 x5
                         " #                " #               " #                " #
              ⃗
              ϕ(s(1))            ⃗
                       = x2 , ϕ(s(2))               ⃗
                                          = x6 , ϕ(s(3))              ⃗
                                                            = x2 , ϕ(s(4))    = x6 ,
                           x3                 x4                x4                 x3

                            x1             x5             x1             x5
                           " #            " #            " #            " #
                  ⃗              ⃗              ⃗              ⃗
                  ϕ(s(5)) = x2 , ϕ(s(6)) = x2 , ϕ(s(7)) = x6 , ϕ(s(8)) = x6 .
                            x4             x3             x3             x4
In this way, the first property that we mentioned in Appendix C.1 still holds. That is, each state
in group a (i.e., s(1), s(2), s(3), and s(4)) must contain at least one same combination of d˜ = 2
sub-states as that in each state of group b (i.e., s(5), s(6), x(7), and s(8)), and vice versa. For
example, the first two sub-states of state s(1) and state s(5) are all (x1 , x2 ). This means that, by
only receiving partial OSI ϕ{1,2} (s) = (x1 , x2 ), the learner is not able to know whether she is in a
state from group a or group b. As another example, the last two sub-states of state s(1) and states
s(6) are (x2 , x3 ). This means that, by only receiving partial OSI ϕ{2,3} (s) = (x2 , x3 ), the learner
is also not able to know whether she is in a state from group a or group b.
Moreover, the second property that we describe in Appendix C.1 still holds. That is, any full com-
bination of the sub-states of any state from one group must exist in some states from another group.
For example, the sub-state sequence in state s(1) (from group a) is x1 , x2 , x3 . The same combi-
nation of sub-states can be collected by receiving the first two sub-states of state s(5) (from group
b), and the second two sub-states of state s(6) (from group b). As another example, the sub-state
sequence in state s(5) (from group b) is x1 , x2 , x4 . The same combination of sub-states can be col-
lected by receiving the first two sub-states of state s(1) (from group a) and the second two sub-states
of state s(3) (from group a). Therefore, finally, by constructing the same state-transition and reward
function, all the previous proof steps still hold. This concludes the proof.

D    P ROOF OF P ROPOSITION 1
In this section, we provide and prove a more general version of Proposition 1. Please see Proposi-
tion 2 below.
Proposition 2. (Intractability) There exist POMDPs with independent sub-states and even with
noisy observations, such that with a probability p ≥ 1/3, learning an ϵ-optimal policy necessarily
requires Ω̃(AH /ϵ2 ) samples.

Proposition 2 indicates that without the partial OSI in item (i) of Class 1 that is defined in Sec. 4,
learning in POMDPs with independent sub-states is still intractable, i.e., with exponentially scaling
sample complexity.

Proof. To prove Proposition 2, we construct a new hard instance, where the emission probabilities
of all states are exactly the same. Thus, the noisy observation cannot help the learner to improve
her statistical knowledge about the true underlying state. As a result, the learner can only rely on
the relation between the action sequence and reward to learn the optimal policy. Therefore, if we
carefully construct the reward function for the optimal and sub-optimal action sequences, we should


                                                  20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


be able to guarantee that only after enough (i.e., exponential number of) episodes, can the learner
figure out the ϵ-optimal policy, i.e., the one that determines which probability distribution over the
action sequences conditioned on the noisy observation is the best with high probability. The hard
instance that we construct for proving Proposition 2 is as follows. We still focus on showing a simple
instance that is easy to understand, which is easy to be extended to more general case.

D.1    O UR I DEAS FOR C ONSTRUCTING THE S UB - STATES AND THE S TATE R EPRESENTATION

We consider a hard instance with the value set of elements S̃ = {x1 , x2 }. That is, there are d = 2
sub-states and the caldinality is |S̃| = 2. Thus, the total number of states is S = |S̃|d = 22 = 4. The
representations of these four states are

              ⃗             x      ⃗           x     ⃗           x      ⃗           x
              ϕ(s(1))  = 1 , ϕ(s(2))        = 1 , ϕ(s(3))     = 2 , ϕ(s(4))      = 2 .              (25)
                            x1                 x2                x1                 x2
The representations are not necessarily exactly the same as that in Eq. (25). Our key idea is to
guarantee that each sub-state takes at least two different values, such that by constructing a spe-
cial emission model and transition kernel (as follows), it is difficult for the learner to improve her
statistical knowledge about the true underlying sub-states.

D.2    O UR I DEAS FOR C ONSTRUCTING THE E MISSION M ODEL

Our key idea for constructing the emission model is to guarantee that, at each step h, the emission
probabilities for all states are exactly the same. As a result, even with noisy observations, the learner
cannot improve her statistical knowledge about the true underlying state at all. In other words, we
let the emission probability be
               Oh (·|s(1)) = Oh (·|s(2)) = Oh (·|s(3)) = Oh (·|s(4)), for all steps h.                (26)
In this way, by receiving any noisy observation, the probability of the true underlying state is the
same. Thus, the noisy observation does not provide any useful information for the learner to infer
the true underlying states at any step.

D.3    O UR I DEAS FOR C ONSTRUCTING THE S UB - STATE T RANSITION

Recall that in our proof for Theorem 1 in Appendix C, the idea is to construct a special state tran-
sition, such that even by combining the partial online state information about different sub-states
from different times together, it is still difficult for the learner to infer the true underlying state. In
contrast, there is no partial online state information here. Thus, differently from the idea in Ap-
pendix C, our idea here is to guarantee that there exists only one specific sequence of actions, such
that for all sub-states, the values that generate a larger reward can be attained. In order to achieve
this, we construct the special sub-state transition below. We consider A = 2 actions. Specifically,
for each sub-state ϕi (s), at step h = 1,

                                                             1, if ϕi (s2 ) = x1 ;
                           P1 (ϕi (s2 )|ϕi (s(1)), a(1)) =                                             (27)
                                                             0, if ϕi (s2 ) = x2 ;

                                                                0, if ϕi (s2 ) = x1 ;
                         P1 (ϕi (s2 )|ϕi (s(1)), a(2)) =                                              (28)
                                                                1, if ϕi (s2 ) = x2 ;
Then, we construct the sub-state transition probabilities of each sub-state ϕi (s) at step h = 2 as
follows,

                                               0, if ϕi (s3 ) = x1 and for all ϕi (s2 );
              P2 (ϕi (s3 )|ϕi (s2 ), a(1)) =                                                   (29)
                                               1, if ϕi (s3 ) = x2 and for all ϕi (s2 );
                                                
                                                 1,    if ϕi (s3 ) = x1 and ϕi (s2 ) = x1 ;
                                                
                                                  0,    if ϕi (s3 ) = x1 and ϕi (s2 ) = x2 ;
                                                
                 P2 (ϕi (s3 )|ϕi (s2 ), a(2)) =                                                       (30)
                                                0,
                                                       if ϕi (s3 ) = x2 and ϕi (s2 ) = x1 ;
                                                
                                                  1,    if ϕi (s3 ) = x2 and ϕi (s2 ) = x2 ;


                                                       21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Finally, we construct the sub-state transition probabilities of each sub-state ϕi (s) at step h = 3 as
follows,
                                               
                                                1, if ϕi (s4 ) = x1 and ϕi (s3 ) = x1 ;
                                               
                                                 0, if ϕi (s4 ) = x1 and ϕi (s3 ) = x2 ;
                                               
                P3 (ϕi (s4 )|ϕi (s3 ), a(1)) =                                                    (31)
                                               
                                                0, if ϕi (s4 ) = x2 and ϕi (s3 ) = x1 ;
                                               
                                                 1, if ϕi (s4 ) = x2 and ϕi (s3 ) = x2 ;


                                                      0, if ϕi (s4 ) = x1 and for all ϕi (s3 );
                 P3 (ϕi (s4 )|ϕi (s3 ), a(2)) =                                                          (32)
                                                      1, if ϕi (s4 ) = x2 and for all ϕi (s3 );
                                                                                    T
That is, in each episode, the learner starts from state s1 = s(1) = [x1 , x1 ] , i.e.,

                                                  1, if s1 = s(1);
                                    ∆1 (s1 ) =                                                           (33)
                                                  0, otherwise.

Then, for step h = 1 to step h = 3, we let

       • At step h = 1, (i) if action a(1) is chosen, each sub-state will transition to x1 ; (ii) if action
         a(2) is chosen, each sub-state will transition to x2 .
       • At step h = 2, (i) if action a(1) is chosen, sub-state x1 will transition to states x2 and
         sub-state x2 will transition to x2 ; (ii) if action a(2) is chosen, sub-state x1 will transition to
         states x1 and sub-state x2 will transition to x2 .
       • At step h = 3, (i) if action a(1) is chosen, sub-state x1 will transition to sub-state x1 and
         sub-state x2 will transition to x2 ; (ii) if action a(2) is chosen, it will transition to states x2 .
       • Note that for sub-state x2 at step h = 2 and h = 3, no matter which action is chosen, the
         states will transition to x2 .

By constructing so, only taking action sequence a(1), a(2) and a(1) will guarantee that both sub-
states are in x1 .

D.4    O UR I DEAS FOR C ONSTRUCTING THE R EWARD F UNCTIONS

Since (i) the emission model that we construct in Appendix D.2 guarantees that the noisy observation
cannot help for inferring the true underlying state, and (ii) the sub-state transitions that we construct
in Appendix D.3 guarantees that there exists only one specific sequence of actions that guarantees
that the sub-state x1 is attained, then our idea for constructing the reward functions is to guarantee
that only sub-state x1 provides larger reward. Hence, finally we construct the reward functions as
follows:

       • The rewards rh at steps h = 1, h = 2 and h = 3 are all 0;
       • If the final sub-state is x2 , the reward at step h = 4 follows Bernoulli distribution with
         mean 12 ;
       • If the final sub-state is x1 , the reward at step h = 4 follows Bernoulli distribution with a
         slightly higher mean equal to 12 + ϵ.

In this way, the optimal policy will take action sequence (a(1), a(2), a(1)) for all episodes, so that
she can enjoy a larger expected total reward in every episode equal to 21 + ϵ. In contrast, the online
learner has to try every AH−1 possible sequence of actions to figure out which sequence provides
larger reward with high probability. Following the same line of the final part of our proof for Theo-
rem 1, we obtain the final conclusion in Proposition 2.


                                                         22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E     O UR N EW A LGORITHM AND R EGRET A NALYSIS FOR THE C ASE WITH
      d˜ = 1

In this section, we first introduce our new algorithm for the simpler case with d˜ = 1 for complete-
ness, i.e., a special case of Class 1 of POMDPs with independent sub-states. Then, we provide our
complete proof for the regret of our algorithm, i.e., Theorem 5 below.
Theorem 5. (Regret) For POMDPs with partial OSI (d˜ = 1) and independent sub-states, with
probability
   q        1 − δ for any δ ∈ (0, 1), the regret of our OP-TLL algorithm with parameter η1 =
      d ln d
O(    H 2 K ) can be upper-bounded as follows,

                                                     √
                                                                       2
                          OP-TLL                3    2       2
                    Reg            (K) ≤ Õ AH |S̃| d K ln(AH |S̃|K/δ)     .                          (34)


Theorem 5 shows that OP-TLL achieves a regret that depends polynomially in A, H, |S̃|, d and
K. We note that the key difference between the tractable Class 1 and factored MDPs is that in the
tractable Class 1, the agent needs to actively query only one sub-state, and then observe the infor-
mation of only this queried sub-state. Hence the problem is still POMDP. In contrast, in factored
MDPs, the full state is observed, and hence the problem is MDP. This is also the main reason that
the same regret in factored MDPs cannot be obtained in the tractable Class 1.

E.1   O PTIMISTIC -P ESSIMISTIC T WO -L AYER L EARNING (OP-TLL)

There are three steps in Algorithm 3. In “Step 1”, OP-TLL updates the weights wk (i) and prob-
abilities pk (i) according to Eq. (35). After updating the query policy πq according to the updated
probability distribution, in “Step-2”, OP-TLL chooses a sub-state ikh according to probability pk (i)
and query partial OSI ϕikh (skh ). In “Step-3”, OP-TLL takes an action akh that maximizes the updated
Q-value function in Eq. (37). Thus, OP-TLL contains two critical learning layers that involve our
two new ideas.
Layer-I (Update the query policy pessimistically): This pessimism is because the query policy
updated in Step-1 of Algorithm 1 affects the choice of action akh in Step-3, which requires com-
plete state information for V -value estimation. As a result of this, the relation between the regret
and model misspecification error Jin et al. (2020) indicates a linear-in-K regret if the estimation
error due to query is not sufficiently considered. Thus, although the state-transition and reward are
stochastic, the query needs to be made sufficiently conservatively. Specifically, at the beginning of
each episode k, OP-TLL updates the weights and probabilities for each sub-state ϕi (s) according
to Eq. (35). We note that this is a new variant of the standard exponential weight method, where
the new change in P estimating the reward is due to the partial OSI. For example, with a smaller η1 ,
              η1      H
                          r k−1
the term e dpk−1 (i) h=1 h increases more slowly. As a result, the weight wk (i) increases more
slowly, and thus the algorithm behaves more pessimistically. In Step-2, OP-TLL chooses the query
                                                          k
according to probability pk (i), where the first term Pd w (i)
                                                            wk (i′ )
                                                                     captures the query importance of
                                                           i′ =1
sub-state i among all sub-states.
Layer-II (Update the action policy optimistically): The intuition for this optimism is to minimize
the bias in reward estimates, which is critical because the query policy updated in Step-1 relies on
the estimated reward. Specifically, in Step-3, OP-TLL takes an action that maximizes the Q-value
function following the optimism-in-face-of-uncertainty
                                             q           principle. Note that the new challenge here
                                    k             2   k
is how to design the bonus term βh = O( H /Nh (ϕikh (s), a)) to address the impact of partial
OSI.

E.2   P ROOF OF T HEOREM 5

We first provide a complete statement for the regret upper-bound of our OP-TLL algorithm. For
simplicity, we will drop (ϕîk (skh ), akh ) from rh (ϕîk (skh ), akh ) when it is clear from the context.
                              h                      h


                                                    23
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 3 Optimistic-Pessimistic Two-Layer Learning (OP-TLL)
  Initialization: w1 (i) = 1 and p1 (i) = d1 for all i = 1, ..., d.
  for k = 1 : K do
     Step 1: update the weights wk (i) and probabilities pk (i) according to Eq. (35) as follows,
                                                     η1             k−1
                                                                        (ϕi (sk−1 ),ak−1
                                                             PH
                                                              h=1 r̂h                    )
                           wk (i) = wk−1 (i) · e dpk−1 (i)                    h      h
                                                                                             ,
                                                 k
                                    (1 − η1 )w (i) η1
                           pk (i) = Pd              + ,                                                  (35)
                                              k ′
                                       i′ =1 w (i )
                                                     d
     where
                        r̂hk−1 (ϕi (sk−1   k−1    k−1
                                     h ), ah ) = rh   (ϕi (sk−1   k−1          k
                                                            h ), ah ), if i = ih ,
                         and r̂hk−1 (ϕi (sk−1   k−1
                                          h ), ah ) = 0, otherwise,                                  (36)
              q
                  d ln d
     η1 = O( H       2 K ) is a key parameter that determines how pessimistic the algorithm is.

     for h = 1 : H do
       Step-2: choose a sub-state ikh according to probability pk (i) and query partial OSI ϕikh (skh ).
       Step-3: take an action akh that maximizes the updated Q-value function in Eq. (37) as follows,
                                                                            q
                                                        k
         Qkh (ϕi (s), a) = min{rh (ϕi (s), a) + [Pkh Vh+1  ](ϕi (s), a) + O( H 2 /Nhk (ϕi (s), a)), H},
                                                                                                     (37)
                                                   Nhk (ϕi (s),a,ϕi (s′ ))
        where Pkh (ϕi (s′ )|ϕi (s), a)    =           Nhk (ϕi (s),a)
                                                                           is the estimated transition ker-
                 k                       k                  ′
        nel, Nh (ϕi (s), a) and Nh (ϕi (s), a, ϕi (s )) are the number of times (ϕi (s), a) and
        (ϕi (s), a, ϕî (s′ )) have been visited at step h up to episode k, respectively, and Vhk (ϕikh (s)) =
        maxa Qkh (ϕikh (s), a) is the estimated V -value function.
    end for
  end for


Proof. The main challenges in the proof of Theorem 2 result from the mutual effects between the
first learning layer and the second learning layer. Specifically, first, note that in Algorithm 1, the first
learning layer is affected by the chosen action and V -value function estimates in the second learning
layer. For example, in the first learning layer, the weight wk+1 (i) at each episode is updated based
                 PH
on the reward h=1 rh (ϕîk (skh ), akh ) received in the last episode, which further depends on the
                              h
chosen action and V -value function estimates in the second learning layer. Thus, a larger gap in
the observed reward will make the quality of the weights and probabilities worse. This will then
affect the choice of the reward action. Second, note that the chosen action and V -value estimates in
the second learning layer depend on the feedback collected from the determined reward sub-state,
which further depend on the first learning layer. Thus, a larger gap in the weights and probabilities
will make the choice of the rewarding action worse. This will make the V -value estimate even worse
than that in classic MDPs.
To address these new challenges and capture the effects between two learning layers, our idea is to
first analyze each layer separately conditioned on a fixed error from the other layer. Then, based on
the resulting bound, which could be a random value, we further characterize the expected total gap
due to the bias from each layer. Finally, by combining these gap together and taking the expectation
over all possible past realizations, we obtain the final regret upper-bound.

E.2.1    S TEP -1: C ONNECT THE S TOCHASTIC O BSERVED R EWARD TO THE S UB -R EGRET IN
         THE F IRST L EARNING L AYER

In this step, we upper-bound the sub-regret due to the sub-optimiality in the first learning layer.
First, according to the update of the weights in Eq. (2), the property in Lemma 1 below holds.
Please see Appendix E.3 for the proof of Lemma 1.


                                                     24
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Lemma 1. At each step h of episode k, we must have
                         
            d
                  k+1
           P
                w     (i)               d XH                      d   H
    1                           1      X            H(e − 2)η1 X X k
      ln  i=1d           ≤                    k
                                               rh,i + 2                   rh,i /pk (i),            (38)
                         
   η1  P k                d(1 − η1 ) i=1            d (1 − η1 ) i=1
                 w (i)                     h=1                        h=1
                 i=1

       k
where rh,i ≜ rh (ϕi (skh ), akh ).

Note that the left-hand side of Eq. (38) captures the evolution of the weights in the logarithmic scale.
The first term on the right-hand side of Eq. (38) represents the parameterized stochastic observed
total reward in episode k. The second term on the right-hand side of Eq. (38) represents a reduced
version of the variance of the observed reward.
Next, for the sum of both sides of Eq. (38) over all episodes k, we take the expectation with respect
to the randomness of the algorithm, including the randomness of the query policy and the action
policy, and the state transition. Then, by rearranging the terms, the expected cumulative reward
of OP-TLL over all episodes k can be lower-bounded as follows,
           "             K X  d XH
                                          #
                 1      X
                                      k
         E                           rh,i
             d(1 − η1 )
                        k=1 i=1 h=1
                                                                                        
                                                                             d
                                                                                  k+1
                                                                            P
               "                 K   d    H
                                                       #            K           w     (i) 
                  H(e − 2)η1 X X X k               k
                                                             1 X         
                                                                           i=1
         ≥E − 2                             rh,i /p (i) + E           ln  d              .   (39)
                                                                                         
                   d (1 − η1 )                                η 1           P           
                                k=1 i=1 h=1                        k=1           wk (i)
                                                                               i=1
           k
Since 0 ≤ rh,i  ≤ 1 for all h and k, according to the telescoping sum, we have
   "             K X d X  H
                                 #                              "           K H
                                                                                                 !#
         1      X
                               k        H(e − 2)η1                1     η1 X X k
 E                           rh,i ≥ − 2              KHd + E         ·             r̂h,ik − ln d    .
     d(1 − η1 )                         d (1 − η1 )               η1    d               h
                k=1 i=1 h=1                                                k=1 h=1
                                                                                                  (40)
        k        k        k     k
where r̂h,ik = r̂h (ϕik (sh ), ah ), and the expectation is taken with respect to the randomness of the
                      h
           h
algorithm, including the query policy and the action policy, and the state transition. Thus, we have
       "K d H             #                        "                    K H
                                                                                            !#
        XXX
                       k           Hη1               d(1 − η1 )    η1 X X k
    E                rh,i ≥ −           KHd + E                 ·              r̂h,ik − ln d   ,   (41)
             i=1
                                     d                  η1         d                h
         k=1      h=1                                                k=1 h=1

Finally, we can upper-bound the conditional difference between the stochastic observed reward of
the our OP-TLL and that of the optimal policy as follows,
                   "K H            #    "K d H             #
                    XX
                              k
                                         XXX
                                                       k                   d ln d
                 E          r̂h,ik   −E               rh,i   ≤ 2H 2 η1 K +        ,         (42)
                                 h
                                             i=1
                                                                             η1
                        k=1 h=1             k=1     h=1

where the expectation is taken with respect to the randomness of the algorithm, including the query
policy and the action policy, and the state transition. Note that we now successfully connect the
stochastic observed reward to the sub-regret in the first learning layer. However, the new difficulty
here is that the reward is not the observed one with noise, i.e., not the true optimal reward that we
can obtain in each episode. This is mainly because of the sub-optimality in the second learning layer
for collecting the partial OSI and estimating the V -value function.

E.2.2    S TEP -2: C ONNECT THE S UB -R EGRET IN THE S ECOND L EANING L AYER TO THE
         W EIGHT E STIMATION IN THE F IRST L EARNING L AYER
In this step, we address the problem that we mentioned at the end of Appendix E.2.1. We first focus
on the first term on the left-hand side of Eq. (42). Note that to upper-bound the final regret, we need
to capture the gap due to the imperfect reward used for updating weights in Eq. (2). To achieve this,


                                                  25
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


we note that the expected difference between the best achievable reward and the observed reward
can be connected as follows,
  "K H            #    "K H            #    "K H                    #    "K         H
                                                                                               #
    XX                   XX                  X X                          X        X
             ∗                     k                    ∗        k             k         k
E          r̂h,i∗h − E           r̂h,ik = E     (     r̂h,i∗h − Vh ) + E    (Vh −      r̂h,ik ) .
                                       h                                                                   h
    k=1 h=1               k=1 h=1                      k=1 h=1                           k=1         h=1
                                                                                                               (43)
         ∗        k       k     k
where r̂h,i∗ = r̂h (ϕi∗ (sh ), ah ), and the expectation is taken with respect to the randomness of
                       h
the algorithm, including the query policy and the action policy, and the state transition. To upper-
bound the first term on the right-hand side of Eq. (43), below we provide an important lemma,
i.e., Lemma 2, that is proved to be useful later.
Lemma 2. In each episode k, for any δ ∈ (0, 1), with probability at least 1 − δ, we have
                                     " H              #
                                       X
                                              ∗
                                   E        r̂h′ ,i∗ ′ ≤ Vhk ,                                                 (44)
                                                             h
                                               h′ =h

where Vhk is the V -value estimated by OP-TLL in Algorithm 1.

Please see the proof of Lemma 2 in Appendix E.4. Note that in Lemma 2, the term on the left-hand
side of Eq. (44) is the best possible expected observed reward, which is equivalent to the expected
residual reward obtained by the optimal policy. Moreover, the term on the right-hand side of Eq. (44)
is the estimated V -value at step h of episode k. According to Eq. (44), we have
                  "K H             #    "K H            #    "K           H
                                                                                     #
                   XX                     XX                  X          X
                              ∗                     k                k         k
                E           r̂h,i∗h − E           r̂h,ik ≤ E     (Vh −       r̂h,ik ) .          (45)
                                                             h                                 h
                    k=1 h=1                k=1 h=1                       k=1        h=1

Thus, we can focus on upper-bounding the difference between the estimated expected reward, i.e.,
Vhk , and the expected reward after taking the action akh . Note that in Lemma 2, we have related the
expected reward used in the first learning layer to the V -value estimate in the second learning layer
                                                        PH
of Algorithm 1. After relating the expected reward E[ h′ =h rh∗ ′ ,i∗ ′ ] used in the first learning layer
                                                                               h
to the V-value estimate Vhk in the second learning layer, we can focus on the difference between
the estimated V-value Vhk and the true reward rh,i
                                               k
                                                  k under the randomness of the queries on the sub-
                                                         h
states ikh . Then, conditioned on the σ-algebra generated by the observation history, such a difference
                                                                   k
                                                                           PH
in each episode k can be decomposed into the sub-differences Vh,i     − E[ h′ =h rhk′ ,i ] resulting from
                                                                                                      k
each sub-state i under the randomness of observing sub-state i. The corresponding sub-regret Vh,i       −
   PH                                                                                     k
              k                                                            k k          π     k
E[ h′ =h rh′ ,i ] due to each sub-state i is equivalent to the sub-regret Vh (sh ) − Vh (sh ) (i.e., the
term inside the summation on the left-hand-side of Proposition 3) in the tabular MDP case studied
in Azar et al. (2017).
Proposition 3. (Lemma 14 in Azar et al. (2017)): With probability 1 − δ, we have
 K h                                                                                   2 !
                                      √
                                                  2                           2
X                    k
                            i                     H   SAK                      H SAK
     V1k (sk1 ) − V1π (sk1 ) ≤ O H 3/2 SAK ln                 + H 2 S 2 A ln               .
                                                      δ                          δ
k=1
                                                                                       (46)

                                                          PK n k        PH              o
Thus, the sum of the sub-regret over all episodes k, i.e., k=1 Vh,i − E[ h′ =h rhk′ ,i ] , can be
upper-bounded by applying Proposition 3. Thus, we have that
          "K          H
                             #
           X          X
                 k         k
        E     (Vh −      rh )
              k=1       h=1
                                                       !                                          !!2 
                   q                       2
                                        H |S̃|AK                    √                2
                                                                                    H |S̃|AK
         ≤ O H 3/2 d|S̃|AK ln                               +H   2
                                                                        dS 2 A ln                     .       (47)
                                            δ                                           δ


                                                        26
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E.2.3    S TEP -3: U PPER - BOUND THE F INAL R EGRET

By connecting the stochastic observed reward to the sub-regret in the first learning layer in step-1 and
connecting the sub-regret in the second learning layer to the weight estimation in the first learning
layer in step-2, we have finally upper-bounded the sub-regrets in both layers due to the errors from
the other layer. Thus, by combining Eq. (42), Eq. (43), Eq. (45) and Eq. (47), we have that, with
probability 1 − δ, the regret of OP-TLL is upper-bounded as follows,

Reg OP-TLL (K)/H
                                                       !                          !!2 
                d ln d
                              q                 2
                                           H |S̃|AK            √             2
                                                                          H |S̃|AK
≤ O H 2 η1 K +        + H 3/2 d|S̃|AK ln                 + H 2 dS 2 A ln               
                  η1                              δ                            δ
                                                                         !2 
       √               3
                         q            2
                                    H |S̃|AK         √              2
                                                                  H |S̃|AK 
= O H dK ln d + H 2 d|S̃|AK ln                 + H 2 d|S̃|2 A ln
                                        δ                             δ
                                                   !2 
       √                 2
                           √  2
                                √       AH 2
                                             | S̃|K
= O H dK ln d + AH d|S̃| K ln                         ,                          (48)
                                           δ

                                                q
                                                    d ln d
where the first equality is by taking η1 = O        H2K       .


E.3     P ROOF OF L EMMA 1

Proof. First, according to the weight updates in Eq. (2), we have
                                               
                                   d
                                        k+1
                                  P
                                      w     (i) 
                          1     
                                 i=1
                             ln  d
                                                
                         η1  P
                                                
                                                
                                       wk (i)
                                   i=1
                                                                              
                                      d            η1 PH     k        k    k
                                           k           h=1 r̂h (ϕik (sh ),ah )
                                      P             d
                                         w (i) · e                h
                              1                                               
                          =     ln  i=1                                       .                   (49)
                                                                              
                             η1                   Pd                          
                                                        k
                                                      w (i)
                                                     i=1


Next, since ex ≤ 1 + x + (e − 2)x2 for all x ≤ 1, according to the update of the probability pk (i)
in Eq. (2), we have
                       
            d
                k+1
          P
              w     (i) 
  1    
    ln  i=1d
                       
  η1  P k
                        
                        
                w (i)
            i=1
           
                              d           H                                d         H
                                                                                                    !2 
                                                                      2 X
     1                η1     X          X                    (e − 2)η1              X
  ≤     ln 1 +                  pk (i)       k
                                             rh,i /pk (i) + 2                pk (i)      k
                                                                                        rh,i /pk (i) 
    η1            d(1 − η1 ) i=1                             d (1 − η1 ) i=1
                                        h=1                                         h=1
                                                                             2
                                                                          !        
                              d X H                           d    H
     1                η1     X
                                        k      (e − 2)η12 X X k
  ≤     ln 1 +                       rh,i  + 2                       rh,i /pk (i)
    η1            d(1 − η1 ) i=1              d (1 − η1 ) i=1
                                 h=1                              h=1
                              d X H                            d XH
                                                                                 !
                                                           2 X
     1                η1     X
                                       k      H(e   −  2)η 1          k
  ≤     ln 1 +                        rh,i + 2                       rh,i /pk (i) .                  (50)
    η1            d(1 − η1 ) i=1               d (1 − η1 ) i=1
                                  h=1                             h=1



                                                    27
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Then, since ln(1 + x) ≤ x for all x, we have
                            
               d
                     k+1
              P
                   w     (i)              d X H                      d   H
      1                             1    X             H(e − 2)η1 X X k
         ln  i=1d           ≤                    k
                                                  rh,i + 2                   rh,i /pk (i).                 (51)
                            
     η1  P k                 d(1 − η1 ) i=1            d (1 − η1 ) i=1
                    w (i)                     h=1                        h=1
                i=1


E.4    P ROOF OF L EMMA 2

Proof. The proof of Lemma 2 mainly utilizes a set of concentration inequalities Azar et al. (2017).
Specifically, we prove Lemma 2 by mathematical induction.
Base case: when h = H, Eq. (44) trivially holds, since according to the definition of VHk , we have
    ∗
E [rH ] ≤ VHk . Note that the reward rh∗ ′ = rh′ (ϕi∗h′ (sh′ ), ah′ ) is a function of the query î∗h′ .
                                       "              #
                                             H
                                                   ∗             k
                                             P
Induction: we hypothesize that E                  rh′ ≤ Vh+1          . Then, we focus on proving that
                                           ′
                                          h =h+1
    H
    P ∗
E        rh′ ≤ Vhk . Note that, we have
    h′ =h
                             " H               #
                              X
                   Vhk − E             rh∗ ′       ≥ Pk,∗ k         ∗ k           k
                                                      h Vh+1 (s) − Ph Vh+1 (s) + bh+1 (s, a),              (52)
                               h′ =h

where bkh+1 (s, a) is the bonus term in Eq. (62). By adding and subtracting some middle terms, we
have that
            " H        #
              X                                         h k,∗       i
     k
                    rh′ ≥ Pk,∗
                     ∗                         ∗                  ∗    ∗
                                  k                                              k
   Vh − E                    h    Vh+1 (s) − V h+1 (s) +  Ph  −  Ph Vh+1 (s) + bh+1 (s, a).  (53)
               h′ =h
                                                       "                     #
                                                             H
                                                                     rh∗ ′          k
                                                             P
According to induction hypothesis that E                                         ≤ Vh+1 , we have
                                                           h′ =h+1
                                 " H               #
                                  X               h        i
                       Vhk − E             rh∗ ′ ≥ Pk,∗  ∗   ∗         k
                                                    h − Ph Vh+1 (s) + bh+1 (s, a).                         (54)
                                  h′ =h

Finally, according to the empirical Bernstein’s inequality, we have that with probability 1 − δ,
                                h            i
                                  P∗h − Pk,∗
                                         h
                                                ∗
                                               Vh+1 (s) ≤ bkh+1 (s, a).                          (55)
                                                 H
                                                 P ∗
Combining Eq. (54) and Eq. (55), we have E           rh′ ≤ Vhk .
                                                              h′ =h


F     P ROOF OF T HEOREM 6
In this section, we first provide the complete version of our new algorithm, OP-MLL, for the case
with d˜ > 1. Please see Algorithm 4. Then, we present our complete proof for the regret of our
algorithm, i.e., Theorem 6. We use mod(k, x) to denote the remainder when k is divided by x and let
κ = ⌈(d−1)/(d−1)⌉. ˜        In this case, after choosing the queried sub-states, since the number of queried
sub-states is larger than 1, then agent needs to pick one of the sub-states as the rewarding sub-state.
That is, at each step, (step-i) the agent actively selects sub-states îkh to query, and receives the partial
OSI {ϕi (skh )}{i∈îk } ; (step-ii) the agent choose one of the queried sub-states as the rewarding state
                       h
ϕikh (skh ); (step-iii) the agent takes the action akh and receives the reward rh (ϕikh (skh ), akh ); (step-iv)
                                                                               Qd
the next state skh+1 is drawn according to probability Ph (·|skh , akh ) = i=1 Ph,i (ϕi (·)|ϕi (skh ), akh ),
where the product form indicates that the sub-states have independent transition kernels.


                                                                 28
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 4 Optimistic-Pessimistic Multi-Layer Learning (OP-MLL)
                                                                       l     m
  Initialization: w1 (i) = 1 and p1 (i) = d1 for all i = 1, ..., d; κ = d−1
                                                                         ˜
                                                                         d−1
                                                                              .
  for k = 1 : K do
     if mod(k, κ) = 1 then
        Step-1: update the global weights wk (i) and probabilities pk (i) as follows,
                                                    (d−1)η1 Pk−1    PH     τ       τ    τ
                                                                     h=1 r̂h (ϕi (sh ),ah )
                            wk (i) = wk−κ (i) · e d(d̃−1)    τ =k−κ
                                                                                              ,
                                                       k
                                                    w (i)                 η1
                            pk (i) = (1 − η1 ) Pd                     +      ,                         (56)
                                                  i′ =1    wk (i′ )       d
        where
                r̂hτ (ϕi (sk−1   k−1    τ       k−1   k−1    τ        k−1   k−1           τ
                           h ), ah ) = rh (ϕi (sh ), ah ) − rh (ϕih (sh ), ah ), if i ̸= ih ,
                                                                  τ


                and r̂hτ (ϕi (sk−1   k−1
                               h ), ah ) = 0, otherwise,                                               (57)

         Step-2: choose the leading sub-state, i.e., the leader, according to the updated global proba-
         bility pk (i).
         Step-3: initialize the local weight w̃k (i) according to the global weight wk (i), i.e., w̃k (i) =
         wk (i).
      end if
      Step-4: choose d˜ − 1 supporting sub-states, i.e., the follower, uniformly randomly         from the
      sub-states that have not yet been chosen in most-recent κ episodes, i.e., from k−1

                                                                                             κ    · κ + 1 to
      ( k−1

          κ     + 1)  · κ.
      Step 5: update the local weights w̃k (i) and probabilities p̃k (i) for sub-state i queried as follows,
                                                       η2 PH            k−1
                                                           h=1 rh (ϕi (sh   ),ak−1 )
                               w̃k (i) = w̃k−1 (i) · e d̃                      h       ,
                                                             k
                                                         w̃ (i)           η2
                               p̃k (i) = (1 − η2 ) P                     + .                           (58)
                                                      i′ ∈îk w̃ k (i′ )
                                                                          d˜

      Step-6: choose the rewarding sub-state according to the updated local probability p̃k (i).
      for h = H : 1 do
         Step-7: update the Q-value function as follows,
                              (                                           s                  !   )
            k                                     k k                             H2
          Qh (ϕi (s), a) = min rh (ϕi (s), a) + [Ph Vh+1 ](ϕi (s), a) + O                      ,H ,
                                                                             Nhk (ϕi (s), a)
                                                                                                 (59)
                                                  Nhk (ϕi (s),a,ϕi (s′ ))
        where Pkh (ϕi (s′ )|ϕi (s), a)    =           Nhk (ϕi (s),a)
                                                                          is the estimated transition ker-
                 k                       k                 ′
        nel, Nh (ϕi (s), a) and Nh (ϕi (s), a, ϕi (s )) are the number of times (ϕi (s), a) and
        (ϕi (s), a, ϕî (s′ )) have been visited at step h up to episode k, respectively, and Vhk (ϕi (s)) =
        maxa Qkh (ϕi (s), a) is the estimated V -value function.
    end for
    for h = 1 : H do
       Step-8: take an action akh that maximizes the updated Q-value function, and collect the partial
       OSI.
    end for
  end for


F.1    O PTIMISTIC -P ESSIMISTIC M ULTI -L AYER L EARNING (OP-MLL)

Idea-I (Determine a leading sub-state pessimistically): The key insight in our idea-I is that, al-
though the state-transition and reward are stochastic, an existing stochastic learning method (such as
upper confidence interval) does not apply in our case. This is because the choice of the sub-state set î


                                                     29
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


will finally affect the V -value estimation, and thus needs to be handled in a more conservative man-
ner. Thus, in the first learning layer (i.e., Step-1 and Step-2 of Algorithm 4), OP-MLL determines
a leading sub-state pessimistically. Specifically, at the beginning of every κ episodes, OP-MLL up-
dates the global weights and probabilities for each sub-state ϕi (s) according to our new exponential
weighting method as follows (and chooses the leading sub-state according to the updated pk (i)),
                                                   k−1   H
                                     (d−1)η1                   τ
                                                                 (ϕi (sτh ),aτh )                              wk (i)
                                                    P    P
                                      d(d̃−1)
                                                             r̂h                                                        η1
    k                k−κ
  w (i) = w                (i) · e              τ =k−κ h=1
                                                                                    , and pk (i) = (1 − η1 ) d         + , (60)
                                                                                                             P k ′      d
                                                                                                                w (i )
                                                                                                         i′ =1
where η1 is a key parameter that determines how pessimistic the algorithm is, e.g., with smaller
η1 , the global weight increases more slowly and thus the algorithm behaves more pessimistically.
Note that the first term in pk (i) captures how important the sub-state ϕi (s) is among all sub-states,
and the second term is a uniform distribution (parameterized by η1 ) that allows the learner to keep
exploiting different sub-states. An important step in our idea-I is how to get the correct factor (i.e.,
(d−1)η1
    ˜
 d(d−1)
         ) for wk (i). We explain it in idea-II below, since it is tuned based on both our idea-I and
idea-II.
Idea-II (Choose the supporting sub-states based on the selections in most-recent episodes): The
key insight in our idea-II is that, due to the bias resulting from partial OSI, the standard  importance
sampling method (e.g., selecting the supporting sub-states î with highest weight i∈î wk (i)) does
                                                                                       P

not apply in our case. Thus, instead, OP-MLL chooses d˜ − 1 supporting sub-states uniformly         ran-
domly from the sub-states that have not yet been chosen in most-recent episodes from k−1

                                                                                               κ   ·κ+1
to ( k−1

       κ   +  1) · κ (i.e., Step-3  in Algorithm  4). As  a result, conditioned on the leading   sub-state
                                                                                ˜
(and independent of the episode), each sub-state is chosen with probability d−1 d−1 , which results in the
factor        η1
                     = (d−1)η
                          ˜
                              1
                                in the global weight. Interestingly, in the regret analysis, we prove that in
            d d̃−1
              d−1
                        d(d−1)
this way, the unnecessary bias (due to partial OSI) that could result in a linear-in-K regret can be
avoided.
Idea-III (Choose the rewarding sub-state and action optimistically): In the third layer, OP-
MLL chooses the rewarding sub-state and the final action in an optimistic manner. Specifically, in
Step-4, OP-MLL updates the local weights w̃k (i) and probabilities p̃k (i) for the sub-states ϕi (s)
that was chosen in the current set îk as follows,
                                            H
                                      η2
                                                  rh (ϕi (sk−1 ),ak−1               w̃k (i)
                                            P
        k             k−1                                  h      h   )                            η2
   w̃ (i) = w̃              (i) · e    d̃
                                            h=1                           , and p̃k (i) = (1 − η2 ) P
                                                                                                 + . (61)
                                                                                           k  ′
                                                                                 i′ ∈îk w̃ (i )    d˜
There are three differences between the global update in Eq. (60) and the local update in Eq. (61).
First, the global weight wk (i) is updated based on the weight wk−κ (i) that is κ episodes earlier,
while the local weight w̃k (i) is updated based on the weight wk−1 (i) that is 1 episodes earlier
and parameterized by an important different η2 . To make the algorithm more optimistic locally to
achieve larger reward, the value of η2 should be larger than the value of η1 . Indeed, Theorem 6
                                                                                                         d−1
below provides a sufficient condition on how η2 should be larger than η1 . Second, the factor d−1        ˜
does not appear in Eq. (61), because the local weight is updated for only the sub-states in the chosen
set îk . Third, since the local probability p̃k (i) is also only for the sub-states in îk , the denominator
in the first term on the right-hand side of the second equation in Eq. (61) is summing only over
i ∈ îk . Finally, in Step-5 and Step-6, OP-MLL takes an action that maximizes the Q-value function
following the optimism-in-face-of-uncertainty principle (please see Appendix F for details),
                                                                         q
   Qkh (ϕi (s), a) = min{rh (ϕi (s), a) + [Pkh Vh+1k
                                                        ](ϕi (s), a) + O( H 2 /Nhk (ϕi (s), a)), H}. (62)
Theorem 6. (Regret) For POMDPs √ with partial online state information and independent sub-
states, by choosing η1 = Õ(1/ K) and η2 = 16(d−1)   ˜
                                                     d−1
                                                          η1 , with probability 1 − δ, the regret
     OP-MLL
Reg         (K) of OP-MLL can be upper-bounded by
           s                           s                              !2        s         
                          3                                    2
          5   d|S̃|AK H |S̃|AK               d               H |S̃|AK              dK ln d 
   Õ H 2            ln          + H2           |S̃|2 A ln               + H2                .
               d˜ − 1       δ             d˜ − 1                  δ                 d˜ − 1
                                                                                                                           (63)

                                                                           30
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Theorem 6 shows that (i) the regret of OP-MLL depends polynomially on all problem parameters
A, H, |S̃|                                                         ˜
          √and d; (ii) the regret of OP-MLL decreases further as d increases; (iii) the dependency on
K is Õ( K), which cannot be further improved. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first such
near-optimal result for POMDPs without full OSI. The main difficulties in the proof of Theorem 6
mainly result from the effects between every two of the three learning layers. For example, in
the first and second layers, two different weight parameters η1 and η2 are used for adapting to the
change of the cumulative reward resulting from the third learning layer. Thus, in order to connect
the local regret in an episode to the global regret across episodes, we leverage the second-order and
third-order Taylor expansions of the function ex . Please see the other difficulties and more details
in Appendix F.

F.2     P ROOF OF T HEOREM 6

Proof. The main challenges in the proof of Theorem 6 result from the mutual effects among the
three learning layers. Specifically, first, note that in Algorithm 4, the first learning layer is affected
by the supporting sub-states chosen in the second learning layer, and the chosen action and V -value
function estimates in the third learning layer. For example, in the first learning layer, the weight
wk (i) at each episode is updated based on the reward received in the last episode, which further
depends on the supporting sub-states chosen in the second learning layer, and the chosen action and
V -value function estimates in the third learning layer. Second, note that the supporting sub-states
chosen in the second learning layer is affected by the leading sub-state chosen in the first learning
layer and the reward received from the third learning layer. Third, note that the chosen action and
V -value estimates in the third learning layer depends on the feedback collected from the determined
leading sub-state and the chosen supporting sub-states, which further depends on the first learning
layer and second learning layer.
To address these new challenges and capture such effects between every two learning layers, our
ideas are to first analyze each layer separately by assuming a fixed error from the other layer. Then,
based on the resulting bound, we characterize the further gap due to the bias from each layer. Finally,
by carefully combining these gap together using the first and second order properties of the reward,
we get the final regret upper-bound.

F.2.1    S TEP -1: C ONNECT THE S UB -R EGRET IN THE S ECOND L EARNING L AYER TO THE
         C HOICE IN THE F IRST L EARNING L AYER
In this step, we focus on capturing the effect from the first learning layer on the sub-regret in the
second learning layer. Specifically, differently from our proof for the simpler case with d˜ = 1
in Appendix E, our OP-MLL algorithm for the case with d˜ > 1 selects the supporting sub-states
for îk based on the choice of the leading sub-state determined in the first learning layer. Thus, we
need to first upper-bound the sub-regret here. First, for every κ episodes, we can lower-bound the
expected observed reward as in Lemma 3 below.
Lemma 3. For each episode k, we have that the expected observed reward can be lower-bounded
as follows,
                                               P k+1 
               
                      H
                                                       w̃   (i)
                 XX               ˜ − η2 )   i∈îk
                                  d(1                             H 2 η2
                          k
             E          rh,i  ≥          E ln  P k            − ˜ .               (64)
                   k h=1
                                      η2                 w̃ (i)          d
                     i∈î
                                                             i∈îk

        k
where rh,i  ≜ rh (ϕi (skh ), akh ), and the expectation is taken with respect to the randomness of the
algorithm, including the query policy and the action policy, and the state transition.. Note that
in Lemma 3, the term on the left-hand side of Eq. (64) is the expected reward observed by the agent.
Moreover, the first term on the right-hand side of Eq. (64) captures the evolution of the weights and
the second term is the gap. Please see Appendix F.3 for the proof of Lemma 3.
Note that the next difficulty to upper-bound the sub-regret from the second learning layer is that the
weight w̃k (i) is the local weight updated according the acceleration parameter η2 that we constructed
to let the algorithm learn the reward and sub-state transitions faster. However, to upper-bound the
sub-regret, we still need to convert it back to the global weight wk (i) that is directly related to the


                                                   31
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


whole episode horizon and the true reward. To resolve this difficulty, we connect the logarithmic
term on the right-hand side of Eq. (64), which contains the local weight w̃k (i), to the first and second
order moments of the reward as in Lemma 4 below.

Lemma 4. For each step h of each episode k, we have
    P k+1 
            w̃   (i)                  
                                            H             H
                                                                   !2      
                                                                                   H
                                                                                           
                                     2
    i∈îk                   X    η 2 
                                           X
                                                k
                                                         X
                                                              k          η 2
                                                                               X  X
                                                                                       k 
E ln  P k           ≥ E                   rh,i − E[     rh,i ]  + E           rh,i   ,
                     
             w̃ (i)               4 ˜2
                                    d                                    d˜
                                k         h=1
                                       i∈î              h=1                    k h=1               i∈î
             i∈îk
                                                                                                           (65)
where the expectation is taken with respect to the randomness of the algorithm, including the query
policy and the action policy, and the state transition.

Note that Lemma 4 provides a lower bound for the weight-evolution term on the right-hand side
of Eq. (64). Specifically, the first term on the right-hand side of Eq. (65) is related to the second
order moment of the observed reward. It is essentially the variance of the total observed reward in
episode k conditioned on the realization before episode k. This term is critical for further connecting
the reward to the global weights wk (i) updated using the parameter η1 for every κ episodes. The
second term on the right-hand side of Eq. (65) is related to the expectation of the observed reward.
This is another critical part that guarantees that the sub-regret can be related to the global weights,
since the expected observed reward with respect to the randomness of the sub-state set îk is equal to
the expected true reward. Please see Appendix F.4 for the proof of Lemma 4.

F.2.2       S TEP -2: C ONNECT THE S UB -R EGRET IN THE F IRST T WO L EARNING L AYERS TO THE
            E XPECTED R EWARD IN THE T HIRD L EARNING L AYER
Note that another challenge to upper-bound the regret is that the the set îk depends on the episode
k and changes randomly. To resolve this problem, we connect the local set îk to the global set
{1, ..., d} of sub-states by using the conclusion in Lemma 5 below.

Lemma 5. For each episode, we have
      
           H            H
                                 !2          
                                                  d
                                                     
                                                       H           H
                                                                           !2 
    X     X             X              ˜
                                       d−1     X      X           X
                k           k                             k           k
 E          rh,i − E[    rh,i ]  ≥       E          rh,i − E[   rh,i ]  , (66)
                                       d − 1     i=1
     k
     i∈î        h=1            h=1                                     h=1                   h=1

where the expectation is taken with respect to the randomness of the algorithm, including the query
policy and the action policy, and the state transition.

Note that Lemma 5 connects the expected variance of the observed reward (i.e., the left-hand side
of Eq. (66)) with respect to the sub-state set îk to the variance of the true reward (i.e., the right-hand
side of Eq. (66)). Please see Appendix F.5 for the proof of Lemma 5. Moreover, similar to the proof
of Lemma 3 in Appendix F.3, we can show Lemma 6 below.

Lemma 6. For each episodes, we have that
                                                                                           
                                                                    d
                                                                            uκ
                                                                    P
                                                                        w        (i)
                                       
                        uκ     H                                                              H 2 η
                        X      X              d(1 − η1 )   i=1
                                                         
                                                                                                     1
                                      rhk  ≥           E ln  d                             −      ,   (67)
                                                                                             
              E
                                                 η1         P (u−1)κ+1                        d
                     k=(u−1)κ+1 h=1                                 w                  (i)
                                                              i=1

where the expectation is taken with respect to the randomness of the algorithm, including the query
policy and the action policy, and the state transition.

Next, by connecting the variance of the true reward on the right-hand side of Eq. (66) to the global
weights wk (i), we connect the sub-regret in the first two learning layers to the expected reward in


                                                    32
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


the third learning layer. To this end, we prove that the evolution of the global weights satisfies the
following inequality,
                               
                 d
                       k+1
                 P
            w      (i) 
      i=1
  E ln  d
                         
                         
      P k              
                w (i)
            i=1
       
          d
                            
                               H             H
                                                      !2                 " d H        #
                          2
        X    (η 1 (d − 1))    X
                                   k
                                            X
                                                 k            η1 (d − 1)    XX
                                                                                     k
  ≤E                            rh,i − E[     rh,i ]    +            E          rh,i ,              (68)
         i=1
              (d(d˜ − 1))2    h=1           h=1
                                                              d(d˜ − 1)     i=1 h=1



This is because according to the update for the global weights wi (k) in Eq. (56), we have
                                                                              
                   d
                           k+1
                   P
                  w   (i)                   d                  η1 (d−1)
                                                                             H
                                                    wk (i)                      k 
                                                                             P
                                     X                                     rh,i
     E ln  i=1d          = E ln                          e  d(d̃−1)
                                                                     h=1
                                                                                    
                                                   d
                                                                                    
         P k                        i=1 P         k
                                                                                    
                   w (i)                              w (i)
              i=1                                 i=1
                                                            
                                           H                                          " d H        #
                  d              η1 (d−1) P
           X        wk (i)      d(d̃−1)
                                                k
                                             (rh,i     k
                                                   −E[rh,i ])   η (d − 1)
                                                                         1
                                                                                       XX
                                                                                                k
     = E ln                  e                               +                             rh,i .   (69)
                                        h=1
                                                               
                                                                                    E
            i=1 P  d
                          k
                                                                      d(d˜ − 1)      i=1 h=1
                         w (i)
                             i=1



Then, since ex ≤ 1 + x + x2 for x ≤ ln 2, the first term on the right-hand side of Eq. (69) can be
upper-bounded as follows,
                                                                   
                                                H
                         d            η1 (d−1) P
                    X     wk (i)     d(d̃−1)
                                                    k
                                                  (rh,i     k
                                                        −E[rh,i ])  
                 E ln             e
                                             h=1
                                                                   
                           d
                                                                    
                     i=1 P                                       
                             wk (i)
                                   i=1
                       "                 " d              H             H
                                                                                  !#
                                          X η1 (d − 1)    X             X
                                                               k            k
                 ≤ E ln 1 + E                                 rh,i − E[    rh,i ]
                                 i=1
                                       d(d˜ − 1)          h=1          h=1
                            
                               d
                                                    
                                                         H            H
                                                                                !2  !#
                                                  2
                              X    (η 1 (d  −  1))      X
                                                             k
                                                                      X
                                                                           k
                         + E                              rh,i − E[     rh,i ] 
                                    (d( d˜ − 1))2
                              i=1                       h=1          h=1
                    "         
                                   d
                                                       
                                                            H             H
                                                                                   !2  #
                                                     2
                                 X     (η 1 (d −  1))      X
                                                                 k
                                                                         X
                                                                               k
                 ≤ E ln 1 + E                               rh,i − E[     rh,i ]  .               (70)
                                        (d( d˜ − 1))2
                                  i=1                      h=1           h=1



Since ln(1 + x) ≤ x, we have
                                                                            
                                                              H
                                     d               η1 (d−1) P
                              X         wk (i)     d(d̃−1)
                                                                    k
                                                                 (rh,i     k
                                                                       −E[rh,i ])  
                           E ln                  e
                                                            h=1
                                                                                  
                                         d
                                                                                   
                               i=1 P                                            
                                            wk (i)
                                        i=1
                                
                                   d
                                                      
                                                             H              H
                                                                                        !2 
                                 X (η1 (d − 1))2           X               X
                                                                  k                k
                           ≤ E                                rh,i  − E[        rh,i ]  .           (71)
                                       (d( ˜ − 1))2
                                           d
                                  i=1                      h=1             h=1



                                                          33
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Thus, Eq. (68) is true because of Eq. (69) and Eq. (71).                   Finally, by combin-
ing Eq. (64), Lemma 4, Eq. (66) and Eq. (68), we have
                                                                
                                                    d
                                                          k+1
                                                   P
                                                        w     (i) 
                                      
                               H
                                                                   H 2 η2
                         XX                   
                                   k 
                                  rh,i   ≥ E ln  i=1d            −      .             (72)
                                              
                    E
                                               P k                 d˜
                        i∈îk h=1                        w (i)
                                                         i=1

Taking the expectation and the sum over all episodes for both sides of Eq. (72), we have
                                                                   
                                                        d
                                                             k+1
                                                       P
                                                           w     (i) 
                                      
                     K XX      H              K
                                                                      H 2 η2 K
                    X                       X       
                                   k 
                                  rh,i   ≥ E    ln  i=1d            −
                                                    
                E
                    k=1 i∈îk h=1
                                            
                                             k=1
                                                      P k                  d˜
                                                             w (i)
                                                         i=1
                                       
                               d
                                 wK (i) 
                              P
                                          H 2 η2 K
                       
                        i=1
                 = E ln  d              −          ,                                          (73)
                        P 1                   d˜
                                  w (i)
                               i=1

where the last step is because of the telescoping sum. Finally, combining Eq. (73) with the updates
of the global weights in Eq. (56), we have
                      "K H        #      "K d H           #
                        XX
                                k
                                           XXX
                                                       k        H 2 η2 K   d ln d
                   E           rh − E                rh,d ≤              +        .            (74)
                                                                    ˜
                                                                    d        η1
                       k=1 h=1            k=1 i=1  h=1


F.2.3    S TEP -3: C ONNECT THE E XPECTED R EWARD IN THE T HIRD L EARNING L AYER TO THE
         T RUE O PTIMAL R EWARD
Note that we now connect the expected observed reward to the sub-regret in the first two learning
layers. However, the new difficulty here is that the reward is not the true optimal reward that we
can obtain in each episode. This is because of the sub-optimality in the third learning layer for
estimating the V -value function.
Hence, in this step, we address the problem that we mentioned above. Let us focus on the first term
on the left-hand side of Eq. (74). We have
     "K H          #     "K H         #    "K H               #     "K           H
                                                                                        #
       XX                 XX                X X                      X          X
                 ∗                  k                 ∗    k                k         k
   E            rh − E             rh = E       (    rh − Vh ) + E       (Vh −      rh ) . (75)
        k=1 h=1           k=1 h=1             k=1 h=1                    k=1        h=1

Below, we provide an important lemma, i.e., Lemma 7, that is proved to be useful soon later.
Lemma 7. For any δ ∈ (0, 1), with probability at least 1 − δ, we have
                                     " H             #
                                       X
                                              ∗
                                   E        rh′ ,i∗ ′ ≤ Vhk .                                     (76)
                                                     h
                                           h′ =h


Please see Appendix F.6 for the proof of Lemma 7. Then, according to Lemma 7, we have
                  "K H             #    "K H       #     "K           H
                                                                            #
                   XX                     XX              X          X
                              ∗                  k               k       k
                E            rh,i∗h − E         rh ≤ E        (Vh −     rh ) .                    (77)
                     k=1 h=1               k=1 h=1             k=1        h=1

Thus, we can focus on upper-bounding the difference between the estimated expected reward, i.e.,
Vhk , and the expected reward after taking the action akh . Note that in Lemma 7, we have related the
expected reward used in the first two learning layers to the V -value estimate in the third learning
                                                                  PH
layer of Algorithm 4. After relating the expected reward E[ h′ =h rh∗ ′ ,i∗ ′ ] used in the first two
                                                                               h
learning layers to the V-value estimate Vhk in the third learning layer, we can focus on the difference
between the estimated V-value Vhk and the true reward rh,i   k
                                                               k under the randomness of the queries
                                                               h


                                                   34
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


on the sub-states ikh . Then, conditioned on the σ-algebra generated by the observation history, such
                                                                                   k
                                                                                          PH
a difference in each episode k can be decomposed into the sub-differences Vh,i       − E[ h′ =h rhk′ ,i ]
resulting from each sub-state i under the randomness of observing sub-state i. The corresponding
             k
                       PH
sub-regret Vh,i − E[ h′ =h rhk′ ,i ] due to each sub-state i is equivalent to the sub-regret Vhk (skh ) −
   k
Vhπ (skh ) in the tabular MDP case studied in Azar et al. (2017).
Proposition 4. (Lemma 14 in Azar et al. (2017)): With probability 1 − δ, we have
 K h                                                                                   2 !
                                     √
                                                  2                           2
X
      k k        πk k
                       i
                                 3/2              H SAK            2 2         H SAK
    V1 (s1 ) − V1 (s1 ) ≤ O H           SAK ln                + H S A ln                   .
                                                      δ                          δ
k=1
                                                                                       (78)
                                                          PK     k
                                                                         PH
Thus, the sum of the sub-regret over all episodes k, i.e., k=1 {Vh,i − E[ h′ =h rhk′ ,i ]}, can be
upper-bounded by applying Proposition 3. Thus, we have that,
    "K          H
                        #
      X        X
            k        k
  E      (Vh −      rh )
        k=1        h=1
                  s                                !          s                                     !!2 
                         d             H 2 |S̃|AK                    d                  H 2 |S̃|AK
      ≤ O H 3/2           |S̃|AK ln                    + H2           |S̃|2 A ln                       .
                       ˜
                       d−1                   δ                     ˜
                                                                   d−1                        δ
                                                                                                         (79)

F.2.4    S TEP -4: U PPER -B OUND THE F INAL R EGRET
By connecting the sub-regret in the second learning layer to the choice in the first learning layer in
step-1, connecting the sub-regret in the first two learning layers to the expected reward in the third
learning layer in step-2, and connecting the expected reward in the third learning layer to the true
optimal reward in step-3, we have finally upper-bounded the sub-regrets in all three layers due to the
errors from the other layers. Hence, we have that, with probability 1 − δ, the regret of OP-MLL is
upper-bounded as follows,
Reg OP-MLL (K)/H
                                                                   !                                 !!2 
          2                                               2                                  2
        H   η   K      d ln d                         H     |                            H     |
                                       q
              2                                               S̃|AK                             S̃|AK
≤ O                +         + dH 3/2 |S̃|AK ln                      + dH 2 |S̃|2 A ln                   
            d˜           η1                                    δ                                 δ
      s                       s                                  !2       s                         
                                                     2                                     2
              dK    ln d            d              H   |S̃|AK            3   d| S̃|AK    H   |S̃|AK
= O H                   + H2           |S̃|2 A ln                   +H2              ln             .
                d˜ − 1           d˜ − 1                  δ                     d˜ − 1          δ
                                                                                                         (80)



F.3     P ROOF OF L EMMA 3

Proof. First, similar to the proof of Lemma 1 in Appendix E.3, we can show that
                                                   P                  η2 PH   k 
                                                           w̃k (i) · e d̃ h=1 rh,i
                          P k+1 
                                 w̃   (i)
                   1      i∈îk             1      i∈îk                         
                      ln  P k            =    ln 
                                                               P k                
                   η2             w̃ (i)     η2                     w̃ (i)        
                              i∈îk                                 i∈îk
                                                        P                   η2 PH    k     
                                                               w̃k (i) · e d̃    h=1 rh,i

                                                1     i∈îk                                
                                            ≤     ln               P                       .           (81)
                                                η2                         w̃k (i)         
                                                                    i∈îk



                                                    35
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Note that differently from that in the proof of Lemma 1 in Appendix E.3, in Eq. (81) we focus on
i ∈ îk . Next, since ex ≤ 1 + x + (e − 2)x2 for all x ≤ 1, according to the update of the probability
pi (k) in Eq. (2), we have

                         w̃k+1 (i)
             P                        
       1        i∈îk
          ln  P k
                      
       η2       w̃ (i)
                       
                     i∈îk
                   
                                              H                                         H
                                                                                                                 !2 
          1              η2   X             X             (e − 2)η22 X k               X
        ≤    ln 1 +                 pk (i)       k
                                                 rh,i  +                      p (i)         k
                                                                                           rh,i                    
          η2         ˜ − η2 )
                     d(1                                  ˜2 (1 − η2 )
                                                          d
                              i∈îk         h=1                         i∈îk          h=1
                                                                                     2
                                                                                  !   
                                      H                                   H
          1              η2   XX
                                            k      (e − 2)η22 X X k
        ≤    ln 1 +                      rh,i  +                              rh,i 
          η2         ˜ − η2 )
                     d(1                          d˜2 (1 − η2 ) k h=1
                              i∈î k h=1                         i∈î
                                                                                  
                                      H                         2        H
          1              η2
                              X      X
                                            k     H(e    −  2)η 1
                                                                  X     X
                                                                               k 
        ≤    ln 1 +                      rh,i  +                             rh,i   .                                  (82)
          η2         ˜ − η2 )
                     d(1                           d˜2 (1 − η2 )
                                   k h=1       i∈î                   k h=1          i∈î


Then, since ln(1 + x) ≤ x for all x, we have

                             w̃k+1 (i)
                   P                      
                                                                         H                               H
           1      i∈îk               1     XX
                                                 k     H(e − 2)η2 X X k
              ln  P k          ≤ ˜            rh,i +                 rh,i .                                           (83)
                                
           η2            w̃ (i)    d(1 − η2 ) k        d˜2 (1 − η2 )
                                                                   i∈î h=1
                                                                     k                           i∈î h=1
                        i∈îk


Thus, we have

                                                                   w̃k+1 (i)
                                                     P                                 
            H                                                                          H
           XX                d(1 −  η2 )         i∈ îk             H(e −  2)η 2
                                                                                    XX
                     rhk  ≥             E ln  P k            −
                                                                                          k 
                                                                                         rh,i
                                                             
      E                                                                         E
                                 η2                     w̃ (i)          d˜
         i∈îk h=1                                                                   k                  i∈î h=1
                                                               i∈îk

                                                    w̃k+1 (i)
                                                       P                     
                               d(1 − η2 )   i∈îk            H 2 (e − 2)η2
                             ≥           E ln  P k           −             .                                        (84)
                                  η2                 w̃ (i)             d˜
                                                               i∈îk


F.4   P ROOF OF L EMMA 4

Proof. First, according to the update for the local weight in Eq. (58), we have

                                 w̃k+1 (i)
                      P                      
                i∈îk
            E ln  P
                                               
                                     w̃k (i)
                                               
                             i∈îk
                                            
                                       H
                             k      η2 P k
                       X   w̃ (i)        rh,i 
             = E ln 
                        P k e d̃ h=1
                             w̃ (i)
                                              
                        k       i∈î
                                       i∈îk
                                                                                                        
                                                             H
                                                       η2                                        H
                   X Pw̃k (i)
                                                             P    k       k
                                                                (rh,i −E[rh,i ])    η2       XX
                                                        d̃                                               k 
             = E ln             e                          h=1
                                                                                    + ˜ E             rh,i .          (85)
                          w̃k (i)                                                       d
                       k        i∈î                                                        i∈îk h=1
                                       i∈îk



                                                                   36
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Since ex ≥ 1 + x + 21 x2 , the first term on the right-hand side of Eq. (85) can be lower-bounded as
follows,
                                                                  
                                                 H
                                   k        η2 P     k       k
                   X Pw̃ (i)                     (rh,i −E[rh,i ]) 
               E ln                 k
                                           e d̃ h=1
                                    w̃ (i)
                                                                    
                            k    i∈î
                                          i∈îk
                             "                                                                          !
                                                      X η2            H
                                                                      X                    H
                                                                                           X
                                                       k              k
                      ≥ E ln 1 + E                   rh,i  − E[     rh,i ] 
                                             d˜
                                      i∈îk       h=1            h=1
                                 
                                    d
                                               
                                                    H              H
                                                                            !2  !#
                                           2
                                   X     η 2 
                                                   X
                                                        k
                                                                  X
                                                                       k
                              + E                     rh,i − E[      rh,i ] 
                                        2 d˜2
                                   i=1             h=1            h=1
                         "                      
                                                       H              H
                                                                                !2  #
                                      X η2            X              X
                                               2           k               k
                      ≥ E ln 1 + E                       rh,i − E[      rh,i ]  .                                                          (86)
                                             2 ˜2
                                               d
                                          k           h=1
                                                      i∈î           h=1

Since ln(1 + x) ≥ x2 for all x ∈ [0, 1], we have
                                                                           
                                                          H
                                         (u−1)κ+1      η2 P   k       k
                            X w̃ P              (i) d̃ h=1(rh,i −E[rh,i ]) 
                        E ln                 k
                                                     e
                                             w̃ (i)
                                                                             
                                     k         i∈î
                                                             i∈îk
                                                             
                                                                     H                    H
                                                                                                         !2 
                                              X η2                   X                    X
                                                        2                    k                   k
                                    ≥ E                                   rh,i − E[           rh,i ]      .                                 (87)
                                                   k
                                                     4d˜2            h=1                 h=1
                                            i∈î


F.5    P ROOF OF L EMMA 5

Proof. We start from considering the right-hand side of Lemma 5. First, we have
     
       d
          
                H            H
                                      !2 
       X       X             X
                    k            k
   E             rh,i − E[    rh,i ] 
         i=1        h=1                 h=1
           
               H
                             !2               H
                                                               !2
               X                               X
                      k          −                    k
      = E           rh,i                 E[          rh,i ]
               h=1                            h=1
                                     
                                            H
                                                             !2                              "H                      H
                                                                                                                                        #
                                            X                                                   X                      X
                                                     k             − Ei∈{1,...,d}                  k                     k
      = Ei∈{1,...,d} E{i′ ̸=i}                    rh,i′                                           rh,i · E{i′ ̸=i} [    rh,i′]            .   (88)
                                            h=1                                                 h=1                   h=1

By rearranging the terms in Eq. (88), we have
            
               d
                  
                       H             H
                                              !2 
              X       X             X
                            k            k
          E             rh,i − E[     rh,i ] 
                   i=1        h=1                     h=1
                                                     
                                                              H
                                                                            !2          H
                                                                                                       !2 
                   1                                          X
                                                                      k
                                                                                        X
                                                                                                k
               =     Ei∈{1,...,d} E{i′ ̸=i}                        rh,i        +             rh,i′
                                                                                                          
                   2
                                                              h=1                       h=1
                                                                             "             "     H
                                                                                                                !   H
                                                                                                                                  !##
                                                                                                 X                  X
                                                                                                          k                k
                                                      + Ei∈{1,...,d} E{i′ ̸=i}                           rh,i             rh,i′

                                                                                                 h=1                h=1
                                                     
                                                              H                  H
                                                                                               !2 
                   1                                          X
                                                                      k
                                                                                 X
                                                                                        k
               =     Ei∈{1,...,d} E{i′ ̸=i}                        rh,i −            rh,i′
                                                                                                  .                                           (89)
                   2
                                                              h=1                h=1



                                                                            37
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Then, we consider all possible random choice of the sub-states sets îk , i.e., taking another expecta-
tion with respect to the randomness of îk . According to the law of total expectation, we have
                   
                      d
                         
                              H              H
                                                     !2 
                     X       X             X
                                 k              k
                E             rh,i − E[      rh,i ] 
                      i=1         h=1                     h=1
                                                                
                                                                         H                   H
                                                                                                            !2       
                      1                                                  X
                                                                                     k
                                                                                             X
                                                                                                    k          îk  .
                  =     E k Ei∈{1,...,d}  E{i′ ̸=i}                              rh,i −         rh,i ′                      (90)
                      2 î
                                                                         h=1                 h=1

According to the updates of weights and probabilities in Eq. (58), we can see that the local prob-
                                                                                           1
ability p̃i (k) can be related to the global probabilities. That is, p̃i (k) = pi (k) · d−1    . Thus,
                                                                                        (d̃−1)
from Eq. (90), we have
                  
                    d
                       
                            H            H
                                                  !2 
                   X       X             X
                                k            k
                E            rh,i − E[    rh,i ] 
                  i=1        h=1                      h=1

                      d−1
                                                                       
                                                                                H               H
                                                                                                                !2       
                    ˜
                   d−1
                                                                                X
                                                                                        k
                                                                                                X
                                                                                                         k
              ≤          Eîk Ei∈{1,...,d}  E{i′ ̸=i}                               rh,i −           rh,i′
                                                                                                                     îk 
                  2 d−2
                     ˜
                    d−2                                                         h=1             h=1
                             
                             H
                                         
                                         H
                                                                                     !2 
                  d − 1 X  X k         X
                                            k
              =          E     rh,i − E[   rh,i ]                                        .                                   (91)
                  d˜ − 1                       h=1                  h=1
                                 i∈îk


F.6     P ROOF OF L EMMA 7

Proof. The proof of Lemma 7 follows the same line of the proof for Lemma 2 and mainly utilizes a
set of concentration inequalities Azar et al. (2017). Specifically, we prove Lemma 7 by mathematical
induction.
Base case: when h = H, Eq. (76) trivially holds, since according to the definition of VHk , we have
    ∗
E [rH ] ≤ VHk . Note that the reward rh∗ ′ = rh′ (ϕi∗h′ (sh′ ), ah′ ) is a function of the query î∗h′ .
                                       "              #
                                              H
                                                   ∗             k
                                             P
Induction: we hypothesize that E                  rh′ ≤ Vh+1          . Then, we focus on proving that
                                          h′ =h+1
    H
    P ∗
E        rh′ ≤ Vhk . Note that, we have
      h′ =h
                             " H                  #
                              X
                  Vhk − E                 rh∗ ′       ≥ Pk,∗ k         ∗ k           k
                                                         h Vh+1 (s) − Ph Vh+1 (s) + bh+1 (s, a),                               (92)
                                  h′ =h

where bkh+1 (s, a) is the bonus term in Eq. (62). By adding and subtracting some middle terms, we
have that
            " H        #
              X                                        h            i
     k
                    rh′ ≥ Pk,∗
                     ∗                         ∗
                                                  (s) + Pk,∗      ∗    ∗
                                  k                                              k
   Vh − E                    h    Vh+1 (s) − Vh+1          h − Ph Vh+1 (s) + bh+1 (s, a).    (93)
              h′ =h
                                                          "                     #
                                                                H
                                                                        rh∗ ′          k
                                                                P
According to induction hypothesis that E                                            ≤ Vh+1 , we have
                                                              h′ =h+1
                                   " H                #
                                    X                 h        i
                       Vhk − E                 rh∗ ′ ≥ Pk,∗  ∗   ∗         k
                                                        h − Ph Vh+1 (s) + bh+1 (s, a).                                         (94)
                                       h′ =h



                                                                    38
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Finally, according to the empirical Bernstein’s inequality, we have that with probability 1 − δ,
                                h            i
                                  P∗h − Pk,∗
                                         h
                                                ∗
                                               Vh+1 (s) ≤ bkh+1 (s, a).                          (95)
                                                 H
                                                 P ∗
Combining Eq. (94) and Eq. (95), we have E           rh′ ≤ Vhk .
                                                h′ =h


G     P ROOF OF T HEOREM 3
In this section, we prove the regret upper-bound in Theorem 3 of our OMLE-POSI algorithm,
i.e., Algorithm 2. Recall that partial online state information (OSI) ϕîk affects both the maxi-
                                                                             1:H
mum likelihood estimation (MLE) and joint query and action policy optimization. Thus, the main
difficulty in the proof of Theorem 3 is how to capture such new effects. Indeed, directly applying
existing observable operator method (OOM) Jaeger (2000); Liu et al. (2022) will result in a regret
                             ˜ which is a critical benefit that we should obtain from using partial OSI.
that does not decrease with d,
To resolve this issue, we develop a new sub-matrix decomposition representation for the cumulative
partial OSI and partial noisy observations, which non-trivially generalizes OOM to the case with
both partial feedback and noisy observations.
In the following, we first provide a proof sketch in Appendix G.1, where we highlight the new
difficulties and our new analytical ideas. Then, we provide a complete proof in Appendix G.4.

G.1   S KETCH OF THE PROOF OF T HEOREM 3

In this subsection, we first provide the proof sketch of Theorem 3, where we highlight the new
difficulties and our new analytical ideas. Please see Appendix G.4 for the complete proof.

Proof. First, the regret can be represented as follows,
                                 K h                i       K          K h         i
                                 X              k           X         X          k
                                       V∗−Vπ
                                                                ∗
          Reg OMLE-POSI (K) =                           =      V −Vk +     Vk −Vπ .                (96)
                                 k=1                        k=1                   k=1


According to Lemma 8 below, from Eq. (96), we have that with probability 1 − δ,
                                          K h                       i       K h        i
                                          X                     k           X        k
                    Reg OMLE-POSI (K) =         V∗−Vπ                   ≤      Vk −Vπ .            (97)
                                          k=1                               k=1

                                                 ˜
Lemma 8. By choosing β = O (|S̃|2d A + |S̃|d−d O) ln(|S̃|d AOHK) + ln K    δ , with probability at
least 1 − δ, we have
                                             n                     o
                                  P, Õ, ∆1 ∈      Pk , Õk , ∆k1    ,                       (98)

where the big-O notation hides the constant and logarithmic terms including dd˜ .



Lemma 8 shows an important property of the maximum likelihood estimation used in our OMLE-
POSI algorithm. That is, by utilizing partial OSI, with high probability, the true transition kernel
and partial emission model must be characterized by the set of the estimated transition kernels and
the partial emission models. Please see Appendix G.2 for the proof of Lemma 8.
Since the expected total reward in each episode is at most H, from Eq. (97), we have
                                           K X
                                           X                k                     k
                 Reg OMLE-POSI (K) ≤ H                  PPπk ,Ōî,k ,∆k (Γ) − PP,
                                                                                π
                                                                                  Ōî ,∆
                                                                                          (Γ) .    (99)
                                                                        1               1
                                           k=1 Γ

Next, based on the observable operator method (OOM) in Jaeger (2000); Liu et al. (2022); Chen
et al. (2022a); Foster et al. (2021), we develop a new trajectory representation using sub-matrix
decomposition. This new development is for addressing the aforementioned problem caused by


                                                    39
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                      d
using partial OSI in our case. Specifically, we use Ōî ∈ RO×|S̃| to denote the augmented partial
emission model and use ∆1 ∈ RS to denote the initialization model. We note that the augmented
partial emission matrix Ōî is generated based on the partial emission matrix õî and depends on the
                         ˜
query î. That is, |S̃|d−d columns of Ōî correspond to the partial noisy observations õ for the non-
                                            ˜
queried sub-states {ϕi (s)}{i∈/ î} and |S̃|d columns are set to 0 because the corresponding sub-states
do not generate partial noisy observation. Then, the observable operator corresponding to a specific
θ in our setting can be represented as follows,


                  bθ0 (î1 ) = Ōî11 ,θ ∆θ1 ∈ RO ,
                                                   î       ,θ
                  Bhθ (õ, a, îh , îh+1 ) = Ōh+1
                                                 h+1
                                                     Pθh,a diag(Ōîhh ,θ (õ|·))(Ōîhh ,θ )† ∈ RO×O ,                     (100)



where Pθh,a ∈ RS×S is the transition matrix for action a, Ōhîh ,θ (õ|·) is the õ-th row of the augmented
partial emission matrix Ōî,θ         îh ,θ
                          h and diag(Ōh (õ|·)) is the diagonal matrix with diagonal entries equal
to Ōîhh ,θ (õ|·). Please note that different from the standard observable operator, due to the partial
OSI in our problem, Bhθ (õ, a, îh , îh+1 ) is now a function of two consecutive queries (îh , îh+1 ) of
the agent. Let us focus on the probability difference on the right-hand side of Eq. (99). Specifically,
the probability difference can be represented by the difference between the product of conditional
(conditioned on the past feedback) probability of feedback at each step under the observed trajectory
and the true case, i.e.,


     K X
     X              k                          k
                 PPπk ,Ōî,k ,∆k (Γ) − PP,
                                         π
                                           Ōî ,∆
                                                   (Γ)
                                     1                  1
     k=1 Γ
          K X
                               θk                                    k                          k
          X
      =                 eTõH BH  (õH , aH , îH , îH+1 ) · · · B1θ (õ1 , a1 , î1 , î2 )bθ0 (î1 )
          k=1 Γ

                                     θ
                            − eTõh BH (õH , aH , îH , îH+1 ) · · · B1θ (õ1 , a1 , î1 , î2 )bθ0 (î1 ) · π k (Γ)

          K X
          X                      k                                  k                      k
                         θ
      =                 BH (õH , aH , îH , îH+1 ) · · · B1θ (õ1 , a1 , î1 , î2 )bθ0 (î1 )
          k=1 Γ

                               θ
                            − BH (õH , aH , îH , îH+1 ) · · · B1θ (õ1 , a1 , î1 , î2 )bθ0 (î1 )         · π k (Γ).   (101)
                                                                                                           1


After decomposing the probability representations as in Eq. (101), according to the triangle inequal-
ity and the partial-revealing condition, we have


K X
X            k                           k
          PPπk ,Ōî,k ,∆k (Γ) − PP,
                                  π
                                    Ōî ,∆
                                            (Γ)
                        1                      1
k=1 Γ
          ˜
             " K H
  |S̃|(d−d)/2 X X X   θk
≤                        Bj (õj , aj , îj , îj+1 ) − Bjθ (õj , aj , îj , îj+1 ) · bθj−1 (Γj−1 ) · π k (Γj )
        α                                                                                            1
              k=1 j=1 Γj
                                  #
                             k
                  + bθ0 (î1 ) − bθ0 (î1 )             .                                                                   (102)
                                                   1



                                                                 40
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


For the first term on the right-hand side of Eq. (102), we have
K−1
XX               K
                Bjθ (õj , aj , îj , îj+1 ) − Bjθ (õj , aj , îj , îj+1 ) · bθj−1 (Γj−1 )                 · π k (Γj )
                                                                                                          1
 k=1 Γj
     K−1                                           K
     XX              K
 ≤                Bjθ (õj , aj , îj , îj+1 ) · bθj−1 (Γj−1 ) − bθj−1 (Γj−1 )                        · π k (Γj )
                                                                                                   1
      k=1 Γj
              K−1
              XX            K                                 K
          +             Bjθ (õj , aj , îj , îj+1 )bθj−1 (Γj−1 ) − Bjθ (õj , aj , îj , îj+1 )bθj−1 (Γj−1 )                        · π k (Γj ).
                                                                                                                                   1
              k=1 Γj
                                                                                                                                             (103)

Next, we can upper-bound the partial observation trajectory difference, i.e., the two terms on the
right-hand side of Eq. (103), using the conclusion in Lemma 9 below.
Lemma 9. For each episode k, we have
                                                                  
                        h2                                                                                              d−d̃
 X                      Y      k
                             îh+1 θ k        îk
                                                            î k       îk     k                                     |S̃| 2            îk    k
    π k (Γkh1 :h2 ) ·     Ōj+1  Pj,a diag(Ōjj (õj |·)(Ōjj )† ) Ōhh11 ∆θh1                                ≤                  Ōhh11 ∆θh1        .
                                                                                                                         α                        1
Γk
 h1 :h2
                              j=h1
                                                                                                            1
                                                                                                                                             (104)

Lemma 9 shows that the conditional probability of receiving a certain trajectory about the partial OSI
and noisy observations, i.e., the left-hand side of Lemma 9, depends on the size of the state space
     d−d̃                                                                                                     îk      k
|S̃| 2 , partial-revealing parameter α and the initial probability measure Ōhh11 ∆θh1                                          , i.e., the terms
                                                                                                                            1
on the right-hand side of Lemma 9. We note that in Eq. (102) and Eq. (104), the multiplicative factor
                  ˜
depends on |S̃|d−d , which is size of the space of the sub-states that cannot be queried by the agent
at each step. Please see Appendix G.3 for the proof of Lemma 9. Applying Lemma 9 to Eq. (103),
we have
         K−1
          XX   K
                     Bjθ (õj , aj , îj , îj+1 ) − Bjθ (õj , aj , îj , îj+1 ) · bθj−1 (Γj−1 ) · π k (Γj )
                                                                                                                       1
              k=1 Γj
                                                    ˜
                                          |S̃|(d−d)/2 p
                                = O(                   Kβ).                                                                                  (105)
                                                α
Finally, by combining Eq. (96)-Eq. (105) and the value of β, with probability 1 − δ, we can upper-
bound the regret of OMLE-POSI as follows,
                                   q
                                                                        ˜
       Reg OM LE−P OSI (K) ≤ O        (|S̃|2d A + |S̃|d−d˜O)K · |S̃|2(d−d) H 4 AO/α2 .       (106)


G.2         P ROOF OF L EMMA 8

Proof. This lemma mainly follows the standard properties of MLE and the proof of Proposition 13
in Liu et al. (2022). The main difference here is due to the queried partial state information and
partial emission model considered in our setting. Specifically, first, according to Eq. (14) there (i.e.,
∥Pπθ − Pπθ̄ ∥1 ≤ T1 ), we have
                                            τ                                    τ
                              K         P πτ τ (Γτ )              K−1        P πτ τ (Γτ )
                              P          P ,Õ                     P          P ,Õ
                                   ln       τ                           ln       τ
                                        P π∗ ∗ (Γτ )                         P π∗ ∗ (Γτ )         τ
                         E[eτ =1         P ,Õ          ] = E[e τ =1          P ,Õ         · ∥PPπτ ,Õτ (ΓK )∥1 ]
                                                   τ
                                   K−1         P πτ τ (Γτ )
                                    P           P ,Õ
                                          ln

                                                   τ
                                               P π∗ ∗ (Γτ )        1
                          ≤ E[e    τ =1         P ,Õ         · 1+    ].                                                                     (107)
                                                                   K


                                                                      41
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


By applying mathematical induction, we have that the right-hand-side of Eq. (107) is upper-bounded
by (1 + 1/K)K , which is less than or equal to e. Thus, Eq. (107) further yields
                                                                                        τ
                                                                         K          P πτ τ (Γτ )
                                                                         P           P ,Õ
                                                                               ln       τ
                                                                                    P π∗ ∗ (Γτ )
                                                                   E[eτ =1           P ,Õ          ] ≤ e.                   (108)

Then, according to Markov’s inequality, we have that
                                          τ
                                X PPπτ ,Õτ (Γτ )
                              (K                               )
                                                             1
                          Pr         ln πτ             > log( ) ≤ eδ.                                                        (109)
                                τ =1
                                        PP∗ ,Õ∗ (Γτ )       δ

Then, by taking the union bound over the state-transition space P, partial emission space Õ and
episodes τ , we have that for any δ ∈ (0, 1), there exists c > 0, s.t.,
                             τ
                         PPπk ,Õk (Γτ )
        (         K                                                                          )
                 X
                                              2d           ˜
                                                         d−d   d                           K
    P r max           ln    π τ (Γτ ) ≥ c(|S̃| A + |S̃|      O ˜ ) ln(|S̃|d AOHK) + ln          ≤ δ,
          P,Õ,k τ =1     PP,  Õ
                                                               d                           δ
                                                                                                  (110)
                                         ˜
where the quantity c(|S̃|2d A + |S̃|d−d O dd˜ ) ln(|S̃|d AOHK) + ln K

                                                                        δ follows because the dimension
of the state-transition space is |S̃|2d A, the dimension of the partial emission model space (i.e., Õ :
                              ˜
S̃ × Õ → [0, 1]) is |S̃|d−d O, the structure of the partial emission model space is independent of the
queried sub-states, and the total number of episodes is K. Finally, Lemma 8 follows because β is an
upper-bound of this quantity.



G.3         P ROOF OF L EMMA 9

Note that this lemma is one of the key parts where we can leverage partial OSI to improve the regret
to be decreasing exponentially as d˜ increases.

Proof. First, we have
                                                                   
                          h2
 X                        Y    î k     k        î k
                                                              îk       îk     k
      π k (Γkh1 :h2 ) ·     Ōj+1   Pj,a diag(Ōj (õj |·)(Ōj )† ) Ōhh11 ∆θh1
                                  h+1 θ             j           j


Γk
 h :h
                                           j=h1
                                                                                                                     1
    1   2
                                                                                                                −1
                                                  h2                                        h2           h2
        X                                         Yîk     k        î k
                                                                                  îk       Y     î k   Y     îk     îk    k
=                π k (Γkh1 :h2 ) ·              Ōj+1  Pj,a diag(Ōjj (õj |·)(Ōjj )† )
                                                     h+1 θ
                                                                                                Ōjj        Ōjj  Ōhh11 ∆θh1          .
    Γk
     h :h
                                            j=h1                                           j=h1         j=h1
        1    2                                                                                                                       1
                                                                                                                             (111)

Due to the partial online state information for the chosen d˜ sub-states, the row space of partial-OSI
representation product in Eq. (111) belongs to the column space of the partial-revealing matrix.
Thus, by canceling out some middle terms on the right-hand side of Eq. (111), we have
                                                                                 
                                       h2
             X                         Y      k
                                            îh+1 θ k        î k
                                                                           î k       îk     k
                   π k (Γkh1 :h2 ) ·     Ōj+1  Pj,a diag(Ōjj (õj |·)(Ōjj )† ) Ōhh11 ∆θh1
                    Γk
                     h :h
                                                               j=h1
                                                                                                                         1
                         1    2
                                                                                     −1
                                                                       h2
                              X                                        Y        îk           îk       k
                     ≤                   π k (Γkh1 :h2 ) ·                   Ōjj         Ōhh11 ∆θh1
                         Γk
                          h :h
                                                                       j=h1
                               1     2                                                                       1
                                   d−d̃
                             |S̃|   2            îk       k
                     ≤                      Ō   h1
                                                   h1
                                                        ∆θh1       .                                                         (112)
                                 α                             1


                                                                                      42
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


G.4     T HE COMPLETE PROOF OF T HEOREM 3

In previous subsections, we have introduced the proof sketch for Theorem 3, where we highlighted
the new difficulties and our new analytical ideas in the proof. In this subsection, we provide the
complete proof of Theorem 3, where we repeat some details in Liu et al. (2022) for completeness.
To begin with, we state Theorem 3 more formally with more details.
Theorem 7. (Regret) For POMDPs with the partial online state information and partially revealing
condition, with probability 1 − δ for any δ ∈ (0, 1], the regret of OMLE-POSI can be upper-bounded
as follows,
                                                           q
                                                ˜
             Reg OMLE-POSI (K) ≤ Õ |S̃|2(d−d) OAH 4 K(|S̃|2d A + |S̃|d−d˜O)/α2               (113)

Proof. The proof of Theorem 3 can be divided into four important steps as follows.
Step 1 (Observable operator decomposition):
Recall that in Class 2, we use Γkh ≜ {îk1 , ϕîk (sk1 ), õk1 , ak1 , ..., îkh−1 , ϕîk    (skh−1 ), õkh−1 , akh−1 } to de-
                                                         1                             h−1

note the feedback (including both the partial OSI Φkh and partial noisy observations õk1:h−1 ). For
simplicity, similar to that in Algorithm 2, we use θ ≜ (P, Ōî , ∆1 ) to denote the joint problem
                                                                                                         d
model, where we use P ∈ RS×S×A to denote the POMDP transition matrix, use Ōî ∈ RO×|S̃|
                                                                    S
to denote augmented partial emission matrix, and use ∆1 ∈ R to denote the initialization matrix.
We note that the augmented partial emission matrix Ōî is generated based on the partial emission
                                                        ˜
matrix õî and depends on the query î. That is, |S̃|d−d columns of Ōî correspond to the partial noisy
                                                                        ˜
observations õ for the non-queried sub-states {ϕi (s)}{i∈/ î} and |S̃|d columns are set to 0 because the
corresponding sub-states do not generate partial noisy observation. Then, the observable operator
corresponding to a specific θ in our setting can be represented as follows,
                   bθ0 (î1 ) = Ōî11 ,θ ∆θ1 ∈ RO ,
                                                 î     ,θ
                   Bhθ (õ, a, îh , îh+1 ) = Ōh+1
                                                  h+1
                                                      Pθh,a diag(Ōîhh ,θ (õ|·))(Ōhîh ,θ )† ∈ RO×O ,               (114)
where Pθh,a ∈ RS×S is the transition matrix for action a, Ōîhh ,θ (õ|·) is the õ-th row of the augmented
partial emission matrix Ōî,θ       îh ,θ
                          h , diag(Ōh (õ|·)) is the diagonal matrix with diagonal entries equal to
Ōîhh ,θ (õ|·), and (·)† represents the Moore-Penrose inverse of a matrix. Please note that different
from the standard observable operator, due to the partial OSI in our problem, Bhθ (õ, a, îh , îh+1 )
is now a function of two consecutive queries (îh , îh+1 ) of the agent. Moreover, we use θk ≜
(Pk , Ōî,k , ∆k1 ) to denote the joint POMDP transition model, augmented partial emission model and
initialization model of Algorithm 2 in the k-th episode. Given the POMDP parameters, we can
represent the probability of observing a specific trajectory (of the queries, partial OSI and partial
noisy observation) based on the observable operator Bhθ (õ, a, îh , îh+1 ). Specifically, we have that

             Pθπ (Γh ) = π(Γh ) × eTõh Bh−1
                                          θ
                                             (õ, a, îh−1 , îh ) · · · B1θ (õ, a, î1 , î2 )bθ0 (î1 ) ∈ R, (115)
                        Qh−1
where π(Γh ) ≜ h′ =1 πq,h′ (îh′ |Γh′ −1 )πa,h′ (ah′ |Γh′ −1 , ϕîh′ , õh′ ), πq and πa denotes the query
policy and action policy, respectively, and eõh is an identity vector.
Step 2 (Bound the total variation distance by the operator estimation error):
The regret of OMLE-POSI can be represented as follows,
                           K h            i X  K           K h         i
                           X            k                 X          k
                               V∗−Vπ =
                                                    ∗
       Reg OMLE-POSI (K) =                         V −Vk +     Vk −Vπ .                                                (116)
                                     k=1                       k=1                     k=1

According to Lemma 8, from Eq. (116), we have that with probability 1 − δ,
                                       K h            i X  K h             i
                                      X             k                    k
                 Reg OMLE-POSI (K) =       V∗−Vπ ≤             Vk −Vπ .                                                (117)
                                                       k=1                    k=1



                                                             43
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Since the expected total reward in each episode is at most H, from Eq. (117), we have

                                                             K X
                                                             X                 k                          k
                       Reg OMLE-POSI (K) ≤ H                              PPπk ,Ōî,k ,∆k (Γ) − PP,
                                                                                                  π
                                                                                                    Ōî ,∆
                                                                                                            (Γ) ,                             (118)
                                                                                         1                        1
                                                             k=1 Γ


where Γ = {î1 , ϕî1 (s1 ), õ1 , a1 , ..., îH , ϕîH (sH ), õH , aH } represents any possible feedback tra-
jectory in a whole episode, Pk , Ōî,k , ∆k1 is the POMDP parameters estimated at episode k, and
P, Ōî , ∆1 are the true POMDP parameters of the environment. Hence, to bound the regret of OMLE-
POSI, we need to bound the total variation (TV) distance on the right-hand-side of Eq. (118).
Specifically, for a matrix A and p ≥ 1, we denote the matrix norm ∥A∥p = sup⃗x:∥⃗x∥p ≤1 ∥A⃗x∥p .
Then, the TV difference can be represented by the difference between the product of conditional
(conditioned on the past feedback) probability of feedback at each step under the observed feedback
trajectory and the true model, i.e.,

       K X
       X                k                          k
                   PPπk ,Ōî,k ,∆k (Γ) − PP,
                                           π
                                             Ōî ,∆
                                                     (Γ)
                                   1                     1
       k=1 Γ
           K X
                                   θk                                    k                          k
           X
       =                    eTõH BH  (õH , aH , îH , îH+1 ) · · · B1θ (õ1 , a1 , î1 , î2 )bθ0 (î1 )
           k=1 Γ

                                      θ
                             − eTõh BH (õH , aH , îH , îH+1 ) · · · B1θ (õ1 , a1 , î1 , î2 )bθ0 (î1 ) · π k (Γ)

           K X
                             θk                                    k                          k
           X
       =                    BH  (õH , aH , îH , îH+1 ) · · · B1θ (õ1 , a1 , î1 , î2 )bθ0 (î1 )
           k=1 Γ

                                θ
                             − BH (õH , aH , îH , îH+1 ) · · · B1θ (õ1 , a1 , î1 , î2 )bθ0 (î1 )                   · π k (Γ),          (119)
                                                                                                                      1


where we keep the additional fictitious query îH+1 for clarity.
Thus, to bound the TV distance, we need to bound the difference between the above two products of
operators in ∥ · ∥1 . Next, we bound such a difference by the difference between observable operator
pairs at each step one-by-one. Specifically, after decomposing the probability representations as
in Eq. (119), according to the triangle inequality and the partially revealing condition in Class 2, we
have that

X
            θk                                    k                          k
           BH  (õH , aH , îH , îH+1 ) · · · B1θ (õ1 , a1 , î1 , î2 )bθ0 (î1 )
 Γ

                        θ
                     − BH (õH , aH , îH , îH+1 ) · · · B1θ (õ1 , a1 , î1 , î2 )bθ0 (î1 )                   · π k (Γ)
                                                                                                              1
     H X               H
     X                 Y           k                                       k
≤                               Bjθ′ (õj ′ , aj ′ , îj ′ , îj ′ +1 ) Bjθ (õj , aj , îj , îj+1 ) − Bjθ (õj , aj , îj , îj+1 )
     j=1 Γ          j ′ =j+1
                      !                                   H
                                              X           Y          k
                                                                                                           k
     · bθj−1 (Γj−1 )            · π k (Γ) +                       Bjθ′ (õj ′ , aj ′ , îj ′ , îj ′ +1 ) bθ0 (î1 ) − bθ0 (î1 )          · π k (Γ),
                            1                  Γ         j ′ =1
                                                                                                                                       1
                                                                                                                                              (120)
                        Qj−1
where bθj−1 (Γj−1 ) = j ′ =1 Bjθ′ (õj ′ , aj ′ , îj ′ , îj ′ +1 )bθ0 (î1 ). Next, we use Lemma 32 in Liu et al.
(2022) to bound the two terms on the right-hand side of Eq. (120). The tricky parts when apply their
result are (i) how to construct the observable operator term and the controlled variable; (ii) how to


                                                                        44
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


address the impact of the partial noisy observation. Specifically, we have that for all j,
           H
                                                                                                                                 !
                                                        k
                 θk
X         Y
                                                        θ                              θ                              θ
               Bj ′ (õj ′ , aj ′ , îj ′ , îj ′ +1 ) Bj (õj , aj , îj , îj+1 ) − Bj (õj , aj , îj , îj+1 ) · bj−1 (Γj−1 )
  Γ           j ′ =j+1
                                                                                                                                                  1
                          ˜
                  |S̃|(d−d)/2 X   θk
      · π k (Γ) ≤                Bj (õj , aj , îj , îj+1 ) − Bjθ (õj , aj , îj , îj+1 ) · bθj−1 (Γj−1 ) · π k (Γj ),
                        α                                                                                    1
                                           Γj
                                                                                                                                         (121)
                                       k

where we consider Bjθ (õj , aj , îj , îj+1 ) − Bjθ (õj , aj , îj , îj+1 ) · bθj−1 (Γj−1 ) as the variable x in
Lemma 32, and we have that
                       H                                            k
               X      Y         k
                           Bjθ′ (õj ′ , aj ′ , îj ′ , îj ′ +1 ) bθ0 (î1 ) − bθ0 (î1 )   · π k (Γ)
                           Γ           j ′ =1
                                                                                                            1
                                               ˜
                                            (d−d)/2
                                       |S̃|                      k
                                   ≤    bθ0 (î1 ) − bθ0 (î1 ) ,                              (122)
                              α                                1
                       k
where we consider bθ0 (î1 ) − bθ0 (î1 ) as the variable x in Lemma 32. We note that in Eq. (121)
                                                                  ˜
and Eq. (122), the multiplicative factor depends on |S̃|d−d , which is size of the space of the sub-
states that cannot be queried by the agent at each step.
By combining Eq. (120), Eq. (121) and Eq. (122), we have that
 X   k                                        k                          k

         θ
       BH  (õH , aH , îH , îH+1 ) · · · B1θ (õ1 , a1 , î1 , î2 )bθ0 (î1 )
   Γ

                             θ
                          − BH (õH , aH , îH , îH+1 ) · · · B1θ (õ1 , a1 , î1 , î2 )bθ0 (î1 )                · π k (Γ)
                                                                                                                1
                 ˜
                         " H
              (d−d)/2
       |S̃|               XX                        k

  ≤                                             Bjθ (õj , aj , îj , îj+1 ) − Bjθ (õj , aj , îj , îj+1 ) · bθj−1 (Γj−1 )       · π k (Γj )
               α          j=1 Γj
                                                                                                                                1
                                                                     #
                                  k
                          +    bθ0 (î1 ) − bθ0 (î1 )                   .                                                               (123)
                                                                 1

Then, by combining Eq. (119) and Eq. (123), we have that the TV distance can be upper bounded
as follows,
 K X
             k
                                 πk
X
         PPπk ,Ōî,k ,∆k (Γ) − PP,Ōî ,∆
                                           (Γ)
                               1                         1
k=1 Γ
          ˜
             " K H
  |S̃|(d−d)/2 X X X   θk
≤                        Bj (õj , aj , îj , îj+1 ) − Bjθ (õj , aj , îj , îj+1 ) · bθj−1 (Γj−1 ) · π k (Γj )
        α                                                                                            1
              k=1 j=1 Γj
                                  #
                                   k
                         + bθ0 (î1 ) − bθ0 (î1 )                   .                                                                   (124)
                                                             1


Step 3 (Bound the operator estimation error by the properties of MLE):
According to Eq. (117) and Eq. (118), to upper bound the regret, we can focus on bounding the dif-
ference between each observable operator pair at each step on the right-hand side of Eq. (124). Note
that such a difference mainly captures the operator estimation error under the estimated parameter
θk and the true parameter θ, which further depends on the property of MLE. Thus, we next upper
bound such a difference by applying the properties of MLE. First, according to Lemma 8, we have
that with high probability,
                                             πτ
                                  K−1
                                  X         PP,Ōî ,∆1
                                                        (Γτ )
                                       ln πτ                   ≤ β.                            (125)
                                  τ =1
                                         PPK ,Ōî,K ,∆K (Γτ )
                                                                                  1


                                                                             45
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Next, according to Proposition 14 in Liu et al. (2022), we have that with probability 1 − δ,
                    K−1
                                                                    !2
                                 πτ                   πτ
                    X X
                               PPK ,Ōî,K ,∆K (Γ) − PP,Ōî ,∆ (Γ)    = O(βK).                                                      (126)
                                                             1                     1
                             τ =1         Γ
By applying the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality to Eq. (126), we have
                              K−1
                                                  τ
                                                                       πτ
                              XX                                                         p
                                               PPπK ,Ōî,K ,∆K (Γ) − PP,Ōî ,∆
                                                                                 (Γ) = O( βK).                                       (127)
                                                            1                      1
                               τ =1       Γ
This means that
    K−1
                                  τ
                                                                         πτ
     X       X                                                                                               p
                               PPπK ,Ōî,K ,∆K (Γh , õh+1 , îh+1 ) − PP,Ōî ,∆
                                                                                   (Γh , õh+1 , îh+1 ) = O( βK)
                                                 1                                         1
      τ =1 Γh ,õh+1 ,îh+1

      K−1
                          τ
                                                        πτ
      X X                                                                         p
                       PPπK ,Ōî,K ,∆K (õ1 , î1 ) − PP,  î
                                                          Ō ,∆
                                                                (õ 1 , î1 ) = O(  β/K).                                            (128)
                                      1                          1
      τ =1 õ1 ,î1

We note that in the above marginalization of the distribution, we have taken the new impact of
partial OSI and query îh in our problem into consideration, because the query is part of the feedback
trajectory and appears in the sum of Eq. (128). According to Eq. (115) and Eq. (128), we have that
                               K−1
                               XX                    K                                        p
                                                bhθ (Γh ) − bθh (Γh )         · π τ (Γh ) = O( βK)
                                                                          1
                                τ =1 Γh
                               K                               p
                            b0θ (Γh ) − bθ0 (Γh ) = O( β/K),                                                                         (129)
                                                     1
            K
                                                                                     θK
                                       Qh
where bθh (Γh )              =             h′ =1 B θ
                                                   h′ (õh′ , ah′ , îh′ , îh′ +1 )b0 (î1 )             and         bθh (Γh )          =
Qh      θ                             θ
 h′ =1 Bh′ (õh , ah , îh , îh +1 )b0 (î1 ).
               ′    ′     ′     ′


Recall from Eq. (124) that our goal is to bound the following two terms:
        K−1
         XX   K
                   Bjθ (õj , aj , îj , îj+1 ) − Bjθ (õj , aj , îj , îj+1 ) · bθj−1 (Γj−1 )                     · π k (Γj ),
                                                                                                                 1
           k=1 Γj

and
                                                            K
                                                         bθ0 (î1 ) − bθ0 (î1 )       .
                                                                                   1
The second equation in Eq. (129) already gives the upper bound for the second term
     K
  bθ0 (î1 ) − bθ0 (î1 ) . Thus, we next focus on bounding the first term using the first equation
                          1
in Eq. (129). To prove this, we first apply the triangle inequality to this term as follows,
 K−1
 XX   K
               Bjθ (õj , aj , îj , îj+1 ) − Bjθ (õj , aj , îj , îj+1 ) · bθj−1 (Γj−1 ) · π k (Γj )
                                                                                                      1
 k=1 Γj
      K−1                                              K
      XX                 K
 ≤                    Bjθ (õj , aj , îj , îj+1 ) · bθj−1 (Γj−1 ) − bθj−1 (Γj−1 )                · π k (Γj )
                                                                                               1
      k=1 Γj
           K−1
           XX                  K                            K
       +                   Bjθ (õj , aj , îj , îj+1 )bθj−1 (Γj−1 ) − Bjθ (õj , aj , îj , îj+1 )bθj−1 (Γj−1 )              · π k (Γj ).
                                                                                                                            1
           k=1 Γj
                                                                                                                                     (130)
By applying the first equation in Eq. (129) and Lemma 32 to Eq. (130), we have that
        K−1
        XX   K
                     Bjθ (õj , aj , îj , îj+1 ) − Bjθ (õj , aj , îj , îj+1 ) · bθj−1 (Γj−1 ) · π k (Γj )
                                                                                                                 1
            k=1 Γj
                                                     ˜
                                              |S̃|(d−d)/2 p
                                   = O(                    Kβ).                                                                      (131)
                                                    α


                                                                     46
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Step 4 (Deriving final regret using l1 eluder argument):
In this final step, we prove the final regret, which depends on the performance of OMLE-POSI in
a new episode K + 1, based on the upper bound that we have proved for the previous K episodes
in Eq. (131). To prove this, we use the l1 eluder argument. Specifically, we first use [A]r to denote
the r-th row of matrix A. Next, Eq. (131) implies that
    K−1                                        O h                                                i
                                                      K
                                                   Bjθ (õ, a, î, î′ ) − Bjθ (õ, a, î, î′ ) Ōj · Ō†j bθj−1 (Γj−1 )
    X                     X                    X
                                                                                                       r
    k=1 Γj :(õj ,aj ,îj ,îj+1 )=(õ,a,î,î′ ) l=1
                                                            ˜
                                        |S̃|(d−d)/2 p
                          · π k (Γj ) = O(             Kβ).                                              (132)
                                              α
Then, toh apply the l1 eluder argument in Proposition                     i22 of Liu et al. (2022), we can
              K
consider   Bjθ (õj , aj , îj , îj+1 ) − Bjθ (õj , aj , îj , îj+1 ) Ōj as the wt,l variable and consider
                                                                                        r
Ō†j bθj−1 (Γj−1 ) · π k (Γj ) as the xt,i variable. Then, we have that,
    K                                          O h                                                i
                                                      k
                                                   Bjθ (õ, a, î, î′ ) − Bjθ (õ, a, î, î′ ) Ōj · Ō†j bθj−1 (Γj−1 )
    X                     X                    X
                                                                                                       r
    k=1 Γj :(õj ,aj ,îj ,îj+1 )=(õ,a,î,î′ ) l=1
                                                                ˜
                                    |S̃|3(d−d)/2 H 2 p
                           · π k (Γj ) = O(            Kβ),                                  (133)
                                            α
where we slightly abuse the notation K and use it to denote any episode. By taking the sum of both
sides of Eq. (133) over all steps j and all possible feedback trajectory Γj , we have that
        K      H X h                                                               i
        X      X        k
                     Bjθ (õj , aj , îj , îj+1 ) − Bjθ (õj , aj , îj , îj+1 ) · bθj−1 (Γj−1 )                     · π k (Γj )
                                                                                                                   1
        k=1     j=1 Γj
                                                            !                     ˜
                              k                                        |S̃|3(d−d)/2 OAH 3 p
                     + bθ0 (î1 ) − bθ0 (î1 )                  = O(                        Kβ),                                (134)
                                                        1                       α
                                                                                                           d

where the big-O notation hides the constant and logarithmic terms including2                               d˜ .
Finally, by combining Eq. (118), Eq. (124) and Eq. (134), we have that the regret of OMLE-POSI can
be upper bounded as follows,
                                                          2 s                             
                                             ˜
                                         2(d−d)     4   d
                                   | S̃|        OAH     ˜
                                                        d

                                                                                       d
     Reg OM LE−P OSI (K) = Õ                                 K(|S̃|2d A + |S̃|d−d˜O ˜ )) ,
                                                                                          
                                                 α2                                    d

                                                                ˜
                                                                                                           !
                                                    |S̃|2d−d OAH 4
                                                                          q
                                                                                                 ˜
                                         = Õ                                 K(|S̃|2d A + |S̃|d−d/2 O))       ,                (135)
                                                           α2

                                               ˜ 2,                          d           ˜ d˜), and the big-O notation hides

where the last inequality is because |S̃| ≥ (d/d)                            d˜   = O((d/d)
the constant and logarithmic terms.



H       P ROOF OF T HEOREM 4
Proof. To prove the regret lower-bound in Theorem 4, we construct a new special state transition,
such that even with partial online state information (OSI), all combinations of sub-states ϕi (s) must
be explored to achieve a regret that is sub-linear in K. Formally, to achieve this, we construct a new
special hard instance as follows.
    2
    Since in our case, the observable operator is not only for the observation-action pair (õ, a), but also for the
                                                                         2
two consecutive query pair (îj , îj+1 ), there will an new factor dd˜    after taking the sum.


                                                                        47
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A new hard instance: We consider S = |S̃|d states, i.e., s(1), s(2), ..., s(S). Each of them is one
specific permutation of the sub-state values. Let us consider S̃ = {0, 1} and d = 3 as an example.
Then, there are 8 states, i.e.,
                                0             1                 0               0
                              " #            " #             " #               " #
                 ⃗
                ϕ(s(1))           ⃗
                           = 0 , ϕ(s(2))           ⃗
                                          = 0 , ϕ(s(3))            ⃗
                                                           = 1 , ϕ(s(4))    = 0 ,
                                0             0                 0               1
                                1             1                 0               1
                              " #            " #             " #               " #
                 ⃗
                ϕ(s(5))           ⃗
                           = 1 , ϕ(s(6))           ⃗
                                          = 0 , ϕ(s(7))            ⃗
                                                           = 1 , ϕ(s(8))    = 1 .             (136)
                                0             1                 1               1

Moreover, there are A actions, i.e., a(1), a(2), ..., a(A), where A ≤ S. In each episode k, the learner
starts from a fixed initial state s1 = [x1 , x2 , ..., xd ]T , e.g., s1 = s(1) = [0, 0, 0]T , i.e.,

                                                       1, if s1 = s(1);
                                      ∆1 (s1 ) =                                                    (137)
                                                       0, otherwise.

Based on these, we construct a new special state transition as follows.
State transitions: In each episode, after taking an action a(j) at the first step h = 1, state s1
transitions to one specific new state at step h = 2 deterministically. Specifically, there are A states
at step h = 2. After taking action a(j), state s1 = s(1) transitions and only transitions to state
s2 = s(j) with probability 1, i.e.,

                                                      1, if s2 = s(j);
                               P1 (s2 |s1 , a(j)) =                                              (138)
                                                      0, otherwise.

Let us consider A = 2 as an example. Then,

                                                           1, if s2 = s(1);
                                P1 (s2 |s1 , a(1)) =
                                                           0, if s2 ̸= s(1).

                                                           1, if s2 = s(2);
                                P1 (s2 |s1 , a(2)) =                                               (139)
                                                           0, if s2 ̸= s(2).

For the next logA S −1 steps, the state transitions are as follows. (In the above example with |S̃| = 2,
d = 3 and A = 2, we have logA S = 3.) After taking action a(j) at step h, the m-th state transitions
to one specific new state at step h + 1 deterministically. Specifically, there are Ah−1 states at step
h. by taking action a(j), state sh,m transitions to state sh+1 = s(A(m − 1) + j) with probability 1,
i.e.,

                                                 1, if s3 = s(A(m − 1) + j);
                       P2 (s3 |s(m), a(j)) =                                                       (140)
                                                 0, otherwise.

Let us still consider the aforementioned example. Then, at step h = 2, we have
                                            
                                            1, if s2 = s(1) and s3 = s(1);
                        P2 (s3 |s2 , a(1)) = 1, if if s2 = s(2) and s3 = s(3);
                                            
                                              0, otherwise.
                                            
                                            1, if s2 = s(1) and s3 = s(2);
                        P2 (s3 |s2 , a(2)) = 1, if if s2 = s(2) and s3 = s(4);                     (141)
                                            
                                              0, otherwise.

Finally, for the rest of steps, the number of states keeps to be equal to S. For the j-th state s(m)
at each episode, only by taking action a(max{mod(m, A), 1}), the next state is still s(m) with
probability 1. Otherwise, the next state is s(1). Formally, we let
                                       
                                       1, if j = max{mod(m, A), 1} and sh(s(m)+1) = s(m);
  Ph(s(m)) (sh(s(m)+1) |s(m), a(j)) = 1, if j ̸= max{mod(m, A), 1} and sh(s(m)+1) = s(1);
                                       
                                          0, otherwise,
                                                                                                (142)


                                                   48
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


where h(s(m)) denotes the step of state s(m) that is under consideration and mod(m, A) denotes
the remainder of dividing m by A.
Reward function: We let the reward be rh = 0 for all the first logA S steps. For the later steps, only
when taking action a(max{mod(m, A), 1}) at state s(m), the reward is rh = Ber( 12 ) for some h,
while uniformly randomly pick one of them to be j ∗ and rh (s(m∗ ), a(max{mod(m∗ , A), 1})) =
Ber( 21 + ϵ). Formally, there exists a step h0 > logA S, such that,
                              1
                                         if j = max{mod(m, A), 1}, h = h0 , and m ̸= m∗ ;
                     
                     Ber( 2 ),
  rh (s(m), a(j)) = Ber( 2 + ϵ), if j = max{mod(m, A), 1}, h = h0 , and m = m∗ ; (143)
                              1
                     
                        0,               otherwise.

Note that in such a instance, even with partial OSI, the online learner has to try all possible action
sequence to figure out which one provide the slightly higher reward. Therefore, learning in this
instance with partial online state information is equivalent to learning which action sequence is the
best one. Since there are at least Ω(|S̃|d AH) of action sequences with expected reward rh ≥ 12 .
                                    √
Thus, the regret lower bound Ω̃( M K) (where M denotes the total number        √ of arms) in bandit
                                                                                                √
learning implies that the regret lower bound in our case is Reg π (K) ≥ Ω̃       AH · |S̃|d/2 · K
for any algorithm π.


                                                 49
