Preprint. Under Review.


D ECEPTIVE P ROBLEMS C AN B E S OLVED W ITHOUT
E XPLICIT D IVERSITY M AINTENANCE
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT

         Navigating deceptive domains has often been a challenge in machine learning due
         to search algorithms getting stuck at sub-optimal local optima. Many algorithms
         have been proposed to navigate these domains by explicitly maintaining diversity
         or equivalently promoting exploration, such as Novelty Search or other so-called
         Quality Diversity algorithms. In this paper, we present an approach with promise
         to solve deceptive domains without explicit diversity maintenance by optimizing
         a potentially large set of defined objectives. These objectives can be extracted di-
         rectly from the environment by sub-aggregating the raw performance of individu-
         als in a variety of ways. We use lexicase selection to optimize for these objectives
         as it has been shown to implicitly maintain population diversity. We compare
         this technique with a varying number of objectives to a commonly used quality
         diversity algorithm, MAP-Elites, on a set of discrete optimization as well as re-
         inforcement learning domains with varying degrees of deception. We find that
         decomposing objectives into many objectives and optimizing them outperforms
         MAP-Elites on the deceptive domains that we explore. Furthermore, we find that
         this technique results in competitive performance on the diversity-focused metrics
         of QD-Score and Coverage, without explicitly optimizing for these things. Our
         ablation study shows that this technique is robust to different subaggregation tech-
         niques. However, when it comes to non-deceptive, or “illumination” domains,
         quality diversity techniques generally outperform our objective-based framework
         with respect to exploration (but not exploitation), hinting at potential directions
         for future work.


1   I NTRODUCTION
In the realm of machine learning, numerous problems exhibit inherent deceptiveness, i.e., direct
optimization towards a given objective within these domains often yields suboptimal solutions. To
traverse these intricate problems, algorithms have been developed to place significant emphasis on
explicit diversity maintenance, such as quality diversity algorithms (Pugh et al., 2016). Such strate-
gies improve exploration capabilities, thereby avoiding the deceptive characteristics inherent in these
problems. Nevertheless, a notable limitation of these explicit diversity maintenance techniques is
the need to define and measure certain diversity metrics during the process of optimization.
In this work, we present an alternative approach to navigating deceptive domains without explicit
diversity maintenance. We propose a method that leverages multi-objective optimization (MOO) to
implicitly maintain stepping stones to global solutions. Instead of directly optimizing for a single
objective, we decompose the objective into multiple sub-objectives and optimize for different com-
binations of these in parallel. This allows us to explore the search space more comprehensively,
potentially uncovering high-quality solutions that explicit diversity techniques might skip. We uti-
lize lexicase selection (Helmuth et al., 2015; Spector, 2012) to perform this optimization, due to its
demonstrated implicit diversity maintenance properties as well as its superior performance in MOO.
Lexicase selection selects individuals by filtering down a population based on a randomly shuffled
ordering of the objectives.
Our experimental results demonstrate that our objective-based approach outperforms MAP-Elites on
the deceptive domains we examine. By decomposing the objectives and optimizing them indepen-
dently, we are able to achieve better solution quality and explore the search space more effectively.


                                                  1
Preprint. Under Review.


Furthermore, our approach achieves competitive performance on diversity-focused metrics, such
as QD-Score and Coverage, without explicitly optimizing for diversity. We also conduct an abla-
tion study to assess the robustness of our subaggregation technique. The results show that different
subaggregation methods yield similar performance, indicating the versatility of our approach.
Overall, our findings demonstrate the efficacy of implicit diversity maintenance using multi-
objective optimization. By decomposing objectives and leveraging lexicase selection, we can ef-
fectively solve deceptive domains without the need for explicit diversity maintenance.


2   R ELATED WORK

There exists a considerable literature of work surrounding finding solutions to deceptive problems.
This work often is inspired by evolution in nature due to it being a fundamentally open-ended pro-
cess. In this section, we outline the areas of research most relevant to this work, and provide refer-
ences for a curious reader to learn more.

Diversity-Driven Optimization Novelty Search (Lehman & Stanley, 2011a) was introduced as
an algorithm to overcome highly deceptive fitness landscapes, where methods that follow objectives
usually fail Deb et al. (1993). Lehman & Stanley (2011a) found that by “abandoning objectives” and
simply optimizing for novelty in the solutions, deceptive problems can be solved more consistently.
Since then, large research efforts have been lead into using Novelty search to solve previously un-
solvable deceptive problems (Mouret, 2011; Gomes et al., 2015; Risi et al., 2010; Lehman & Stanley,
2010).
Novelty Search with Local Competition enhances Novelty Search’s use by assessing individuals for
both novelty and fitness (Lehman & Stanley, 2011b). This approach was among the first ”Quality
Diversity” (QD) algorithms, simultaneously optimizing for performance and diversity (Pugh et al.,
2016). Another method optimizes aggregate performance and diversity with a multi-objective evo-
lutionary algorithm (Mouret, 2011).
The MAP-Elites algorithm maintains an archive of diverse individuals with respect to specific qual-
itative “measures”, with each cell housing individuals with the highest fitness found so far (Mouret
& Clune, 2015). There have been many MAP-Elites variants that can exploit gradients (Fontaine
& Nikolaidis, 2021; Tjanaka et al., 2022; Boige et al., 2023; Lim et al., 2023b), utilize advanced
evolutionary algorithms (Fontaine & Nikolaidis, 2023), or apply policy-gradient-based techniques
(Nilsson & Cully, 2021; Lim et al., 2023a).
QD algorithms typically solve deceptive problems, where there is a single optimal solution to find,
and illuminative problems, where the goal is to span a series of qualitative “measures” or “descrip-
tors” while maintaining high performance. A classic example of an illumination problem, that we
consider in this work, is finding a set of reinforcement learning policies π(s) that effectively reach
a specific maze position (x, y) while minimizing energy cost (Mouret & Clune, 2015; Cully et al.,
2015).

Multi-Objective Optimization The concept of multi-objectivation (Knowles et al., 2001) has
been explored in traditional hill-climbing-style optimization methods to reduce the likelihood of
becoming trapped in local optima. Our work further extends this concept with population-based
optimization methods for implicit diversity maintenance, where the objectives are constructed ac-
cording to different heuristics that may imply certain diversity characteristics. There has been a
recent interest in combining Multi-Objective Optimization with Quality Diversity (Janmohamed
et al., 2023; Pierrot et al., 2022). However, we consider large sets of objectives, which would cause
dominance-based techniques like those in the literature to be ineffective due to the curse of dimen-
sionality.
Another important aspect of this paper is lexicase selection, a popular parent selection algorithm
developed for use in evolutionary computation systems (Helmuth et al., 2015; Spector, 2012). It
has been shown to be effective at solving these problems when there are many objectives, as the
domination-based MOOs suffer from the curse of dimensionality) La Cava et al. (2019). There also
has been recent interest in comparing lexicase selection and quality diversity techniques (Boldi &
Spector, 2023; Jundt & Helmuth, 2019). Lexicase selection continually filters down a population


                                                  2
Preprint. Under Review.


Algorithm 1: Lexicase Selection for Implicit Diversity Maintenance
Data:
      • subaggregate() - function that sub-aggregates raw scores
Result:
       • A population of individuals
candidates ← randomly initialize p solutions
for iter 1 → N do
    scores ← subaggregate(Evaluate(candidates, env))
    objectives ← list of all objectives based on subaggregate(·)
    for ind 1 → p do
        shuffled objs ← Shuffle(objectives)
        for obj in shuffled objs do
            candidates ← subset of candidates with exactly best performance on obj
            if candidates contains only one single candidate then
                break
            end
        end
        candidate ← a randomly selected individual in candidates
        Append candidate to new population
    end
    candidates ← mutate new population
end
return candidates


based on a random shuffle objectives by keeping individuals that are elite on the given test cases, in
order. A more in depth description of lexicase selection can be found in Algorithm 1.


3     O PTIMIZATION WITH I MPLICIT D IVERSITY

Diversity-driven algorithms have been praised for their ability to explore complex search spaces
by actively preserving phenotypic differences in a population of solutions, which is often achieved
by employing explicit diversity maintenance, e.g., MAP-Elites (Mouret & Clune, 2015). However,
such explicit diversity maintenance has its limitations. It often needs prior knowledge to choose
relevant diversity metrics. More importantly, in more complex or deceptive search spaces where
the relationship between phenotypic traits and fitness is not straightforward, these explicit measures
can inadvertently steer the search away from optimal or even satisfactory solutions. Take a deceptive
maze that has no exterior walls. Novelty search and MAP-Elites might devote too much time explor-
ing the space outside the maze as it is (rightfully) novel, whereas the implicit diversity preservation
would only preserve diversity to the extent it helps reach the goal.
This work introduces implicit diversity maintenance as a promising alternative in such scenarios.
Instead of overtly measuring and preserving diversity, our method inherently promotes diversity
through its structure and operation. In general, we propose an objective subaggregation approach
that turns the search problem into a multi-objective optimization (MOO) problem, and utilizes lex-
icase selection, which has been shown to produce diverse solutions and maintain such diversity, to
solve it. This leads to a more adaptive and efficient exploration of the search space, potentially
uncovering solutions that explicit methods might miss, especially when the terrain of the search
landscape is intricate or misleading. An overview of the proposed method is described in Alg. 1.

3.1   O BJECTIVE S UBAGGREGATION

In the realm of general search problems, the objectives are often framed as aggregated values over
a series of steps or stages. For instance, in reinforcement learning (RL), the goal typically boils
down to maximizing the cumulative reward over time, i.e., the sum of step rewards over the course
of an episode, until termination. Similarly, in robotics problems such as navigation or control, the


                                                  3
Preprint. Under Review.


overarching goal is often to reach a desired endpoint of a trajectory, determined by an accumulation
of individual position changes over time.
Delving deeper into this notion of aggregation, we introduce the concept of “objective subaggrega-
tion”. Instead of aggregating over all objective values, we focus on subsets of these values, where
the subsets could be sampled based on certain heuristics or predefined rules. Given the set of steps
or stages T and n heuristics, the ith heuristic hi samples a subset Si where Si = hi (T ). The
sub-aggregated objectives R can be expressed as:
                                            nX o
                              R = {Ri } =         rt , i = 1, 2, · · · , n                       (1)
                                                 t∈Si

where rt is objective value at step/stage t.
This objective subaggregation approach converts a single-objective optimization problem into a
multi-objective or many-objective one, where the objectives can be used to promote diversity de-
pending on the heuristics for sampling. This allows for more granular and targeted optimization that
can potentially enhance the efficiency and effectiveness of the search process.

3.2   M ULTI -O BJECTIVE O PTIMIZATION WITH I MPLICIT D IVERSITY M AINTENANCE

While the proposed objective subaggregation method can be potentially used to improve the diver-
sity of solutions, another essential problem to solve is how to obtain and maintain such diversity
during the optimization process. In this work, we utilize lexicase selection (Spector, 2012; Helmuth
et al., 2015), which is a recently developed parent selection method in evolutionary computation.
The idea of lexicase selection is that instead of compiling performance metrics over the training
dataset, we can leverage individual performance to sift through a population via a sequence of ran-
domly shuffled training cases. This strategy effectively tailors the selection pressure towards specific
subsets of training cases that yield worse performance. Recent work also shows that by replacing
individual performance with different objectives, lexicase selection can be used for multi-objective
optimization, and outperforms state-of-the-art optimization algorithms (La Cava et al., 2019). A
more in depth explanation of Lexicase Selection can be found in appendix ??.
There are two main reasons for our specific choice of lexicase selection. Firstly, prior work (Hel-
muth et al., 2016) has shown that lexicase selection can maintain high diversity and re-diversify
less-diverse populations. For complex search problems, the initial solutions (usually sampled from
a Gaussian distribution) may not be diverse enough to drive the search, and may even lose diversity
at certain points depending on the topology of the search space. Lexicase selection could potentially
overcome these problems. Secondly, with different subaggregation strategies, the number of objec-
tives for optimization after subaggregation may be large. Lexicase selection has shown to be the
state-of-the-art method on many-objective optimization problems (La Cava et al., 2019) compared
to other methods such as NSGA-II (Deb et al., 2002) and HypE (Bader & Zitzler, 2011) .

3.3   G ENERAL S UBAGGREGATION S TRATEGIES

One important component in the proposed method is how the heuristics for subaggregation are
chosen. We hereby introduce two general strategies that are used in this work and can be potentially
extended to many other tasks in the RL, robotics, and beyond.

Space-based Subaggregation Suppose there is some location information in each state t that can
be easily retrieved, e.g., the position of the agent or end-point of a robot arm, we denote it as (xt , yt )
in a 2D space for simplicity. Each heuristic hi thus defines a sub-space (X, Y ), and construct a
sample Si = {t ∈ T | xt ∈ X and yt ∈ Y }. An example would be to split the 2D space into n × n
blocks, and each block is a heuristic to construct the sample. This is often a cost-free approach as
long as such location information is inherently contained in the state variables.

Time-based Subaggregation Given the trajectory of states T , we can define a subset directly
based on its position. Here, each heuristic hi defines a sub-space T ′ , and samples from Si =
{t ∈ T ′ }. An example would be to split the whole trajectory into n pieces where each piece is the
sample for subaggregation. This is an even more general strategy that can be applied to almost any
optimization and search problem.


                                                     4
Preprint. Under Review.


4     D OMAINS

In order to test the problem solving performance of our implicit diversity maintenance technique, we
consider two domains that are deceptive as search problems in general but vary in a few key aspects.
We also present two variations of the latter domain to demonstrate robustness to task.

4.1   K NIGHT ’ S T OUR

A knight’s tour is a path through a chess board taken by a knight that satisfies the following condi-
tions: a) the Knight doesn’t leave the board and b) Every tile is visited exactly once.
The Knight’s Tour domain is inherently deceptive. There exist many local optima that are easy to be
trapped in. For example, consider a knight’s tour that visits all but 1 tile on the board. This knight’s
tour is very nearly optimal. However, reaching this solution might not be very helpful in finding
the tour that visits all tiles on the board, as that solution would likely be largely different. This is a
good domain to test the problem solving ability of quality diversity algorithms, as well as lexicase
selection. The maintenance of stepping stones is also very important to this domain, so the use of
quality diversity algorithms here fits their usual use case in deceptive problems.

Objective and Subaggregation The objective in the knight’s tour domain is to have the longest
tour without breaking any rules. So, we define the fitness to be the size of the set of visited positions
before the first rule break. The size of this set will range between 1 (worst) and 64 (best). This
problem naturally lends itself to a space-based subaggregation where each heuristic hi references a
quadtree decomposition of the positions of the board. For example, with 4 objectives, we split the
8 × 8 board into 4 smaller 4 × 4 portions, and aggregate the fitness achieved in these positions (i.e.
the total number of tiles visited in this region). This leads to a four-dimensional objective vector,
where each objective ranges from 0 to 16. In this work, we study objective counts of 1, 4, 16, 64.
For our MAP-Elites implementation, we use the measure function defined as the end position of the
knight before a rule break, and we use the aggregated score as the objective value.

4.2   M AZE

The Maze domain (Lehman & Stanley, 2011a) has often been cited as the motivating problem for
novelty search based algorithms. In this maze, there is an agent represented by a neural network
policy πθ (s). Appendix A includes more details regarding this policy and other environmental con-
figurations. The goal for this agent is to reach the top left of the maze, where myopically minimizing
the distance to the goal would result in the agent falling into one of many local minima on the maze.
Other versions of this domain (Mouret & Doncieux, 2012; Grillotti & Cully, 2023) are presented
with a slightly different purpose: to measure the “illumination” strength of these algorithms. This is
a measure of how well the given algorithm can effectively spread across a given behavioral feature
space. To do this, we must define the behavioral measures to be the end position of the robot.
The objective then becomes some measure of the energy taken to reach this end position. A well
performing illumination algorithm should find a large number of low energy consuming policies that
result in reaching highly diverse parts of the maze. We decided to use this maze due to its historical
precedence, as well as the fact that, with slight modifications to the reward function, it can be used
as both a deceptive domain or an illumination domain.

Objective for Deceptive Maze The objective in this task is to minimize the final distance to the
goal. Another way to look at it is the agent must maximize the distance moved towards the goal at
each time step. rt = dt − dt−1 where dt is the distance from the agent to the goal at timestep t.

Objective for Illumination Maze The objective in this task is based on that used by Grillotti &
Cully (2023). At each timestep, the agent receives a reward based on the energy consumption during
that time-step. The agents actions at can be characterized as:

                                 Velocity command wheel 1
                    at = clip                                  , −1, 1 × 0.025
                                 Velocity command wheel 2

                                                    5
Preprint. Under Review.


and therefore, can assign the reward at each time step to be rt = −||at ||22 . In order to get the total
                                                                                              PT
objective value or fitness f , you can simply aggregate this reward over every time step f = t=1 rt .


Subaggregation We follow the same subaggregation scheme for both types of maze domain.
Since we get a single reward value per time-step, as well as a position of the agent at that
time step, we follow a similar aggregation to that used in the knight’s domain. We perform a
quadtree subaggregation of the rewards received when the agent is in certain parts of the state
space. For example, when we have four objectives, we aggregate the reward received by the
agent in each quadrant of the board, and end up with a four dimensional objective function.
       PT
fi = t=1 1 [Agent in quadrant i at time t] × rt where 1 is the indicator function, that evaluates to
1 if the agent is in quadrant i at timePt, or 0 otherwise. Since the agent can only be in one quadrant
                                         n
at a time, it becomes clear that f = i=0 ri where n is the number of objectives previously decided
on, which satisfies our definition of a space based subaggregation. For both mazes, the measure
function used for MAP-Elites is the end position of the robot, and the objective is the aggregated
reward over the course of the trajectory.


5     E XPERIMENTS

We perform a series of experiments to empirically validate the performance of our implicit diversity
preservation algorithm. For each of the lexicase selection based systems, we instantiate a single
population of solutions, and repeatedly select from them based on the objective subaggregation that
is in use. Then, we perform mutation on the population members. These populations have a fixed
size p, and at each generation, we select (with replacement) p individuals to be parents for the next
generation. Note that this is different to the usual QD frameworks, where an archive of solutions
is maintained over the course of the entire algorithm run. For the MAP-Elites based systems, we
simply initialize an empty archive, and insert a series of solutions into the archive. Then, we select
a batch of the elites from the archive, mutate them, and re-insert them if the cell that corresponds to
their measure (x and y position for both domains) is empty or contains a worse solution. In these
experiments, we set the batch size to be equal to the population size (p) used in lexicase selection.
We hold a number of things constant for this investigation. We hold the total number of individ-
ual evaluations, solution representation and mutation scheme constant across both systems. Since
lexicase selection operates on a population, we maintain an archive similar to that used in the MAP-
Elites loop to report all of our statistics from. Every generation, we insert the current population of
solutions into the archive in the same way as detailed by MAP-Elites, and use this for comparison.
From these successive archives, we report three different kinds of statistics. Best Score refers to the
score that the best individual in the population/archive at that step has achieved. QD-Score is simply
defined as the sum of the scores for each individual in the archive, corrected to account for negative
values. Finally, coverage is simply the percentage of the cells in the archive that are full. For each
of these metrics, we report the mean over 10 replicate runs, with standard deviation shaded at every
step of our search procedure. Below, we outline the results of these experiments.


5.1   K NIGHTS T OUR

For this domain, we report the Best Score and the QD-Score over time for both algorithms. We
did not include coverage results for this domain as all algorithms had full coverage of the defined
measure archive for every iteration. We find that for the Knight’s tour domain, lexicase based ap-
proaches reach a solution that has a longer tour than MAP-Elites. This provides evidence that the
MOO based approach is better at finding high performing solutions in the domain of choice. In terms
of QD-Score, we also find that the lexicase selection based approaches outperform the MAP-Elites
algorithm. The results for this can be found in Figure 1a. This was a surprising result, as MAP-
Elites operates directly to maximize this value, whilst lexicase selection is agnostic to the measures
we use to measure diversity. This hints that lexicase selection is able to maintain diversity with
respect to many human-chosen diversity metrics, demonstrating its’ potential applicability across a
wide variety of domains.


                                                   6
Preprint. Under Review.


               (a) QD-Score                                 (b) Best Score

Figure 1: Knight’s Tour results. We compare implicit diversity preservation approaches using lex-
icase selection and MAP-Elites across iterations. Lexicase selection (lex n where n is the number
of objectives) shows an increasing performance given more objectives and outperforms MAP-Elites
(me) with 16 and 64 objectives.


              (a) QD-Score                                    (b) Best Score

Figure 2: Deceptive Maze results. Implicit diversity preservation techniques have a higher QD-
Score than the archives for MAP-Elites. They also find the best solution faster than MAP-Elites.


5.2   M AZE

Deceptive Maze The results for our deceptive maze can be found in Figure 2. From these figures,
it is clear that the objective-based techniques are outperforming MAP-Elites. With more objectives,
we see better performance on this domain. This is likely due to the added diversity preservation
that arises from a large number of objectives, which is one of the benefits of lexicase selection.
We also see that, with all techniques but Lex-1 (single objective optimization), a policy is found
that overcomes the deception of the maze and actually achieves the globally optimal score of 0.
Surprisingly too do we see that the implicit diversity preservation techniques have a higher QD-
Score than the archives for MAP-Elites, despite the fact that MAP-Elites is operating directly to
optimize this metric.

Illumination Maze The results for the illumination maze can be found in Figure 3a. We can see
from these results a very similar conclusion to the prior two domains. Note that the objective is
not designed to be deceptive and all algorithms very quickly reach the optimal score of 0 (can be
seen in Appendix C.2). However, when it comes to the QD Score, it appears that lexicase selection
with 64 objectives actually outperforms MAP-Elites. This result was especially surprising for us
as this domain is not inherently deceptive, and so using an objective-based algorithm would not
necessarily make sense in this context. However, we still find that the space-based subaggregation
prioritizes exploration in the search space implicitly. We study whether this improvement holds
across subaggregation strategies in our ablation study in Section 6.


                                                7
Preprint. Under Review.


                                                                  (b1) Lexicase Selection w/ 64 Objs


               (a) Illumination Maze: QD-Score


                                                                          (b2) MAP-Elites
                                                                      (b) Archive Visualizations

Figure 3: Illumination Maze Archive results. (a) The QD-Score over time for a variety of methods.
(b1) and (b2) show visualizations of the final archives for lexicase selection and MAP-Elites. A
blank cell means that no individual was found with that given measure.


We also include a visualization of the archive to highlight the actual illumination abilities of each
algorithm. Each position in the archive represents an individual that reaches that spot in the maze,
and the fitness is determined by the energy used by the individual. Figures 3b1 and 3b2 shows two
of the final archives from a randomly chosen replicate run. We can see that lexicase selection results
in a better illumination of the measure space as more of the archive is filled with high performing
solutions. The coverage results for both mazes are included in Appendix C.1. The results for
coverage align well with the QD-Score metrics, as these two results are nearly directly correlated.

6   A BLATION S TUDY

In order to verify the robustness of our proposed methodology, we ablate the subaggregation we
used on both the deceptive and illumination maze, and we compare the results. For this experiment,
we replace the subaggregation used on the maze domain from a space-based one to a time-based
one. This means, instead of the multiple objectives referring to the objective value collected at
different locations on the maze, the multiple objectives refer to the time step that these values were
collected in. For example, with 4 objectives, the time based aggregation would simply sum the
rewards achieved in the first, second, third and fourth quarters of time-steps of the episode, treating
each as a single objective. This could be applied in any time-based RL domain.
The results of this ablation can be found in Figure 4. We see that the time-based and space-based
subaggregation are competitive when the domain is deceptive. This is because in the deceptive do-
main, the ultimate goal is to maximize an objective. Maintaining diversity generates stepping stone
solutions to the problem. As long as the subaggregation scheme used is reasonable, lexicase selec-
tion would result in added diversity preservation. We see that our algorithm maintains diversity the
lines up with human intuitions of diversity as evidenced by the increased QD-score on the deceptive
domain. However, when the main goal in the space is illumination of a certain set of qualitative
measures, one should try to design a subaggregation scheme with these measures in mind. Without
it, using an uncorrelated subaggregation scheme might result in low exploration with respect to these
measures, as one would expect.


                                                  8
Preprint. Under Review.


    (a) Deceptive Maze: Best Score                     (b) Illuminative Maze: Best Score


      (c) Deceptive Maze: QD Score                    (d) Illuminative Maze: QD Score

Figure 4: Results of the ablation study. We compare time-based subaggregation with 4, 16 and 64
objectives to the space based subaggregation results we show above with 64 objectives and to MAP-
Elites (me). When comparing problem solving performance (or the best score achieved throughout
the search process), it is clear that lexicase is robust to the choice of subaggregation when using a
deceptive domain.


7   C ONCLUSION

In this work, we presented a technique to solve potentially deceptive problems without explicitly
measuring or maintaining diversity. Given a domain, we sub-aggregate the objective as opposed
to fully aggregating it, and solve this subaggregation of objectives with many objective optimiza-
tion. We use lexicase selection perform this optimization, which has demonstrated implicit diversity
preservation properties whilst also being able to operate on large numbers of objectives.
We show that better search performance can be achieved using the objective-based approach than
with diversity-based methods such as MAP-Elites. This suggests that when domains are deceptive,
using implicit diversity preservation techniques can result in better stepping stones for optimization.
Furthermore, we find that our objective-based approaches outperform the diversity-based approaches
on evaluation metrics that are diversity-focused. Despite the fact that MAP-Elites is designed to opti-
mize for QD-Score, our technique often performs better without directly optimizing these quantities.
This demonstrates the wide applicability of our strategy to solve other deceptive domains.
Our ablation study shows that our technique can be robust to changes in the subaggregation scheme
for deceptive domains. However, we find that when the domains are non-deceptive, the exploration
ability of our algorithm is subject to the subaggregation scheme used, and likely would require more
careful choices regarding how to aggregate states (based on their location spatially or temporally).
Lehman & Stanley (2011a) end their seminal novelty search paper with the line “To achieve your
highest goals, you must be willing to abandon them.” This work hints at an alternative view: “To
achieve your highest goals, you must be willing to decompose them and work towards each compo-
nent, in a potentially random order.”


                                                  9
Preprint. Under Review.


R EFERENCES
Johannes Bader and Eckart Zitzler. Hype: An algorithm for fast hypervolume-based many-objective
  optimization. Evolutionary computation, 19(1):45–76, 2011.
Raphael Boige, Guillaume Richard, Jérémie Dona, Thomas Pierrot, and Antoine Cully.
  Gradient-informed quality diversity for the illumination of discrete spaces. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2306.05138, 2023.
Ryan Boldi and Lee Spector. Can the Problem-Solving Benefits of Quality Diversity Be Obtained
  without Explicit Diversity Maintenance? Proceedings of the Companion Conference on Genetic
  and Evolutionary Computation, pp. 2152–2156, July 2023. doi: 10.1145/3583133.3596336. URL
  https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/3583133.3596336.
Antoine Cully, Jeff Clune, Danesh Tarapore, and Jean-Baptiste Mouret. Robots that can adapt like
  animals. Nature, 521(7553):503–507, 2015.
Kalyanmoy Deb, Jeffrey D. Horn, and David E. Goldberg. Multimodal deceptive functions. Complex
  Syst., 7, 1993. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:18011571.
Kalyanmoy Deb, Amrit Pratap, Sameer Agarwal, and TAMT Meyarivan. A fast and elitist mul-
  tiobjective genetic algorithm: Nsga-ii. IEEE transactions on evolutionary computation, 6(2):
  182–197, 2002.
Matthew Fontaine and Stefanos Nikolaidis. Differentiable quality diversity. Advances in Neural
 Information Processing Systems, 34:10040–10052, 2021.
Matthew Fontaine and Stefanos Nikolaidis. Covariance matrix adaptation map-annealing. In Pro-
 ceedings of the Genetic and Evolutionary Computation Conference, GECCO ’23, pp. 456–465,
 New York, NY, USA, 2023. Association for Computing Machinery. ISBN 9798400701191. doi:
 10.1145/3583131.3590389. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3583131.3590389.
Jorge Gomes, Pedro Mariano, and Anders Lyhne Christensen. Devising effective novelty search
  algorithms: A comprehensive empirical study. In Proceedings of the 2015 Annual Conference on
  Genetic and Evolutionary Computation, pp. 943–950, 2015.
Luca Grillotti and Antoine Cully. Kheperax: a Lightweight JAX-based Robot Control Environment
  for Benchmarking Quality-Diversity Algorithms. In Proceedings of the Companion Conference
  on Genetic and Evolutionary Computation, pp. 2163–2165, Lisbon Portugal, July 2023. ACM.
  ISBN 9798400701207. doi: 10.1145/3583133.3596387. URL https://dl.acm.org/doi/
  10.1145/3583133.3596387.
Thomas Helmuth, Lee Spector, and James Matheson. Solving Uncompromising Problems With
  Lexicase Selection. IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation, 19(5):630–643, October
  2015. ISSN 1089-778X, 1089-778X, 1941-0026. doi: 10.1109/TEVC.2014.2362729. URL
  http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/6920034/.
Thomas Helmuth, Nicholas Freitag McPhee, and Lee Spector. Effects of lexicase and tournament
  selection on diversity recovery and maintenance. In Proceedings of the 2016 on Genetic and
  Evolutionary Computation Conference Companion, pp. 983–990, 2016.
Hannah Janmohamed, Thomas Pierrot, and Antoine Cully. Improving the data efficiency of multi-
  objective quality-diversity through gradient assistance and crowding exploration. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2302.12668, 2023.
Lia Jundt and Thomas Helmuth. Comparing and combining lexicase selection and novelty search.
  In Proceedings of the Genetic and Evolutionary Computation Conference, pp. 1047–1055, 2019.
Joshua D Knowles, Richard A Watson, and David W Corne. Reducing local optima in single-
  objective problems by multi-objectivization. In International conference on evolutionary multi-
  criterion optimization, pp. 269–283. Springer, 2001.
William La Cava, Thomas Helmuth, Lee Spector, and Jason H. Moore. A Probabilistic and Multi-
 Objective Analysis of Lexicase Selection and ϵ-Lexicase Selection. Evolutionary Computation,
 27(3):377–402, 2019. ISSN 1530-9304. doi: 10.1162/evco a 00224.


                                               10
Preprint. Under Review.


Joel Lehman and Kenneth O. Stanley. Efficiently evolving programs through the search for nov-
  elty. In Proceedings of the 12th Annual Conference on Genetic and Evolutionary Computation,
  GECCO ’10, pp. 837–844, New York, NY, USA, 2010. Association for Computing Machin-
  ery. ISBN 9781450300728. doi: 10.1145/1830483.1830638. URL https://doi.org/10.
  1145/1830483.1830638.
Joel Lehman and Kenneth O Stanley. Abandoning objectives: Evolution through the search for
  novelty alone. Evolutionary computation, 19(2):189–223, 2011a.
Joel Lehman and Kenneth O Stanley. Evolving a diversity of virtual creatures through novelty search
  and local competition. In Proceedings of the 13th annual conference on Genetic and evolutionary
  computation, pp. 211–218, 2011b.
Bryan Lim, Manon Flageat, and Antoine Cully. Understanding the synergies between quality-
  diversity and deep reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the Genetic and Evolutionary
  Computation Conference. ACM, jul 2023a. doi: 10.1145/3583131.3590388. URL https:
  //doi.org/10.1145%2F3583131.3590388.
Bryan Lim, Manon Flageat, and Antoine Cully. Efficient exploration using model-based quality-
  diversity with gradients. In ALIFE 2023: Ghost in the Machine: Proceedings of the 2023 Artificial
  Life Conference. MIT Press, 2023b.
Jean-Baptiste Mouret. Novelty-based multiobjectivization. In New Horizons in Evolutionary
  Robotics: Extended Contributions from the 2009 EvoDeRob Workshop, pp. 139–154. Springer,
  2011.
Jean-Baptiste Mouret and Jeff Clune. Illuminating search spaces by mapping elites. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1504.04909, 2015.
Jean-Baptiste Mouret and Stéphane Doncieux. Encouraging Behavioral Diversity in Evolution-
  ary Robotics: an Empirical Study. Evolutionary Computation, 20(1):91–133, 2012. doi:
  10.1162/EVCO a 00048. URL https://hal.science/hal-00687609. Publisher: Mas-
  sachusetts Institute of Technology Press (MIT Press).
Olle Nilsson and Antoine Cully. Policy gradient assisted map-elites. In Genetic and Evolutionary
  Computation Conference, 2021.
Thomas Pierrot, Guillaume Richard, Karim Beguir, and Antoine Cully. Multi-objective quality
  diversity optimization. In Proceedings of the Genetic and Evolutionary Computation Conference,
  pp. 139–147, 2022.
Justin K. Pugh, Lisa B. Soros, and Kenneth O. Stanley. Quality Diversity: A New Frontier for
  Evolutionary Computation. Frontiers in Robotics and AI, 3, July 2016. ISSN 2296-9144. doi:
  10.3389/frobt.2016.00040. URL http://journal.frontiersin.org/Article/10.
  3389/frobt.2016.00040/abstract.
Sebastian Risi, Charles E Hughes, and Kenneth O Stanley. Evolving plastic neural networks with
  novelty search. Adaptive Behavior, 18(6):470–491, 2010.
Lee Spector. Assessment of Problem Modality by Differential Performance of Lexicase Selection
  in Genetic Programming: A Preliminary Report. 2012.
Bryon Tjanaka, Matthew C. Fontaine, and Stefanos Nikolaidis. Learning a repertoire of robot
  arm configurations. pyribs.org, 2021. URL https://docs.pyribs.org/en/stable/
  tutorials/arm_repertoire.html.
Bryon Tjanaka, Matthew C. Fontaine, Julian Togelius, and Stefanos Nikolaidis. Approximating
  gradients for differentiable quality diversity in reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the
  Genetic and Evolutionary Computation Conference, GECCO ’22, pp. 1102–1111, New York,
  NY, USA, 2022. Association for Computing Machinery. ISBN 9781450392372. doi: 10.1145/
  3512290.3528705. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3512290.3528705.
Vassiiis Vassiliades and Jean-Baptiste Mouret. Discovering the elite hypervolume by leveraging in-
  terspecies correlation. In Proceedings of the Genetic and Evolutionary Computation Conference,
  pp. 149–156, 2018.


                                                11
Preprint. Under Review.


                 Figure 5: Kheperax domain adapted from Grillotti & Cully (2023)


Algorithm 2: Batch MAP-Elites, adapted from Mouret & Clune (2015)
Data:
      • env - the environment to solve
       • measures() - function that get descriptors
Result:
       • An archive of individuals
X ← randomly initialize empty archive with p random solutions
for iter 1 → N do
    candidates ← randomly select p solutions from X
    scores ← sum(Evaluate(candidates, env)
    for i : i → p do
        xi ← randomly select p candidates from archive
        x′i ← randomly mutate xi
        m′i ← measures(x′i )
        fi′ ← use sum of scores x′i
        P(m′i ) ← performance of elite in archive position for m′i
        if P(m′i ) = or P(m′i ) < fi′ then
             P(m′i ) ← fi′
             X (m′i ) ← x′i
        end
    end
    return Archive X
end



A    M AZE D OMAIN S PECIFICATION

Figure 5 shows the Maze domain used from Grillotti & Cully (2023). In this domain, each individual
is a neural network policy πθ that encodes the control strategy for the robot pictured in the figure
(left). There are three limited-range lasers placed at − π4 , 0 and π4 . We use a single MLP with 8
neurons in the hidden layer as the policy. In total, the episode lasts 250 timesteps.


B    MAP-E LITES A LGORITHM

An outline of the MAP-Elites (Mouret & Clune, 2015) algorithm can be found in algorithm 2. Given
an archive, and a “measure” function that outputs the qualitative features for each individual, MAP-
Elites continually inserts and selects individuals from this archive based on their fitness score and
their measures. This results in exploration (as new cells that are reached can have a solution of any
quality inserted), as well as exploitation (as if an individual improves upon the fitness of an another
while achieving the same measures, it replaces the other in the archive).


                                                  12
Preprint. Under Review.


            (a) Deceptive Maze                                 (b) Illuminative Maze

      Figure 6: Percentage coverage of the mazes by solutions discovered by each algorithm.


            Figure 7: Illumination Maze: Best performance achieved by each algorithm


C     F URTHER R ESULTS F OR M AZES

C.1    C OVERAGE R ESULTS FOR THE T WO M AZE D OMAINS

We include results (Figure 6) for the coverage of the archive for each of these algorithms. The cov-
erage is the fraction of the archive that is full at every step of the search procedure. For the deceptive
domain, these results are directly proportional to the QD-Score results as the objective value at a
given portion of the archive is entirely determined by it’s (x, y) position. For the illumination maze,
whilst not directly proportional, we expect the coverage to be highly correlated with the QD-Score,
as discovering more solutions would lead to a higher QD-Score as well as coverage.

C.2    B EST S CORE FOR I LLUMINATION M AZE

We include results (Figure 7) for the best performance of any individual produced using MAP-Elites
versus those produced by Lexicase selection. It is clear that both of these algorithms rapidly discover
solutions with the minimum energy expenditure of 0. This highlights the fact that this domain is not
deceptive at all, as achieving a globally optimal solution is trivial (just staying still suffices to achieve
this).


D     A RM R EPERTOIRE

In order to verify the performance of our algorithm in domains that are not deceptive, we include
results from a new domain. The arm domain (Vassiliades & Mouret, 2018) is one specifically de-
signed to test Quality Diversity algorithms’ illumination ability. The goal represented by this domain
is to find the angle parameters of a multiple link arm that leads to low variance between the angles,


                                                     13
Preprint. Under Review.


whilst also reaching a given (x, y) position with the end-effector. The implementation was based off
of code by Tjanaka et al. (2021).
Objective and Subaggregation The objective in this domain is to have the lowest possible variance
of the parameters θ of the arm. Therefore, we define the fitness of the arm to be the negated variance
of the angle parameters. The subaggregation we use here is very simple: we take the variance of
n subsets of the angles in the arm. This is most similar to a time-based de-aggregation, although
this domain is not time-based. For example, with an 8-link arm, and 4 objectives, we split the angle
values into 4 lists of length 2, and find the total variance from each pair of angles to the mean of the
entire arm.

D.1   R ESULTS

We study arms with 8, 16 and 32 links (figures 8, 9, 10, respectively). Across these three config-
urations, we see that, for this non-deceptive domain, our implicit diversity preservation technique
outperforms MAP-elites with respect to the actual raw score. This makes sense, as when there is no
diversity preservation needed in the domain, simply following an objective is the best way to reduce
the variance between the links of the arm.
However, across all three of the parameterizations of the domain, MAP-Elites significantly outper-
forms out implicit diversity maintenance technique when it comes to QD-Sccre. This is likely due
to the fact that the domain is not deceptive at all, and as such the diversity maintenance is not instru-
mental at all. In other words, there is no need to explore low-fitness portions of the search space, as
those do not lead to global optima in this domain.

D.2   A RCHIVE V ISUALIZATIONS

In order to validate the conclusions, we visualize the resulting archive from using our implicit di-
versity maintenance techniques as well as MAP-Elites. These figures depict all the points in search
space that are illuminated by each algorithm over the course of it running. We select these archives
from the final iteration of a random run of each of the studied techniques. These archives are de-
picted in figures 11, 12, 13 for the 8-, 16- and 32-link arm, respectively.
From these figures, we can conclude that the implicit diversity maintenance technique illuminates
the high-quality portions of the domain, but does not explore the regions with low fitness. However,
MAP-Elites explores all regions regardless of their quality. This result further validates that, when
domains are not deceptive, our implicit diversity maintenance technique prioritizes exploitation over
exploration, which indeed results in higher quality solutions. However, the technique does not
“illuminate” the space of solutions, as MAP-Elites does.


                                                   14
Preprint. Under Review.


        (a) Corrected QD-Score                            (b) Best Score

                                  Figure 8: 8-Link Arm Results


        (a) Corrected QD-Score                            (b) Best Score

                                 Figure 9: 16-Link Arm Results


        (a) Corrected QD-Score                            (b) Best Score

                                 Figure 10: 32-Link Arm Results


                                              15
Preprint. Under Review.


      (a) Lexicase Selection (8 objs)                       (b) MAP-Elites

                            Figure 11: 8-Link Arm Archive Visualizations


     (a) Lexicase Selection (16 objs)                       (b) MAP-Elites

                           Figure 12: 16-Link Arm Archive Visualizations


     (a) Lexicase Selection (32 objs)                       (b) MAP-Elites

                           Figure 13: 32-Link Arm Archive Visualizations


                                                16
