Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


L EMUR : I NTEGRATING L ARGE L ANGUAGE M ODELS
IN AUTOMATED P ROGRAM V ERIFICATION

 Haoze Wu∗, Clark Barrett                                      Nina Narodytska
 Department of Computer Science                                VMware Research
 Stanford University                                           VMware by Broadcom
 {haozewu, barrett}@stanford.edu                               n.narodytska@gmail.com



                                                A BSTRACT

             The demonstrated code-understanding capability of LLMs raises the question of
             whether they can be used for automated program verification, a task that demands
             high-level abstract reasoning about program properties that is challenging for veri-
             fication tools. We propose a general methodology to combine the power of LLMs
             and automated reasoners for automated program verification. We formally de-
             scribe this methodology as a set of transition rules and prove its soundness. We
             instantiate the calculus as a sound automated verification procedure and demon-
             strate practical improvements on a set of synthetic and competition benchmarks.


1       I NTRODUCTION

AI-powered language models are being routinely used to help developers. Examples include pro-
gram synthesis from natural language descriptions by GPT-4 (OpenAI, 2023) or Github Copi-
lot (Chen et al., 2021; GitHub, 2021), and repairing code (White et al., 2019), among others. These
models have shown impressive results in generating correct code in many programming languages.
An important research question is whether modern AI models are capable of understanding the
logic behind the programs they analyze. Recently, several approaches have been proposed to com-
bine the strengths of formal verification and Large Language Models (LLMs) that demonstrate such
capabilities. For example, Pei et al. (2023) made an important step in this direction by investigat-
ing whether LLMs can generate program properties, namely, program invariants, which remains a
crucial and challenging task for automated program verification (Clarke et al., 2018). The authors
demonstrated that LLMs are effective in generating program invariants on a set of synthetic Java
programs. Another example is the recent work by Charalambous et al. (2023), who demonstrated
that LLM models can be used to repair vulnerabilities in code, given examples of incorrect behav-
ior. They provided compelling evidence of the complementary strengths of LLMs, which serve as a
generator for code repair snippets, and formal techniques, which are used to check the correctness
of the generated code. While these approaches show promise in program analysis tasks, they do not
provide a formalization of the interaction between LLMs and formal verifiers, they require manual
effort, or they are limited to the invariant generation process as a stand-alone procedure.
In this work, we propose a novel LLM-powered framework, LEMUR, for automated program veri-
fication tasks. Our key idea is to combine LLMs’ ability to perform abstract high-level reasoning
and automated reasoners’ ability to perform precise low-level reasoning. Specifically, LLMs are em-
ployed to propose program invariants in the form of sub-goals, which are then checked by automated
reasoners. This transforms the program verification tasks into a series of deductive steps suggested
by LLMs and subsequently validated by automated reasoners. Our main contributions are:
• a novel framework for combining LLMs and automated reasoners for program verification;
• a presentation of LEMUR as a proof system and a proof of its soundness, which to the best of our
  knowledge, is the first formalization of such a hybrid approach;
• an instantiation of the LEMUR calculus that gives a sound and terminating algorithm;
• an implementation of the proposed framework (using OpenAI’s GPT models);
    ∗
        This work was mostly done during an internship at VMware Research.


                                                      1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


• an experimental evaluation of LEMUR on two sets of benchmarks that demonstrates its efficiency
  compared with both existing AI-powered and conventional verification tools.
We highlight that LEMUR is the first fully automated framework combining LLMs and reasoners.

2   D EFINITIONS
Given a program P : Prog, a reachability property, or simply property, is a tuple p = ⟨ϕ, l⟩, where
ϕ : Pred is a Boolean predicate of the program state and l : N is a program line. The negation of p,
denoted ¬p, is defined as ⟨¬ϕ, l⟩. Next we introduce several useful definitions and their properties.
Definition 2.1. A property p = ⟨ϕ, l⟩ is an invariant on P, denoted Inv(P, p), iff p holds (i.e., ϕ
always evaluates to true at line l) for all possible executions of the program P.
Example 2.1. Consider the simple program P in Figure 2 (the first frame, top row). P instantiates
an unsigned 32-bit integer variable x to 0 and increases its value by 4 on each loop iteration. A
property p = ⟨ϕ, l⟩ is specified on the 4th line, so ϕ = (x != 30) and l = 4 for this property. It is
easy to see that p is an invariant as x will never be divisible by 3, for example. ■
An assumption q = ⟨ϕ, l⟩ is a condition that is assumed in a program.
Definition 2.2. An assumption q = ⟨ϕ, l⟩ modifies a program P as follows:
      1. if ϕ holds at line l during some execution of P, then P continues execution without changes;
      2. if ϕ does not hold at line l during some execution of P, then that execution terminates at l.
We use P ′ = Asm(P, q) to denote the modification of P with the assumption q. An assumption can
itself be an invariant. We now introduce a special notion of an implication.
Definition 2.3. Let P be a program, and p, q be properties on P. We say that q implies p with
respect to P, denoted q − → p, iff p is an invariant on Asm(P, q).
                          P
Example 2.2. Consider the program P in Figure 2 and an assumption q = ⟨ϕ = (x%4==1), l = 3⟩,
with P ′ = Asm(P, q) (depicted in the first frame in the bottom row of Figure 2). To see the difference
between P and P ′ , observe that the loop is executed only once in P ′ . This is because x=0 when
entering the loop, so (x%4)!=1, which is the formula ϕ in q, does not hold, and therefore, P ′
terminates. If we consider an alternative assumption q ′ = ⟨ϕ = (x%4==0), l = 3⟩ (depicted in
the fourth frame at the bottom of Figure 2), we can see that its predicate ϕ holds for all executions.
Hence, q ′ is an invariant for P. Finally, we can see q ′ −
                                                          → p, where p is from Example 2.1. ■
                                                         P
The following propositions follow from the definitions above.
Proposition 2.1. Let P be a program, and p, q be properties on P:
       • The property p is an invariant on P if q is an invariant on P and q implies p with respect
         to P. More formally, (Inv(P, q) ∧ q −→ p) ⇒ Inv(P, p).
                                                P
     • The property p is not an invariant on P if the property p is not an invariant on P ′ =
        Asm(P, q). More formally, ¬Inv(P ′ , p) ⇒ ¬Inv(P, p) .
Proposition 2.2. For any property p on a program P, p −
                                                      → p.
                                                             P
Proposition 2.3. For any properties p, q, r on a program P, if p −
                                                                 → q and q −
                                                                           → r, then p −
                                                                                       → r.
                                                                   P            P             P
Note that it is possible that neither a property p nor its negation ¬p is an invariant on a program.
Example 2.3. Consider again our example from Example 2.1 and two properties at line 3: p =
⟨ϕ = (x%8==4), l = 3⟩ and p′ = ⟨ϕ′ = (x%8!=4), l = 3⟩. Neither p nor p′ is an invariant on P.
On the first loop iteration, we have that x=0 before line 3, so ϕ′ holds and ϕ does not at line 3. But
on the second loop iteration, we have that x=4 before line 3, so ϕ holds and ϕ′ does not. ■
Definition 2.4. A property p = ⟨ϕ, l⟩ is stable for P, denoted S(P, p), if, for each execution of the
program, either ϕ always evaluates to true at line l or ϕ always evaluates to false at line l.
Example 2.4. Consider an example to illustrate the definition of stability.

Line 1: uint32_t x=rand();
Line 2: assert(x==1);

The property in Line 2 is stable, as it always evaluates to true or false within a single execution.■


                                                    2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


An invariant must be stable, but a property that is not an invariant might still be stable. For example,
any property on a program without loops is stable. If p is stable, then ¬p is also stable. Lemma 2.1
exploits stable invariants (see a proof in the extended version of the paper (Wu et al., 2023)).
Lemma 2.1. Consider a program P, two properties p, q on P, and a program P ′ = Asm(P, q).
The property p is an invariant on P if: (i) q is stable for P; (ii) q implies p with respect to P; and
(iii) ¬q implies p with respect to P. More formally: S(P, q) ∧ (q −  → p) ∧ (¬q −   → p) ⇒ Inv(P, p).
                                                                     P              P
Assume we have a verifier V : Prog ×P(Prop) × Prop 7→ {T RUE              , FALSE, U  NKNOWN }, which
takes as inputs a program P, a set of assumptions A and a property p, and checks whether A
implies p. More precisely, given set of assumptions A = {q1 , . . . , qn }, we construct a new program
P ′ = Asm(Asm((. . . , Asm(P, q1 )), qn−1 ), qn ), and the verifier checks if p is an invariant on this
program. Hence, a statement that A implies p on P means that p is an invariant on P ′ . We further
assume that V is sound, meaning if V returns T RUE, then A implies p, and if V returns FALSE, then
A does not imply p. Note that A can be empty, in which case the verifier just checks whether p is
an invariant. When the verifier V returns T RUE, we say p is proven; and when V returns FALSE, we
say the property is falsified. V is incomplete, meaning that V can return U NKNOWN.
In practice, V can be instantiated with an automated program verifier such as CBMC (Kroening &
Tautschnig, 2014), ESBMC (Gadelha et al., 2018), or UAUTOMIZER (Heizmann et al., 2013). We
provide an overview of the main techniques employed by these tools in the extended version of
the paper (Wu et al., 2023) and note here that a crucial challenge shared across existing verifiers is
the automatic decomposition of a verification task into smaller, more manageable sub-tasks. This
decomposition requires high-level reasoning that is difficult to automate using conventional formal
methods, but plausibly could be performed by LLMs, with their documented code-understanding ca-
pability. However, it is crucial to preserve soundness when LLMs are used to automatically perform
this high-level reasoning in program verification tasks.

3   LEMUR : I NTEGRATING LLM S IN P ROGRAM V ERIFICATION

We present LEMUR, a proof calculus that combines LLMs and automated reasoners to prove proper-
ties of programs. The calculus operates over a configuration, which is either one of the distinguished
symbols {SUCCESS, FAIL} or a tuple ⟨P, A, M⟩, where P is a program, A is either ∅ or a singleton
representing the assumption, and M is a list of properties referred to as proof goals. M itself is
referred to as a trail. The last element of M represents the current property to prove. We use the
notation : : to denote a concatenation of two lists. In particular, M = M′ : : p means that M is a
concatenation of a trail M′ and a property p, where p is the last element of M. The rules describe
the conditions under which a certain configuration can transform into another configuration. In this
calculus, deciding whether Inv(P, p) holds reduces to finding a sequence of valid rule applications
from the starting configuration ⟨P, ∅, [p]⟩ to either SUCCESS or FAIL.
Our calculus performs oracle calls to LLMs to propose new properties and revise them. The oracle
Opropose : Prog × Prop 7→ P(Prop) proposes new properties, given a program and the current proof
goal as inputs. A key hypothesis here is that LLMs are capable of generating new properties that
are likely to (i) be invariants, and (ii) imply the proof goal given in a prompt. We will discuss
strategies to generate prompts in Section 4. Importantly, properties generated by an LLM are treated
as assumptions until we can prove that they are invariants of the original program. The oracle Orepair
revises previously proposed properties, e.g., if we determine that a property q previously produced
by Opropose does not hold or does not imply the current proof goal. In this case, we request an LLM to
repair q. We have Orepair : Prog × Prop × Prop ×{FALSE, U NKNOWN} 7→ P(Prop), whose inputs
comprise a program, two properties, and a solver return value. The first property is the current proof
goal, and the second property q is an assumption previously proposed by oracles. The output of
Orepair is a new set of properties. In practice, we implement it with a prompt to an LLM to either
correct or strengthen q (see Section 4). Finally, the calculus performs an external call to a verifier V
to check whether a property holds.
The proof rules of LEMUR are shown in Fig. 1. Each rule defines a set of conditions that must hold
for the rule to be applicable. Note again that these conditions permit invocations of LLMs and/or
verifiers. The rules within the calculus can be partitioned into four groups.
The first group contains rules that are responsible for generating new proof goals for specific con-
figurations. These rules are Propose, Repair 1, and Repair 2. The Propose rule states that if the


                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                M = M′ : : p     V(P, A, p) = U NKNOWN q ∈ Opropose (P, p)
                                                                                    (Propose)
                                   P, A, M =⇒ P, {q}, M

                        A = {q}     M = M′ : : p V(P, A, p) = T RUE
                                                                              (Decide)
                                    P, A, M =⇒ P, ∅, M : : q

               M = M′ : : p : : q    V(P, A, q) ̸= T RUE   q ′ ∈ Opropose (P, p)
                                                                                   (Backtrack)
                               P, A, M =⇒ P, {q ′ }, M′ : : p

   A = {q}    M = M′ : : p V(P, A, p) = U NKNOWN            q ′ ∈ Orepair (P, p, q, U NKNOWN)
                                                                                                  (Repair 1)
                                P, A, M =⇒ P, {q ′ }, M′ : : p

      A = ∅ M = M′ : : p : : q       V(P, A, q) = FALSE      q ′ ∈ Orepair (P, p, q, FALSE)
                                                                                              (Repair 2)
                                P, A, M =⇒ P, {q ′ }, M′ : : p

                        A = ∅ M = M′ : : p V(P, A, p) = T RUE
                                                                          (Success 1)
                               P, A, M =⇒ SUCCESS

               A = ∅ M = M′ : : p : : q S(P, q) V(P, {¬q}, p) = T RUE
                                                                                    (Success 2)
                             P, A, M =⇒ SUCCESS
                                  M = [p] V(P, A, p) = FALSE
                                                                     (Fail)
                                       P, A, M =⇒ FAIL

                          Figure 1: Deductive rules of the LEMUR calculus.

verifier is unable to prove or disprove the current proof goal p, we can invoke the Opropose oracle
to obtain a property q and update A to be {q}. The Repair 1 rule can be applied when the current
assumption q is not sufficient for the verifier to prove the current proof goal p. In this case, we
can use the oracle Orepair to propose ways to strengthen q and choose one of them, q’, as the new
assumption. The Repair 2 rule can also be applied when q is already in the trail but is falsified by
the verifier V. In this case, we can use Orepair to repair q and update A accordingly.
The second group contains only the Decide rule. This rule allows an assumption q to become a new
goal (i.e., be appended to M) if the verifier V is able to prove that q implies the current goal.
The third group allows LEMUR to recover from faulty assumptions. The Backtrack rule is applicable
when there are at least two elements in the trail and the verifier cannot prove the current proof goal.
It allows LEMUR to revert to the previous proof goal (the second to last property in the trail M)
and pick a different assumption suggested by Opropose . Note that Backtrack might not be the only
applicable rule. For example, Repair 1 or Repair 2 could also be applicable. In practice, we use a
strategy to decide between multiple applicable rules. This is discussed in Sec. 4.
The final group specifies three termination conditions for the calculus. The Success 1 rule states that
whenever the assumption is empty and the verifier is able to prove the current proof goal (i.e., the
last property p in the trail M), we can transition into the SUCCESS state. Note that if the verifier can
prove the original property, then this rule can be directly applied to the starting configuration to reach
SUCCESS. Success 2 states that if the last two elements of the trail M are p and q, the current proof
goal q := ⟨ϕ, l⟩ is stable (as defined in Sec. 2), and the verifier is also able to also prove p under the
assumption⟨¬ϕ, l⟩, then p is an invariant (as a consequence of Lemma 2.1), and we can transition to
SUCCESS. The Success 2 rule constitutes a way to utilize an incorrect sub-goal q proposed by the
LLM-based oracles to decompose the verification task: we separately reason about the cases when
q holds and when it does not hold. Finally, if the verifier V proves that the original property is not
an invariant, whether under an assumption or not, then we transition to the FAIL state using Fail.
Note that the program P remains unchanged in every rule. We keep it as part of the state for two
reasons. First, it is convenient for keeping the calculus self-contained, as P is an input to the verifiers
and the oracles. Second, in the future, it might be possible to augment the calculus with rules that
update P, by, for example, rewriting the program using LLMs in an invariant-preserving manner.
We state the following soundness properties about LEMUR. The proof is presented in the extended
version of the paper (Wu et al., 2023).


                                                    4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                      V: U NKNOWN                     V: T RUE
     V: U NKNOWN                                                                                  V: T RUE
                                    uint32_t x=0;                 uint32_t x=0;
  uint32_t x=0;   Opropose                                                                    uint32_t x=0;
                                    while (rand()){ Orepair       while (rand()){
  while (rand()){                                                                             while (rand()){
                                    assume(x%2==0);               assume(x%4==0);
  x+=4;           Propose                           Rep. 1                        Decide      assert(x%4==0); Succ. 1
                                    x+=4;                         x+=4;
  assert(x!=30);                                                                              x+=4;
                                    assert(x!=30);                assert(x!=30);
  }                                                                                           }


                       O
                                    }                             }


                        pr
                            op
                     Pr

                              os
 ...


                       op

                                e
                        os
 x+=4;


                            e
 assert(x!=30);                   V: T RUE                                                           V: T RUE
                                                                      V: FALSE
 ...
                              uint32_t x=0;                                                     uint32_t x=0;
 List invariants that prove                                       uint32_t x=0;    Opropose
                              while (rand()){                                                   while (rand()){
 the assertion. Your answer                                       while (rand()){
                              assume(x%4==1);                                                   assume(x%4==0);
 should look like                             Decide              assert(x%4==1); Backtrack                     ...
                              x+=4;                                                             x+=4;
 assert(...) //Line number                                        x+=4;
                              assert(x!=30);                                                    assert(x!=30);
 ------------------------                                         }
                              }                                                                 }
 assert(x % 2 == 0); //Line 2
 assert(x % 4 == 1); //Line 2


                   Figure 2: A running example of executing the LEMUR calculus.


Theorem 3.1 (Soundness). Given a property p0 and a program P, if SUCCESS is reached by a
sequence of valid rule applications starting from ⟨P, ∅, [p0 ]⟩, then p is an invariant on P.
Theorem 3.2 (Soundness 2). Given a property p0 and a program P, if FAIL is reached by a sequence
of valid rule applications starting from ⟨P, ∅, [p0 ]⟩, then p is not an invariant on P.

Example 3.1. To provide more intuition about the proof system and to motivate the design choices
when instantiating LEMUR, we consider again our running example. Figure 2 illustrates how
LEMUR can be used to verify properties in practice. In Figure 2 each frame represents a state
of the program. Transitions between states are depicted by arrows, with each arrow marked with the
rule applied to execute this transition. In this example, our goal is to prove the property x!=30 in
a while loop that keeps adding 4 to an unsigned 32-bit integer variable x. We note that this partic-
ular verification task is adapted from a similar one in the SV-COMP competition.1 While seemingly
trivial, during the competition, 19 out of the 24 participating tools (including the overall winner of
the competition UAUTOMIZER) were not able to solve this benchmark.
The initial configuration is ⟨P, ∅, [p])⟩, where P is the given program and p = ⟨x!=30, 3⟩.2 Sup-
pose the verifier V is unable to solve this problem and returns U NKNOWN. In this case, we need to
generate a new proof goal, so the only rule we can apply is Propose. To do so, we invoke the LLM-
based oracle Opropose to obtain a set of new properties that are potentially themselves invariants
and might help prove the property. An example prompt is given in the bottom left of Figure 2. Note
that this is not the exact prompt we found most useful, but we defer a full discussion of prompts and
prompting strategies to Sec. 4. Suppose the oracle returns two potential predicates, both of which
should hold at the beginning of the while loop (line 3): x%2==0 and x%4==1. The Propose rule
allows us to make one of them the current assumption.
Case (x%2==0): The top row illustrates what happens when we transition to ⟨P, {q =
⟨x%2==0, 3⟩}, [p]⟩. While q is indeed an invariant, it does not help to prove the assertion, and
V still returns U NKNOWN. This means that the Repair 1 rule is applicable, which invokes the oracle
Orepair to strengthen q. Suppose in this case, the oracle suggests the predicate q ′ = x%4==0, which
clearly implies the original property x!=30. Now, suppose V(P, {q ′ }, p) returns T RUE. We can
apply the Decide rule and transition to ⟨P, ∅, [p, q ′ ]⟩, making q’ the current proof goal. Proving q’
is arguably easier because x%4==0 is inductive (i.e., if it holds in one iteration, then it will hold in
the next iteration), making conventional automated reasoning techniques such as k-induction appli-
cable. Now, if V(P, ∅, q ′ ) = T RUE, we can apply Success 1 and transition to the SUCCESS state,
thus completing the proof.
We discuss the case x%4==1 in the extended version of the paper (Wu et al., 2023). ■


  1
    https://sv-comp.sosy-lab.org/2023/results/results-verified/META_
ReachSafety.table.html#/table?filter=id_any(value(jain_5-2))
  2
    3 is the line number (in the snippet) where the predicate is asserted.


                                                              5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 1 The LEMUR procedure
 1: Input: A program P, a property p.
 2: Output: SUCCESS only if Inv(P, p); FAIL only if ¬Inv(P, p); and U NKNOWN if inconclusive.
 3: Parameters: Verifier V, oracles Opropose and Orepair (which satisfy Condition 1), number of proposals k
 4: function lemur check(P, p)
 5:    d 7→ V(P, ∅, p)
 6:    if d = FALSE then return FAIL                                                                   ▷ Fail
 7:    else if d = T RUE then return SUCCESS                                                      ▷ Success 1
 8:    else
 9:        i, Q 7→ 0, Opropose (P, p)
10:         while i < k ∧ |Q| > 0 do
11:             i 7→ i + 1
12:             q 7→ pop(Q)
13:             e 7→ V(P, {q}, p)                                                       ▷ Propose/Backtrack
14:             if e = FALSE then return FAIL                                                          ▷ Fail
15:             else if e = T RUE then
16:                  f 7→ lemur check(P, q)                                                         ▷ Decide
17:                  if f = SUCCESS then return SUCCESS                                          ▷ Success 1
18:                  else if S(P, q) ∧ (V(P, {¬q}, p) = T RUE) then return SUCCESS               ▷ Success 2
19:                  else if f = FAIL then Q 7→ join(Q, Orepair (P, p, q, FALSE))                 ▷ Repair 2
20:                  else continue
21:             else Q 7→ join(Q, Orepair (P, p, q, U NKNOWN))                                    ▷ Repair 1
22:         return U NKNOWN



4    I NSTANTIATING THE LEMUR CALCULUS

In this section, we present strategies for instantiating LEMUR as an automated procedure. While we
showed that the LEMUR calculus is sound, there are no guarantees that it terminates. Here, we will
discuss two sources of non-termination.
The first one corresponds to an unbounded sequence of suggestions for new sub-goals. Concretely,
when trying to prove a particular proof goal p, we could get stuck if V(P, {q}, p) = U NKNOWN or
V(P, ∅, q) = FALSE for each proposed assumption q. This could occur as a result of limitations in
either the LLM or the verifier. One way to avoid this type of non-termination is by putting an upper
bound on the number of proposed assumptions for each proof goal. That is, for any proof goal p, we
require that V(P, {q}, p) is invoked for at most k different values of q.
The second source of non-termination is the potentially unbounded depth of the trail M. Concretely,
it is possible to construct an infinite sequence of Propose and Decide transitions, where: (i) the
verifier returns U NKNOWN on the current proof goal; (ii) the oracle proposes an assumption that
is not invariant but implies the current proof goal; (iii) the verifier proves the implication; (iv) the
assumption becomes the new proof goal; and (v) this process repeats. This can be avoided by adding
a side condition to the rules requiring that properties proposed by oracles (q = ⟨ψ, l′ ⟩) must contain
a smaller program line number than the one in the current proof goal (p = ⟨ϕ, l⟩), that is,

                                  ⟨ψ, l′ ⟩ ∈ O∗ (P, ⟨ϕ, l⟩, . . .) ⇒ l′ < l                   (Condition 1)

Based on these strategies, a terminating (by Thm. 4.1 at the end of this section) and sound (by
Thm. 3.1) algorithm for checking whether a property p is an invariant on a program P is presented
in Alg. 1. Alg. 1 is a recursive procedure lemur check. It takes a program P and a property p as
inputs. If lemur check returns SUCCESS, then the property is an invariant. If lemur check returns
FAIL , then the property is not an invariant. The function can also return U NKNOWN if the analysis
is inconclusive. At a high level, Alg. 1 searches for a potential subgoal q that implies the current
goal p (lines 9–21). If such a q is identified in line 13, we recurse to prove q (line 16). The while
loop starting at line 10 ensures that at most k attempts can be utilized to generate a new subgoal for
p. The comments in Alg. 1 indicate which lines correspond to specific proof rules. The algorithm is
sound as it only applies the rules of the calculus. A full description of Alg 1, including a proof of
termination can be found in the extended version of the paper (Wu et al., 2023).
Theorem 4.1 (Termination). Given a program P, and a property p on the program, Alg. 1 terminates
with either SUCCESS, FAIL, or U NKNOWN.


                                                     6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Note that, Alg. 1 is one of many possible instantiations of the LEMUR calculus. One can develop
alternative strategies to apply the rules, e.g., by changing the frequency of the repair rules and the
Propose rules to balance the cost of LLM oracle calls. We evaluate one of the alternatives in the
extended version of the paper (Wu et al., 2023).

5     E XPERIMENTS
We have presented the LEMUR calculus and described a sound and terminating algorithm based on
LEMUR . In this section, we investigate the following questions:

• Can we develop a practical automated verification procedure based on Alg 1? [Yes]
• Is LEMUR competitive with existing end-to-end learning-based verification approaches? [Yes]
• Can LEMUR already prove hard benchmarks that are beyond the reach of state-of-the-art conven-
  tional program verifiers? [In several cases]

5.1   B UILDING AN LLM- BASED PROGRAM VERIFIER

We report on several practical considerations when building a prototype of Alg. 1. There are two
types of external calls that Alg. 1 depends on. The first type is calls to V. We use off-the-shelf
verifiers in our framework that are extensively tested by the community (described in later para-
graphs), so we have some expectations about their reliability and performance. On the other hand,
the second type of calls, calls to LLM oracles, introduces more uncertainty, as LLMs are newer and
are treated as black boxes. In our framework, the oracles Opropose and Orepair automatically prompt
a GPT-family model through the OpenAI API and parse the output. We found that while GPT has
great potential for generating sensible loop invariants, it still has practical limitations. We report
several tactics that we found useful in practice.

• Formatting the output: While investigating whether chain-of-thought (CoT) (Wei et al., 2022)
  reasoning is useful when seeking new properties for P and p, We found that GPT’s outputs,
  even when containing useful information, were verbose and often contained irrelevant or incorrect
  statements, making it difficult to extract invariants. To address this, we use in-context learning to
  encourage the LLM to format the output in a specific way. For example, adding Your output
  should be "assert(...);// Line number" to the prompt is sufficient for GPT to
  consistently generate outputs of exactly this format, without providing verbose explanations.
• Inserting markers in the program: We found that GPT is not good at counting program lines.
  Often, the generated predicate is otherwise correct, but the line number is slightly off. Unfortu-
  nately, an invariant at a wrong position is of no use to the verifier. To mitigate this challenge, we
  insert placeholder lines of the form "// Line A", "// Line B" and prompt GPT to gener-
  ate invariants of the form assert(...);// Line name (for those specific locations). As a
  simple practical heuristic, we insert placeholders right before loops and at the beginning of loops.
• Ordering the proposal: The output of an oracle call is non-deterministic for a given prompt,
  depending on the hyper-parameters of the call. Moreover, the oracles produce a set of properties
  and we need good heuristics to choose the order of trying those properties. A heuristic we found
  useful is to prompt GPT multiple times and order the properties by the frequency with which they
  are proposed (breaking ties by preferring shorter expressions). Moreover, instead of relying on
  string matching, we treat two proposals the same if their abstract syntax trees are equivalent.

The exact prompts are described in the extended version of the paper (Wu et al., 2023). For V,
we consider two state-of-the-art formal tools for C program verification, ESBMC (Gadelha et al.,
2018) and UAUTOMIZER (Heizmann et al., 2013). The former is based on k-induction and the
latter is based on predicate abstraction. ESBMC and UAUTOMIZER were the top two performing
non-portfolio solvers in the reachability track of the most recent edition of the software verification
competition (SV-COMP (Beyer, 2023)). Furthermore, UAUTOMIZER was the overall winner. By
default, we impose a 30-second time limit for each invocation of the verifier. That is, if the verifier
does not terminate within 30 seconds, then the verifier returns U NKNOWN.3
  3
    The source code and the benchmarks are publicly available at https://github.com/wu-haoze/
Lemur-program-verification.


                                                  7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   Configurations Solved Time (s) # proposal          Configurations Solved Time (s) # proposals
      Code2Inv       92        –           -          UAUTOMIZER         1      824.3        0
     ESBMC            68      0.34         0             ESBMC           1      675.7        0
  LEMUR (GPT3)       103      35.6        8.6         LEMUR (GPT3)      14      162.2       8.5
  LEMUR (GPT4)       107      24.9        4.7         LEMUR (GPT4)      25      234.5       7.2
           (a) The Code2Inv benchmarks.                     (b) The 47 SV-COMP benchmarks.

Table 1: Solved instances by ESBMC, LEMUR, and Code2Inv (1a) or UAUTOMIZER (1b) on two
benchmark sets. We also report the average time and number of proposals for solved instances.

5.2   L OOP INVARIANT GENERATION BENCHMARKS

A prominent approach in learning-based end-to-end program verification is Code2Inv (Si et al.,
2020), which uses reinforcement learning to train an invariant synthesizer to propose loop invariants.
At a high level, to infer a loop invariant for a given program, Code2Inv learns a generative neural
network whose goal is to repeatedly propose candidate invariants until an automated reasoning tool
determines that the candidate is correct. Throughout this process, the generator is fine-tuned using
the feedback from the automated reasoning tool. In this section, we study how LEMUR compares
with this approach on the same benchmark set considered in the original Code2Inv work. The
benchmark set contains 133 benchmarks, each containing a C program and a property expressed as
an assert statement in the program. Each program contains a single loop and each loop can have
nested if-then-else blocks (without nested loops). The assertion to check is always after the loop.
Code2Inv is designed to generate invariants at the beginning of the while loop. We prompt the
oracles to generate invariants at the same location.
We use the k-induction-based verifier, ESBMC, to check the implication (line 13 in Alg. 1) which
aligns with the verification procedure used in Code2Inv. We report the number of solved instances
as well as the number of failed suggestions (either the suggestion itself cannot be verified or ESBMC
times out on the implication check). As a point of comparison, we report the statistics from the
original Code2Inv approach. Code2Inv was given a one-hour timeout. In addition, we also report
ESBMC ’s performance on this set of benchmarks. The result is shown in Table 1a (the Time column
shows the average time in seconds to solve a benchmark).
With a 10-minute timeout, ESBMC alone can solve 68 problems.
On the other hand, LEMUR (GPT4) can solve 107 problems within
the same time limit. Surprisingly, this approach solves more in-
stances than Code2Inv, which is specifically designed for invariant
synthesis tasks. For problems unsolved by ESBMC but solved by
LEMUR (GPT4), a histogram of the values of Log2 of the number
of proposals is shown in Fig. 3. While in most cases, Alg. 1 can
produce the correct proposals within 4 attempts, there are bench-
marks for which LEMUR (GPT4) requires many iterations to find
the desired loop invariant, e.g., one of the benchmarks took 177 pro-
posals. In addition, we experimented with the GPT-3.5 turbo LLM Figure 3: Nb. of proposals
model, denoted LEMUR (GPT3), as shown in Table 1a. Note that for LEMUR (GPT4) to solve a
LEMUR (GPT3) solved four fewer benchmarks and required more Code2Inv benchmark.
time and more calls to the GPT-3.5 turbo oracle.

5.3   S OLVING HARD SV-COMP BENCHMARKS

Next, we study LEMUR’s ability to solve hard benchmarks from the 2003 edition of SV-
COMP (Beyer, 2023). We focus on benchmarks with less than 150 tokens (after removing com-
ments and unnecessary headers, and after applying clang-formatting).We select 47 benchmarks that
ESBMC and UAUTOMIZER are unable to solve within 10 minutes. The property is expected to hold
in all benchmarks. We use a 15-minute per-instance timeout.
The results are shown in Table 1b. Impressively, with the guidance of the proof goals suggested
by the LLM, LEMUR (GPT4) is able to solve 25 of the 47 SV-COMP benchmarks. While ESBMC
and UAUTOMIZER can each solve only 1 benchmark. Upon closer examination, 8 of the solved


                                                  8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


instances contain two loops and 5 contain three or more loops. This suggests that LEMUR is capable
of (i) handling programs with more than one loop; and (ii) boosting the performance of state-of-the-
art conventional C program verifiers.
The average number of proposals before solving a problem is higher
compared to the Code2Inv benchmarks (7.2 vs. 4.7). Fig. 4 sheds
more light on the behavior of LEMUR (GPT4). We observe that 12
of the 26 solved instances require at least 5 proposals in total.
We found that LLM oracles can produce surprisingly insightful loop
invariants which are difficult for conventional formal methods to
synthesize. While predicate-abstraction-based techniques typically
generate predicates that involve only the operators and values in the
program and follow a particular template, LLMs are not constrained
by these limitations. For example, for the program in Fig. 2, GPT-4
can consistently generate x%4==0 as the loop invariant although Figure 4: Nb. of proposals
the modulo operator is not present in the program. In another ex- for LEMUR (GPT4) to solve
ample, the LLM correctly understands the range of an unsigned an SV-COMP benchmark.
char and suggests variable bounds as the assumption, which ends up being the key to proving the
property. This example is shown in the extended version of the paper (Wu et al., 2023). There are
also several cases where the LLM generates disjunctive invariants that precisely characterize the
behavior of the loops.
Finally, we observe that LEMUR (GPT4) significantly outperforms LEMUR (GPT3) across all met-
rics. This suggests that the choice of oracle is also crucial for performance. Additional experiments
are presented in the extended version of the paper (Wu et al., 2023). They include running the base-
line solvers with a 12 hour timeout, using a configuration in which repair rules are not employed in
Alg. 1, and running LEMUR multiple times to account for the stochasticity of the oracles.

6   D ISCUSSION OF LIMITATIONS AND EXTENSIONS
In this work, we propose a novel framework, LEMUR, which combines automated reasoning and
LLMs. To the best of our knowledge, LEMUR is the first framework to provide a theoretical founda-
tion for such an integration via a formal calculus. We also implemented LEMUR as a fully automated
framework and demonstrated its efficiency on standard benchmark sets. We conclude by discussing
the current limitations of LEMUR, which also point to future research directions.
As mentioned above, the practical performance of LEMUR depends on two types of external calls:
the verifiers and the LLMs. Any improvements in these tools should translate into LEMUR im-
provements. Currently, modern verifiers are capable of handling only relatively small programs (see
SV-COMP’23 (Beyer, 2023)). Interestingly, even when provided with a strong invariant, they some-
times cannot solve the verification problem. One research direction that we envision is to customize
LEMUR to a particular back-end verifier to obtain better performance and solve larger programs.

We also note that LEMUR primarily focuses on imperative languages. Extending it to functional
languages is a direction for future research.
While our experience with LLMs was largely positive (see Section 5.1 for a discussion of limitations
that have already been at least partially addressed), there are more interesting challenges to tackle.
First, current LLMs have token limits, and many practical programs exceed those limits. Second,
it is sometimes challenging for LLMs to generate complex logical formulas such as those with
nested if-then-else expressions. We believe that to overcome this limitation, we need to (i) develop a
prompting language for LLM invariant generation, and (ii) fine-tune LLMs for invariant generation
tasks using this language. Third, reasoning about programs with multiple loops remains challenging
for LLMs. We believe fine-tuning could help address this challenge. Fourth, we observed that the
performance of LEMUR may vary depending on the LLM oracle. For example, our experiments
demonstrate that GPT-4 is superior to GPT-3.5 turbo on tested benchmarks. Finally, due to the
limitations of LLMs and automated reasoners, our framework does not yet offer a significant boost
for complex properties of real-world C libraries. However, a modular approach, where large parts
of the program are abstracted and summarized in the form of pre- and post-conditions, can benefit
from frameworks like LEMUR.


                                                  9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Dirk Beyer. Competition on software verification and witness validation: Sv-comp 2023. In Sriram
  Sankaranarayanan and Natasha Sharygina (eds.), Tools and Algorithms for the Construction and
  Analysis of Systems, pp. 495–522, Cham, 2023. Springer Nature Switzerland. ISBN 978-3-031-
  30820-8.

Yiannis Charalambous, Norbert Tihanyi, Ridhi Jain, Youcheng Sun, Mohamed Amine Ferrag, and
  Lucas C. Cordeiro. A new era in software security: Towards self-healing software via large
  language models and formal verification, 2023.

Mark Chen, Jerry Tworek, Heewoo Jun, Qiming Yuan, Henrique Pondé de Oliveira Pinto, Jared
 Kaplan, Harrison Edwards, Yuri Burda, Nicholas Joseph, Greg Brockman, Alex Ray, Raul Puri,
 Gretchen Krueger, Michael Petrov, Heidy Khlaaf, Girish Sastry, Pamela Mishkin, Brooke Chan,
 Scott Gray, Nick Ryder, Mikhail Pavlov, Alethea Power, Lukasz Kaiser, Mohammad Bavar-
 ian, Clemens Winter, Philippe Tillet, Felipe Petroski Such, Dave Cummings, Matthias Plap-
 pert, Fotios Chantzis, Elizabeth Barnes, Ariel Herbert-Voss, William Hebgen Guss, Alex Nichol,
 Alex Paino, Nikolas Tezak, Jie Tang, Igor Babuschkin, Suchir Balaji, Shantanu Jain, William
 Saunders, Christopher Hesse, Andrew N. Carr, Jan Leike, Joshua Achiam, Vedant Misra, Evan
 Morikawa, Alec Radford, Matthew Knight, Miles Brundage, Mira Murati, Katie Mayer, Pe-
 ter Welinder, Bob McGrew, Dario Amodei, Sam McCandlish, Ilya Sutskever, and Wojciech
 Zaremba. Evaluating large language models trained on code. CoRR, abs/2107.03374, 2021.
 URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2107.03374.

Edmund M Clarke, Thomas A Henzinger, Helmut Veith, Roderick Bloem, et al. Handbook of model
  checking, volume 10. Springer, 2018.

Mikhail R Gadelha, Felipe R Monteiro, Jeremy Morse, Lucas C Cordeiro, Bernd Fischer, and De-
 nis A Nicole. Esbmc 5.0: an industrial-strength c model checker. In Proceedings of the 33rd
 ACM/IEEE International Conference on Automated Software Engineering, pp. 888–891, 2018.

Inc. GitHub. GitHub Copilot. https://copilot.github.com/, 2021. Accessed: September
  2023.

Matthias Heizmann, Jürgen Christ, Daniel Dietsch, Evren Ermis, Jochen Hoenicke, Markus Lin-
 denmann, Alexander Nutz, Christian Schilling, and Andreas Podelski. Ultimate automizer with
 smtinterpol: (competition contribution). In International Conference on Tools and Algorithms for
 the Construction and Analysis of Systems, pp. 641–643. Springer, 2013.

Daniel Kroening and Michael Tautschnig. Cbmc–c bounded model checker: (competition contribu-
  tion). In Tools and Algorithms for the Construction and Analysis of Systems: 20th International
  Conference, TACAS 2014, Held as Part of the European Joint Conferences on Theory and Prac-
  tice of Software, ETAPS 2014, Grenoble, France, April 5-13, 2014. Proceedings 20, pp. 389–391.
  Springer, 2014.

OpenAI. Gpt-4 technical report, 2023.

Kexin Pei, David Bieber, Kensen Shi, Charles Sutton, and Pengcheng Yin. Can large language
  models reason about program invariants? In Andreas Krause, Emma Brunskill, Kyunghyun
  Cho, Barbara Engelhardt, Sivan Sabato, and Jonathan Scarlett (eds.), Proceedings of the 40th
  International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 202 of Proceedings of Machine Learning
  Research, pp. 27496–27520. PMLR, 23–29 Jul 2023. URL https://proceedings.mlr.
  press/v202/pei23a.html.

Xujie Si, Aaditya Naik, Hanjun Dai, Mayur Naik, and Le Song. Code2inv: A deep learning frame-
  work for program verification. In Shuvendu K. Lahiri and Chao Wang (eds.), Computer Aided
  Verification - 32nd International Conference, CAV 2020, Los Angeles, CA, USA, July 21-24,
  2020, Proceedings, Part II, volume 12225 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pp. 151–164.
  Springer, 2020. doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-53291-8\ 9. URL https://doi.org/10.1007/
  978-3-030-53291-8_9.


                                               10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Fei Xia, Ed Chi, Quoc V Le, Denny
  Zhou, et al. Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:24824–24837, 2022.
Martin White, Michele Tufano, Matias Martinez, Martin Monperrus, and Denys Poshyvanyk. Sort-
 ing and transforming program repair ingredients via deep learning code similarities. In 2019 IEEE
 26th International Conference on Software Analysis, Evolution and Reengineering (SANER).
 IEEE, feb 2019. doi: 10.1109/saner.2019.8668043. URL https://doi.org/10.1109%
 2Fsaner.2019.8668043.
Haoze Wu, Clark Barrett, and Nina Narodytska. Lemur: Integrating large language models in
  automated program verification. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.04870, 2023.


                                               11
