Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


L ARGE -BATCH ,  I TERATION -E FFICIENT                                                N EURAL
BAYESIAN D ESIGN O PTIMIZATION
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT

         Bayesian optimization (BO) provides a powerful framework for optimizing black-
         box, expensive-to-evaluate functions. It is therefore an attractive tool for engineer-
         ing design problems, typically involving multiple objectives. Thanks to the rapid
         advances in fabrication and measurement methods as well as parallel computing
         infrastructure, querying many design problems can be heavily parallelized. This
         class of problems challenges BO with an unprecedented setup where it has to deal
         with very large batches, shifting its focus from sample efficiency to iteration effi-
         ciency. We present a novel Bayesian optimization framework specifically tailored
         to address these limitations. Our key contribution is a highly scalable, sample-based
         acquisition function that performs a non-dominated sorting of not only the objec-
         tives but also their associated uncertainty. We show that our acquisition function
         in combination with different Bayesian neural network surrogates is effective in
         data-intensive environments with a minimal number of iterations. We demonstrate
         the superiority of our method by comparing it with state-of-the-art multi-objective
         optimizations. We perform our evaluation on two real-world problems - airfoil de-
         sign and 3D printing - showcasing the applicability and efficiency of our approach.
         Our code is available at: https://github.com/an-on-ym-ous/lbn_mobo


1   I NTRODUCTION

Design of objects and materials that lead to a specific performance, typically defined by multiple
objectives, is a long-standing, critical problem in engineering Arnold (2018). For real-world de-
sign problems, the forward mechanisms that govern the design processes are either sophisticated
physics-based simulations or time- and labor-intensive lab experiments. We call these underlying
mechanisms native forward processes (NFP), which unlike surrogate models, are the most faithful
design evaluation tools at our disposal. A powerful paradigm of design optimization is Bayesian
optimization Jones et al. (1998) featuring a surrogate model that queries the NFP iteratively using a
single data sample or a small batch of data. The choice of the next-iteration data is through optimizing
a so-called acquisition function.
While Bayesian optimization literature focuses on solutions with a minimum number of NFP evalu-
ations, a practically common but heavily underrepresented class of problems, especially in design
optimization, are those in which heavy parallelization is possible but performing iteration is very
demanding. A lower number of iterations is particularly beneficial in experimental scenarios where
conducting lab experiments can be costly and time-consuming, making it desirable to minimize the
number of lab visits. Thanks to emerging high throughput experimentation MacLeod et al. (2022),
many of these problems lend themselves well to large-batch settings where it is feasible to produce
a large batch of samples in an iteration with almost equivalent cost of generating a single sample.
In such setups, it is typically desirable to increase the batch size as large as possible. This type of
setup is abundant in real-world applications, such as materials science Raccuglia et al. (2016), drug
discovery Dahl et al. (2014), robotics Marco et al. (2016), aerospace engineering Chen and Ahmed
(2021), manufacturing Cucerca et al. (2020); Panetta et al. (2022), computational fluid dynamics
Jofre and Doostan (2022); Du et al. (2021); Sun et al. (2023), etc. Despite the numerous real-world
experiments that could gain from large-batch optimization, there is a remarkable scarcity of Bayesian
optimization algorithms adept at managing large batches particularly for multi-objective optimization.
To solve this class of problems effectively, we need to work toward shifting the paradigm from sample


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


efficiency to iteration efficiency. Existing methods have limitations in retrieving good solutions either
in a few iterations, or handling very large training data, or dealing with multiple objectives.
We address these shortcomings by proposing a large-batch, neural multi-objective Bayesian opti-
mization method (LBN-MOBO). The larger batch size results in fewer iterations needed to identify
the Pareto front, enhancing the efficiency significantly. Similar to any BO framework, our method
has two key components. First, demonstrating the insufficiency of current acquisition functions
in dealing with large batch regimes, we propose a highly practical acquisition function based on
multi-objective sorting of samples where not only the performance objective but also its associated
uncertainty is considered when ranking the samples. By bringing in the uncertainty as an additional
objective, LBN-MOBO can explore previously unseen regions, preventing it from getting trapped
in local minima. Second, a surrogate model capable of handling very large batches of data and also
computing predictive uncertainty. We illustrate that, while our pipeline is compatible with all the
introduced Bayesian neural networks (BNNs), Deep Ensembles Lakshminarayanan et al. (2016)
ultimately presents the most balanced trade-off between performance and scalability. We evaluate a
range of state-of-the-art acquisition functions and surrogate models to show how current Bayesian
optimizers struggle to exploit such large batch sizes. While we focus on evaluating neural BO
frameworks in the paper, suitable for learning via large batches, we provide extensive evaluation of a
set of promising standard BO methods (relying on Gaussian process surrogates) in the Appendix.
We investigate two real-world problems one requiring hands-on lab work with a 3D printer and the
second one an expensive CFD fluid dynamic simulation and show the Pareto front can be obtained
with an order of magnitude less iterations.
Our proposed method offers a set of important advantages. First, it can retrieve a dense Pareto front,
capturing the trade-off between multiple objectives, at each iteration which results in convergence in
as few iterations as possible. Second, it can handle very large training data, enabling it to be applied
to a wide range of engineering problems including those arising from high-dimensional design
spaces. Third, it is highly parallelizable, shifting the computational bottleneck from the optimization
algorithm to the computational infrastructure or experimentation capacities used to evaluate the NFP.
Our contributions include:
       • A novel and scalable Bayesian optimization algorithm designed for the parallel, large-batch
         optimization of multi-objective problems, with a focus on iteration efficiency.
       • A novel, practical acquisition function designed to effectively manage large batch multi-
         objective optimizations without inducing a computational bottleneck. Remarkably, this
         function is architected to be embarrassingly parallelizable, is gradient-free, offering the flex-
         ibility to be paired with any arbitrary surrogate models, thereby broadening its applicability
         and utility in diverse optimization scenarios.
       • Extensive and critical evaluation of the state-of-the art BO acquisition functions and surro-
         gate models in large batch regimes.

2     R ELATED WORK : M ULTI - OBJECTIVE NEURAL BAYESIAN OPTIMIZATION
Standard BO methods face two major bottleneck when given large batch sizes for multi-objective
optimization. Initially the acquisition function cannot scale with the data and becomes extremely
slow and later the Gaussian process surrogate faces great difficulty in fitting the large amount of data.
Thus, in this section we focus on a variety of neural surrogate models for Bayesian optimization. We
start by reviewing suitable acquisition functions capable of handling multiple objectives for at least a
batch size of two. In Section 3, we show how all of them can fail in a large batch setup.

2.1   M ULTI OBJECTIVE BATCH ACQUISITION FUNCTIONS

Expected Hypervolume Improvement (EHVI) serves as an acquisition function in multi-objective
Bayesian optimization (MOBO). EHVI calculates the expected improvement in the hypervolume of
the Pareto front. It has gained significant attention due to its capability to handle multi-objective opti-
mization problems effectively. Emmerich et al. (2005) initially proposed the concept of hypervolume
improvement, and several advancements have been made since then. qEHVI is a batch version of
EHVI, designed to make decisions about querying multiple points in the design space simultaneously
Daulton et al. (2020).


                                                    2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Non-dominated EHVI (NEHVI) is a variant of EHVI that focuses on the improvement of non-
dominated points Daulton et al. (2021). The introduction of NEHVI was a step forward in dealing
with issues related to the scalability of EHVI by reducing the complexity from exponential to
polynomial with respect to the batch size. Moreover, NEHVI has demonstrated superior performance
in addressing high-dimensional problems. Following the development of qEHVI, qNEHVI emerged
as the batch variant of NEHVI.
Pareto Efficient Global Optimization (ParEGO) transforms a multi-objective problem into a series
of single-objective problems through scalarization functions, combining the strengths of Efficient
Global Optimization (EGO) in a multi-objective setting Knowles (2006). The batch version of
ParEGO, qParEGO, facilitates parallel evaluations of multiple points, significantly reducing the time
required to find optimal solutions in multi-objective optimization scenarios Daulton et al. (2020).
In Section 3 , we demonstrate the limitations of these acquisition functions while scaled to larger
batch sizes. As we will see, several methods either fail to conclude the optimization process or
encounter extreme inefficiencies for batch sizes exceeding 1000.


2.2   BAYESIAN NEURAL SURROGATE MODELS

There have been numerous attempts to substitute Gaussian Processes (GPs) with neural networks
to improve surrogate’s scalability Li et al. (2023), but in order to convey uncertainty information,
derivation of Bayesian Neural Networks is necessary. For inferring the posterior in a Bayesian neural
network with stochastic parameters, several methods are available:
Hamiltonian Monte Carlo (HMC) is a Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) method used for
sampling from posterior distributions and has been recognized as a computational gold standard in
Bayesian inference Neal et al. (2011). HMC leverages Hamiltonian dynamics to propose candidate
states, reducing the correlation between consecutive samples and improving sampling efficiency.
Stochastic Gradient HMC (SGMC) is a variant of HMC that incorporates stochastic gradients
to scale to large datasets by working with mini-batches Chen et al. (2014). SGHMC addresses the
challenges of noise introduced by mini-batch gradients, making it a scalable and robust approach for
approximate Bayesian inference.
Deep Ensembles trains multiple neural networks independently and aggregates their predictions to
approximate the posterior predictive distribution Lakshminarayanan et al. (2016). This technique
serves as a practical and effective heuristic for uncertainty estimation in BO.
Monte Carlo Dropout (MC Dropout) serves as a technique for approximating uncertainty in neural
network models Gal and Ghahramani (2016). It involves performing dropout at inference time and
running multiple forward passes (Monte Carlo simulations) through the network, each time with
different dropped-out nodes. By averaging the results of these passes, MC Dropout provides a
measure of uncertainty associated with the model’s predictions.
Aside from methods for inferring the posterior of neural networks with stochastic parameters, several
fundamentally different strategies exist for adapting a neural network as a Bayesian surrogate model:
Infinite Width Bayesian Neural Networks (IBNNs) are another class of neural surrogate models
that can be seen as a bridge between the realm of neural networks and Gaussian processes. Research
has shown that as a neural network’s width approaches infinity, the distributions of the functions
represented by the network converge to a Gaussian Process Neal (2012); Lee et al. (2017). This
phenomenon implies that IBNNs can be seen as GPs with a specific neural network-derived covariance
function. The properties of IBNNs make them a scalable alternative to traditional GPs, especially in
high-dimensional spaces.
Deep Kernel Learning (DKL) combines deep neural networks and Gaussian Processes to model
complex and high-dimensional data sets, harnessing the representational power of deep learning and
the uncertainty quantification of GPs Wilson et al. (2016b;a); Ober et al. (2021). In DKL, a neural
network acts as a feature extractor, transforming input data into a feature space where a GP models
the relationships between the transformed inputs and the output at the last layer. This approach offers
advantages such as non-linear feature learning, uncertainty quantification, and flexibility in model
architecture.


                                                  3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                               SGHMC             HMC                       Deep Ensembles              DKL               IBNN

                                               qEHVI                                         qNEHVI                                    qParEGO
                                                                         0.3
                             0.3                                                                                     0.3


               Hypervolume
                                                                         0.25
                             0.25                                                                                    0.25

                             0.2                                         0.2                                         0.2

                             0.15                                        0.15                                        0.15

                             0.1                                         0.1                                         0.1
                                      10
                                           1            2
                                                       10       10
                                                                     3            10 1             10 2     10 3              10
                                                                                                                                   1
                                                                                                                                            10
                                                                                                                                                 2
                                                                                                                                                     10
                                                                                                                                                          3

                                                                                           Batch size

                                                                              5
                                                                         10                                          10
                                                                                                                          5



                                  3                                           4
                             10                                          10                                          10
                                                                                                                          4
               Time (s)


                                                                              3
                                                                         10                                          10
                                                                                                                          3



                                                                              2
                                  2                                      10                                          10
                                                                                                                          2
                             10
                                                                              1
                                           1                2        3   10            1                2        3
                                                                                                                     10
                                                                                                                          1
                                      10               10       10                10               10       10                     1             2        3
                                                                                                                              10            10       10
                                                                                           Batch size


    Figure 1: Optimizing 6D ZDT3 problem using a range of acquisition functions and surrogates.


In the following sections, we will illustrate how various combinations of these surrogate-acquisition
pairs struggle to process even a moderate batch size of 500 samples, rendering them unsuitable for
our class of problems which typically involves batch sizes an order of magnitude larger.


3     A NALYSIS OF C ONTEMPORARY BATCH N EURAL M ULTI -O BJECTIVE BO

In this section, we critically evaluate a selection of advanced acquisition functions adept at multi-
objective batch optimization. Our findings highlight their limitations, specifically their inability to
conduct optimization using large data batches. In combination with the acquisition functions, we
evaluate a range of contemporary neural surrogates. The results indicate that the primary bottleneck
in numerous scenarios is the acquisition function, followed by the surrogate. For this empirical
validation, we rely on the ZDT3 problem. ZDT3 refers to one of the problems in the Zitzler-Deb-
Thiele (ZDT) test suite Zitzler et al. (2000), widely used to evaluate and compare the performance
of multi-objective optimizations. ZDT3 specifically consists of two objectives and a disjoint Pareto
front (Section C.1 of the Appendix).
We start by computing the Pareto front of the 6-dimensional ZDT3 problem using qEHVI using
several neural surrogates: DKL, HMC, IBNN, SGHMC, and Deep Ensembles (Section 2.2). For
each batch size, the optimization is executed for 10 iterations, presenting the hypervolume of the best
Pareto front achieved. Figure 1 (top left) demonstrates that when employing qEHVI as the acquisition
function, the optimization stagnates at a batch size of 10. Notably, expanding to a batch size of 20
results in memory overflows independent of the surrogate. The compute time for this experiment is
shown in Figure 1 (bottom left).
For applying qNEHVI and ParEGO, we rely on BoTorch implementation that supports only DKL
and IBNN. Figure 1 reveals that both acquisition functions can handle batch sizes larger than qEHVI.
Nonetheless, as depicted in Figure 1 (bottom row, middle and right), going beyond batch sizes larger
than 200 increases the computational demand dramatically. In this work, each algorithm’s GPU
run-time was restricted to 44 hours for every batch size optimization process. More information
regarding the hardware configuration is presented in Section D of the Appendix. Collectively, these
experiments signify a gap in the capabilities of contemporary acquisition functions: They struggle
with batch sizes approaching 500 samples, a scenario frequently encountered in our real-world
applications, as elaborated in Section 5. Next, we introduce a novel acquisition function uniquely
designed for working with extremely large batches.


4     M ETHOD : L ARGE - BATCH NEURAL MOBO

Bayesian optimization for optimizing black-box NFP, Φ, uses a surrogate model to create a prior
over the objective function, which is updated with each new observation. An acquisition function AF,
derived from the surrogate model, guides the selection of the next samples, balancing exploration and


                                                                                             4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                   Acquisition
                                                                                                                                    Max
                                                                                high performance


                                                                                                                                          Uncertainty 1
                                                                   BNN


                                                                                                    Performance 1
                                                                                 high uncertainty
                                        Train the                                 Performance
                                          BNN                                     Uncertainty
                              Random
                              designs                           Retrain                                                             Min
                                                               the BNN                                              Performance 2

                                                                                                                                    Max


                                                                                                                                          Uncertainty 2
                                                                                                    Performance 1
                                               Performance 1
                                                                                  Evaluate
                                                                                 candidates                                         Min
                                                                Performance 2    on the NFP                         Performance 2
                                                                    NFP                                                 Surrogate


Figure 2: LBN-MOBO starts with training a Bayesian neural network (fBN N ) on random designs.
We then run our acquisition function (AF) and compute a 2MD Pareto front to explore promising
(green) and under-represented regions (red) of the NFP. We then append the acquired candidates
to the data set and retrain fBN N . By incorporating uncertainty information alongside the Pareto
front of the best performances (blue candidates), we identify promising candidates in areas of high
uncertainty, where there is potential for additional information (red candidates).



exploitation. After evaluating the sample’s performance, the surrogate model is updated. The process
continues until a predetermined stopping criterion is reached.
Our method, LBN-MOBO, works on the same principles but is devised to achieve scalability.
LBN-MOBO begins with a random sampling of the design space US (X ) of the given NFP (Φ).
Subsequently, it fits an approximation of a Bayesian neural network surrogate fBN N to the randomly
sampled dataset X0 in order to handle larger training data. Additionally, the Bayesian neural network
fBN N , and particularly its approximation through Deep Ensembles Lakshminarayanan et al. (2016),
enables computing predictive uncertainties (Fσ (x)) in a fully parallelized manner (Section 4.1). Upon
training fBN N , we utilize our acquisition function (AF) to compute the candidates, which explores
both promising and under-represented regions (Section 4.2). We append the calculated candidates to
our data and utilize the updated dataset to train the BNN for the next generation.
Figure 2 illustrates the stages of the LBN-MOBO algorithm using two objectives as an example.
Observe that some of the candidates may not be positioned on the Pareto front of the NFP (indicated
by the red regions), but they are still retained in the dataset. This is because they contribute to
enhancing the information of fBN N and decreasing its uncertainty level (Fσ (x)). Algorithm 1
provides a concise summary of all the steps of LBN-MOBO.


Algorithm 1 Large-batch, neural multi-objective Bayesian optimization (LBN-MOBO).
Input
S      // Batch size
 Q      // Number of iterations of the main algorithm
 X     // X ∈ Rn , n dimensional design space
 Φ     // Native Forward Process, e.g., a simulation
 Output PS , PF // Pareto set(designs) and Pareto front(performances) of NFP
 begin
     X0 ← US (X ) // Draw S random samples from the design space.
     Y 0 ← Φ(X0 ) // Query Φ and form the data set.
     dataset ← (X0 , Y 0 )
       0      train
      fBN N ⇐== dataset // Train the BNN surrogate.
      for i ← 1 to Q do
                        i−1
            PSi ← AF(fBN   N , S)
            PFi ← Φ(PSi ) // Calculate the performance on the NFP.
            dataset ← (PFi , PSi ) // Append new data to the old.
             i        train
            fBN N ⇐== dataset // Train the BNN surrogate.

      end
end


                                                                                5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


4.1   BAYESIAN NEURAL NETWORK SURROGATE fBN N

Given that Deep Ensembles Lakshminarayanan et al. (2016) presents the most balanced trade-off
between performance and scalability (Section 5.1), it will serve as the primary acquisition function
in our pipeline. Here, we delve into its implementation and make slight modifications to enhance
its performance further. In this work, we employ a modified version of Deep Ensembles Laksh-
minarayanan et al. (2016) as an approximation of a BNN Snoek et al. (2015). Deep Ensembles
consist of an ensemble of K neural networks, fˆk , each capable of providing a prediction µk (x) and
its associated aleatoric uncertainty σk (x) in the form of a Gaussian distribution N (µk (x), σk (x)).
In our case, in order to guide our optimizer to explore under-represented regions, we only require
epistemic uncertainty. In the areas with higher epistemic uncertainty the networks in the ensemble fit
differently due to a lack of information. Therefore, the regions with epistemic uncertainty are where
we could potentially find better solutions. We don’t include the aleatoric uncertainty because it finds
the built-in noise in the NFP and cannot be reduced by taking more samples. In this work, we assume
the NFPs do not feature significant noise.
Thus, we only train K neural networks using the traditional mean squared error (MSE) loss.
                                      LM
                                       k
                                         SE
                                            := (y∗ − µk (x))2 .                                       (1)

Next, we extract the epistemic uncertainty Fσ (x) from the networks in the ensemble:


                                             1 X
                                       Fµ (x) :=    µk (x),                                          (2a)
                                             K
                                                 k
                                          1 X 2
                                 Fσ (x) =     (µk (x) − F2µ (x)).                                    (2b)
                                          K
                                                   k

Apart from this modification, we find that providing a diverse set of activation functions across K
members of the ensemble significantly helps with obtaining higher quality uncertainty. More details
are provided in Section D of the appendix.

4.2   2MD ACQUISITION FUNCTION

An acquisition function should predict the worthiest candidates for the next iteration of the Bayesian
optimization Shahriari et al. (2015). This translates to not only selecting designs with high perfor-
mance on the surrogate model but also considering the uncertainty of the surrogate model. Candidates
in uncertain regions of the surrogate model may contain appropriate solutions and a powerful ac-
quisition function should be able to explore these regions effectively. Several popular acquisition
functions such as Expected Improvement Jones et al. (1998) and Upper Confidence Bound Brochu
et al. (2010) operate on this principle.
Without the loss of generality, we assume a problem that seeks to maximize performance objectives.
Our acquisition function employs the widely-used NSGA-II Deb et al. (2002) and specifically its
multi-objective non-dominated sorting method (Section A.1). This sorting is the key to find the Pareto
front of the surrogate at a given iteration of LBN-MOBO. The main insight of our acquisition method
is that instead of finding an M dimensional Pareto front corresponding to M objectives (each given
by Fmµ (x), m ∈ [1, M ]), it finds a 2M dimensional Pareto front where M dimensions correspond to
performance objectives and the other M dimensions correspond to the uncertainty of those objectives
(each given by Fm  σ (x), m ∈ [1, M ]). In other words, our acquisition function AF simultaneously
maximizes the predicted objectives and their associated uncertainties (both given by our surrogate
fBN N ):

                          AF := arg max Fm       m

                                         µ (x), Fσ (x) , m ∈ [1, M ] .                                (3)
                                        x

Note that in practice NSGA-II experiences a sample size bottleneck and struggles to scale effectively
as the population expands. To overcome this limitation, we propose to compute in parallel independent
acquisitions (different NSGA-II seeds) with smaller batch sizes, and combine the results. Ultimately,
similar to our surrogate model, our acquisition function (AF) is fully parallelizable, and its performance


                                                       6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                     GT         SGHMC              HMC   Deep Ensembles             DKL     IBNN           MC Dropout
                             0.35                                                             105


                             0.3                                                              104


                             0.25                                                             103


               Hypervolume


                                                                                   Time (s)
                             0.2                                                              102


                             0.15                                                             101


                             0.1                                                              100
                               100        101                102         103                          101                 102           103
                                                Batch size                                                   Batch size



Figure 3: ZDT3 benchmark optimization via 2MD acquisition function and various neural BO
surrogate models. The fitting time of each model was recorded to assess computational efficiency.


remains unhampered even when batch size increases. Therefore, the sole limiting factor for executing
LBN-MOBO is our parallel processing or experimentation capability when querying the NFP.
The inset figure provides an intuitive explanation by showing a schematic four-                P1
dimensional acquisition function. Clearly, we are interested in evaluating the          P2
orange samples (currently measured only using the surrogate) on the NFP as they
are suggested by AF to be dominant in at least one performance dimension (P1 or
P2). On the other hand, the blue, red, and green samples are chosen partially or                       U2
entirely due to their high uncertainty in at least one dimension (U1 or U2). These
samples correspond to unexplored regions in the design space. They are beneficial
in two ways: either they prove to be part of the Pareto front once being evaluated       U1
on the NFP, or they contribute to filling the gap between the surrogate and the NFP, leading to a more
informative surrogate model. This enhances the quality of the surrogate model, making it as similar
as possible to the NFP, thereby improving its predictive power for subsequent iterations.

5     E VALUATION AND D ISCUSSION
Before starting with two challenging real-world problems we evaluate the most scalable surrogate
capable of handling large batch sizes in a reasonable time. While the focus of this section is on
optimizing real-world problems using our neural Bayesian optimization, a comprehensive evaluation
of various standard state-of-the-art Bayesian optimization techniques, as well as multi-objective
evolutionary algorithms, can be found in Section C of the Appendix.

5.1   S ELECTING THE MOST SUITABLE SURROGATE

A pivotal aspect, distinct from the acquisition function selection, is the choice of the neural surrogate.
Even though our pipeline can work with any surrogate models (Appendix Section B.2), our objective
is identifying the model that has the most efficiency and scalability. Analogous to Section 3, we assess
the performance of various surrogate models, this time employing our 2MD acquisition function.
As depicted in Figure 3 (left), by using our proposed acquisition function, the bottleneck associated
with the acquisition function is entirely alleviated, and all methods, with the exception of IBNN,
have successfully completed the optimization for batch sizes up to 1000. Figure 3 (right) shows
the optimization time for different surrogates, each undergoing a 10-iteration optimization across a
spectrum of batch sizes. Deep Ensembles and MC dropout prove to be the most time-efficient models,
adeptly conducting optimizations for batch sizes up to 1000 and finding the best Pareto front in the
least number of iterations. These experiments substantiate Deep Ensembles and MC dropout as the
clear choice to be paired with our novel surrogate model. A detailed explanation of how we use the
MC dropout in combination with our 2MD acquisition is provided in the Appendix Section B.1. We
have provided more challenging experiments in the appendix with larger input and output dimensions
(Appendix Section C.3).

5.2   R EAL - WORLD E XPERIMENT SET UP

As discussed earlier, we found LBN-MOBO to be useful in two important classes of experiment:
those involving cumbersome lab work or expensive simulations which can be parallelized.


                                                                               7
 Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                             70
                                             60                                                                                  100
          0.8                                                                            1.4
                                             50


                                                                                                                                CIE a*
                                         Cl/Cd


                                                                                Hypervolume
Hypervolume
          0.6                                40                                          1.2                                             0
          0.4                                30                                               1
                                             20                                                                                 -100         Random
          0.2        LBN-MOBO-Dropout        10             LBN-MOBO-dropout             0.8            LBN-MOBO-Dropout        -150         LBN-MOBO-Dropout
                                                            LBN-MOBO-ensemble
                     LBN-MOBO-Ensemble                      Random                                      LBN-MOBO-Ensembles                   LBN-MOBO-Ensemble
              0                               0                                          0.6
                  2   4       6     8          0   0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6                        2      4    6      8     10       -200 -100 0        100 200 300 400
                  Number of iterations                     Cl                                         Number of iterations                            CIE b*

                       (a)                               (b)                                              (c)                                         (d)


 Figure 4: We present the evolution of hypervolume and the Pareto front for both the airfoil and
 the printer color gamut problems, utilizing LBN-MOBO with Deep Ensembles and MC dropout as
 the surrogate models. Figure (a) shows the hypervolume expansion of the Airfoil problem, and (b)
 represents the Pareto front calculated using each surrogate. Similarly, (c) depicts the hypervolume
 expansion of the printer color gamut problem, and (d) displays the gamut actually discovered by
 LBN-MOBO using both surrogates.


 3D printer’s color gamut experiment is an examples of type 1 experiments. The color gamut is the
 range of all colors that a device, such as a printer, can produce. The colorfulness is quantified using
 the CIE a*b* color space CIE (2004). In this space the diversity of colors directly translates into the
 area of the CIE a*b* plot. The Bayesian optimization iteratively enlarges this area as it discovers
 more saturated colors 1 . 3D printer is capable of generating many small (e.g., 1x1 mm) patches of
 color in a single operation making it a perfect show case for the benefits of large-batch optimization
 that LBN-MOBO can perform. In Sections 5.3 and C we show how this approach outperforms all
 other algorithms. More details of this experiment can be found in Section C.5.2 of Appendix.
Airfoil’s lift (Cl ) and drag (Cd ) coefficient optimization falls into the second category of problems.
In this setup we have control over the shape of the airfoils through 6 design parameters. The goal is
to optimize the the designs to generate the largest Cl and Cl /Cd ratio. The evaluation of a single
shape using a CFD simulator, i.e., NFP, is lengthy. Thus, to minimize the total optimization time we
can rely on parallel computing to create large batches of data and find the best Pareto front in a few
iterations. More details of the airfoil experiment can be found in Section C.5.1 of Appendix.

 5.3              LBN-MOBO FOR REAL - WORLD PROBLEMS

In this study, we delve into the practical capabilities of LBN-MOBO by applying it to two complex
real-world problems: airfoil and printer’s color gamut, employing larger batch sizes of 15,000 and
20,000, respectively. The primary focus of this section is a comparison between LBN-MOBO
with MC dropout and LBN-MOBO with Deep Ensembles. Both variations exhibit commendable
performance in addressing the complexities of the selected problems, with Deep Ensembles showing
a better performance. A comprehensive evaluation of additional methods on these problems is
presented in Section C.6.1 andC.6.2 of Appendix. There we also establish the superiority of our
method over a few other algorithms that can operate in this large batch regime.
Figure 4 illustrates the analysis for the airfoil problem, showcasing the performance of LBN-MOBO
with MC dropout and with Deep Ensembles. This experiment introduces the complex problem of
mapping the airfoil shapes to intricate aerodynamic properties. Both variations of LBN-MOBO runs
with batch size equal 15,000. The candidate samples of each optimization iteration is simulated by
the high-fidelity CFD solver OpenFOAM OpenFOAM Foundation (2021). Remarkably, as depicted
in Figure 4a, both LBN-MOBO variations are capable of handling this huge batch of data and uncover
superior Pareto fronts in a limited number of iterations. We can observe the superior performance of
LBN-MOBO utilizing Deep Ensembles due to its higher-quality epistemic uncertainty.
 For the printer’s color gamut exploration, LBN-MOBO initiates with 10,000 samples, with each
 subsequent iteration managing a batch size of 20,000 samples. The high dimensionality of this design
 space (44) presents a formidable challenge, rendering it an intriguing test case. The performance
    1
      For this problem, we solve four Bayesian optimizations for four quadrants in order to advance the Pareto
 front in four different segments.


                                                                                8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


              70                                                                    150

              60                                                                    100

              50                                                                    50
              40                                                                     0


                                                                           CIE a*
      Cl/Cd

              30
                                                                                    -50
              20
                                                                                -100
              10
                                           With uncertainty                     -150      With uncertainty
               0                           Without uncertainty                            Without uncertainty
                                                                                -200
                   0   0.1   0.2   0.3     0.4      0.5          0.6               -200   -100       0          100   200   300   400
                                   Cl                                                                       CIE b*


                             (a) Airfoil                                                          (b) Color gamut

Figure 5: Ablation studies on the effect of uncertainty in our 2MD acquisition function, using our
real-world problems.


space for this experiment is represented by the 2-dimensional a*b* color space. Figure 4c vividly
demonstrates the expedited increase in the hypervolume (are) of the color gamut achieved by LBN-
MOBO. The final gamut estimation for both variations of LBN-MOBO after 10 iterations is illustrated
in Figure 4d, revealing the effectiveness of our method in estimating a significantly large gamut is
small number of iterations.

5.4   T HE IMPACT OF UNCERTAINTY ON THE PERFORMANCE OF LBN-MOBO

One of the key factors enhancing the performance of LBN-MOBO is its use of uncertainty to effec-
tively explore under-represented parts of the design space. We investigate the impact of uncertainty
on the computation of the Pareto front for both airfoil design and color gamut exploration. Both ex-
perimental setups mirror the conditions described in Section 5.3, except that they exclude uncertainty
information. The candidate distribution from iteration 4 to 8 is illustrated in Figures 5a and 5b. For
a clearer depiction of the samples’ spatial distribution, we have illustrated their convex hull. Note
that in the absence of uncertainty, the candidates have a tendency to cluster within particular areas.
This clustering leads to diminished diversity and, as a consequence, a reduction in the capacity for
exploration (as represented by the yellow samples). Conversely, when uncertainty is incorporated
into the process, we observe an increase in the diversity of the candidates and consequently, a broader
Pareto front is discovered (represented by blue samples). Furthermore, uncertainty guides the candi-
dates to progressively bridge the information gap in the surrogate models, making them increasingly
similar to the NFP. This factor further enhances the quality of the Pareto front retrieved through the
LBN-MOBO process.
We also observe that when uncertainty is excluded from the process, the budget for surrogate Pareto
front optimization is concentrated solely on performance dimensions. This concentration may
occasionally lead to a slight local enhancement in optimization, as illustrated in the bottom-left
quarter of Figure 5b.

Limitations. LBN-MOBO emerges as a potent optimizer for problems where an increase in
the batch size does not significantly inflate simulation or experimentation costs, but iterations are
expensive. Notably, LBN-MOBO not only retrieves a superior Pareto front but also enhances the
surrogate model throughout the optimization process, making it closely resemble the NFP. This
implies that, within the context of active learning, this methodology could be implemented: starting
with a random dataset and incrementally training the network with missing data until it converges to
the NFP. Looking forward, there are a few key aspects of this method that warrant further exploration.
First, the potential of LBN-MOBO in managing design constraints needs to be assessed. Second,
an analysis of its performance in the presence of noisy data could be undertaken, and possibly, it
could be extended to enhance its robustness against noise. Finally, while our current acquisition
function is tuning-free, it is intriguing to explore explicit methods that manipulate the balance between
exploration and exploitation and see how this balance affects the overall performance of LBN-MOBO.


                                                                       9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Navid Ansari, Hans-Peter Seidel, and Vahid Babaei. Mixed integer neural inverse design. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2109.12888, 2021.
Navid Ansari, Hans-Peter Seidel, Nima Vahidi Ferdowsi, and Vahid Babaei. Autoinverse: Uncertainty
  aware inversion of neural networks. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:
  8675–8686, 2022.
Frances H Arnold. Directed evolution: bringing new chemistry to life. Angewandte Chemie
  International Edition, 57(16):4143–4148, 2018.
Jonathan T Barron. Continuously differentiable exponential linear units.           arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1704.07483, 2017.
Syrine Belakaria, Aryan Deshwal, Nitthilan Kannappan Jayakodi, and Janardhan Rao Doppa.
  Uncertainty-aware search framework for multi-objective bayesian optimization. In Proceedings of
  the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 34, pages 10044–10052, 2020.
J. Blank and K. Deb. pymoo: Multi-objective optimization in python. IEEE Access, 8:89497–89509,
   2020.
Eric Bradford, Artur M Schweidtmann, and Alexei Lapkin. Efficient multiobjective optimization
  employing gaussian processes, spectral sampling and a genetic algorithm. Journal of global
  optimization, 71(2):407–438, 2018.
Eric Brochu, Vlad M Cora, and Nando De Freitas. A tutorial on bayesian optimization of expensive
  cost functions, with application to active user modeling and hierarchical reinforcement learning.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:1012.2599, 2010.
Tianqi Chen, Emily Fox, and Carlos Guestrin. Stochastic gradient hamiltonian monte carlo. In
  International conference on machine learning, pages 1683–1691. PMLR, 2014.
Wei Chen and Faez Ahmed. Mo-padgan: Reparameterizing engineering designs for augmented
 multi-objective optimization. Applied Soft Computing, 113:107909, 2021.
CIE. CIE 15:2004 Colorimetry. CIE Central Bureau, 3rd edition, 2004.
Djork-Arné Clevert, Thomas Unterthiner, and Sepp Hochreiter. Fast and accurate deep network
  learning by exponential linear units (elus). arXiv preprint arXiv:1511.07289, 2015.
Sebastian Cucerca, Piotr Didyk, Hans-Peter Seidel, and Vahid Babaei. Computational image marking
  on metals via laser induced heating. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG), 39(4):70–1, 2020.
George E Dahl, Navdeep Jaitly, and Ruslan Salakhutdinov. Multi-task neural networks for qsar
  predictions. arXiv preprint arXiv:1406.1231, 2014.
Samuel Daulton, Maximilian Balandat, and Eytan Bakshy. Differentiable expected hypervolume
  improvement for parallel multi-objective bayesian optimization. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 33:9851–9864, 2020.
Samuel Daulton, Maximilian Balandat, and Eytan Bakshy. Parallel bayesian optimization of multiple
  noisy objectives with expected hypervolume improvement. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 34:2187–2200, 2021.
Kalyanmoy Deb, Amrit Pratap, Sameer Agarwal, and TAMT Meyarivan. A fast and elitist multiob-
  jective genetic algorithm: Nsga-ii. IEEE transactions on evolutionary computation, 6(2):182–197,
  2002.
Kalyanmoy Deb, Lothar Thiele, Marco Laumanns, and Eckart Zitzler. Scalable test problems for
  evolutionary multiobjective optimization. Springer, 2005.
Aryan Deshwal, Syrine Belakaria, and Janardhan Rao Doppa. Mercer features for efficient combi-
  natorial bayesian optimization. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
  volume 35, pages 7210–7218, 2021.


                                               10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Xiaosong Du, Ping He, and Joaquim RRA Martins. Rapid airfoil design optimization via neural
  networks-based parameterization and surrogate modeling. Aerospace Science and Technology,
  113:106701, 2021.
Michael Emmerich, Nicola Beume, and Boris Naujoks. An emo algorithm using the hypervol-
 ume measure as selection criterion. In International Conference on Evolutionary Multi-Criterion
 Optimization, pages 62–76. Springer, 2005.
Yarin Gal and Zoubin Ghahramani. Dropout as a bayesian approximation: Representing model
  uncertainty in deep learning. In international conference on machine learning, pages 1050–1059.
  PMLR, 2016.
Sunil Gupta, Alistair Shilton, Santu Rana, and Svetha Venkatesh. Exploiting strategy-space diversity
  for batch bayesian optimization. In International conference on artificial intelligence and statistics,
  pages 538–547. PMLR, 2018.
José Miguel Hernández-Lobato, James Requeima, Edward O Pyzer-Knapp, and Alán Aspuru-Guzik.
  Parallel and distributed thompson sampling for large-scale accelerated exploration of chemical
  space. In International conference on machine learning, pages 1470–1479. PMLR, 2017.
Andrew Howard, Mark Sandler, Grace Chu, Liang-Chieh Chen, Bo Chen, Mingxing Tan, Weijun
 Wang, Yukun Zhu, Ruoming Pang, Vijay Vasudevan, et al. Searching for mobilenetv3. In
  Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision, pages 1314–1324,
  2019.
Lluís Jofre and Alireza Doostan. Rapid aerodynamic shape optimization under uncertainty using a
  stochastic gradient approach. Structural and Multidisciplinary Optimization, 65(7):196, 2022.
Donald R Jones, Matthias Schonlau, and William J Welch. Efficient global optimization of expensive
  black-box functions. Journal of Global optimization, 13(4):455, 1998.
Joshua Knowles. Parego: A hybrid algorithm with on-line landscape approximation for expensive
  multiobjective optimization problems. IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation, 10(1):
  50–66, 2006.
Mina Konakovic Lukovic, Yunsheng Tian, and Wojciech Matusik. Diversity-guided multi-objective
 bayesian optimization with batch evaluations. Advances in Neural Information Processing
 Systems, 33:17708–17720, 2020.
Balaji Lakshminarayanan, Alexander Pritzel, and Charles Blundell. Simple and scalable predictive
  uncertainty estimation using deep ensembles. arXiv preprint arXiv:1612.01474, 2016.
Yann LeCun, Léon Bottou, Genevieve B Orr, and Klaus-Robert Müller. Efficient backprop. In Neural
  networks: Tricks of the trade, pages 9–50. Springer, 2002.
Jaehoon Lee, Yasaman Bahri, Roman Novak, Samuel S Schoenholz, Jeffrey Pennington, and Jascha
  Sohl-Dickstein. Deep neural networks as gaussian processes. arXiv preprint arXiv:1711.00165,
  2017.
Yucen Lily Li, Tim GJ Rudner, and Andrew Gordon Wilson. A study of bayesian neural network
  surrogates for bayesian optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.20028, 2023.
Andrew L Maas, Awni Y Hannun, Andrew Y Ng, et al. Rectifier nonlinearities improve neural
  network acoustic models. In Proc. icml, volume 30, page 3. Atlanta, GA, 2013.
Benjamin P MacLeod, Fraser GL Parlane, Connor C Rupnow, Kevan E Dettelbach, Michael S
  Elliott, Thomas D Morrissey, Ted H Haley, Oleksii Proskurin, Michael B Rooney, Nina Taheri-
  makhsousi, et al. A self-driving laboratory advances the pareto front for material properties. Nature
  communications, 13(1):995, 2022.
Alonso Marco, Philipp Hennig, Jeannette Bohg, Stefan Schaal, and Sebastian Trimpe. Automatic lqr
  tuning based on gaussian process global optimization. In 2016 IEEE international conference on
  robotics and automation (ICRA), pages 270–277. IEEE, 2016.


                                                  11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Vinod Nair and Geoffrey E Hinton. Rectified linear units improve restricted boltzmann machines. In
  Proceedings of the 27th international conference on machine learning (ICML-10), pages 807–814,
  2010.
Radford M Neal. Bayesian learning for neural networks, volume 118. Springer Science & Business
  Media, 2012.
Radford M Neal et al. Mcmc using hamiltonian dynamics. Handbook of markov chain monte carlo,
  2(11):2, 2011.
Sebastian W Ober, Carl E Rasmussen, and Mark van der Wilk. The promises and pitfalls of deep
  kernel learning. In Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, pages 1206–1216. PMLR, 2021.
OpenFOAM Foundation. OpenFOAM. https://openfoam.org/, 2021.
Julian Panetta, Haleh Mohammadian, Emiliano Luci, and Vahid Babaei. Shape from release: Inverse
  design and fabrication of controlled release structures. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG), 41
  (6):1–14, 2022.
Kyoungwoo Park and Juhee Lee. Optimal design of two-dimensional wings in ground effect using
  multi-objective genetic algorithm. Ocean Engineering, 37(10):902–912, 2010.
Paul Raccuglia, Katherine C Elbert, Philip DF Adler, Casey Falk, Malia B Wenny, Aurelio Mollo,
  Matthias Zeller, Sorelle A Friedler, Joshua Schrier, and Alexander J Norquist. Machine-learning-
  assisted materials discovery using failed experiments. Nature, 533(7601):73–76, 2016.
Adriana Schulz, Harrison Wang, Eitan Grinspun, Justin Solomon, and Wojciech Matusik. Interactive
  exploration of design trade-offs. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG), 37(4):1–14, 2018.
Bobak Shahriari, Kevin Swersky, Ziyu Wang, Ryan P Adams, and Nando De Freitas. Taking the
  human out of the loop: A review of bayesian optimization. Proceedings of the IEEE, 104(1):
 148–175, 2015.
Simone. Hypervolume approximation. https://www.mathworks.com/matlabcentral/
  fileexchange/50517-hypervolume-approximation, 2023. MATLAB Central File
  Exchange.
Jasper Snoek, Oren Rippel, Kevin Swersky, Ryan Kiros, Nadathur Satish, Narayanan Sundaram,
  Mostofa Patwary, Mr Prabhat, and Ryan Adams. Scalable bayesian optimization using deep neural
  networks. In International conference on machine learning, pages 2171–2180. PMLR, 2015.
Raj Subbu, Piero P Bonissone, Neil Eklund, Srinivas Bollapragada, and Kete Chalermkraivuth.
  Multiobjective financial portfolio design: A hybrid evolutionary approach. In 2005 IEEE Congress
  on Evolutionary Computation, volume 2, pages 1722–1729. IEEE, 2005.
Yubiao Sun, Ushnish Sengupta, and Matthew Juniper. Physics-informed deep learning for simul-
  taneous surrogate modeling and pde-constrained optimization of an airfoil geometry. Computer
  Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering, 411:116042, 2023.
William R Thompson. On the likelihood that one unknown probability exceeds another in view of
 the evidence of two samples. Biometrika, 25(3-4):285–294, 1933.
Nils Thuerey, Konstantin Weißenow, Lukas Prantl, and Xiangyu Hu. Deep learning methods for
  reynolds-averaged navier–stokes simulations of airfoil flows. AIAA Journal, 58(1):25–36, 2020.
Sattar Vakili, Henry Moss, Artem Artemev, Vincent Dutordoir, and Victor Picheny. Scalable thompson
  sampling using sparse gaussian process models. Advances in neural information processing
  systems, 34:5631–5643, 2021.
Andrew G Wilson, Zhiting Hu, Russ R Salakhutdinov, and Eric P Xing. Stochastic variational deep
  kernel learning. Advances in neural information processing systems, 29, 2016a.
Andrew Gordon Wilson, Zhiting Hu, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, and Eric P Xing. Deep kernel learning.
  In Artificial intelligence and statistics, pages 370–378. PMLR, 2016b.


                                               12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Günther Wyszecki and Walter Stanley Stiles. Color science: concepts and methods, quantitative data
  and formulae, volume 40. John wiley & sons, 2000.
Eckart Zitzler, Kalyanmoy Deb, and Lothar Thiele. Comparison of multiobjective evolutionary
  algorithms: Empirical results. Evolutionary computation, 8(2):173–195, 2000.


                                               13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 Our code is available at: https://github.com/an-on-ym-ous/lbn_mobo



A PPENDIX

A Complementary related works                                                                     16
   A.1 Stochastic multi-objective optimizations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     16
   A.2 Advanced Bayesian multi-objective optimizations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        16
   A.3 Bayesian optimization and Pareto front of prediction and uncertainty . . . . . . . .       16

B Complementary Methods                                                                           17
   B.1 MC dropout . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     17
   B.2 Combination of Other BNNs with 2MD acquisition function . . . . . . . . . . . .            17

C Complementary evaluation details                                                                18
   C.1 ZDT problems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     18
        C.1.1    ZDT1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   18
        C.1.2    ZDT2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   18
        C.1.3    ZDT3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   19
        C.1.4    Benchmarking LBN-MOBO on ZDT3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .            19
        C.1.5    Further evaluation using ZDT1 and ZDT2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       19
   C.2 DTLZ test suite with 3 dimensional output . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      21
        C.2.1    DTLZ1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    21
        C.2.2    DTLZ4 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    21
        C.2.3    DTLZ5 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    21
   C.3 Benchmarking LBN-MOBO against other BNNs on DTLZ5 problem . . . . . . .                    22
   C.4 Benchmarking LBN-MOBO on DTLZ1 and DTLZ4 using a variety of other opti-
       mization techniques . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    22
   C.5 Real-world Experiment set up . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       24
        C.5.1 Airfoil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   24
        C.5.2    3D printer’s color gamut . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   24
   C.6 Complementary experiments on the real world problems . . . . . . . . . . . . . .           25
        C.6.1    Evaluation of 44-ink printer gamut experiment using NSGA II and DGEMO            25
        C.6.2    Evaluation of Airfoil experiment using NSGA II and DGEMO . . . . . . .           25
   C.7 Printer color gamut for 8 ink . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    26

D Implementation details                                                                          26
   D.1 Deep Ensembles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     26
   D.2 MC dropout . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     27


                                                14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   D.3 Hardware configuration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   27

E Complementary discussions                                                                     28


                                               15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A     C OMPLEMENTARY RELATED WORKS

In addition to the neural BO models discussed in Section 2, several advanced BO algorithms, as
well as stochastic multi-objective optimizations, are adept at handling multi-objective Bayesian
optimization for moderate batch sizes. In this section we review the most relevant state of the art
methods that can address our class of problems. In Sections C, we assess these methods using
synthetic ZDT and DTLZ test suits, Printer color gamut, and Airfoil problems. We observe their
stagnation with increasing batch sizes, generally lacking scalability for batches exceeding 1000
samples. Ultimately, we demonstrate that in terms of Pareto front optimality, these methods are not
comparable to our LBN-MOBO algorithm.

A.1   S TOCHASTIC MULTI - OBJECTIVE OPTIMIZATIONS

Non-dominated sorting genetic algorithm II (NSGA-II) Deb et al. (2002) is an exceptionally
popular method for multi-objective optimization. It belongs to multi-objective evolutionary algorithms
(MOEA), which have been applied to a variety of problems, from engineering Schulz et al. (2018)
to finance Subbu et al. (2005). Despite their widespread use, MOEA have certain limitations. One
major challenge is the computational cost of MOEAs, as they typically require a large number of
function evaluations, and iterations to converge to a good solution Konakovic Lukovic et al. (2020).
This can make MOEAs impractical for problems with computationally expensive objective functions
or high-dimensional design spaces. Moreover, they are prone to trap in local minima. This can be
particularly problematic for problems with multiple local optima or non-convex objective functions.

A.2   A DVANCED BAYESIAN MULTI - OBJECTIVE OPTIMIZATIONS

Bayesian optimization (BO) is adept at efficiently searching for the global optimum while minimizing
the number of function evaluations Jones et al. (1998). However, extending BO to multi-objective
batch optimization is not straightforward. USeMO Belakaria et al. (2020) is one of the state of the art
extensions of BO that is capable of solving multi objective problems. It employs NSGA-II to identify
the Pareto front on the surrogate and uses uncertainty information to select a subset of candidates for
the next iteration. TSEMO Bradford et al. (2018) takes a different approach by using Thompson
sampling and NSGA-II on Gaussian process (GP) surrogates to find the next batch of samples that
maximize the hypervolume. However, these methods struggle to maintain diversity and fail to capture
part of the final Pareto frontKonakovic Lukovic et al. (2020).
Diversity-guided multi-objective Bayesian optimization (DGEMO) seeks to address this issue by
dividing the performance and design spaces into diverse regions and striving to identify candidates in
as diverse locations as possible while maintaining the performance Konakovic Lukovic et al. (2020).
However, its computational time grows exponentially with the increase in batch size.
Thompson Sampling (TS) has been the subject of significant research, with key contributions aiming
to enhance the scalability of Bayesian Optimization. Hernández-Lobato et al. (2017) demonstrated its
scalability in the chemical space through parallel and distributed computing, effectively handling large
parallel measurements in BO. Deshwal et al. (2021) further extended its potentials in combinatorial
BO settings by incorporating Mercer features, opening up new possibilities in molecular optimization.
Vakili et al. (2021) addressed scalability challenges by integrating sparse Gaussian process models
with Thompson Sampling. They provide a theoretical and empirical analysis proving that this scalable
TS shows much less computational complexity while maintaining its performance quality. Scalable
TS introduces new possibilities especially in the combinatorial space of high-throughput molecular
design problems.

A.3   BAYESIAN OPTIMIZATION AND PARETO FRONT OF PREDICTION AND UNCERTAINTY

Gupta et al. (2018) proposed a unique algorithm that employs two distinct acquisition techniques to
generate candidates for subsequent iterations. The primary insight of their method is to effectively
handle problems characterized by a wide variety of local extrema, ranging from minimal to substantial
in number. Their approach integrates the Gaussian Process Upper Confidence Bound (GP-UCB) with
an additional Pareto front. This Pareto front is derived from optimizing predictions and uncertainties
as separate objectives.


                                                  16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


However, unlike the LBN-MOBO approach, Gupta et al.’s algorithm does not specifically focus
on large batch optimization. Furthermore, it doesn’t leverage Bayesian Neural Networks (BNNs)
as surrogate models, which are key in enhancing scalability to the levels necessary for addressing
complex real-world problems. Another distinct aspect of their work is that it appears primarily geared
towards problems with single objectives, rather than the multi-objective scenarios that LBN-MOBO
is designed to tackle.

B     C OMPLEMENTARY M ETHODS
B.1   MC DROPOUT

Incorporating MC dropout Gal and Ghahramani (2016) as a substitute for Deep Ensembles aims to
leverage its inherent characteristics for assessing model uncertainty. MC dropout performs model
uncertainty approximation by enabling dropout at the inference phase, generating diverse network
predictions over multiple forward passes. These sub-networks will then ensemble in the same
manner as our Deep Ensembles surrogate (Section 4.1) to calculate the mean and uncertainty of the
predictions.

MC Dropout as Surrogate Model For seamless integration with LBN-MOBO, we employ a
Neural Network with dropout layers, designated as fM C . During the inference the dropout layers
remain active, resulting in varied network structures for each forward pass. This stochasticity during
inference results in a distribution of predictions for any given input, enabling the estimation of
epistemic uncertainty.
A primary advantage of utilizing MC dropout lies in its capacity to compute uncertainties in parallel,
akin to Deep Ensembles, hence maintaining the scalability of LBN-MOBO. After fitting fM C to the
initial samples, the subsequent steps in LBN-MOBO remain consistent, with the updated surrogate
model being utilized to compute the novel acquisition function.

Epistemic Uncertainty through MC Dropout MC dropout facilitates the calculation of epistemic
uncertainty by observing the variance in predictions across multiple stochastic forward passes. Given
a set of T stochastic forward passes, the epistemic uncertainty for an input x can be computed as
follows:

                                                    1X
                                     FµM C (x) :=       µt (x)                                     (4)
                                                    T t

                                            1X 2
                              FσM C (x) =       (µt (x) − F2µM C (x)).                             (5)
                                            T t

Modified Acquisition Function with MC Dropout With MC dropout incorporated as the surrogate
model, the novel acquisition function now utilizes the uncertainties and predictions obtained from
fM C . The modified acquisition function aims to balance the trade-off between exploiting regions of
high predicted performance and exploring regions with high uncertainty, as determined by the MC
dropout model.

                     AFM C := arg max Fm          m

                                       µM C (x), FσM C (x) , m ∈ [1, M ] .                         (6)
                                      x

This integration of MC dropout with the novel acquisition function ensures that the benefits of
epistemic uncertainty estimation are harnessed effectively while maintaining the scalability and
parallelism inherent to the LBN-MOBO framework.

B.2   C OMBINATION OF OTHER BNN S WITH 2MD ACQUISITION FUNCTION

One of the main advantages of 2MD acquisition function is that it only queries a surrogate models
that provides the prediction and uncertainty (without the need of gradient information). Figure 6


                                                 17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                            2MD acquisition
                 Black box function                                               P1
                                                  Predictions
                                                                            P2

               Any Surrogate model
                                                                                          U2
                                                 Uncertainties
                                                                            U1


                                            Query new samples


            Figure 6: 2MD acquisition function can be paired with any surrogate model.


demonstrates how 2MD performs by iteratively using these queried information and evolves the
solution until a practically good convergence. This property of 2MD acquisition allows it to be paired
easily with any form of surrogate model.

C     C OMPLEMENTARY EVALUATION DETAILS
C.1     ZDT PROBLEMS

The ZDT (Zitzler-Deb-Thiele) test suite Zitzler et al. (2000) is a set of benchmark problems commonly
used for testing the performance of multi-objective optimization algorithms. The suite consists of
six problems (ZDT1 through ZDT6), each having two objective functions. Here, we describe the
formulations for ZDT1, ZDT2, and ZDT3.

C.1.1    ZDT1
ZDT1 is a 30-dimensional problem defined as follows:
Objective 1:
                                              f1 (x) = x1

Objective 2:                                             r
                                                            x1
                                       f2 (x) = g(x) 1 −
                                                           g(x)

where:
                                                             n
                                                        9 X
                                        g(x) = 1 +              xi
                                                      n − 1 i=2
and xi is in the range [0,1].

C.1.2    ZDT2
ZDT2, like ZDT1, is also a 30-dimensional problem and is defined as follows:
Objective 1:
                                              f1 (x) = x1

Objective 2:                                      "                   2 #
                                                               x1
                                      f2 (x) = g(x) 1 −
                                                              g(x)

where:
                                                             n
                                                        9 X
                                        g(x) = 1 +              xi
                                                      n − 1 i=2
and xi is in the range [0,1].


                                                  18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C.1.3    ZDT3
ZDT3, a 30-dimensional problem, introduces a discontinuous Pareto front. The objectives are defined
as:
Objective 1:
                                             f1 (x) = x1

Objective 2:
                                            r
                                               x1   x1
                          f2 (x) = g(x) 1 −       −     sin(10πx1 )
                                              g(x) g(x)

where:
                                                          n
                                                     9 X
                                      g(x) = 1 +             xi
                                                   n − 1 i=2
and xi is in the range [0,1].

C.1.4    B ENCHMARKING LBN-MOBO ON ZDT3
In this study, we highlight the superior performance of the LBN-MOBO compared to a set of state-of-
the-art Multi-objective Bayesian optimizations, namely USeMO, DGEMO, TSEMO, and NSGA-II,
on the ZDT3 test. We demonstrate how LBN-MOBO adeptly manages large design spaces while
maintaining a significantly shorter optimization time compared to its counterparts. This investigation
involves two ZDT3 problem configurations. The first experiment focuses on a 6-dimensional design
space, while the second broadens this space to 30 dimensions, thereby increasing the complexity
of the search space. We maintain a fair comparison by limiting the batch size to 1000 samples for
all algorithms despite the fact that LBN-MOBO inherently possesses the ability to handle much
larger batches. Using 1000 samples is an approximate limit of tractability for most of the competing
methods. Moreover throughout this experiment we use an equal number of iterations for all methods,
except in cases where a method becomes intractable due to unmanageable computational load.
Figure 7 (top) shows the superior performance of LBN-MOBO and DGEMO in contrast with the
other algorithms for the 6-dimensional ZDT3 problem. In this figure, the illustrated Pareto fronts are
the final results of 10 optimization iterations. When confronted with the 30 dimensional problem
(bottom row), the optimization methods must navigate a significantly larger space within the same
sampling constraints. For this problem, we have shown the results of optimizations at iteration 5.
In Figure 8 (left and middle), we further clarify the performance of different methods by showing the
evolution of the hypervolume of the Pareto front at each iteration. For the 6D problem, LBN-MOBO
manages to find the Pareto front after a single iteration. For the 30D problem, LBN-MOBO finds the
Pareto front after two iterations and maintains its dominance over the other methods until the 6th
iteration where DGEMO reaches it. We note that to approximate the hypervolume, we employed
Simone (2023) that uses random sampling. As a result, occasional minor fluctuations may arise. It’s
worth mentioning that for the 30D problem we were unable to complete 10 iterations for UseMO,
TSEMO, and DGEMO due to their exponential rise in computational time.
Figure 8 (right) depicts the run-time of all methods for 6D ZDT3 for 10 iterations. Even in this fairly
straightforward problem, the computational time for UseMO, TSEMO, and particularly DGEMO
surged dramatically. Conversely, the total computational time for NSGA2 was less than 14 seconds.
The last and longest iteration of LBN-MOBO was 167s for training the ensemble models and 13.5s
for acquisition.

C.1.5    F URTHER EVALUATION USING ZDT1 AND ZDT2
In this section, we showcase ZDT1 and ZDT2, two problems from the ZDT test suite Zitzler et al.
(2000). Both problems involve conflicting objectives, with the only distinction that ZDT1 has a
convex Pareto front, whereas ZDT2 has a non-convex one. Both tests are conducted using their
original 30-dimensional design space. The problem setup configuration is entirely identical to that of
the ZDT3 problem Section 4.2 in the paper. As illustrated in Figure 9, similar to the case of ZDT3,
LBN-MOBO demonstrates its superiority in both the ZDT1 and ZDT2 problems.


                                                 19
 Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                           LBN-MOBO                               DGEMO                       TSEMO                                      USeMO                                              NSGA-II

6D
30D


                                                                                         Pareto front              GT

 Figure 7: Obtained Pareto front by different methods on 6 dimensional and 30 dimensional ZDT3
 problem. Batch size for all experiments is fixed at 1000.

                                                  DGEMO                     TSEMO                 USeMO                                NSGA-II                                        LBN-MOBO
                                                                                                                                                          4
                                                                                                                                               15 10

              0.3                                                       0.3                                                                               6D


                                                                                                                                   Elapsed time (s)
Hypervolume


                                                                                                                                               10
                                                                        0.2
              0.2

                                                                        0.1                                                                       5
              0.1
                                                                  6D        0
                                                                                                                   30D
                    1         2       3   4   5       6   7   8   9    10    1   2   3    4  5    6     7    8        9       10                  0
                                                                                                                                                      1       2       3       4   5     6    7       8    9   10
                                                                                           Number of iterations


 Figure 8: The left and middle plot represent the hypervolume of the 6 and 30 dimensional ZDT3
 problem, respectively. The plot on the right shows the elapsed time for 6D problem for all methods
 (the NSGA-II plot is masked under LBN-MOBO).


                          LBN-MOBO                             DGEMO                        TSEMO                                  USeMO                                               NSGA-II
ZDT 1
ZDT 2


                                                              ZDT 1                                                                                               ZDT 2
                                  1                                                                            0.9
                                                                                                               0.8
                              0.8                                                                              0.7
                                                                                                     Hypervolume
                    Hypervolume


                                                                                                               0.6
                              0.6                                                                              0.5
                                                                                                               0.4
                              0.4
                                                                                                               0.3
                              0.2                                                                              0.2
                                                                                                               0.1
                                  0                                                                             0
                                      1   2       3       4   5    6        7    8   9     10                     1       2        3                  4           5       6       7     8        9       10
                                                      Number of iterations                                                                  Number of iterations
                                              DGEMO                     TSEMO                    USeMO                                  NSGA2                                         LBN-MOBO

 Figure 9: ZDT 1 and ZDT 2 in 30 dimensional setting. Note the immediate convergence of LBN-
 MOBO to Pareto front (bottom). The Pareto front is presented after 10 iterations of optimization
 except for USeMO (7 iterations), DGEMO (7 iterations), and TSEMO (8 iterations) in ZDT2 problem.


                                                                                                20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


The Pareto front in Figure 9 for the ZDT1 problem was obtained after 10 iterations for all the methods
considered in the analysis. As for the ZDT2 problem, USeMO and DGEMO were able to run for 7
iterations, while TSEMO managed to run for 8 iterations before becoming intractable.

C.2     DTLZ TEST SUITE WITH 3 DIMENSIONAL OUTPUT

The DTLZ test suite is a popular benchmark set of test problems used for testing the performance
of multi-objective optimization algorithms Deb et al. (2005). The DTLZ test suite is characterized
by scalable problems, meaning that the number of objectives and decision variables can be easily
adjusted. This feature makes it particularly useful for assessing how well algorithms handle problems
of varying complexity.
Below are the definitions of the DTLZ1, DTLZ4, and DTLZ5 problems, which we used to benchmark
LBN-MOBO for 3D output.

C.2.1    DTLZ1
DTLZ1 is defined as:
Objective function fm is given by:
                                                            m−1
                                               1            Y
                                    fm (x) =     (1 + g(x))     (1 − xi )
                                               2            i=1

                                                                                     
                                             |x|
                                             X               2
                      g(x) = 100 |x| +            (xi − 0.5) − cos(20π(xi − 0.5))
                                             i=1


                                     0 ≤ xi ≤ 1,       for i = 1, 2, . . . , n
where m is the number of objectives. Here, x denotes the decision variables vector.

C.2.2    DTLZ4
DTLZ4 is similar to DTLZ1, but with an additional parameter α that controls the shape of the Pareto
front. The objective functions are defined as:

                                                            m−1
                                                            Y        π
                                   fm (x) = (1 + g(x))          cos xα
                                                                     i
                                                            i=1
                                                                       2

                                     0 ≤ xi ≤ 1,       for i = 1, 2, . . . , n
where g(x) is the same as in DTLZ1, m is the number of objectives, and α is a user-defined parameter,
typically set to 100, which controls the density of solutions.

C.2.3    DTLZ5
DTLZ5 is formulated to test the algorithm’s ability to converge to a curved Pareto front and to
maintain diversity among solutions. The DTLZ5 problem is defined as follows:
Objective functions:
                                   π                  π       π
        fi (x) = (1 + g(xM )) cos x1   . . . cos xi−1    sin xi   ,              for i = 1, 2, . . . , m   (7)
                                     2                2         2
where

        • x = (x1 , x2 , . . . , xn ) are the decision variables.
        • m is the number of objectives.


                                                       21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                   5
             1000                                                 10

                                                                   4
                                                                  10
               950
      Hypervolume


                                                       Time (s)
                                                                   3
                                                                  10
               900
                                                                   2
                                                                  10

               850                                                 1
                                                                  10


               800 0                                               0
                             1                2         3         10      1               2      3
                 10         10           10           10                10              10     10
                                 Batch size                                      Batch size



Figure 10: DTLZ5 benchmark optimization via 2MD acquisition function and various neural BO
surrogate models. The fitting time of each model was recorded to assess computational efficiency.


              • g(xM ) is a function defined as: g(xM ) = xi ∈xM (xi − 0.5)2 , with xM being the subset
                                                           P
                of decision variables starting from the mth variable to the nth variable.

The constraints are:
                                        0 ≤ xi ≤ 1,    for i = 1, 2, . . . , n                       (8)


DTLZ5’s primary challenge lies in its reduced dimensionality of the search space due to the use
of trigonometric functions, which tends to align the solutions along a curve in the objective space.
This problem is particularly useful for assessing the ability of an optimization algorithm to handle
non-linear relationships between objectives and to generate a well-distributed set of solutions along a
curved Pareto front.

C.3          B ENCHMARKING LBN-MOBO AGAINST OTHER BNN S ON DTLZ5 PROBLEM

The DTLZ5 problem, with its extensive input and output dimensions, presents a formidable challenge
in optimization. To showcase the robustness and scalability of our pipeline, we applied it to the
DLTZ5 test, characterized by 20 input design parameters and 3 output dimensions. As illustrated in
Figure 10, this problem displays behavior akin to what we observed in our earlier tests (see Figure 3).
Although all the methods we tested show comparable performance, dropout and Deep Ensembles
particularly distinguish themselves with their notably higher scalability. The setup of this experiment
is identical to the experiment in Section 5.1.

C.4          B ENCHMARKING LBN-MOBO ON DTLZ1 AND DTLZ4 USING A VARIETY OF OTHER
             OPTIMIZATION TECHNIQUES

In this section, we aim to compare the performance of our method on two problems from the DLTZ
test suite Deb et al. (2005) with a 6-dimensional design space and a 3-dimensional performance space.
We address both the DLTZ1 and DLTZ4 problems using the same configuration described in the ZDT3
problem Section C.1. during these experiment we have used LBN-MOBO with Deep Ensembles as
the surrogate model. Note that for a 3 dimentional output we need to solve a 6 dimentional problem
while running our 2MD acquisition function. As the dimensional of the output increases We are
going to need more sample budget for our 2MD acquisition function. As a result we solve the DTLZ4
problem using LBN-MOBO with both 1000 and 4000 sample budget.
Figures 11 and 12b illustrates that not only LBN-MOBO has achieved the best Pareto front but also
in term of computation time it is by far more scalable than the counterpart methods. Notably, even by
increasing the batch size to 4000 samples, which resulted in even better Pareto front, the computation
time is still insignificant compared to the rival methods.


                                                       22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                               LBN-MOBO,                                               DGEMO                                                           TSEMO
                              1000 samples


                               LBN-MOBO,
                              4000 samples                                              USeMO                                                       NSGA-II


                                Figure 11: The Pareto front of the DLTZ4 problem with 6-D input and 3-D output.


                              104
                     18                                                                                        20
                                        NSGA2
                     16                 DGEMO                                                                  18
                                        TSEMO
                     14                 USEMO                                                                  16
                                        LBN-MOBO-1000
  Elapsed time (s)


                     12                 LBN-MOBO-4000
                                                                                                               14
                                                                                                 Hypervolume


                     10                                                                                        12

                     8                                                                                         10
                                                                                                                                                                 DGEMO
                     6                                                                                         8
                                                                                                                                                                 TSEMO
                                                                                                                                                                 USEMO
                     4                                                                                         6
                                                                                                                                                                 NSGA II
                     2                                                                                         4                                                 LBN-MOBO-1000
                                                                                                                                                                 LBN-MOBO-4000
                     0                                                                                         2
                          1         2       3      4       5       6       7   8   9   10                           1   2     3   4        5       6         7    8     9        10
                                                        Iteration number                                                              Number of iterations



                                             (a) Optimization time                                                          (b) Hypervolume expansion

                                                        Figure 12: DTLZ4 experiment with 6 inputs and 3 outputs.


                                                                                            23
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                               105
                      3                                                                                        107
                                         NSGA2
                                         DGEMO
                     2.5                 TSEMO
                                                                                                               106
                                         USEMO
                                         LBN-MOBO
  Elapsed time (s)


                      2


                                                                                                 Hypervolume
                                                                                                               105

                     1.5

                                                                                                               104
                      1
                                                                                                                                                                       DGEMO
                                                                                                                                                                       TSEMO
                                                                                                               103                                                     USEMO
                     0.5
                                                                                                                                                                       NSGA II
                                                                                                                                                                       LBN-MOBO
                      0                                                                                        102
                           1         2       3      4      5       6       7   8   9   10                            1   2     3   4        5       6         7   8       9       10
                                                        Iteration number                                                               Number of iterations



                                             (a) Optimization time                                                           (b) Hypervolume expansion

                                                        Figure 13: DTLZ1 experiment with 6 inputs and 3 outputs.


Figure 13b suggests that DLTZ1 problem follows the same pattern except that in this case the achieved
Pareto front is orders of magnitude better than the counterpart methods. Likewise from Figure 13a
we understand that the computation time for LBN-MOBO is also significantly lower than the other
methods.

C.5                            R EAL - WORLD E XPERIMENT SET UP

C.5.1                            A IRFOIL
Airfoil represents, for example, the cross-sectional shape of an airplane wing,                                                                                       5 D Latent space
with its performance quantified by the lift coefficient CL and the lift-to-drag ratio
CL /CD Park and Lee (2010).
The aim of this experiment is to explore different airfoil shapes to discover the                                                                                         GAN
Pareto front of these performances (CL and CL /CD ). Lift is the upward force
that acts perpendicular to the direction of incoming airflow, primarily serving to


                                                                                                                                                                                         NFP
counterbalance the weight of an aircraft or providing an upward thrust for an airfoil.
Drag is the resistance encountered by an object as it moves through a fluid. It acts
in the opposite direction to the free stream flow and parallel to it.
                                                                                                                                                                      CFD simulator
Minimizing the drag is important for maximizing the efficiency and speed of
vehicles, as well as reducing fuel consumption. In standard computational fluid
dynamics (CFD) simulations, the Navier-Stokes equations are solved around the      Lift

airfoil to compute CL and CL /CD . We utilize the open-source software Open-
FOAM for running our simulations, setting the free stream angle to 0 and length to      Drag

40 OpenFOAM Foundation (2021); Thuerey et al. (2020). The design parameters
of this problem describe the shape of the airfoils. Due to high dimensionality and
complex shape constraints, we employ a specific type of Generative Adversarial
Networks (GANs) to transform the complex design space into a manageable five-
dimensional latent space Chen and Ahmed (2021). We assess the shapes generated by GAN using a
Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD) simulator to measure the values of CL and CL /CD . As such,
our NFP in this problem is a combination of the GAN and the CFD simulator (inset).

C.5.2                            3D PRINTER ’ S COLOR GAMUT
A color gamut represents the range of colors that can be achieved using a specific device, such as a
display or a printer Wyszecki and Stiles (2000). In this experiment, we compute the color gamut of
a 3D printer by determining the Pareto front of a multi-objective optimization problem. A printer
combines different amounts of its limited number of inks to create a range of colors. The design
parameters of this problem are the amount of available inks. We explore CIEa*b* color space CIE
(2004) which is our performance space. CIE a* represents the color-opponent dimension of red-green,


                                                                                            24
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


              1.1                                                              150

               1                                                               100

                                                                                50
Hypervolume


              0.9


                                                                      CIE a*
                                                                                  0
              0.8
                                                                                -50
              0.7
                                                                               -100      LBN-MOBO
                                                     LBN-MOBO                            NSGA-II
              0.6                                    NSGA-II                   -150      DGEMO
                                                     DGEMO                               Random
              0.5                                                              -200
                      2         4        6           8          10                -200   -100    0     100     200    300    400
                              Number of iterations                                                    CIE b*


                          (a) Hypervolume evolution                             (b) Piecewise linear color gamut at iteration 10

Figure 14: The hypervolume evolution and gamut of the 44-ink printer calculated by different
methods.


with negative values representing green and positive values representing red. CIE b* represents the
color-opponent dimension of blue-yellow, with negative values representing blue and positive values
representing yellow.
Following Ansari et al. (2022) we create a printer NFP using an ensemble of 10 neural networks (not
related to our ensemble surrogate). We create a complex instance of this problem where we simulate
a printer NFP with 44 inks Ansari et al. (2021). All networks in the ensemble NFP are trained on
344,000 printed patches with varying ink-amount combinations and their corresponding a*b* colors.
This problem has a 44 dimensional design space as the printer NFP assumes 44 inks.

C.6                 C OMPLEMENTARY EXPERIMENTS ON THE REAL WORLD PROBLEMS

Following the experiments in Section 5 we compare LBN-MOBO with NSGA-II and DGEMO on
our real-world problems. Other than LBN-MOBO, NSGA-II is the sole method capable of managing
a batch sizes of 20,000. Additionally, we consider DGEMO due to its competitive performance in
ZDT problems (Section C.1), although we must limit its batch size to 1,000 and restrict it to 5 to 6
iterations due to prohibitive run time.

C.6.1                E VALUATION OF 44- INK PRINTER GAMUT EXPERIMENT USING NSGA II AND DGEMO
For the task of exploring the 44-ink color gamut, we initialize LBN-MOBO with 10,000 samples, and
each subsequent iteration processes a batch size of 20,000 samples. Given the high dimensionality of
the design space, this problem poses a significant challenge to many optimization algorithms, making
it a fascinating experimental case. The performance space in this experiment is the 2 dimensional
a*b* color space. Figure 14a graphically depicts the accelerated increase in hypervolume of the color
gamut when using LBN-MOBO. Also, final gamut estimation for NSGA-II and LBN-MOBO after
10 iterations, and DGEMO after 5 iterations, is depicted in Figure 14b, showing a significanlty larger
estimated gamut by LBN-MOBO.

C.6.2                E VALUATION OF A IRFOIL EXPERIMENT USING NSGA II AND DGEMO
Figure 15 showcases a comparison between NSGA-II, DGEMO, and LBN-MOBO for the airfoil
problem. This experiment has a significantly more complex NFP since the relationship between the
design and performance space is highly complex as we map the latent code of a GAN to aerodynamic
properties. We start LBN-MOBO and NSGA-II with 15,000 samples, and each iteration runs with a
batch size of 15,000 all simulated by OpenFOAM, a high-fidelity CFD solver OpenFOAM Foundation
(2021).
Once again, as depicted in Figure 15a, LBN-MOBO discovers a superior Pareto front in a remarkably
small number of iterations. Although with many more iterations, NSGA-II also reaches an acceptable


                                                                     25
  Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                   70
                0.7
                                                                                   60
               0.65                                                                50
Hypervolume



                0.6                                                                40


                                                                           Cl/Cd
                                                                                   30
               0.55
                                                                                   20                                                  MONBO
                                                           LBN-MOBO                                                                    NSGA-II
                0.5                                        NSGA-II                 10                                                  Random
                                                           DGEMO                                                                       DGEMO
               0.45                                                                0
                            2           4            6          8                        0         0.1    0.2   0.3       0.4        0.5    0.6
                                    Number of iterations                                                        Cl
                                (a) Hypervolume evolution                           (b) Piecewise linear Pareto front at iteration 5


  Figure 15: The hypervolume evolution and the Pareto front of the airfoil problem of LBN-MOBO
  and NSGA-II with equal batch sizes.

                                     DGEMO                 NSGA-II                           LBN-MOBO                 Random

               0.7                                                                       150


                                                                                         100
               0.6
 Hypervolume


                                                                                             50
                                                                                CIE a*


               0.5
                                                                                              0

               0.4
                                                                                          -50


               0.3                                                                       -100
                        2             4          6          8         10                    -100         -50          0         50          100
                                    Number of iterations                                                        CIE b*


                                                           Figure 16: 8-ink printer gamut


  Pareto front, this is most likely due to the use of a large batch size for each iteration in a comparatively
  smaller design space (five dimensions). In contrast, DGEMO’s performance significantly deteriorates.
  This likely stems from its reliance on the precise estimation of the gradient and Hessian of the NFP
  through the surrogate model. This task becomes increasingly difficult as the complexity of the NFP
  increases. In Figure 15b we show also the random samples to depict the landscape of peformances.

  C.7                 P RINTER COLOR GAMUT FOR 8 INK

  Figure 16 displays the results of the 8-ink printer color gamut problem, which has a setup that is
  nearly identical to the 44-ink problem, with smaller number of available inks and as a result smaller
  design space. The advantage of this NFP, is in its ability in accurately mimicking the behavior of the
  Epson printer from which the data set is derived.
  As observed, both NSGA-II and DGEMO exhibit results that are closer to LBN-MOBO, which could
  be attributed to the lower dimensionality of the problem.

  D                  I MPLEMENTATION DETAILS
  D.1                 D EEP E NSEMBLES

  For our surrogate model, building on the methodology proposed in Ansari et al. (2022), we have
  constructed Deep Ensembles, utilizing a diverse collection of activation functions, to enhance the


                                                                           26
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


precision of epistemic uncertainty quantification. This enhancement serves as a cornerstone for
ensuring the robust operation of the remaining procedures.
In our implementation, the Deep Ensembles comprises ten sub-networks, each employing a specific
activation function as outlined below:

       • Tanh ×2 LeCun et al. (2002)
       • ReLU ×2 Nair and Hinton (2010)
       • CELU ×2 Barron (2017)
       • LeakyReLU ×2 Maas et al. (2013)
       • ELU Clevert et al. (2015)
       • Hardswish Howard et al. (2019)

For the ZDT3 and printer’s color gamut networks, we employ a three-layer architecture, with neuron
configurations of 100, 50, and 100 per layer respectively. To conduct our analysis on the rival methods,
we utilized the pymoo library Blank and Deb (2020) and DGEMO source code Konakovic Lukovic
et al. (2020).
Given the complexity inherent to the airfoil problem, it necessitates a more intricately designed
network. We configured this network with four hidden layers, containing 150, 200, 200, and 150
neurons, respectively. In the Native Forwared Process (NFP) of the Airfoil design, i.e., the open
source fluid simulator OpenFoam, we have observed that sampling the latent space of the GAN near
0 and, in general, below 0.1 occasionally leads to invalid designs. This occurrence can introduce
instability for the optimizers. To address this issue, we have imposed a limitation on the GAN latent
space, restricting it between 0.1 and 1 to ensure the generation of valid designs.
Over the course of the LBN-MOBO iterations, data accumulation intensifies. Although it is feasible
to progressively enlarge the batch size to maintain a constant total training time, we have chosen
to keep the batch sizes fixed due to the minimal increment in training time relative to competing
methods. Specifically, we employed a batch size of 20 for the airfoil problem, 10 for ZDT3, and 100
for the printer’s color gamut.
All networks underwent a training period spanning 60 epochs.

D.2   MC DROPOUT

As a general rule of thumb, we opt for wider architectures compared to those in the Deep Ensembles
network. This approach is based on the consideration that, since a dropout layer is utilized in
every training instance, some of the perceptrons are deactivated, leading to a somewhat narrower
sub-network in the trained model. The dropout ratio for all the models is set at 0.05, and ReLU is
employed as the activation function. To compute the epistemic uncertainty for every inference, each
network is queried 100 times.
For the ZDT3 problem, a network consisting of four fully connected layers with 100, 50, 50, and 100
perceptrons respectively, is trained for 100 epochs. The batch size in this instance is set at 5.
Addressing the printer’s color gamut problem, we use a network configuration with three layers,
containing 200, 100, and 200 perceptrons. This model is trained with a batch size of 100 for 80
epochs.
Given the Airfoil problem’s increased complexity, a network comprising four layers with 300, 400,
400, and 300 perceptrons is employed for modeling. The batch size designated for this problem is 20,
and the network is trained for 160 epochs.

D.3   H ARDWARE CONFIGURATION

We leveraged a parallel compute cluster consisting of GPUs and CPUs for the simultaneous training
of the network and computation of the acquisition function.
The GPU units within our cluster comprise two models: the NVIDIA Tesla A100, the NVIDIA Tesla
A40, and NVIDIA Tesla A16. The GPU units have a memory up to 64GB.


                                                  27
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


The CPU units in the cluster are AMD EPYC 7702 64-Core Processor.

E    C OMPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS
USeMO Belakaria et al. (2020) shares some similarity with LBN-MOBO, however, besides its
limitation in handling large batches, its utilization of uncertainty information is much more limited
than ours. USeMO finds the Pareto front on their surrogate function by running the NSGA-II Deb
et al. (2002). Note that they do not optimize for uncertainty in a simultaneous manner as it happens
in our 2MD acquisition. Instead they use uncertainty in a sequential manner to choose the most
promising candidates among the ones already calculated by the NSGA-II. This approach cannot
account for the samples that are not Pareto dominant according to performance predictions but have
high uncertainty. The results in Figures 7 , 9, 12, 13 in the Appendix also confirm that USeMO is not
very successful in recovering a diverse Pareto front.
Similar to USeMO, TSEMO Bradford et al. (2018) utilizes NSGA-II for the calculation of the
approximated Pareto set and Pareto front on the computationally inexpensive surrogates. What brings
TSEMO closer to our approach is their utilization of Thompson sampling Thompson (1933) to exploit
or explore the black box function, guided by the uncertainty information obtained from Gaussian
process surrogates.


                                                 28
