Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


S I BB L I N GS: S IMILARITY- DRIVEN B UILDING -B LOCK
I NFERENCE USING G RAPHS ACROSS S TATES
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                              A BSTRACT

         Data in many scientific domains are often collected under multiple distinct states
         (e.g., different clinical interventions), wherein latent processes (e.g., internal bi-
         ological factors) can create complex variability between individual trials both
         within single states and between states. A promising approach for addressing
         this complexity is uncovering fundamental representational units within the data,
         i.e., functional Building Blocks (BBs), that can adjust their temporal activity and
         component structure across trials to capture the diverse spectrum of cross-trial
         variability. However, existing methods for understanding such multi-dimensional
         data often rely on Tensor Factorization (TF) under assumptions that may not align
         with the characteristics of real-world data, and struggle to accommodate trials of
         different durations, missing samples, and varied sampling rates. Here, we present
         a framework for Similarity-driven Building Block Inference using Graphs across
         States (SiBBlInGS). SiBBlInGS employs a robust graph-based dictionary learning
         approach for BB discovery that considers shared temporal activity, inter- and intra-
         state relationships, non-orthogonal components, and variations in session counts
         and duration across states, while remaining resilient to noise, random initializa-
         tions, and missing samples. Additionally, it enables the identification of state-
         specific vs. state-invariant BBs and allows for cross-state controlled variations
         in BB structure and per-trial temporal variability. We demonstrate SiBBlInGS
         on synthetic and several real-world examples to highlight its ability to provide
         insights into the underlying mechanisms of complex phenomena across fields.


1    I NTRODUCTION
The analysis of high-dimensional time-series is increasingly important across various scientific dis-
ciplines, ranging from neuroscience (Kala et al., 2009; Mudrik et al., 2022) to social sciences (Jerzak
et al., 2023) to genetics (Bar-Joseph et al., 2012; Tanvir Ahmed et al., 2023). These data, however,
present a daunting challenge in terms of comprehensibility as they are often highly heterogeneous.
Specifically, data in many domains are gathered under multiple states (e.g., clinical interventions),
while latent factors may introduce variability across trials within states (e.g., internal biological
processes that lead to variations in patient responses to treatment).
Current analysis methods often struggle to capture the full variability in such multi-state data. Addi-
tionally, integrating data from repeated trials within an observed state into a coherent representation
is often challenged by variable session duration, sampling rates, or missing samples (Goris et al.,
2014; Charles et al., 2018; Duncker & Sahani, 2018), and the common practice of within-state trial
averaging, for example, obscures important patterns within individual trials.
A promising approach to analyzing multi-state data is by identifying fundamental representational
units, i.e., Building Blocks (BBs), that are similar across trials and states (e.g., neural ensembles in
the brain, social networks, gene groups), while exhibiting temporal activity variations from trial to
trial. Identifying such cross-state BBs can facilitate the identification of the underlying latent pro-
cesses and provide valuable insights into core commonalities and differences among states. How-
ever, uncovering these BBs poses a challenge, as their individual activities are often unobservable.
Furthermore, it is plausible that in addition to trial to trial variations in the temporal activity of these
BBs–subtle cross-state variations in their composition are presented across states. For instance, a
neural ensemble may not only display temporal activity differences across different normal brain


                                                     1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


activity sessions and seizures but also show subtle structural changes during seizures compared to
normal activity (van den Berg & Friedlander, 2008), e.g., neurons that are not typically part of the
ensemble might become involved during a seizure.
Here, we present SiBBlInG, a graph-driven framework to unravel the complexities of high-
dimensional multi-state time-series data, by unveiling its underlying sparse, similarity-driven Build-
ing Blocks (BBs) along with their temporal activity. Our main contributions encompass:

       • A novel framework that addresses challenges in real-world scenarios where dynamic struc-
         tures evolve across time, states, and contexts.
       • The ability to account for both cross-trial variation in temporal activities and subtle differ-
         ences in the cross-state BB composition, as well as to accommodate varying trial condi-
         tions, including different time durations, sampling rates, missing samples, and trial counts.
       • Demonstrations of our method’s robustness through synthetic data examples and evalua-
         tions on multiple real-world datasets.

2    BACKGROUND AND RELATED W ORK
Conventional 2D methods for identifying BBs underlying time-series often rely on Singular Value
Decomposition (SVD) (Kogbetliantz, 1955), Principal Components Analysis (PCA) (Hotelling,
1933), Independent Components Analysis (ICA) (Hyvarinen et al., 2001), or Non-negative Ma-
trix Factorization (NMF) (Lee & Seung, 1999), which prioritize identifying components based on
maximum variability or independence, or strictly enforcing assumptions (e.g.,non-negativity), that
may not align with the characteristics of some real-world data. Newer methods, such as Dynamic
Mode Decomposition (DMD) (Schmid, 2010), further model the temporal dynamics more explicitly
as dynamical systems. However, the design of these methods for 2D analysis makes their application
to multi-state and multi-session data challenging. Tensor decomposition (e.g., PARAFAC (Harsh-
man, 1970; Williams et al., 2018; Mishne et al., 2016)) and higher-order matrix decomposition (e.g.,
HOSVD (De Lathauwer et al., 2000)) offer alternatives to traditional 2D methods by considering
trials as additional dimensions, thus accounting for higher-order tensors. Some generalizations of
tensor factorization, such as neural tensor factorization (e.g., Wu et al. (2018; 2019)), introduce tem-
poral dependencies to better model sequential relationships in the data. However, these methods fail
to account for variability in trial duration, address state variability, or result in sparse ℓ1 -driven basis
BBs. Gaussian Process (GP) tensor factorization (GP-TF) (e.g.,Tillinghast et al. (2020); Wang & Zhe
(2022b); Ahn et al. (2021); Xu et al. (2011); Zhe et al. (2016)) offer a significant advancement for
integrating temporal dimensions into the factorization of high-dimensional data by combining GPs
with tensor decomposition. Despite their capability in probabilistically modeling temporal interac-
tions, GP-TF approaches cannot handle trials of varying durations or distinguish between within to
between state variability. Some methods (e.g., Wang & Zhe (2022b)) address non-stationarity, but
generally focus on more continuous temporal notions of non-stationarity. While some addressing
sparsity, current GP-TF methods struggle to isolate interpretable, sparsely-distributed components
based on co-activation, deviating from our paper’s objectives. Significant modification to the GP
kernels would be necessary to distinguish trials within states from those across states and account
for the discrete nature of states vs trials.
All these methods, however, are inherently data-driven and do not leverage state meta-information.
Targeted dimensionality reduction (TDR) (Mante et al., 2013) and model-based TDR (mTDR) (Aoi
& Pillow, 2018; Aoi et al., 2020) directly regress rank-1 (TDR) or low-rank (mTDR) components to
explicitly target task-relevant variables. However, they are not inherently adaptable to accommodate
trials of varying duration or to differentiate between within-state and between-state variability.
Closer to our approach, dictionary learning (DL) (Olshausen & Field, 2004; 1996; Aharon et al.,
2006), relying on robust theoretical foundations (e.g., Sun et al. (2016); Sulam et al. (2022)), re-
constructs data points using a few vectors from a feature dictionary under a sparsity-promoting
regularization term (e.g., LASSO) and often provides more interpretable representations than other
methods(Tošić & Frossard, 2011). While traditional DL often treats individual data points as inde-
pendent, recent DL models based on re-weighted ℓ1 (Candes et al., 2008; Garrigues & Olshausen,
2010) present sparsity regularization terms that account for spatio-temporal similarities between
data points (Garrigues & Olshausen, 2010; Charles & Rozell, 2013; Charles et al., 2016; Zhang &
Rao, 2011; Qin et al., 2017; Mishne & Charles, 2019). Re-Weighted ℓ1 Graph Filtering (RWL1-


                                                     2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


GF) (Charles et al., 2022) was recently developed for demixing fluorescing components in calcium
imaging recordings by learning a data-driven graph that redefines pixel similarity. While GraFT
proves the efficacy of graph-based correlations in extracting meaningful features from imaging
recordings, it is constrained to single-trial data and confines its graph construction to a single path–
the pixel space of the data–overlooking the possibility of meaningful structures in other dimensions.
In the context of TF, some methods can be thought of as handling either identical BBs across states
with flexible temporal patterns or fixed identical temporal traces across states with flexible cross-
state BBs. In the shared response model (SRM) (Chen et al., 2015), a multi-subject fMRI model
is proposed where the same temporal activity is applied to all individuals (states) who may have
different spatial responses. However, SRM relies on the assumption of orthogonality for compo-
nent identification, which may not align with biological plausibility. Multi-dataset low-rank matrix
factorization (Valavi & Ramadge, 2019) assumes identical structure across datasets but requires pre-
alignment and pre-processing, which may not always be practical. Fuzzy clustering (Yang, 1993),
and similarly its multiview extension (Wei et al., 2020), and the wavelet tensor fuzzy clustering
scheme (WTFCS) (He et al., 2018) allow data points to exhibit varying degrees of membership in
multiple clusters, addressing limitations of methods that restrict data points to a single BB. However,
this approach does not address varying trial durations or sampling rates, does not consider structural
variations of BBs across views, focuses solely on BB structures rather than their temporal activities,
and does not distinguish between within-state and between-state variability.
Notably, the above approaches are all constrained in their capacity to capture the intricacies of
multi-state multi-trial variability. Particularly, they are either restricted by an orthogonality assump-
tion (De Lathauwer et al., 2000; Chen et al., 2015), limited interpretability (De Lathauwer et al.,
2000; Harshman, 1970), or inability to handle trials of different duration (De Lathauwer et al., 2000;
Harshman, 1970; Williams et al., 2018; Mante et al., 2013; Aoi & Pillow, 2018; Aoi et al., 2020;
Wei et al., 2020; He et al., 2018). Other methods require detailed labels and sufficient training
data (Liu et al., 2022; Schneider et al., 2023), and cannot incorporate both within and between state
variability (De Lathauwer et al., 2000; Harshman, 1970; Mante et al., 2013; Schmid, 2010; He et al.,
2018), or to model cross-state variations in BB structure (De Lathauwer et al., 2000; Harshman,
1970; Williams et al., 2018; Valavi & Ramadge, 2019; Schmid, 2010). Hence, there is a need for
new approaches that can provide a more comprehensive framework for identifying and exploring
the BB’s underlying high-dimensional multi-state data.

3   P ROBLEM D EFINITION AND N OTATION

Consider a system with N channels that collectively organize into a maximum of p functional BBs,
which represent groups of channels with shared functionality. These BBs serve as the fundamental
constituents of a complex process, and their composition is not directly observed nor explicitly
known. In particular, let A ∈ RN ×p capture these BBs in its columns, such that the value of Aij
describes the contribution of the i-th channel to the j-th BB, with a value of 0 indicating that the
channel does not belong to that BB. We assume that channels have the flexibility to belong to more
than one BB, and that each BB is sparse (i.e., ∥A:j ∥0 = K << N ∀j = 1 . . . p).
We first consider a single instance of the system Y ∈ RN ×T (here termed “trial”), where T time
points is the duration of activity. During this trial, each BB exhibits temporal activity that influences
the system’s behavior, captured by Φ ∈ RT ×p , with the entry at index (t, j) representing the activity
of the j-th BB at time t. These temporal profiles are assumed to be smooth over time, bounded
(i.e., ||Φ||F < ϵ1 , with ϵ1 being a scalar threshold), and have low correlation between distinct
BBs’ activity (i.e., ρ(Φ:j , Φ:i ) < ϵ2 ∀i ̸= j, with ϵ2 being a scalar threshold). In this single-trial
scenario, our observations are limited to the combined activity of all BBs operating together, as
captured by Y = AΦT + η, where η is i.i.d. Gaussian observation noise.
In the more general setting, we observe a set of M trials, {Ym }M m=1 , where the duration of each
trial may vary, i.e., Ym ∈ RN ×Tm , and the BBs (A) remain constant across trials while their corre-
sponding temporal activity (Φm ∈ RTm ×p ) may vary across trials to capture trial-to-trial variabil-
ity. This general structure can typically be addressed by either concatenating the trials end-to-end
and applying a matrix decomposition or by reshaping the trials to a uniform length (e.g., by time-
wrapping (Venkatesh & Jayaraman, 2010) or zero-padding (Wang & Zhang, 2012)) and applying a
tensor decomposition. However, both of these approaches overlook the significance of trial to trial


                                                   3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 1: The SiBBlInGS model. A SiBBlInGS adapts to real-world datasets with varying session
durations, sampling rates, and state-specific data by learning interpretable graph-driven hidden pat-
terns and their temporal activity. B SiBBlInGS is based on a per-state-and-trial matrix factorization
where the BBs (Ad ) are identical across trials and similar across states. C BB similarity is controlled
via data-driven channel graphs (H d ∈ RN ×N ) and state-similarity graph (P ∈ RD×D ), which can
be either predefined (supervised) or data-driven. D The learning schematic with an exemplary trial
for each of the 3 exemplary states. The BBs of each state d (columns of Ad ) are constrained with two
regularization terms: 1) state-specific λd captures similar activity between channels by leveraging
a channel-similarity graph H d , and 2) P , captures BB consistency across states via state similarity
graph. ν controls the relative level of cross-state similarity between BBs, allowing the discovery of
both background and state-specific BBs. Higher (lower) ν values promote greater (lesser) consis-
tency of specific BBs across states (e.g. ν1 v.s ν5 ).


variability within and across states. Hence, the setting we focus on extends beyond a single set of
trials; instead, we deal with a collection of D multi-trial sets, each associated with a known state or
condition. Within each d-th set, the number of trials, denoted as Md , may also vary. In essence, the
full observation set includes this collection of D multi-trial sets, {Ym1 }M            D MD
                                                                             m=1 , ...{Ym }m=1 , where
                                                                               1

                                                                d      d   d T       d
each set represents a different state d = 1 . . . D, such that Ym = A (Φm ) + ηm .
We further assume that while the temporal activities of the BBs (Φdm ) can vary across trials, both
within and between states, the compositions of the BBs themselves (Ad ) might also present subtle
variations across different states. Specifically, we posit that the dissimilarity between BB composi-
tions for any pair of distinct states d and d′ (d ̸= d′ ) reflects the dissimilarity between those states,
                                                          ′
such that the dissimilarity between Ad and Ad for any distinct states d and d′ is constrained by
               ′
∥Ad − Ad ∥F < ϵ3 (d, d′ ). Here, ϵ3 (d, d′ ) is a scalar threshold determined by the expected dissim-
ilarity between these states (e.g., if considering different disease stages as states, we assume that
consecutive disease stages are more similar to each other than they are similar to a healthy state, i.e.,
ϵ3 (ddisease1 , ddisease2 ) < ϵ3 (dhealthy , ddisease )).
The main challenge SiBBlInGS addresses is recovering the unknown underlying BBs (Ad ) and
their associated temporal activity (Φdm ) for all states and trials given solely the combined activity
observations (Fig. 1 top). Further notation details can be found in Section A.


                                                    4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


4     T HE S I BB L I N GS MODEL
We present a framework to identify interpretable BBs based on shared temporal activity within trials
and shared activation patterns across trials and states. Our framework serves as a foundation for
understanding cross-trial and cross-state variability and enables deeper insights into how BBs differ
across sessions both in terms of their structure and temporal dynamics. Unlike existing methods
(Table 2), SiBBlInGS clusters BB components based on temporal similarity and enables the study
of variability in high-dimensional data without assuming orthogonality. In addition, SiBBlInGS
enables BB interdependency or overlap, recognizes the existence of variations in trial counts within
states, and is capable of coping with trials of different duration or sampling rates. SiBBlInGS
also offers both supervised and unsupervised state-similarity setting–thus providing the flexibility to
choose between data-driven or predefined approaches based on the specific data structure.
We develop a dictionary learning-like iterative procedure that alternates between updating the BBs
{Ad } and their temporal profiles {Φdm } for all states d = 1 . . . D. Critical to our approach is the
integration of both channels’ nonlinear similarity knowledge and the understanding of how states
differ. We thus augment the model with two graphs, one over channels, and one over states, to cap-
ture these relationships. The graph over channels is used to identify regularities between channels,
and the states graph is used to promote consistency in BB structure across states. Mathematically,
we formulate the fitting procedure as minimizing the following cost function {A      bd }, {Φb d } for all
                                                                                               m
d = 1 . . . D and m = 1 . . . Md :

                                                                                                  d′
    min ΣD         ΣM
                          d
                         ∥Ym − Ad (Φdm )T ∥2F + R(Φdm ) + R(Ad ) + ΣD                      d             2

                                                                          d′ ̸=d Pd,d′ ∥(A − A )V ∥F
                      d
               d    m
{Ad },{Φd
        m}


where the first term is a data fidelity term, the second regularizes the BBs’ temporal traces, the reg-
ularization R(Ad ) regularizes each BB to group channels based on shared temporal activity and to
be sparse (as described in the next sections), and the last term regularizes BBs to be similar across
states. The square matrix P ∈ RD×D is a state-similarity graph that determines the effect of the
similarity between each pair of states on the regularization of the distance between their BB repre-
sentations. P can be set manually (supervised P ) or in a data-driven way (unsupervised P ), thus
allowing selection based on specific goals, data type, and knowledge of data labels. Each of these
two options offers unique benefits: the supervised variant enables explicit regulation of the similar-
ity and the incorporation of important knowledge into the model based on human-expert familiarity
with the data, whereas the unsupervised variant leverages the data itself to learn similarities and
patterns, and is advantageous for learning data patterns without preconceived biases. The use of
the matrix V = diag(ν) ∈ Rp×p , accompanied by the weight vector ν ∈ Rp , allows for assigning
varying weights to individual BBs, thereby facilitating the creation of state-invariant vs state-specific
BBs. The model operates iteratively, with updates applied to Ad and Φdm for each trial and state.
The process is detailed in Algorithm 1 and in Figure 1, with computational complexity in Section E.
Updating Ad : In SiBBlInGS, we assume that BBs may require subtle state-to-state adaptations
but are required to remain constant within a state. Hence, we demand that the BB matrix (Ad ) is
shared across same-state trials but undergoes subtle adjustments across states, proportionate to the
corresponding states’ similarities. The update of Ad for each state d, is achieved via an extended re-
weighted ℓ1 graph filtering with an integration of a channel-similarity graph in a way that promotes
channels with similar temporal activity to be grouped into the same BBs. In particular, we update
the n-th row of each ab dn = A
                             bd via the re-weighted procedure that alternates between updating a
                               n:                                                                 b dnj
and λdn,j as:
                                                                                                 ′
    b dn
    a      =   arg min ∥Ynd∗ − adn (Φd∗ )T ∥22 + Σpj=1 λdn,j |adn,j | + Σd′ ̸=d Pdd′ ∥(adn − adn ) ◦ ν∥22 , (1)
                    ad
                     n


with λdn,j = ϵ/(β+|A
                   bd |+wgraph |H d A
                     n,j
                                    bd
                                 n: :j |), Y
                                             d∗
                                                is a matrix of size N ×(ΣM    d
                                                                         m=1 Tm ) of horizontally
                                                                          d

                                                                              Md    d
concatenated observations from all Md trials of state d, and Φd∗ ∈ R(Σm=1 Tm )×p is a matrix formed
by vertically concatenating the current estimates of temporal traces from all trials of that state.
Above, ◦ is element-wise multiplication, β, ϵ, and wgraph are model hyper-parameters. H d and P d
are channel and state similarity graphs, described below:
State similarity graph (P ∈ RD×D ): Can be either pre-defined (supervised) or data-driven. Here,
we present the supervised version of P , which is particularly useful when one has prior knowledge or


                                                      5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 2: Demonstration on Synthetic Data. A Three example time traces identified by SiBBlInGS
vs. ground truth traces, projected onto the axes of the three synthetic states. SiBBlInGS manages to
recover both traces that are highly correlated with specific states (state-sensitive, e.g., Φ10 ; green),
as well as traces exhibiting similar activation across states (state-invaariant, e.g., Φ2 ; blue). B Com-
parison between the identified BBs and the ground truth BBs. C Correlation between the identified
time traces and the ground truth (right), and Jaccard index of the identified BBs compared to the
ground truth (left). D Comparison between the ground truth data (top), SiBBlInGS reconstruction
(middle), and the residual (bottom). E Performance under increasing levels of missing samples
(200 repeats). The scattered dots represent model repetitions, the curves depict the median values
calculated by rounding to the nearest 5%, and the background shading corresponds to the 25-75
percentiles. F Comparison to other relevant methods, including Tucker, PARAFAC, PCA “global”
(applying a single PCA to all states), PCA “local” (applying PCA to each state), NONFAT Wang
& Zhe (2022b), and NNDTN (discretetime NN decomposition with nonlinear dynamics, as imple-
mented by Wang & Zhe (2022a)). See Section H.4 for details. G Performance under increasing
levels of noise and random matrix initalizations (300 repeats). The scattered dots represent model
repetitions, the curves depict the median values calculated by rounding to the nearest 0.25 noise std,
and the background shading corresponds to the 25-75 percentiles. While the model remains robust
under varying noise (SNR < 3), it experiences a phase transition at a specific noise level, aligning
with dictionary-learning literature (e.g. Studer & Baraniuk (2012)).


expectations regarding quantitative state values that can be leveraged to integrate desired information
into the model, while the data-driven approach is presented in Section B.2. This supervised version,
unlike the data-driven option, assumes that a numerical label Ld , associated with each state d, can
provide valuable information for constructing the state-similarity graph P (e.g., vector labels that
denote x-y positions in a reaching-out task where the states are the possible positions). This way, the
similarity Pd,d′ between each pair of states (d, d′ ) is calculated based on the distance
                                                                                            between the
labels (Ld , Ld′ ) associated with these states: Pd,d′ = exp −∥Ld − Ld′ ∥22 /σP  2
                                                                                       where σP2 controls
how the similarities in labels scale to similarities in BBs. The supervised approach easily extends
to both data with identical or different session duration, and can also handle categorical states as
described in Sec. B.1.1.

Channel similarity graph (H d ∈ RN ×N ): Defined by H          fd = exp −∥Y d∗ − Y d∗ ∥2 /σ 2 ,
                                                                 i,j                i:      j:      H
                                                                                                    f
where σH f is a model hyperparameter that controls the kernel bandwidth. To enhance the robustness
of H d for each state d, we utilize the previously computed state-graph (P ) to re-weight H along


                                                   6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 3: Demonstration on Google Trends data. A Temporal traces of the identified BBs demon-
strate seasonal trends consistent with the words associated with each BB. B BBs by different states
along with their per-state dominancy. States are marked by colors, and dot sizes represent the con-
tribution of the term in the associated BB.

the states dimension. This process mitigates the influence of outliers and encourages the clustering
of similarly behaving channels into the same BB. We achieve this by calculating H d as a weighted
sum ΣD             fd′
         d=1 Pd,d′ H , and then retaining only the k largest values in each row, setting the remainder
to zero. We then symmetrize this graph and row-normalize it so that its rows sum to 1 (Sec. C). The
advantage of this graph-driven re-weighted approach, compared to other TF and dictionary learning
procedures, lies in that the weighted evolving regularization term (λd ∈ RN ×p ) is a function of
the channel similarity graph H d in a way that promotes the grouping (separating) of channels with
similar (dissimilar) activity into the same (different) BBs. Specifically, as seen in the last term of the
λdn,j ’s denominator, for a given state d, a strong (weak) correlation between the similarity values of
the nth channel (Hn: d
                       ) and the j-th BB (Abd ) results in decreased (increased) λd . Consequently, the
                                             :j                                   n,j
                         d
ℓ1 regularization on a b n is reduced (increased), promoting the inclusion (exclusion) of this channel
in the j-th BB.
After each update of all rows in Ad , each column is normalized to have a maximum absolute value
of 1. In practice, we update A ( equation 1) for a random subset of trials in each iteration to improve
robustness and computation speed.
Updating Φdm : The update step over Φdm uses the current estimate of Ad to re-estimate the temporal
profile matrix Φdm independently over each state d and trial m. Note that we do not enforce similarity
in Φdm to allow for flexibility in capturing differences across states and trials. Thus, for each trial m
and state d, ϕ = Φdm is updated by solving the following minimization problem:
                               2
b = arg min Y d − Ad ϕT
ϕ                                  + γ1 ∥ϕ∥2F + γ2 ∥ϕ − ϕ
                                                        biter−1 ∥2 + γ3 ∥ϕ − ϕt−1 ∥2 + γ4 Rcorr (ϕ) (2)
             m                 F                                 F                 F
         ϕ≥0

where the first term is for data fidelity, the second term regularizes excessive activity, the third
term encourages continuity across iterations (ϕ biter−1 refers to ϕ from the previous model iteration),
and the fourth term is a diffusion term that promotes temporal consistency of the dictionary across
                         t−1
consecutive samples (ϕ        refers to a shifted version of ϕ by one time point), and Rcorr (ϕ) =
∥ ϕT ϕ − diag(ϕT ϕ) ◦ D∥sav promotes decorrelation among the temporal traces of BBs (where
D ∈ Rp×p is a normalization matrix with Dij = ∥ϕ:i ∥21∥ϕ:j ∥2 , and sav stands for sum-of-absolute-
values). This update step thus seeks to improve the dictionary by minimizing the cost function, while
balancing sparsity, decorrelated elements, continuity, and temporal consistency (refer to Section D
for how to solve equation 2 in practice).

5    E XPERIMENTS
SiBBlInGS recovers ground truth BBs in synthetic data: Synthetic data were generated with D =
3 states, each consisting of a single trial, with p = 10 ground-truth BBs, and N = 100 channels.
Each i-th BB was generated with a maximum cardinality of maxd,i ∥Ad:,i ∥0 = 21 channels, and


                                                    7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 4: Identification of Temporal Patterns in Monkey Somatosensory Cortex. A The reach-
ing out task (Rodriguez (2023)). B Sparse clusters of neurons representing identified BBs. C Con-
fusion matrix of a logistic regression model using the inferred temporal traces to predict the state
label. D The BB’s temporal traces as they vary across states and time. E Ratios of within-to-between
states temporal correlations for each BB, with ρρbetween
                                                  within
                                                         > 1, indicating states distinguishability.



on average, each channel was associated with 2.1 BBs. While the BBs were designed to be non-
orthogonal, we constrained their pairwise correlations to be below a threshold of max ρ < 0.6. The
temporal dynamics of the synthetic data were generated by summing 15 trigonometric functions
with different frequencies (Sec. H.2 for details). SiBBlInGS exhibited a monotonically increasing
performance during training (Fig. 6A,B,C,D), and at convergence was able to successfully recover
the underlying BBs in the synthetic data and their temporal traces (Fig 2A, B, C). Example traces
demonstrate a high precision of the recovered temporal traces, with correlation to the ground truth
traces being close to one (Fig. 2A, C, 6F). Furthermore, the identified BB components align closely
with the ground truth BBs (Fig. 2B,C), as indicated by high Jaccard index values. Notably, tensor
decomposition models were unable to identify the BBs nor their traces (Fig. 2F, Fig 6F).
SiBBlInGS finds interpretable BBs in Google Trends data: We use Google Trends Google Trends
(Accessed 11 November 2022) to demonstrate SiBBlInGS’ capability in identifying temporal and
structural patterns by querying search term frequency on Google over time. We used a monthly
Trends volume of 44 queries (fromJan. 2011 to Oct. 2022) related to various topics, as searched in 8
US states selected for their diverse characteristics Coulby (2000). The p = 5 BBs identified by SiB-
BlInGS reveal meaningful clusters of terms, whose time traces convey the temporal evolution of user
interests per region (Fig. 3A), while aligning with the seasonality of the BBs’components (Fig. 3B).
For instance, the first BB represents college-related terms and shows a gradual annual decrease with
periodic activity and a notable deviation during the COVID pandemic, possibly reflecting factors
such as the shift to remote learning (Fig. 9, Sec. I.3). The 2-nd and 4-th BBs, respectively, demon-
strate periodic patterns associated with Passover in April (Fig. 10, Sec. I.4) and winter terms in
December. Interestingly, CA, FL, and NY—all states with larger Jewish populations—show more
pronounced peaks of the “Passover” BB activity in April (when Passover is celebrated) compared
to the other states (Fig. 10). The last BB represents COVID-related terms and exhibits temporal
patterns with a sharp increase around Jan. 2020, coinciding with the onset of the COVID pandemic
in the US. Remarkably, ’Hopkins’ exhibits a less pronounced COVID-related search peak in MD
(blue), where the university and hospital are located, likely attributed to its well-established local
presence. Conversely, other states witnessed a more significant surge in Hopkins-related searches
at the onset of the COVID outbreak, as Hopkins suddenly garnered increased attention during this
period. This emphasizes our model’s interpretability and the need to capture similar yet distinct BBs
across states, distinguishing it from other tensor factorization methods (Fig. 8).
SiBBlInGS identifies meaningful patterns in brain recordings: We next test SiBBlInGS on neu-
ral activity recorded from the somatosensory cortex in a monkey performing a reaching task, as
described by Chowdhury & Miller (2022). The data consist of 8 different hand angle directions,
representing distinct states, with each angle comprising 18 trials observed under noisy conditions.


                                                  8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 5: Emerging local BBs in Epilepsy. The recovered BBs under 1) normal activity, 2) activity
during the 8 seconds proceedings CPS seizures located around the F8 area, and 3) activity during
the seizures. Colors represent different BBs, and the size of the dots corresponds to the contribution
of the respective electrode to each BB. Refer to Figure 13 for a comparison to other methods.



This spikes data were convolved over time with a Gaussian kernel. When applying SiBBlInGS with
a maximum of p = 4 BBs, SiBBlInGS identified sparse functional BBs (Fig. 4B) along with mean-
ingful temporal traces (Fig. 4D) that exhibit state-specific patterns. Interestingly, the 3-rd BB consis-
tently shows minimal activity across all states, suggesting it captures background or noise activity.
The structure of the identified BBs exhibits subtle yet significant adaptations across states in terms of
neuron weights and BB assignments. Furthermore, SiBBlInGS finds neurons belonging to multiple
neural clusters, suggesting their involvement in multiple functions. When examining the temporal
correlations of corresponding BBs within and between states, all BBs exhibited a within/between
ratio significantly > 1 (Fig. 4E, Fig. 12, Sec. J.4). This indicates reduced variability within states
and clear distinctions between states. Furthermore, multi-class logistic regression based only on the
identified temporal traces, was able to accurately predict states (Fig. 4C).
SiBBlInGS discovers emerging local BBs preceding epileptic seizures: Finally, we applied SiB-
BlInGS to EEG recordings of an epileptic patient from Handa et al. (2021); Nasreddine (2021) (refer
to Sec. K for application details). Specifically, we examined data from an 8-year-old individual who
had experienced 5 complex partial seizures (CPS) localized around electrode F8. SiBBlInGS un-
veiled interpretable and localized EEG activity in the period preceding seizures (Fig. 5), a feat not
achieved by other methods (Fig. 13). In particular, it identified a BB specific to the region around
the clinically labeled area (F8) that emerged during the 8 seconds prior to the seizure (Fig. 5, mid-
dle, prominent pink circle). Additionally, several alterations in BB composition were evident during
the seizure in comparison to the normal activity period (Fig. 5, right vs. left panels). For example,
the contribution of T4 to the red BB during normal activity is higher than its contribution during a
seizure, while the contribution of T5 to the same BB is larger during a seizure. This example un-
derscores the potential of SiBBlInGS in discovering BBs that uniquely emerge under specific states,
made possible by the flexibility of ν to support both state-variant and state-invariant BBs.



6   C ONCLUSION

We propose SiBBlInGS for graphs-driven identification of interpretable cross-state BBs with their
temporal profiles in multi-way time-series data—thus provides insights into system structure and
variability. Unlike other approaches, SiBBlInGS naturally accommodates variations in trial num-
bers, durations, sampling rates, BB sensitivity to states, and subtle changes in cross-states BB struc-
tures. We demonstrate SiBBlInGS’ capacity to identify functional neural assemblies and discern
cross-state variations in web-search data structures, showcasing its promise in additional domains,
including, e.g., detecting gene expression clusters in health vs disease, unveiling financial patterns
across locations based on stock data, and studying activity shifts in social media dynamics. Re-
garding limitations, SiBBlInGS assumes Gaussian data statistics, yet Poisson may be more suitable
in certain cases. Also, exploring advanced distance metrics for graph construction holds promise
for future research. Additionally, the identified BBs currently do not consider potential directed
connectivity within them, presenting an exciting opportunity for future research.


                                                   9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Michal Aharon, Michael Elad, and Alfred Bruckstein. K-svd: An algorithm for designing over-
 complete dictionaries for sparse representation. IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing, 54(11):
 4311–4322, 2006.
Dawon Ahn, Jun-Gi Jang, and U Kang. Time-aware tensor decomposition for sparse tensors. In
  2021 IEEE 8th International Conference on Data Science and Advanced Analytics (DSAA), pp.
  1–2. IEEE, 2021.
Mikio Aoi and Jonathan W Pillow. Model-based targeted dimensionality reduction for neuronal
 population data. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 31, 2018.
Mikio C Aoi, Valerio Mante, and Jonathan W Pillow. Prefrontal cortex exhibits multidimensional
 dynamic encoding during decision-making. Nature Neuroscience, 23(11):1410–1420, 2020.
Ziv Bar-Joseph, Anthony Gitter, and Itamar Simon. Studying and modelling dynamic biological
  processes using time-series gene expression data. Nature Reviews Genetics, 13(8):552–564, 2012.
Donald J Berndt and James Clifford. Using dynamic time warping to find patterns in time series. In
  Proceedings of the 3rd International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, pp.
  359–370. AAAI Press, 1994.
Emmanuel J Candes, Michael B Wakin, and Stephen P Boyd. Enhancing sparsity by reweighted ℓ1
  minimization. Journal of Fourier analysis and applications, 14:877–905, 2008.
Adam S Charles and Christopher J Rozell. Spectral superresolution of hyperspectral imagery using
  reweighted ℓ1 spatial filtering. IEEE Geoscience and Remote Sensing Letters, 11(3):602–606,
  2013.
Adam S Charles, Aurele Balavoine, and Christopher J Rozell. Dynamic filtering of time-varying
  sparse signals via ℓ1 minimization. IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing, 64(21):5644–5656,
  2016.
Adam S Charles, Mijung Park, J Patrick Weller, Gregory D Horwitz, and Jonathan W Pillow. De-
  throning the fano factor: a flexible, model-based approach to partitioning neural variability. Neu-
  ral Computation, 30(4):1012–1045, 2018.
Adam S Charles, Nathan Cermak, Rifqi O Affan, Benjamin B Scott, Jackie Schiller, and Gal Mishne.
  Graft: Graph filtered temporal dictionary learning for functional neural imaging. IEEE Transac-
  tions on Image Processing, 31:3509–3524, 2022.
Po-Hsuan (Cameron) Chen, Janice Chen, Yaara Yeshurun, Uri Hasson, James Haxby, and Peter J
  Ramadge. A reduced-dimension fmri shared response model. In C. Cortes, N. Lawrence, D. Lee,
  M. Sugiyama, and R. Garnett (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, vol-
  ume 28. Curran Associates, Inc., 2015.
Raeed Chowdhury and Lee Miller. Area2 bump: macaque somatosensory area 2 spiking activity
  during reaching with perturbations. Data set, 2022.
Raeed H Chowdhury, Joshua I Glaser, and Lee E Miller. Area 2 of primary somatosensory cortex
  encodes kinematics of the whole arm. Elife, 9:e48198, 2020.
David Coulby. Beyond the national curriculum: Curricular centralism and cultural diversity in
  Europe and the USA. Psychology Press, 2000.
Lieven De Lathauwer, Bart De Moor, and Joos Vandewalle. Multilinear subspace learning: dimen-
  sionality reduction of multidimensional data. In Proceedings of the 2000 Conference on Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 485–491, 2000.
Lea Duncker and Maneesh Sahani. Temporal alignment and latent gaussian process factor inference
  in population spike trains. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 31, 2018.
Pierre Garrigues and Bruno Olshausen. Group sparse coding with a Laplacian scale mixture prior.
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 23, 2010.


                                                 10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Gene H Golub and Charles F Van Loan. Matrix computations. JHU press, 2013.
Google Trends. Google Trends. https://trends.google.com/trends/, Accessed 11
  November 2022.
Robbe LT Goris, J Anthony Movshon, and Eero P Simoncelli. Partitioning neuronal variability.
  Nature Neuroscience, 17(6):858–865, 2014.
JC Gower. Dijksterhuis, gb: Procrustes problems, 2004.
Palak Handa, Monika Mathur, and Nidhi Goel. Open and free eeg datasets for epilepsy diagnosis.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.01030, 2021.
Richard A Harshman. oundations of the parafac procedure: Models and conditions for an ”explana-
  tory” multimodal factor analysis. UCLA Working Papers in Phonetics, 16(1):1–84, 1970.
Hong He, Yonghong Tan, and Wuxiong Zhang. A wavelet tensor fuzzy clustering scheme for multi-
  sensor human activity recognition. Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence, 70:109–
  122, 2018. ISSN 0952-1976. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.engappai.2018.01.004. URL https:
  //www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0952197618300046.
Harold Hotelling. Analysis of a complex of statistical variables into principal components. Journal
  of educational psychology, 24(6):417, 1933.
Aapo Hyvarinen, J Karhunen, and E Oja. Independent component analysis and blind source separa-
  tion, 2001.
Connor T Jerzak, Gary King, and Anton Strezhnev. An improved method of automated nonpara-
  metric content analysis for social science. Political Analysis, 31(1):42–58, 2023.
Rahul Kala, Anupam Shulkla, and Ritu Tiwari. Fuzzy neuro systems for machine learning for large
  data sets. In 2009 IEEE International Advance Computing Conference, pp. 541–545. IEEE, 2009.
EG Kogbetliantz. Solution of linear equations by diagonalization of coefficients matrix. Quarterly
  of Applied Mathematics, 13(2):123–132, 1955.
Jean Kossaifi, Yannis Panagakis, Anima Anandkumar, and Maja Pantic. Tensorly: Tensor learning
  in python. arXiv preprint arXiv:1610.09555, 2016.
Jean Kossaifi, Yannis Panagakis, Anima Anandkumar, Maja Atanasijevic, Nikolaos Balntas, Andrei
  Bursuc, Siyu Chen, Theodore Cohen, Emile Contal, Benoit Couellan, Khalid El Housni, Dariusz
  Krol, Evgenia Kusmenko, David Marteau, Alexandru Mocanu, Mickael Perrot, Antoine Prouvost,
  Roman Remme, Justus Schock, and Kiran R. Varikooty. TensorLy: Tensor learning in python.
  http://tensorly.org/stable/, 2021.
Daniel D Lee and H Sebastian Seung. Learning the parts of objects by non-negative matrix factor-
  ization. Nature, 401(6755):788–791, 1999.
Ran Liu, Mehdi Azabou, Max Dabagia, Jingyun Xiao, and Eva Dyer. Seeing the forest and the tree:
  Building representations of both individual and collective dynamics with transformers. Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:2377–2391, 2022.
Valerio Mante, David Sussillo, Krishna V Shenoy, and William T Newsome. Context-dependent
  computation by recurrent dynamics in prefrontal cortex. Nature, 503(7474):78–84, 2013.
Gal Mishne and Adam S Charles. Learning spatially-correlated temporal dictionaries for calcium
  imaging. In ICASSP 2019-2019 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal
  Processing (ICASSP), pp. 1065–1069. IEEE, 2019.
Gal Mishne, Ronen Talmon, Ron Meir, Jackie Schiller, Maria Lavzin, Uri Dubin, and Ronald R.
  Coifman. Hierarchical coupled-geometry analysis for neuronal structure and activity pattern dis-
  covery. IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Signal Processing, 10(7):1238–1253, 2016. doi:
  10.1109/JSTSP.2016.2602061.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Noga Mudrik, Yenho Chen, Eva Yezerets, Christopher J Rozell, and Adam S Charles. Decomposed
  linear dynamical systems (dlds) for learning the latent components of neural dynamics. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2206.02972, 2022.
Wassim Nasreddine. Epileptic eeg dataset, 2021.
Bruno A Olshausen and David J Field. Wavelet-like receptive fields emerge from a network that
  learns sparse codes for natural images. Nature, 381:607–609, 1996.
Bruno A Olshausen and David J Field. Sparse coding of sensory inputs. Current Opinion in Neuro-
  biology, 14(4):481–487, 2004.
The pandas development team. pandas-dev/pandas: Pandas, February 2020. URL https://doi.
  org/10.5281/zenodo.3509134.
Fabian Pedregosa, Gaël Varoquaux, Alexandre Gramfort, Vincent Michel, Bertrand Thirion, Olivier
  Grisel, Mathieu Blondel, Peter Prettenhofer, Ron Weiss, Vincent Dubourg, Jake Vanderplas,
  Alexandre Passos, David Cournapeau, Matthieu Brucher, Matthieu Perrot, and Édouard Duch-
  esnay. Scikit-learn: Machine learning in Python. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 12:
  2825–2830, 2011. URL http://jmlr.org/papers/v12/pedregosa11a.html.
Felix Pei, Joel Ye, David M. Zoltowski, Anqi Wu, Raeed H. Chowdhury, Hansem Sohn, Joseph E.
  O’Doherty, Krishna V. Shenoy, Matthew T. Kaufman, Mark Churchland, Mehrdad Jazayeri,
  Lee E. Miller, Jonathan Pillow, Il Memming Park, Eva L. Dyer, and Chethan Pandarinath. Neu-
  ral latents benchmark ’21: Evaluating latent variable models of neural population activity. In
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), Track on Datasets and Bench-
  marks, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2109.04463.
Jing Qin, Shuang Li, Deanna Needell, Anna Ma, Rachel Grotheer, Chenxi Huang, and Na-
   talie Durgin. Stochastic greedy algorithms for multiple measurement vectors. arXiv preprint
   arXiv:1711.01521, 2017.
M. Ravasi and I. Vasconcelos. Pylops–a linear-operator python library for scalable alge-
 bra and optimization. SoftwareX, 11:100495, 2020. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.softx.
 2020.100495. URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
 S2352711020302449.
Andrea Colins Rodriguez. Monkey (arm movement), 2023. URL https://doi.org/10.
  5281/zenodo.4662738.
Peter J Schmid. Dynamic mode decomposition of numerical and experimental data. Journal of
  Fluid Mechanics, 656:5–28, 2010.
Steffen Schneider, Jin Hwa Lee, and Mackenzie Weygandt Mathis. Learnable latent embeddings for
  joint behavioural and neural analysis. Nature, pp. 1–9, 2023.
Christoph Studer and Richard G Baraniuk. Dictionary learning from sparsely corrupted or com-
  pressed signals. In 2012 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Pro-
  cessing (ICASSP), pp. 3341–3344. IEEE, 2012.
Jeremias Sulam, Chong You, and Zhihui Zhu. Recovery and generalization in over-realized dictio-
   nary learning. The Journal of Machine Learning Research, 23(1):6060–6082, 2022.
Ju Sun, Qing Qu, and John Wright. Complete dictionary recovery over the sphere i: Overview and
  the geometric picture. IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 63(2):853–884, 2016.
Khandakar Tanvir Ahmed, Sze Cheng, Qian Li, Jeongsik Yong, and Wei Zhang. Incomplete time-
  series gene expression in integrative study for islet autoimmunity prediction. Briefings in Bioin-
  formatics, 24(1):bbac537, 2023.
Conor Tillinghast, Shikai Fang, Kai Zhang, and Shandian Zhe. Probabilistic neural-kernel tensor
  decomposition. In 2020 IEEE International Conference on Data Mining (ICDM), pp. 531–540.
  IEEE, 2020.


                                                12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Ivana Tošić and Pascal Frossard. Dictionary learning. IEEE Signal Processing Magazine, 28(2):
  27–38, 2011.
Hossein Valavi and Peter J Ramadge. Multi-dataset low-rank matrix factorization. In 2019 53rd
  Annual Conference on Information Sciences and Systems (CISS), pp. 1–5. IEEE, 2019.
Ewout van den Berg and Michael P. Friedlander. Probing the pareto frontier for basis pursuit solu-
  tions. SIAM Journal on Scientific Computing, 31(2):890–912, 2008.
N Venkatesh and Srinivasan Jayaraman. Human electrocardiogram for biometrics using dtw and
  flda. In 2010 20th International Conference on Pattern Recognition, pp. 3838–3841. IEEE, 2010.
Pauli Virtanen, Ralf Gommers, Travis E. Oliphant, Matt Haberland, Tyler Reddy, David Courna-
  peau, Evgeni Burovski, Pearu Peterson, Warren Weckesser, Jonathan Bright, Stéfan J. van der
  Walt, Matthew Brett, Joshua Wilson, K. Jarrod Millman, Nikolay Mayorov, Andrew R. J. Nel-
  son, Eric Jones, Robert Kern, Eric Larson, C J Carey, İlhan Polat, Yu Feng, Eric W. Moore,
  Jake VanderPlas, Denis Laxalde, Josef Perktold, Robert Cimrman, Ian Henriksen, E. A. Quin-
  tero, Charles R. Harris, Anne M. Archibald, Antônio H. Ribeiro, Fabian Pedregosa, Paul van
  Mulbregt, Ashwin Vijaykumar, Alberto Bardelli, Adrian Rothberg, Andreas Hilboll, Andreas
  Kloeckner, and SciPy 1.0 Contributors. SciPy 1.0: fundamental algorithms for scientific comput-
  ing in Python. Nature Methods, 17:261–272, 2020. doi: 10.1038/s41592-019-0686-2.
Yu-Xiong Wang and Yu-Jin Zhang. Nonnegative matrix factorization: A comprehensive review.
  IEEE Transactions on knowledge and data engineering, 25(6):1336–1353, 2012.
Zheng Wang and Shandian Zhe. NONFAT: Nonparametric Factor Trajectory Learning for Dynamic
  Tensor Decomposition. https://github.com/wzhut/NONFAT, 2022a.
Zheng Wang and Shandian Zhe. Nonparametric factor trajectory learning for dynamic tensor decom-
  position. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 23459–23469. PMLR, 2022b.
Huiqin Wei, Long Chen, Keyu Ruan, Lingxi Li, and Long Chen. Low-rank tensor regularized fuzzy
  clustering for multiview data. IEEE Transactions on Fuzzy Systems, 28(12):3087–3099, 2020.
  doi: 10.1109/TFUZZ.2020.2988841.
Wes McKinney. Data Structures for Statistical Computing in Python. In Stéfan van der Walt and
 Jarrod Millman (eds.), Proceedings of the 9th Python in Science Conference, pp. 56 – 61, 2010.
 doi: 10.25080/Majora-92bf1922-00a.
Alex H Williams, Tony Hyun Kim, Forea Wang, Saurabh Vyas, Stephen I Ryu, Krishna V Shenoy,
  Mark Schnitzer, Tamara G Kolda, and Surya Ganguli. Unsupervised discovery of demixed,
  Low-Dimensional neural dynamics across multiple timescales through tensor component anal-
  ysis. Neuron, 98(6):1099–1115.e8, June 2018.
Xian Wu, Baoxu Shi, Yuxiao Dong, Chao Huang, and Nitesh Chawla. Neural tensor factorization.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.04416, 2018.
Xian Wu, Baoxu Shi, Yuxiao Dong, Chao Huang, and Nitesh V Chawla. Neural tensor factorization
  for temporal interaction learning. In Proceedings of the Twelfth ACM international conference on
  web search and data mining, pp. 537–545, 2019.
Zenglin Xu, Feng Yan, et al. Infinite tucker decomposition: Nonparametric bayesian models for
  multiway data analysis. arXiv preprint arXiv:1108.6296, 2011.
M-S Yang. A survey of fuzzy clustering. Mathematical and Computer Modelling, 18(11):1–16,
 1993.
Zhilin Zhang and Bhaskar D Rao. Sparse signal recovery with temporally correlated source vectors
  using sparse bayesian learning. IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Signal Processing, 5(5):912–
  926, 2011.
Shandian Zhe, Kai Zhang, Pengyuan Wang, Kuang-chih Lee, Zenglin Xu, Yuan Qi, and Zoubin
  Ghahramani. Distributed flexible nonlinear tensor factorization. Advances in neural information
  processing systems, 29, 2016.


                                               13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


S UPPLEMENTARY M ATERIAL

A      N OTATIONS

Throughout the paper, we adopt the following notations: superscript ()d refers to state d, and sub-
script ()m refers to trial m. Specifically, Ymd and Φdm denote the observations and temporal traces of
trial m of state d, while Ad represents the BBs of state d. Additionally, for a general matrix Z, let
Zi: (Z:j ) denote the i-th row (j-th column) of a matrix Z.


Table 1: List of notations for SiBBLINGS.
 Symbol                  Description
 BBs                     Building Blocks
 channels                Each feature in the observations, e.g., neurons in recordings
 states                  Different “views” of the observations. e.g. different cognitive tasks
 trials/sessions         Repeated observations within state
 p                       Number of BBs
 D                       Number of states
 Md                      Number of trials for state d
 N                       Number of channels
 Zn: (or Z[n,:] )        The n-th row of a general matrix Z
 Z:i (or Z[:,i] )        The i-th column of a general matrix Z
 Ld                      Label of state d (optional, can be a scalar or a vector)
                   d
 Ymd ∈ RN ×Tm            Observation for trial m and state d
 Ad ∈ RN ×p              Matrix of BBs for state d.
                   d
   d        N ×Tm
 Φm ∈ R                  Matrix of temporal traces for trial m of state d.
 P ∈ RD×D                States similarity graph
 H ∈ RN ×N ×D            Channel similarity graph
 ν ∈ Rp                  Controls the relative level of cross-state similarity for each BB
 V = diag(ν)             A diagonal matrix whose entry in index ii is the i-th entry of ν
 β                       An hyperparameter controlling the strength of regularization
 γ1 , γ2 , γ3 , γ4       Hyperparameters to regularize Φdm
 σHf P, σ                Hyperparameters that control the bandwidth of the kernel
 ψnij ∈ RMj ,Mi          Transformation of the data from state i to state j for channel n


Algorithm 1 SiBBlInGS Model Training (short version)
    Inputs
    {Ym }1m=1:M1 , ...{Ym }D       m=1:MD                  ▷ Observations under D states, Md trials for state d
    {β, ξ, ϵ, γ1 , γ2 , γ3 , γ4 , ν, K, wgraph , σp , σH }, L (optional labels)              ▷ Model parameters
    Initialization and pre-Calculations
    Ad , {Φdm }m=1:Md              ∀d = 1 . . . D                        ▷ Initialize BBs and temporal matrices
    P ∈ RD×D , H ∈ RN ×N ×D                                                         ▷ Calculate similarity graphs
    while not all states converged do                                   ▷ Repeat until convergence of all states
        for all d = 1 . . . D do                                                             ▷ Iterate over states
            Select a random batch of trials from state d                                            ▷ Take a batch
            Update Ad and λd                                                                     ▷ via equation 1
            for all m = 1 . . . Md do                                                 ▷ for every trial in the state
                  update Φdm                                                                      ▷ via equation 2



B      F URTHER OPTIONS FOR P COMPUTATION

Here, we explore additional approaches for computing the state-similarity graph P . These options
take into account factors like data properties, single vs. multi-trial cases, variations in trial duration,
and the desired approach (supervised or data-driven).


                                                         14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 2: Assumptions and capabilities comparison between SiBBlInGS and other methods.
                   Method                   SiBBlInGS   mTDR   PCA   Fast ICA   NMF   GPFA   SRM   HOSVD   PARAFAC
       Do not force orthogonality?              V        X      X       V        V     V      X      X        V
                   Sparse?                      V        X      X       X        X     X      X      X        X
      Flexible in time across states?           V        X      X       X        X     X      X      V        V
  Support variations in BB across states?       V        X      X       X        X     X      X      X        X
     Used for condition variability?            V        V      X       X        X     X      X      V        V
            Works on tensors?                   V        V      X       X        X     X      V      V        V
           Consider both within                 V        V      na      na       na    na     X      X        X
      & between states variability?
          Supports state-specific              V         V      na     na       na     na    V      X        X
         emerging components?
        Works on non-consistent                V         X      na     na       na     na    X      X        X
              data duration or
              sampling rates?
           Can prior knowledge                 V         V      na     na       na     na    V      X        X
           (labels) control state
                 similarity?
          Ability to define both               V         V      na     na       na     na    X      X        X
             state-specific and
        background components?
          Supports non-negative                V         X      X       X        V     X     X      X        V
              decomposition?



B.1     S UPERVISED P

B.1.1     C ATEGORICAL OR S IMILAR -D ISTANCED S TATES
For cases where observation states are represented by categorical labels, and we expect a high degree
of similarity between all possible pairs of states (i.e., no pair of labels is closer to each other than to
another pair), we can define the state similarity matrix P to be identical for all pairs of states. P is
then constructed as
                                          P = 1 ⊗ 1T + cI,                                              (3)
where P = 1 ⊗ 1T ∈ RD×D is a matrix of all ones, I ∈ RD×D is the identity matrix, and c is a
weight that scales the strength of self-similarity with respect to cross-state similarities.

B.2     DATA -D RIVEN P

When prior knowledge about state similarity is uncertain or unavailable, SiBBlInGS also provides an
unsupervised, data-driven approach to calculate P based on the distance between data points across
states. Here we discuss the four options for constructing the matrix P in a data-driven manner,
depending on the structure of the observations.

B.2.1     S INGLE - TRIAL PER - STATE WITH EQUAL - LENGTH ACROSS STATES :
This case refers to the scenario of a single trial for each state (Md = 1∀d = 1 . . . D), where all
cross-state trials have the same length (T1d = T ∀d = 1 . . . D). Here, the similarity graph P is
constructed as
                                                           ′
                               Pd,d′ = exp −||Y1d − Y1d ||2F /σP   2
                                                                       ,                        (4)

where σP controls the bandwidth of the kernel (more options and information about P reconstruc-
tion are found in section B).

B.2.2     M ULTIPLE TRIALS PER STATE , SAME TRIAL DURATION
In the most general case where all trials have the same temporal duration, the similarity matrix P is
computed by evaluating the distance between the values of each pair of states, considering all trials
within each state. For this, we first find the transformation ψnij ∈ RMj ×Mi between the observations
of state i to the observation of state j, by solving the Orthogonal Procrustes problem (Golub &
Van Loan, 2013; Gower, 2004). For this, let Y i∗ ∈ RMi ×(T ×N ) be the matrix obtained by vertically
concatenating the flattened observations from each trial (m = 1 . . . Mi ) of state i. Then, the optimal
transformation from the observations of state i (Y i∗ ∈ RMi ×(T ×N ) ) to the observations of state j


                                                               15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


(Y j∗ ∈ RMj ×(T ×N ) ) will be
                                 bij = arg min∥ψ ij Y i∗ − Y j∗ ∥2 ,
                                 ψ                                                                  (5)
                                                                 F
                                           ψ ij
where this mapping projects the multiple trials of state i into the same space as of state j, via
Ye i∗ = ψ
        bij Y i∗ . The state similarity matrix will thus be

                                 Pij = exp −∥Ye i∗ − Y j∗ ∥2 /σp 2 ,
                                                               F                              (6)
for all states i, j = 1 . . . D, and where σp controls the kernel bandwidth.

B.2.3    S INGLE - TRIAL PER STATE , DIFFERENT DURATION
Further generalization of the state similarity computation requires addressing the case of trials being
of varying duration. When the observations correspond to the same process and their alignment
using dynamic time warping is justifiable, we can replace the Gaussian kernel measure with the Dy-
namic Time Warping (DTW) distance metric (Berndt & Clifford, 1994). When we observe a single
trial for each state, the similarity metric becomes the average DTW distances over all channels,
                                                  N
                                                                         !
                                                1 X
                               Pij = exp −            DT W (Yn:i , Yn:j ) .                         (7)
                                               N n=1

B.2.4    M ULTIPLE TRIALS PER STATE , DIFFERENT DURATION
Similarly, for the multi-trial case we have
                                                                                             
                        N           Mj
                    1  X        1   X
   Pij = exp −                        DT W (Ye i∗ )m,[(n−1)T :nT ] , (Y j∗ )m,[(n−1)T :nT ] ,   (8)
                    N n=1 Mj m=1

where, as before, Y j∗ is the stacked-trials version of the observations at state j in channel n, such
that (Y j∗ )m: is the m-th row of this matrix, and (Y j∗ )m,[(n−1)T :nT ] corresponds to the m-th row
of this matrix, but limited to the columns ranging from (n − 1)T to nT . Ye i∗ , as before, refers to
the re-ordered version of Y i∗ according to Y j∗ . It is crucial to note that this approach operates
under the assumption that the trials being compared depict similar processes, and that aligning them
using DTW is a valid assumption. By aligning the rows using DTW, we can assess the dissimilarity
between the trials while accommodating potential temporal distortions and variations in the time
axis.

C    C HANNEL - SIMILARITY KERNEL (H )— GENERATION AND PROCESSING

The kernel post-processing involves several steps. First, we construct the kernel H  fd for each state
d = 1 . . . D, as described in Equation (1). To incorporate similarities between each possible pair of
states d′ ̸= d, where d, d′ = 1 . . . D, we perform a weighted average of each H d with the kernels
of all other states, using Pd: for the weights, as it quantifies the similarity between state d and all
                      PD
other states: H d = d′ Pdd′ H   fd′ . Then, to promote a more robust algorithm, we only retain the k
highest values (i.e., k-Nearest Neighbors; kNN) in each row, while the rest are set to zero. The value
of k is a model hyperparameter, and depends on the desired        BB size. We then symmetrize each
state’s kernel by calculating H d ← 12 H d + (H d )T for all d = 1 . . . D. Finally, the kernel is

                                                                  d
                                                        P Let Λ be a diagonal matrix with elements
row-normalized so that each row sums to one, as follows:
                                   d         d             N       d
representing the row sums of H , i.e., Λii = diag          n=1 Hi,n . The final normalized channel
                                  d
similarity kernel is obtained as Hfinal = (Λd )−1 H d .

D    S OLVING Φ IN PRACTICE
In Section 4, the model updates the temporal traces dictionary ϕ = Φdm for all m = 1 . . . Md ,
d = 1 . . . D using an extended least squares for each time point t, i.e.,
                               e[t,:] = arg min ∥Ye d − M
                               ϕ                            f ϕ[t,:] ∥2 ,                   (9)
                                                      m[:,t]          2
                                            ϕ[t,:]



                                                     16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


where ϕ[t,:] ∈ Rp is the dictionary at time t,

                                              
                            Ymd [:,t]
                                                                               d
                                                                                           
                                                                          √ A            √
    Yemd [:,t] =           [0]p×1             ,   and   M
                                                          f = γ4 ([1]p×p D − (Ip×p ◦ D)) ,
                                              
                      (iter−1)
                  γ2 ϕ[t,:]    + γ3 ϕ[(t−1),:]                        (γ1 + γ2 + γ3 )Ip×p

with all parameters being the same as those defined in Section 4 of the main text. Here, [0]p×1 ∈ Rp
represents a column vector of zeros, [1]p×p represents a square matrix of ones with dimensions p×p,
and Ymd [:,t] ∈ RN denotes the measurement in the m-th trial of state d at time t.


E     M ODEL C OMPLEXITY

SiBBIInGS relies on 4 main computational steps:
Channel Graph Construction: This operation, performed once for all N channels of every state
d = 1 . . . D, generates a channel graph H ∈ RN ×N for each state d ∈ [1, D] by concatenating
                                                               PM d
within-state trials 1 . . . Md horizontally, resulting in a N × m d Tm matrix. For simplicity, let Te =
PMd d
  m Tm . The computation complexity          of calculating
                                                         the pairwise similarities of this concatenated
matrix for all D states is thus O DT̃ 2 N (N − 1) .

For the k-threshold step (B.2.1), that involves keeping only the k largest
                                                                        values in each row while
setting the other values to zero—the complexity will be O(˜(T ) log k per row for a total computa-
tional complexity of O(DN (T˜ ) log k) for N rows and D states.
State Graph Construction: This is a one-time operation that involves calculating the pairwise
similarities between each pair of states. For simplicity, if we assume the case of user-defined scalar
labels, and as in this case there are D states  (and accordingly D labels), the computation includes
D(D − 1))/2 pairwise distances for O D2 .
BB Inference ( equation 1): This iterative step involves per-channel re-weighted ℓ1 minimization.
If the computational complexity of a weighted ℓ1 is denoted as C, then the computational complexity
of the Re-Weighted ℓ1 Graph Filtering is N LC + LN k, where N is the number of channels, L is the
number of iterations for the RWLF procedure, and k is the number of nearest neighbors in the graph.
For the last term in equation 1, there are p2 multiplicative operations involving the vector ν and the
difference in BBs, with the exponent 2 arising from the ℓ22 norm. Additionally, there is an additional
multiplication step involving the scalar Pdd′ . For each state d, this calculation repeats itself D − 1
times, corresponding to all states that are different from that d state. This process
                                                                                      is carried out for
                                                                           2
every d = 1 . . . D. In total, these multiplicative
                                                    operations sum up to  p  +  1   D(D  − 1), resulting
                                           2 2
in a computational complexity of O D p .
Optimization for ϕ: This step refers to the least-squares problem presented in equation 9.
If a non-negative constraint is applied, SiBBlInGSuses scipy’s nnls for solving ϕ               e[t,:] =
arg minϕ[t,:] ∥Yemd [:,t] − M
                            f ϕ[t,:] ∥2 , where Y d ∈ R(N +2p)×Td and M ∈ R(N +2p)×p . This re-
                                      2

sults in complexity of O p(N + 2p)2 F T , for all T time points, where F is the number of nnls
iterations. Without non-negativity
                                         constraint, this problem is a least squares problem with a com-
plexity of O T p2 (2p + N )) . Potential complexity reduction options include: parallelizing RWL1
optimizations per channel, using efficient kNN or approximate kNN search for constructing kNN
graphs instead of full graphs, and employing dimensionality reduction techniques to expedite nearest
neighbor searches.


F     DATA AND C ODE AVAILABILITY

The code used in this study will be shared on GitHub upon publication, ensuring reproducible results.
The data used in this study are publicly available and cited within the paper.


                                                     17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


G     G ENERAL E XPERIMENTAL D ETAILS

All experiments and code were developed and executed using Python version 3.10.4 and are com-
patible with standard desktop machines.


H     S YNTHETIC DATA —A DDITIONAL I NFORMATION

H.1    S YNTHETIC G ENERATION D ETAILS

We initiated the synthetic data generation process by setting the number of channels to N = 100
and the maximum number of BBs to p = 10. We further defined the number of states as D = 3 and
determined the number of time points in each observation to be T d = 300, where d represents the
state index (here d ∈ {1, 2, 3}). We defined the number of trials for each state as one, i.e., Md = 1
for d = 1, 2, 3.
We first initialized a “general” BB matrix (A) as the initial structure, which will later undergo minor
modifications for each state. We determined the number of non-zero values k j (i.e., the cardinatlity)
for each j-th BB in the general A matrix by sampling from a uniform distribution between 1 and
21. Next, we sampled the values in each j-th BB from normal distribution (zero mean and unit
variance), and set all but the top kj values to zero. For each state d, we generated the time-traces Φd
via a linear combination of 15 trigonometric signals, such that the temporal trace of the j-th BB is
                    P15
defined as Φd:j = i=1 ci fi (freqi ∗ x) where x is an array of T = 300 time points (x = 1 . . . 300),
freqi is an array of random frequencies sampled uniformly on [0, 5], f refers to a random choice
between the sine and cosine functions (with probability 1/2 for each), and the sign (ci ) was flipped
(+1 or −1) with a probability of 1/2.
During the data generation process, we incorporated checks and updates to A and Φ to ensure that
the BBs and their corresponding time traces are neither overly correlated nor orthogonal, are not a
simple function of the states labels, and that different BBs exhibit comparable levels of contributions.
This iterative process involving the checks persisted until no further modifications were required.
The first check aimed to ensure that the temporal traces of at least two BBs across all states were not
strongly correlated with the state label vector ([1, 2, 3]) at each time point. Specifically, we examined
whether the temporal traces of a j-th BB across all states (Φ1tj , Φ2tj , Φ3tj ) exhibited high correlation
with the state label vector at each time point. This check was important to avoid an oversimplification
of the problem by preventing the temporal traces from being solely influenced by the state labels. To
perform this check, we calculated the average correlation between the temporal traces and the state
labels ([1, 2, 3]) at each time point. If the average correlation over time exceeded a predetermined
threshold of 0.6, we introduced additional variability in the time traces of the BB that exhibited a
high correlation with the labels. This was achieved by adding five randomly generated trigonometric
functions to the corresponding BB. These additional functions were generated in the same manner
                                   P5
as the original data (with Φd:j = i=1 ci fi (freqi · x)).
The second check ensured that the time traces were not highly correlated with each other and ef-
fectively represented separate functions. If the correlation coefficient between any pair of temporal
traces of different BBs within the same state exceeded a threshold of ρ = 0.6, the correlated traces
were perturbed by adding zero-mean Gaussian noise with a standard deviation of σ = 0.02.
Next, we ensured that the BBs represented distinct components by verifying that they were not
highly correlated with each other. Specifically, if the correlation coefficient between a pair of BBs
(A:j , A:i for j, i = 1 . . . 10) within a state exceeded the threshold ρ = 0.6, each BB in the highly-
correlated pair was randomly permuted to ensure their distinctiveness.
To prevent any hierarchical distinction or disparity in BB contributions and differentiate our ap-
proach from order-based methods like PCA or SVD, we evaluated each BB’s contribution by mea-
suring the increase in error when exclusively using that BB for reconstruction. Specifically, for the
j-th BB of state d, we calculated its contribution as contributionj = −∥Yb d − Ad:j ⊗ Φd:j ∥F , where ⊗
denotes the outer product. Then, we compared the contributions between every pair of BBs within
the same state. If the contribution difference between any pair of BBs exceeded a predetermined


                                                    18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


threshold of 10, both BBs in the pair were perturbed with random normal noise. Subsequently, a
hard-thresholding operation was applied to ensure that the desired cardinality was maintained.
To introduce slight variability in the BBs’ structure across states, the general basis matrix A under-
went modifications for each of the states. In each state and for each BB, a random selection of 0 to 2
non-zero elements from the corresponding BB in the original A matrix were set to zero, effectively
introducing missing channels as differences between states, such that Ad is the updated A modified
for state d. Finally, the data was reconstructed using Y d = Ad (Φd )T for each state d = 1, 2, 3.

H.2   E XPERIMENTAL DETAILS TO THE S YNTHETIC DATA

We applied SiBBLInGS to the synthetic data with p = 10 components and a maximum number
of 103 iterations, while in practice about 50 iterations were enough to converge (see Fig. 6). The
parameters for the λ update in Equation equation 1 were ϵ = 0.01, β = 0.09, and wgraph = 1. For the
regularization of Φ in Equation equation 2, the parameters used were γ1 = 0.1, γ2 = 0.1, γ3 = 0,
and γ4 = 0.0001. ν was set to be a vector of ones with length p = 10. The number of repeats for
theA update within an iteration, for each state, is numreps = 2. The number of neighbors used in
the channel graph reconstruction (H d ) is k = 25. The python scikit-learn’s (Pedregosa et al., 2011)
LASSO solver was used for updating A in each iteration. This synthetic demonstration used the
supervised case for building P , where P was defined assuming similar similarity levels between
each pair of states, by defining P = 1 ⊗ 1T ∈ R3×3 (the case described in Section B.1.1, with
c = 1).

H.3   JACCARD INDEX CALCULATION

In Figure 1C, we computed the Jaccard similarity index between the identified BBs by SiBBlInGS
and the ground truth BBs. To obtain this measure, we first rearranged the BBs based on the correla-
tion of their temporal traces with the ground truth traces (since the method is invariant to the order
of the BBs). Then, we nullified the 15 lower percentiles of the A matrix, which correspond to values
close to zero. Finally, we compared the modified identified BBs to the ground truth BBs using the
”jaccard score” function from the sklearn library (Pedregosa et al., 2011).

H.4   C OMPARISON OF S I BB L I N GS R ESULTS FOR S YNTHETIC DATA

Initial Extraction of BBs from each method: To compare SiBBlInGS with other methods, we
employed the following approach. For PCA global, we conducted PCA on the entire dataset after
horizontally concatenating the time axis. Subsequently, we employed PCA with sklearn (Pedregosa
et al., 2011), specifying the number of Principal Components (PCs) to match the number of BBs
allowed by SiBBlInGS (p = 10). These PCs were then treated as the BBs. In the case of PCA
local, we followed a similar procedure. However, we ran PCA individually for each state. For
Tucker and PARAFAC, we utilized the Tensorly library (Kossaifi et al., 2021) with a rank set to
p = 10 (the number of BBs allowed by SiBBlInGS). We interpreted the BBs as the first factor
(factors[0] in Tensorly output), and we considered the temporal traces as the second factor (factors[1]
in Tensorly output) while multiplying them by the corresponding weights from the state factor (third
factor, factors[2]) to enable cross-state flexibility to these temporal traces. For NONFAT Wang &
Zhe (2022b), we utilized the code shared by the authors at Wang & Zhe (2022a). The model was
executed with the same parameters as specified in Wang & Zhe (2022b), but with rank set to 10 to
align with the desired BBs. The algorithm was trained for 500 epochs across 10 folds. BBs were
extracted from the two views of the ”Za rr” matrix during the last epoch. For single-state BBs,
the first view was reweighted using the weights obtained from the second view of ”Za rr” for each
state and BB. Temporal traces were then extracted from the ”Ua rr” matrix to calculate the trace of
each BB under each state. For NNDTN (discrete-time NN decomposition with nonlinear dynamics,
as implemented by Wang & Zhe (2022a)), we employed the ”U vec” attribute by concatenating
individual components of ”vin ” to neurons over states over the number of BBs across all time points.
The traces were then obtained by optimizing the BBs’ activity to the original tensor.
post-processing steps applied to the BBs and traces of all methods to align them with the
ground truth results: To assess and compare the results of these alternative methods against the
ground truth BBs and traces, we initially normalized the BBs to fit the range of the ground truth


                                                  19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


BBs, applied sparsity using hard-thresholding such that the identified BBs from each method will
present similar sparsity level to that of the ground truth, and then reordered the BBs to maximuze
the correlations of their temporal traces with the ground truth traces. This alignment was necessary
since SiBBlInGS is insensitive to the ordering of BBs.
For the correlation comparisons (ρ(A, A)),
                                        b we examined the correlation between the BBs, as well as
their temporal traces, in comparison to the ground truth. Recognizing that correlation might not be
the most suitable metric for sparse BBs comparison, we further evaluated the clustering performance
using the Jaccard index as well. However, to utilize the Jaccard index as a metric and considering that
the BBs of these methods are inherently dense (not sparse), we introduced artificial sparsity through
hard thresholding. To ensure a fairer comparison and align it with SiBBlInGS (which naturally
generates sparse BBs), we employed the sparsity level of the ground truth BBs for each state as the
hard thresholding parameter for the BBs of the other methods.


I     G OOGLE T RENDS —A DDITIONAL I NFORMATION

I.1   T RENDS DATA ACQUISITION AND PRE - PROCESSING

The acquisition and pre-processing of Google Trends data involved manually downloading the data
from April 1, 2010, to November 27, 2022, for each of the selected states: California (CA), Maryland
(MD), Michigan (MI), New York (NY), Illinois (IL), Louisiana (LA), Florida (FL), and Washington
(WA), directly from the Google Trends platform (Google Trends, Accessed 11 November 2022).
The comprehensive list of terms, as clustered according to SiBBlInGS, is presented in Figure 7.
To ensure comprehensive coverage of search patterns, the data was downloaded by examining each
query in all capitalization formats, including uppercase, lowercase, and mixed case.
The data (in CSV format) was processed using the ’pandas’ library in Python (pandas development
team, 2020; Wes McKinney, 2010) and keeping only the relevant information from January 2011 to
October 2022, inclusively. We conducted a verification to ensure the absence of NaN (null) values
for each term in every selected state. This step confirmed that no terms or states were inadvertently
missed during the data downloading process. To pre-process each term, we implemented a two-step
normalization procedure. First, the values within the chosen date range were scaled to a maximum
value of 100. This step ensured that the magnitude of each term’s fluctuations remained within
a consistent range. Next, the values for each term were divided by the sum of values across all
dates and then multiplied by 100, resulting in an adjusted scale where the area under the curve
for each term equaled 100. This normalization procedure accounted for potential variations in the
frequency and magnitude of term occurrences, enabling fair comparisons across different terms.
By applying these pre-processing steps, we aimed to mitigate the influence of isolated spikes or
localized peaks that could distort the overall patterns and trends observed in the data. Since the
focus of this processing was on assessing the relative contribution of a term within a BB rather than
comparing the overall amplitude and mean of the term across states, factors such as population size
and other characteristics of each state were not taken into consideration.

I.2   E XPERIMENTAL DETAILS FOR G OOGLE TRENDS

We ran the Trends experiment with p = 5 BBs, and applied non-negativity constraints to both the
BB components and their temporal traces. The λ’s parameters in Equation equation 1 included
ϵ = 9.2, β = 0.01, and wgraph = 35. For the regularization of Φ in Equation equation 2, we used the
parameters γ1 = 0, γ2 = 0, γ3 = 0.05, γ4 = 0.55. The trends example used the data-driven version
for studying P , and we set ν to be a vector of ones with length p = 5.
During each iteration, A underwent two updates within each state. The number of neighbors we
used in the channel graph reconstruction was k = 4. We used the PyLops package in Python, along
with the SPGL1 solver (Ravasi & Vasconcelos, 2020) to update A in each iteration. With respect to
SPGL1 parameters (as described in (Ravasi & Vasconcelos, 2020)), we set the initial value of the
parameter τ to 0.12, and a multiplicative decay factor of 0.999 was applied to it at each iteration.
We note here that SPGL1 solves a Lagrangian variation of the original Lasso problem, where, i.e., it
bounds the ℓ1 norm of the selected BB to be smaller than τ , rather than adding the ℓ1 regularization
to the cost (van den Berg & Friedlander, 2008; Ravasi & Vasconcelos, 2020).


                                                  20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 6: Synthetic Data Results Robustness - cont. A Model performance under increasing lev-
els of noise along with random initializations, over the model training iterations. Color: increasing
levels of missing samples. Left: Jaccard index between the recovered A and the ground true A.
Middle: Correlation between the recovered A and the ground true A. Right: Correlation between
the recovered Φ and the ground true Φ. B Model performance under random initializations (no
noise), over the model training iterations. The blue curve is the median over all repeats. C Model
performance under increasing levels of noise only (fixed initializations). D Model performance
under increasing levels of missing samples, over the model training iterations. E SiBBlInGSPer-
formance under increasing noise levels. F Comparison to other relevant methods, for each state
individually (SiBBlInGSin blue, other methods in pink to red colors).


                                                 21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 7: Table of clustered words for the Google Trends experiment


Figure 8: Comparison of The Google Trends Results to Other Methods with 5 BBs for CA:
Comparison to other methods, each applied with 5 Building Blocks (BBs) like SiBBlInGS, yielded
less interpretable BBs, particularly for the ’CA’ (California) theme. BBs for the Google Trends
dataset were obtained following an additional thresholding step applied to each model’s factorization
results, preserving only the top 90% values from each method’s BB matrix. SiBBlInGS discerns
theme-specific BBs (e.g., ’Covid’ and ’University’), while other methods produce more blended
compositions. Empty cells for PARAFAC and Tucker indicate that those BBs remained empty.


Figure 9: Temporal traces of college admission patterns showing bi-yearly peaks around March
and October, aligning with key milestones in the US college admissions process. Additionally, a
decrease in online interest in the college BB is observed during the COVID-19 pandemic.



                                                 22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 10: Temporal trace of Passover BB. The Passover BB patterns show an alignment with the
percentage of Jewish population in different states. A Temporal traces of the Passover BB for each
state. Vertical black lines indicate the month of April, when Passover is usually celebrated. B The
mean and standard error of peak values for each state.


Figure 11: Post-processed data of the temporal activity of the chosen queries. Ordered by state
and alphabetical order of the queries. The states are markered by the small colorful vertical lines
that appear at the top.



I.3   T EMPORAL TRACES OF COLLEGE BB

The temporal traces of the college admission identified BB exhibit distinct bi-yearly peaks, with
notable increases in activity around March and October, along with a clear decrease between March
to next October (Fig. 9). These peaks align with key periods in the college admissions cycle, includ-
ing application submission and admission decision releases. Particularly, around the end of March,
many colleges and universities release their regular admission decisions, prompting increased popu-
lation interest. Similarly, October marks the time when prospective students typically start showing
increased interest in applying to colleges as many colleges have early application deadlines that fall
in late October or early November. The bi-yearly peaks pattern in March and October thus reflects
the concentrated periods of activity and anticipation within the college admissions process. External
factors such as the COVID-19 pandemic can also influence the timing and dynamics of the college
admissions process, as we observe by the decrease in the college BB activity during the pandemic
period (Fig. 9).


I.4   T EMPORAL TRACES OF PASSOVER BB

SiBBInGS identified a “Passover” BB, characterized by temporal traces that show a clear alignment
with the timing of Passover, which usually occurs around April. The time traces demonstrate a
prominent peak in states with higher Jewish population percentages, like CA, FL, and NY (Fig. 10),
as computed by the average peak value plotted for the different states. The peak finding was done
using scipy’s (Virtanen et al., 2020) ”find peaks” function with a threshold of 4.


                                                 23
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


J     N EURAL DATA —A DDITIONAL I NFORMATION
J.1   N EURAL DATA P RE -P ROCESSING

In this experiment we used the neural data collected from Brodmann’s area 2 of the somatosen-
sory cortex in a monkey performing a reaching-out movement experiment from Chowdhury et al.
(Chowdhury & Miller, 2022; Chowdhury et al., 2020). While the original dataset includes data both
under perturbed and unperturbed conditions, here, for simplicity, we used only unperturbed trials.
We followed the processing instructions provided by Neural Latents Benchmark Pei et al. (2021)
to extract the neural information and align the trials. The original neural data consisted of spike
indicators per neuron, which were further processed to approximate spike rates by convolving them
with a 60-point wide kernel.
For each of the 8 angles, we randomly selected 18 trials, resulting in a total of 144 data matrices.
The states were defined as the angles, and for learning the supervised P , we used as labels the x-y
coordinates of each angle in a circle with a radius of 1 (i.e., sine and cosine projections).

J.2   E XPERIMENTAL DETAILS FOR THE NEURAL DATA EXPERIMENT

We ran SiBBLInGS on the reaching-out dataset with p = 4 BBs. The λ’s parameters used were
ϵ = 2.1, β = 0.03, and wgraph = 10.1. For the regularization of Φ we used: γ1 = 0.001, γ2 = 0.001,
γ3 = 0.1, and γ4 = 0.3 and we set ν to be a vector of length p = 4 with ν1 = 0.8 (to allow more
flexibility in the first BB), and νk = 1 for k = 2, 3, 4. For the neural data, we used the supervised
version of P , where the x − y coordinates are used as the labels for calculating P . During each
iteration, A underwent two updates within each state. We chose k = 7 neighbors for the channel
graph reconstruction, and used Python scikit-learn’s (Pedregosa et al., 2011) LASSO solver for the
update of A.

J.3   S TATE PREDICTION USING TEMPORAL TRACES

We used the identified temporal traces Φ to predict the state (hand direction). The dimensionality
of each state’s temporal activity Φd was reduced to a vector of length p × 4 = 16 using PCA with 4
components. A k-fold cross-validation classification approach with k = 4 folds was employed. In
each iteration, a multi-class logistic regression model with multinomial loss was trained on 3 folds
and used to predict the labels of the remaining fold. This process was repeated for each fold, and the
results were averaged. The confusion matrix and accuracy scores for each state (angle), as shown in
Figure 4C and in Figure 12F.

J.4   C OMPUTATION OF ρWITHIN/BETWEEN

To compute the correlation for the ”within” state case, a random bootstrap approach was employed.
Specifically, for each state, we randomly selected 100 combinations of temporal trace pairs corre-
sponding to the same BB but from different random trials within the state, computed the correlations
between these temporal trace pairs, and averaged the result over all 100 bootstrapped samples to ob-
tain the average correlation. Similarly, for the “between” states case, we repeated this procedure
with the difference that we selected 100 random bootstrapped combinations of pairs of the same
BB but from trials of different states. In Figure 12C, the average correlations are shown for each
BB. The ratio depicted in Figure 4E represents the ratio between the averages of the “within” and
“between” state correlations.

K     E PILEPSY —A DDITIONAL I NFORMATION
K.1    DATA C HARACTERISTICS AND P RE - PROCESSING FOR S I BB L I N GS A NALYSIS

The Epilepsy EEG experiment in this paper is based on data kindly shared publicly in (Handa et al.,
2021).
The data consist of EEG recordings obtained from six patients diagnosed with focal epilepsy, who
were undergoing presurgical evaluation. As part of this evaluation, patients temporarily discontinued


                                                 24
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 12: Additional Figures for the Neural Recordings Experiment. A The identified BBs for
the different states. While there is clear consistency, slight modifications can be observed across
states, capturing the natural variability in neural ensembles corresponding to different tasks. B Tem-
poral traces of the identified BBs, shown with a 90% confidence interval (background color), and all
trials are plotted in light gray. The color corresponds to the state color used in Figure 4. We observe
adaptation over the states as well as differences between the temporal traces of BBs within a given
state. The third BB exhibits significantly lower activity compared to the others (see also Figure 4),
suggesting that it might capture general background trends or noise. C Within and between temporal
trace correlations (averaged over 100 bootstrapped examples) with standard error, colored according
to the BB color, and transparency representing the strength of the between (opaque) and within (less
opaque) correlations. D Example of the correlations between each pair of BBs within the 1-st state
(0°). This shows that while some BBs are orthogonal, others are not. E Example of within-state
correlations between each pair of temporal traces of the BBs within the 1-st trial of the 1-st state
(0°), showing that the temporal traces are neither orthogonal nor overly correlated. F Accuracy in
predicting the state using only the temporal traces of that state as input (colored by the state color).
While the random accuracy would be 1/length(labels) = 18 = 0.125, the achieved accuracies are
significantly higher for all states.


                                                  25
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


their anti-seizure medications to facilitate the recording of habitual seizures. The data collection
period spanned from January 2014 to July 2015.
The EEG data, as described by (Handa et al., 2021), were recorded using a standard 21 scalp elec-
trodes setuc, following the 10-20 electrode system, with signals sampled at a rate of 500 Hz. To
enhance data quality, all channels underwent bandpass filtering, with a frequency range from 1/1.6
Hz to 70 Hz. Furthermore. Certain channels, including Cz and Pz, were excluded from some record-
ings due to artifact constraints. These seizures manifest different patients, seizure types, ictal onset
zones, and durations.
Here, we focused on the EEG data from an 8-year-old male patient. This patient experienced five
recorded complex partial seizures (CPS) in the vicinity of electrode F8. The EEG data for this patient
includes both an interictal segment during which no seizures are recorded and 5 ictal segments
representing seizures. ,
To prepare the data for compatibility with the input structure of SiBBlInGS, we divided the epileptic
seizure data into non-overlapping batches, with a maximum of 8 batches extracted from each seizure.
Each batch had a duration of 2000 time points, equivalent to 4 seconds. This process resulted in 4
seizures with 8 batches each and one seizure with 7 batches due to its shorter duration.
For each seizure, we also included data from the 8 seconds preceding the marked identification
of the seizure, as indicated in the data. This amounted to 2 additional 2000-long batches (each
corresponding to 4 seconds) before each seizure event.
Regarding normal activity data, we randomly selected 40 batches, each spanning 4 seconds (2000
time points), from various time intervals that did not overlap with any seizure activity or the 8-second
pre-seizure period.
In total, we had 40 batches of normal activity, 39 batches of seizure activity, and 10 batches of
pre-seizure data.
We ran SiBBlInGS on this data with p = 7 BBs. For the state-similarity graph (P ), we adopted a
supervised approach to distinguish between seizure and non-seizure states, as detailed in the cate-
gorical case in B.1.1, where we assigned a strong similarity value constraint to same-state trials and
lower similarity values to different-state trials.
We also leverage this example to underscore the significance of the parameter ν in the model’s
ability to discover networks that emerge specifically under certain states as opposed to background
networks. In this context, we defined here ν = [1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 0] such that the similarity levels of
the 1st to 6th BBs are determined by the relevant values in P , while the last network’s similarity is
allowed to vary between states.
During the training of SiBBlInGS on this data, we adopted a training strategy where 8 random
batches were selected in each iteration to ensure that the model was exposed to an equal number of
trials from each state during each iteration and enhancing its robustness.



K.2   C OMPARING EEG R ESULTS TO E XISTING A PPROACHES

We extended tensor and matrix factorization methods, including Tucker decomposition, PARAFAC,
global PCA, and local PCA, to adapt them for capturing state information and generating sparse
clusters in EEG data. Tucker and PARAFAC were implemented using the Tensorly Python pack-
age (Kossaifi et al., 2016)(tensorly.decomposition.parafac, tensorly.decomposition.tucker), while
PCA was applied using scikit-learn.
For 2D methods (PCA   P local and PCA global), we applied global PCA to horizontally concatenated
data (19 channels x i Ti ) with the number of principal components equal to the number of Building
Blocks (BBs) used in SiBBlInGS (6). For PCA local, we conducted individual PCA for each state’s
trials, resulting in k = 3 distinct BB matrices.
To address differing state durations in tensor factorization, we horizontally concatenated trials within
the same state, zero-padded them to match the longest duration, and created a tensor (N electrodes
x time-padded x 3 states) for applying tensor factorization methods.


                                                  26
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


After applying the aforementioned approaches to the data, we extracted the BBs (A). In the cases of
global and local PCA, these BBs were treated as the Principal Components (PCs). In the PARAFAC
and Tucker tensor-factorization methods, they were considered the first factor (factors[0] from the
tensorly output), weighted by the relevant components from the third factor (the states axis, fac-
tors[2]).
We then performed the following steps: 1) Normalized the matrices to ensure that each BB had
a similar absolute sum of its columns, resulting in BBs of comparable magnitudes for state com-
parison, and 2) Introduced artificial sparsity into the matrices through hard thresholding, aiming
to achieve the same level of sparsity observed in SiBBlInGS for each state. Figure 13 illustrates
the outcomes, demonstrating that these approaches failed to detect the emergence of BBs around
electrode F8, resulting in widespread non-specific clusters.


Figure 13: Comparison of the EEG results to Other Methods: Various approaches (different
rows) failed to identify the BB emerging before the seizure around F8, resulting in widespread
uninterpretable networks.


                                                27
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 14: BBs identified by different methods. BBs identified by SiBBlInGS are compared with
those from other methods, including PARAFAC, Tucker, PCA (global and local), and Gaussian-
process-based methods. The identified BBs were reordered to best match the ground truth BBs’
temporal traces through maximum correlations. A subsequent hard-thresholding step was applied
to achieve sparsity, aligning with the sparsity level with of the ground truth components. The BBs
were normalized to sum to 1 each for visualization purposes only.


                                               28
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 15: Correlations between BBs identified by different methods and ground truth BBs for
each state and BB number.


                                             29
