Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


L EVERAGING H YPERBOLIC E MBEDDINGS                                                                 FOR
C OARSE - TO -F INE ROBOT D ESIGN
  Heng Dong1∗ Junyu Zhang2∗ Chongjie Zhang3
 1
   IIIS, Tsinghua University 2 Huazhong University of Science and Technology
 3
   Washington University in St. Louis
 {drdhxi,jyzhang1208}@gmail.com, chongjie@wustl.edu



                                                A BSTRACT
              Multi-cellular robot design aims to create robots comprised of numerous cells
              that can be efficiently controlled to perform diverse tasks. Previous research has
              demonstrated the ability to generate robots for various tasks, but these approaches
              often optimize robots directly in the vast design space, resulting in robots with
              complicated morphologies that are hard to control. In response, this paper presents
              a novel coarse-to-fine method for designing multi-cellular robots. Initially, this
              strategy seeks optimal coarse-grained robots and progressively refines them. To
              mitigate the challenge of determining the precise refinement juncture during the
              coarse-to-fine transition, we introduce the Hyperbolic Embeddings for Robot De-
              sign (HERD) framework. HERD unifies robots of various granularity within a
              shared hyperbolic space and leverages a refined Cross-Entropy Method for opti-
              mization. This framework enables our method to autonomously identify areas of
              exploration in hyperbolic space and concentrate on regions demonstrating promise.
              Finally, the extensive empirical studies on various challenging tasks sourced from
              EvoGym show our approach’s superior efficiency and generalization capability.


1        I NTRODUCTION
For decades, humans have envisioned the creation of artificial creatures with morphological intelli-
gence (Lipson & Pollack, 2000; Howard et al., 2019; Gupta et al., 2021b). To achieve this goal, a
highly promising solution is to learn optimal robot morphologies for a variety of tasks in simulated
environments (Sims, 1994a; Wang et al., 2019; Yuan et al., 2021; Dong et al., 2023). Inspired by
the wide existence of multi-cellular organisms, such as animals, land plants, and most fungi, one
natural way of representing robots is to formulate them as multi-cellular systems. The creation of
multi-cellular robots is challenging because of the twin difficulties: 1) the design space of robots,
including cell types, positions, and parameters, etc., is immensely large, and 2) the evaluation of each
design requires learning its optimal control policy, which is often computationally expensive.
For multi-cellular robot design, previous methods typically adopt Genetic Algorithms (GA) (Sims,
1994b; Medvet et al., 2021; Cheney et al., 2014b), which sample robots from a large population to
accomplish the given tasks and then only keep the top-performing robots and their offspring. However,
these methods are inclined to learn from scratch in the vast design space and could be highly sample-
inefficient (Wang et al., 2022). Intuitive examples are provided in Figure 1, where we use time-lapse
images to show the control process of different designs performing task ObstacleTraverser-v0 (Bhatia
et al., 2021). This task requires 2D robots to cross the terrain that is full of obstacles and is getting
increasingly bumpy. GA (Figure 1 (a-b)) fails to learn any effective robot structures to solve this task
because of the vast design space. To overcome this issue, Wang et al. (2022) uses a curriculum-based
design (CuCo) method by gradually expanding the robot design from a small size to the target size
through a predefined curriculum. However, as shown in Figure 1 (c,d) and empirical evidence in
Section 5, robots of small size can hardly solve the original task and thus, unfortunately, cannot
provide helpful information for the next stage of the curriculum.
In view of these challenges, we propose to design multi-cellular robots in a coarse-to-fine manner
by first searching for coarse-grained robots with satisfactory performance and subsequently refining
     *
         Equal contributions.


                                                      1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


           Iteration A                                       Iteration B                   Vertical Actuator
  GA                                                                                       Horizontal Actuator
                                                                                           Rigid Cell
                                                           Target Direction                Soft Cell

                   Obstacle                                                                Empty Cell
                                               Stuck

             (𝑎)                                                (𝑏)
 CuCo


                                                                   Stuck

           (𝑐)                                                  (𝑑)
 HERD (Ours)


             (𝑒)                                                (𝑓)


Figure 1: Visualization of the control process of our method HERD compared with baseline GA and
CuCo (Wang et al., 2022) during training in task ObstacleTraverser-v0 (Bhatia et al., 2021). Iteration
B is one of the iterations later than Iteration A, such that corresponding algorithms have updated the
robot. (a-b) GA directly searches in the vast design space and fails to learn effective structures to
cross the obstacles; (c-d) CuCo adopts a predefined curriculum from smaller robots to larger robots,
but the smaller robot typically faces more challenges when solving the original tasks, e.g., the same
obstacles could be more difficult for it. Thus, smaller robots cannot offer useful guidance for the
remaining stage in the curriculum. (e-f) Our method designs robots in a coarse-to-fine manner and
can focus on promising regions with the helpful guidance of coarse-grained design. Finally, our
method successfully finds a simple but effective design to solve this challenging task.


them. The key insight to our approach is that the coarse-grained robot design stage can provide
computationally inexpensive guidance for subsequent fine-grained design stages and help focus on
refining promising robot designs. There are two reasons for this insight. First, coarse-grained robots
are less complicated to design and control due to their low degree of freedom. Second, coarse-grained
robots can usually solve part of the tasks (Figure 1 (e)), and serve as the starting points for the
subsequent fine-grained design stage (Figure 1 (f)). In this way, coarse-to-fine robot design can
potentially learn simple but effective robots for the given tasks. In literature, the idea of coarse-to-fine
is common in computer vision (Zhu et al., 2015; Pavlakos et al., 2017) and molecule generation
(Qiang et al., 2023), but has not been well studied in the field of robot design to our best knowledge.
The realization of coarse-to-fine robot design involves two major challenges. The first challenge is
how to define the granularity of robots. To consider a wide range of granularities for robots of any
shape, we propose to coarsen robots by aggregating adjacent cells based on their initial positions.
The higher the degree of aggregation, the coarser the robots are. The coarse-grained robots under
this definition are less complicated and informative for refinement because of their similarity to
fine-grained robots. The second challenge is how to determine the coarse-to-fine interval, i.e., when
to refine current coarse-grained robots. Specifically, the design space of any-grained robots can be
formulated as a tree structure, in which the parent nodes correspond to coarse-grained robots, and the
child nodes represent fine-grained robots similar to their parent robots. Optimizing in this discrete
tree is troublesome, as we have to determine whether to search child nodes or sibling nodes. To tackle
this challenge, we introduce a novel Hyperbolic Embeddings for Robot Design (HERD) framework,
where we first embed the above tree into hyperbolic space, which is naturally suitable for hierarchical
representations, and then use a modified Cross-Entropy Method to optimize the robot design in this
hyperbolic space. As a result, HERD unifies and optimizes any-grained robots in a shared space, and
it demonstrates significant improvements over other methods.
We evaluate our HERD framework on 15 tasks in the benchmark EvoGym (Bhatia et al., 2021). HERD
significantly outperforms previous state-of-the-art algorithms in terms of both sample efficiency and
final performance on most tasks. Training performance comparison and visualization of optimizing in
hyperbolic space strongly support the effectiveness of our method. Our experimental results highlight
the importance of coarse-to-fine robot design and the representation learning of robots.


                                                       2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


2     R ELATED W ORKS

Multi-Cellular Soft Robot Design. Automatic robot design focuses on generating robots that
possess easy controllability for a wide range of tasks. It requires concurrently optimizing the
robot morphology and control policy. A line of works in this field aims for evolving morphologies
composed of rigid elements, including skeletal structures and attributes of limbs and joints (Sims,
1994a; Lipson & Pollack, 2000; Lehman & Stanley, 2011; Yuan et al., 2021). However, this setting
will result in limited design space due to the compositions of predefined elements and restricted
capacity of robots to interact with environments (Cheney et al., 2014b). To design robots with stronger
generalization and better flexibility (Pfeifer et al., 2007), multi-cellular soft robots that are constructed
by combining small cells might be a promising alternative. Previous works in multi-cellular robot
design directly explore the vast design space through evolutionary search or reinforcement learning
(Cheney et al., 2018; Jelisavcic et al., 2019; Walker & Hauser, 2021). Yet, evolutionary search is
sample inefficient, and reinforcement learning can be easily trapped in local optimal due to exploration
issues (Spielberg et al., 2019). To alleviate the burden of the thorough search, recent work CuCo
incorporated curriculum learning to design processes by gradually expanding robot size (Wang et al.,
2022). However, CuCo required prior knowledge to predefine the curriculum, and smaller robots
might not be helpful in complex tasks. In comparison, our work enables automatic determination of
coarse-to-fine transition during training, and coarse-grained robots are informative for refinement.
Coarse-to-Fine. Coarse-to-fine strategy refers to progressively refining a system from high-level
representations by incorporating detailed information. It has been applied for some intelligent
systems (Pedersoli et al., 2015) mainly including computer vision, robot manipulation, and molecule
generation. Previous works on computer vision primarily mimic natural coarse-to-fine process to
capture features through hierarchical localization paradigm (Sarlin et al., 2019; Yu et al., 2021), or
propose a unified model architecture that enables efficient parameter reuse between different training
stages (Qian et al., 2020; Dou et al., 2022). Other works in robot manipulation use this mechanism to
address exploration difficulty in sparsely-rewarded and long-horizon tasks (Johns, 2021; James et al.,
2022). In the field of drug discovery, it allows for 3D non-autoregressive molecule generations with a
hierarchical diffusion-based model (Qiang et al., 2023). The coarse-to-fine strategy has shown its
strengths in other fields. However, to our best knowledge, this strategy has not been well studied in
robot design problems and our method is the first work to apply it in multi-cellular robot design.
Reinforcement Learning for Incompatible State-Action Space. Robot design typically requires
learning generalizable control policies that could be shared among robots of diverse morphologies
where the state and action spaces are incompatible. To address this challenge, prior works mainly
utilize modular reinforcement learning to control each actuator separately. In the case of multiple
different morphologies, one approach is to leverage GNNs to learn joint controllers (Khalil et al.,
2017; Huang et al., 2020). While GNN-based methods employ graph representation relevant to the
robot’s morphology to ensure message passing in a shared policy (Battaglia et al., 2018; Yuan et al.,
2021), Transformer-based approaches with attention mechanisms can further improve generalization,
dealing with the limitation of aggregating multi-hop information (Kurin et al., 2020). In this paper,
we build our control policy based on Transformer (Vaswani et al., 2017) to dynamically track the
relationships between components of the robots (Gupta et al., 2021a; Dong et al., 2022).


3     P RELIMINARIES

In this section, we present essential background knowledge and notations for our method.

3.1   H YPERBOLIC S PACE AND P OINCAR É BALL

Riemannian manifold. A Riemannian manifold is defined as a tuple (M, g) (Petersen, 2006), where
M and g are the manifold and the metric tensor, respectively, as defined below. A manifold M is a set
of points z that are locally similar to the linear space. Every point z of the manifold M is attached to a
tangent space Tz M, which is a real vector space of the same dimensionality as M and contains all the
possible directions that can tangentially pass through z. Each point z of the manifold also associates
a metric tensor g that defines an inner product of the tangent space:
                                                                  p      g = ⟨·, ·⟩z : Tz M × Tz M → R.
Then the inner product can induce norm on Tz M : ∥ · ∥z = ⟨·, ·⟩z .


                                                     3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Hyperbolic space. A d-dimensional hyperbolic space Hd is a d-dimensional Riemannian manifold
with constant negative curvature −c. Hd can be represented using various isomorphic models, such
as the hyperboloid model, the Beltrami-Klein model, the Poincaré half-plane model, and the Poincaré
ball (Beltrami, 1868). In this paper, we use Poincaré ball for hyperbolic embeddings.
Poincaré ball. The Poincaré ball can be formally defined as a Riemannian manifold Bdc = (Bcd , gc ),
where Bcd = {z ∈ Rd : c∥z∥<1} is an open ball, and gc is the metric tensor defined as gc =(λcz )2 gE (z)
               2
where λcz = 1−c∥z∥        E
                   2 and g =I
                              n
                                is the Euclidean metric tensor, i.e., the usual dot product.
Using this metric tensor, we can induce the distance in Poincaré ball:

                                                            ∥z1 − z2 ∥2

                                 1      −1
                 Dc (z1 , z2 ) = √ cosh      1 + 2c                                .                 (1)
                                  c                 (1 − c∥z1 ∥2 )(1 − c∥z2 ∥2 )

To connect hyperbolic space and Euclidean space, we can use an exponential map and a logarithm
map to map from Euclidean space to the hyperbolic space and vice versa with anchor z. On the
Poincaré ball, both maps have the closed-form expressions:
                                               √ λcz ∥v∥

                                                               v
                     expcz (v) = z ⊕c tanh       c          √                               (2)
                                                      2       c∥v∥
                                    2           √                 −z ⊕c v
                      logcz (v) = √ c tanh−1       c∥ − z ⊕c v∥                             (3)
                                   cλz                           ∥ − z ⊕c v∥
Here the operator ⊕c is the Möbius addition (Ungar, 2022) defined as

                                  (1 + 2c⟨z, v⟩ + c∥v∥2 )z + (1 − c∥z∥2 )v
                       z ⊕c v =                                            .                         (4)
                                         1 + 2c⟨z, v⟩ + c2 ∥z∥2 ∥v∥2
Note that we can recover the Euclidean addition as c → 0.

3.2   S ARKAR ’ S C ONSTRUCTION FOR H YPERBOLIC E MBEDDING

Embedding a tree into Poincaré ball Bdc has many solutions. We will introduce a training-free com-
binatorial construction method: Sarkar’s Construction (Sarkar, 2011), whose resulting embeddings
can exhibit arbitrarily low distortion (Sala et al., 2018). For simplicity, we discuss the setting where
dimensionality d = 2 and curvature c = 1. The basic idea is to embed the tree’s root at the origin and
recursively embed the children of each node by spacing them evenly around a sphere centered at the
parent node as in Algorithm 2. Specifically, consider a node q of degree deg(q) with parent node p
and suppose q and p have already been embedded into zq and zp in B2 (omitting curvature c = 1).
We now place the children a1 , a2 , · · · , adeg(q)−1 of q into B2 .
Several steps are needed. First, zq and zp are reflected across a geodesic of the Poincaré ball B2 by
using circle inversion so that zq is mapped to the origin 0 and zp is mapped to some point zp′ . The
reflection map is:
                                                    ∥u∥2 − 1
                               Fzq →0 (zp ) = u +             (zp − u)                              (5)
                                                   ∥zp − u∥2
where u = zq /∥zq ∥2 . Next, place the children nodes to embeddings y1 , y2 , · · · , ydeg(q)−1 that are
                                             τ
equally spaced around a circle with radius eeτ −1
                                               +1 where τ is a scaling factor, and maximally separated
from the reflected parent node embedding zp′ . One embedding method is:

                           eτ − 1

                                                   2πn                   2πn
                     yn = τ        · cos θ +               , sin θ +                                 (6)
                           e +1                   deg(q)               deg(q)

where θ = arg(zp′ ) is the angle of zp′ from x-axis in the plane. Lastly, reflect all the points z back
using the same reflection map: Fzq →0 (z). To embed the entire tree, we first position the root node at
the origin and its children in a circle around it, then recursively position children nodes as discussed
above until all nodes are placed. Figure 2 (b) provides an intuitive example for this construction.


                                                   4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024

                                                                                    Higher             Lower
                      Vertical Actuator                                             Fitness            Fitness
                      Horizontal Actuator
                      Rigid Cell
                      Soft Cell
                      Empty Cell


  Coarse-Grained                                                                              Sampled Robots
                                                    Hyperbolic


                                                                                                                 As optimization proceeds
                                                                                e
                                                    Embedding


                                                                             Fin
                    D!               D"


                                                                        -to-
                                                                    rse
                                                                 Coa
                                                       Initial
                                                       State
                                            A
 Fine-Grained


                                            B



                   𝒞(D! )          𝒞(D" )

                            (𝑎)                        (𝑏)                                       (𝑐)


Figure 2: Hyperbolic embeddings for coarse-to-fine robot design framework. (a) An example of
coarse-grained and fine-grained robots of EvoGym (Bhatia et al., 2021), where the designs C(Di ) are
Di ’s child robots, i.e., refined robots and the robots in A and B boxes are all fine-grained but have
different cell segmentation styles; (b) Hyperbolic embeddings in the Poincaré ball for any-grained
robot designs; (c) Our method is initialized at the center of the Poincaré ball, and automatically learn
to move to promising regions that may close to the edge. An important property is that sampling
robots from the center to the border is exactly the process of coarse-to-fine robot design.


4                  M ETHOD

In this section, we present our novel learning framework that leverages Hyperbolic Embeddings
for coarse-to-fine Robot Design (HERD). As in most previous works on robot design, our learning
framework mainly consists of robot design optimization and control policy learning. The novelty of
our framework is to design robots in a coarse-to-fine manner whose realization relies on hyperbolic
embeddings. To this end, our method is characterized by two components: (1) embedding any-grained
robot designs into hyperbolic space (Section 4.1) and (2) optimizing robot designs in this hyperbolic
space (Section 4.2). The algorithm is outlined in Algorithm 4.

4.1                E MBEDDING A NY-G RAINED ROBOT D ESIGNS INTO H YPERBOLIC S PACE

In this subsection, we first discuss the definition of granularity of robots in multi-cellular robot designs,
then reveal the nature of the hierarchical structure of design space when learning in a coarse-to-fine
manner, and finally, discuss why and how to embed any-grained robot designs in hyperbolic space.
In this paper, we will focus on multi-cellular robot design and use EvoGym (Bhatia et al., 2021) as
our benchmark, where each robot design D ∈ D consists of Nc (= 25) inter-connected robot cells.
Each robot cell has a fixed initial position (x, y, z) and will be assigned a cell type chosen from
{Empty, Rigid, Soft, Horizontal Actuator, Vertical Actuator} during the design process.
Granularity refers to the extent to which groups of small components of robots, e.g., robot cells,
have joined together to become large components. Coarse-grained robot designs have fewer, larger
discrete components than fine-grained robot designs. The benefit of coarse-graining is that it can
remove certain redundant degrees of freedom, such as the designing types and controlling actions
between several neighboring robot cells.
To determine which robot cells can be aggregated together, we use a simple but effective clustering
algorithm, K-Means (Hartigan & Wong, 1979), purely based on the position features of robot cells,
to cluster neighboring robot cells into groups. The larger the number of clusters, the finer the
granularity of the robots. In practice, we cluster the robot cells into k components iteratively, where
k ∈ {16, 8, · · · , 1}. Importantly, the clustering results in the last iteration will be used as the input to


                                                      5
  Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  K-Means in the next iteration. Figure 2 (a) shows several results of this clustering, where robots in A
  and B boxes are fine-grained robots but with different clustering results due to the randomness of
  K-Means. It is worth noting that our method can also use other clustering methods.
  Hierarchical structure in coarse-to-fine robot design. Given coarse-grained robots (Di in Figure 2
  (a)), we can refine them by dividing large components of these robots into smaller ones (C(Di ) in
  Figure 2 (a)) according to the clustering results for fine-grained robots mentioned above. All child
  robots originating from the same parent robot use the same clustering results. By recursive refinement,
  the space of robot designs with varying granularity can be organized into a hierarchy in which the
  parent nodes are coarse-grained robots, and the child nodes are fine-grained robots that are similar to
  their parent robots. In practice, similarity here means that fine-grained robots only need to change
  one component to be the same as their parent robots. In the following, we use D0 to represent the
  root node of the hierarchy and use C(D) to denote robot design D’s child robots. Denote the robot
  hierarchy with {Di , C(Di )}Ni=1 , where N is a parameter controlling the size of hierarchy.

  Why utilize hyperbolic space. Directly searching for the optimal robot in the above robot hierar-
  chy is cumbersome because we have to determine the coarse-to-fine interval, i.e., when to refine
  current robots. Short intervals may lead to wrong branches of the robot hierarchy due to inaccurate
  performance evaluation, and long intervals may result in inefficiency. This is verified in Section 5.3.
  To solve this problem, we propose to embed the robot hierarchy into a shared hyperbolic space. There
  are two main advantages to this solution. First, embedding any-grained robot designs in a shared
  space allows us to search for coarse-grained robots and refine promising ones in a unified way. This
  can lead to simpler and more efficient optimization, as shown in Section 5. Second, hyperbolic space
  is quite suitable for representing hierarchies, and actually, it can be viewed as a continuous analog of
  trees (Cetin et al., 2022; Hsu et al., 2021). In particular, the typical geometric property of hyperbolic
  space is that its volume increases exponentially in proportion to its radius, whereas the Euclidean
  space grows polynomically (Yang et al., 2022). Because of this nature, it is possible to embed robot
  hierarchy into Poincaré ball Bdc , one of the representations for hyperbolic space, with arbitrarily low
  distortion (Sarkar, 2011; Sala et al., 2018). Remarkably, Euclidean space cannot embed hierarchies
  with arbitrarily low distortion for any number of dimensions. Section 3.1 provides formal discussion.

  Algorithm 1: HERD: Hyperbolic Embeddings for Coarse-to-Fine Robot Design
   Input: robot design space D, hierarchy size N , Poincaré ball Bdc , population size of CEM Nv
                  N                                                N
 1 {Di , C(Di )}i ← build the robot hierarchy for designs {Di }i ⊂ D using K-Means;
                   N                                            N                     d
 2 S = {Di , zi }i ← embed the robot hierarchy {Di , C(Di )}i in Poincaré ball Bc by applying
    Sarkar’s Construction in Algorithm 2 recursively;
 3 initialize control policy π, CEM mean µ and variance σ;
 4 while not reaching max iterations do
 5      replay buffer H ← ∅;
 6      for i ∈ {1, 2, · · · , Nv } do
 7          vi ∼ N (µ, diag(σ)) ; // sample an embedding from Euclidean space
 8           z̄i = expc0 (vi ) ; // map to Poincaré ball, Equation (2)
 9           Di , zi ← arg min(D,z)∈S Dc (z̄i , z) ; // find the nearest valid
              embedding and its corresponding design, Equation (1)
10           use π to control current robot design Di and store trajectories to H;
11      update π with PPO using samples in H;
12      update µ by averaging the elite vi s based on the performance in H, and linearly decrease σ;
     ∗    ∗                              c
13 D , z ← arg min(D,z)∈S Dc (exp0 (µ), z) ; // optimal robot design
                                       ∗
14 Output: optimal robot design D , control policy π


  How to embed in hyperbolic space. Embedding the robot hierarchy into hyperbolic space can be
  realized with two main strategies. The first is to use a loss function and gradient descent to learn
  the embedding, such as Poincaré Variational Auto-Encoder (VAE) (Mathieu et al., 2019). However,
  Poincaré VAE cannot embed too many randomly generated robots as we will do during the training.
  Thereby, we resort to the second, training-free strategy, which is termed Sarkar’s Construction (Sarkar,
  2011). The idea of Sarkar’s Construction is simple but effective. First, it places the root node D0
  of the given hierarchy at the origin of Poincaré ball and places all its children nodes C(D0 ) equally


                                                     6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024

                                )                                   )              ) )

                  ) - )    )-                      )        ( )-                         (       ( )-


)


                                    )


                                                                        )
(


                                    (


                                                                        (
              ) - )   )-                               )) ) -                                )   )-
)


                                    )


                                                                        )
(


                                    (


                                                                        (
       Figure 3: Training performance of HERD compared against baselines in hard tasks.
spaced in a circle around it. It then moves one of the children to the origin using hyperbolic reflection
defined in Equation (5) and repeats. In the following, we use S = {Di , zi }N  i to represent the robots
and their resulting embeddings.
We show the embedding results of a simplified robot hierarchy in Figure 2 (b), where each node is
the embedding for its corresponding robot design. For more details, please refer to Section 3.2. A
very important property of this representation is that as the norm of the embedding increases, the
robots become more fine-grained. This property allows us to realize coarse-to-fine in an elegant way.


4.2   O PTIMIZING ROBOT D ESIGNS IN H YPERBOLIC S PACE

To optimize robot design in hyperbolic space Bdc , our method HERD adapts the idea of the Cross-
Entropy Method (CEM) (Rubinstein & Kroese, 2004). It works by repeating the following four
phases: (1) sampling embeddings from a normal distribution, (2) finding the corresponding robots of
the embeddings, (3) evaluating these robots, and (4) updating the probability distribution based on
the top-performing samples. Figure 2 (c) shows an example of this optimization in Poincaré ball.
Recalling that sampling robots from the center to the border of Poincaré ball is exactly the process of
refining robots, we only need to initialize the mean µ ∈ Rd of CEM to zero to enable coarse-to-fine
robot design. To control the exploration rate, we use a time-decayed variance σ ∈ Rd , which
decreases from 0.2 to 0.01 linearly during training.
At each iteration, HERD samples Nv embeddings {vi |vi ∼ N (µ, diag(σ)) ∀i = 1, 2, · · · , Nv }. To
find the corresponding robots, HERD maps each vi from Euclidean space to the Poincaré ball by
using the exp map defined in Equation (2), i.e., z̄i = expc0 (vi ). As not all points in Poincaré ball
are valid under Sarkar’s Construction, HERD chooses the nearest zi in the robot hierarchy with the
distance function Dc defined in Equation (1) and uses zi ’s robot for z̄i .
Next, the generated robots are evaluated in the given task with a shared control policy π learned
as in CuCo (Wang et al., 2022), which adopts self-attention mechanism (Vaswani et al., 2017) to
handle incompatible state-action space and capture the internal dependencies between robot cells.
The shared control policy is learned using PPO (Schulman et al., 2017), an actor-critic reinforcement
learning algorithm.

                         P µ by averaging the elite vi s based on their fitness defined by the
Finally, we update the mean
discounted sum of rewards t γ t rt , where γ is the discount factor and rt is the reward at time step t.


5     E XPERIMENTS

In this section, we benchmark our method HERD on various tasks from EvoGym (Bhatia et al.,
2021). We evaluate the effectiveness of HERD by answering the following questions: (1) Can robot
design help improve performance in comparison with handcrafted design? (Section 5.2) (2) Can
HERD outperform other robot design baselines in various tasks? (Section 5.2) (3) How does each
component of HERD contributes to its performance? (Section 5.3) (4) How does HERD design


                                                   7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024

                                                       HERD (Ours)                   NGE            HERD w/o HE               HERD w/o C2F
                                ObstacleTraverser-v1                                       PlatformJumper-v0                                   GapJumper-v0
                 6                                                              4                                                     4


Episode Reward


                                                              Episode Reward


                                                                                                                    Episode Reward
                                                                                3                                                     3
                 4
                                                                                2                                                     2
                 2                                                              1                                                     1

                                                                                0                                                     0
                 0
                                                                               −1                                                    −1
                 0          5        10        15      20                        0   5        10        15     20                      0   5    10       15   20
                                       T (mil)                                                 T (mil)                                           T (mil)
                                    Traverser-v0                                              Carrier-v1                                        Hurdler-v0
                 6                                                              3
                                                                                                                                      3
Episode Reward


                                                              Episode Reward


                                                                                                                    Episode Reward
                 4                                                              2
                                                                                                                                      2
                                                                                1
                 2                                                                                                                    1

                                                                                0                                                     0
                 0
                                                                               −1                                                    −1
                 0          5        10       15       20                        0   5        10       15      20                      0   5    10       15   20
                                      T (mil)                                                  T (mil)                                           T (mil)



                          Figure 4: Ablation studies of HERD in hard tasks.
robots in a coarse-to-fine manner? (Section 5.4). For qualitative results, please refer to the videos on
our anonymous project website* . And our code is available on GitHub* .

5.1                       E XPERIMENT S ETUP

We conduct experiments on 15 tasks from EvoGym and only show the results of hard tasks in this
section. Please refer to Appendix C for the full results. All runs are conducted with four random
seeds, and the mean value as well as 95% confidence intervals are shown.
Environments. We follow the original setting of EvoGym, where each robot is made up of 5 × 5
inter-connected 2D voxel cells. Each cell has a unique type chosen from five options: empty, soft,
rigid, horizontal actuator, and vertical actuator. The design space is huge with roughly 2.98 × 1017
designs. The designed robot is controlled by assigning actions to all the actuator cells. The action
value a is within the range [0, 6, 1.6] and corresponds to a gradual expansion/contraction of that
actuator to a times its rest length. The designed robots are required to perform multiple tasks, varying
in objectives (locomotion, manipulation), terrains (flat, bumpy), and difficulties (easy, medium,
hard). Please refer to Appendix B.1 for a detailed description of these tasks.
Implementations and Baselines. Our method HERD is implemented on the top of CuCo (Wang
et al., 2022) by replacing its design policy with our novel optimization method in hyperbolic space.
We use the same control policy and hyperparameters as CuCo for a fair comparison. To show
the strengths of HERD, we consider the following baselines: (1) CuCo: a curriculum-based robot
design method by expanding the design space from small size (3 × 3) to the target size (5 × 5)
gradually through a predefined curriculum; (2) GA (Michalewicz & Michalewicz, 1996; Sims,
1994a; Wang et al., 2019): a widely used black-box optimization method by relying on biologically
inspired operators such as mutation, crossover and selection. It directly encodes the robot as a
vector, where each element is the cell type. (3) CPPN-NEAT (Cheney et al., 2014a;b; Corucci
et al., 2018): the predominant method for evolving soft robot design. It indirectly encodes robots
by Compositional Pattern Producing Network (CPPN) (Stanley, 2007; Cheney et al., 2014a) and
trained by NeuroEvolution of Augmenting Topologies (NEAT) (Stanley & Miikkulainen, 2002). (4)
BO (Kushner, 1964; Močkus, 1975): a commonly used global optimization method of black-box
functions by training a surrogate model based on Gaussian Process (GP) to alleviate the burden of
computationally expensive fitness evaluation. (5) Vanilla RL: a strong baseline that uses reinforcement
learning to update the design policy and control policy. (6) HandCrafted Robot: a human-designed
robot using expert knowledge that can efficiently solve many tasks. Please refer to Appendix B.2 and
Appendix B.3 for more details of HERD and other baselines.

5.2                       T RAINING P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON

We summarize the training performance in Figure 3 where the x-axis and y-axis are timesteps and
episode reward, respectively. We also show one representative robot designed by HERD at the end of
training in the upper left corner of each sub-figure to offer more intuition, and the time-lapsed images
of the control stage for these robots are provided in Appendix B.1. Here, we only show the hard
                     *
                         https://sites.google.com/view/hyperbolic-robot-design
                     *
                         https://github.com/drdh/HERD


                                                                                                8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                  Iteration 0     Iteration 5     Iteration 10        Iteration 30        Iteration 80


 Embeddings
  Hyperbolic
 Selected
 Designs


           Figure 5: Visualization of the learning process of HERD in PlatformJumper-v0.
tasks, and please refer to Figure 22 for full results. HERD significantly outperforms the baselines
and handcrafted robots in most tasks in terms of both design efficiency and effectiveness. This
validates that (1) robot design can improve final performance compared with handcrafted robots and
(2) leveraging hyperbolic embedding for coarse-to-fine learning can effectively help design robots in
both efficiency and final performance.

5.3            A BLATIONS

To investigate the contributions of each component of HERD, we conduct elaborate ablation studies
here. There are two main contributions that characterize our method: (1) the idea of coarse-to-fine
robot design and (2) a realization of this idea in hyperbolic space. To validate the effectiveness of
our method, we designed the following ablation studies. (1) HERD w/o HE: Using other method,
e.g., an evolutionary algorithm NGE (Wang et al., 2019), to implement the idea coarse-to-fine robot
design. This ablation will show the effectiveness of hyperbolic embeddings. (2) HERD w/o C2F:
Do not adopt coarse-to-fine robot design, and use CEM to directly search the optimal design. This
ablation can verify the effectiveness of coarse-to-fine robot design. (3) NGE: Directly use NGE for
multi-cellular-robot design. More details are available in Appendix B.4.
We show the results of hard tasks in Figure 4, and please refer to Figure 23 for other tasks. HERD
is better than these variants in most tasks. Specifically, HERD outperforms HERD w/o C2F and
NGE in all tasks, which shows the effectiveness of the idea of coarse-to-fine. Further, HERD is
better than HERD w/o HE in most tasks, which indicates the usefulness of hyperbolic embeddings
in coarse-to-fine robot design. As for our HERD being inferior to HERD w/o HE in Carrier-v0 and
Carrier-v1, we speculate that these two tasks may only need find-grained robots, whose embeddings
are close to the border of Poincaré ball. There may be a problem with bits of precision in hyperbolic
embeddings (Sala et al., 2018), which is further discussed in Section 6.

5.4            ROBOT D ESIGN P ROCESS A NALYSIS

To explore how HERD can learn these robot designs, in this subsection, we visualize the evolution
process of the designed robots by HERD in PlatformJumper-v0 in Figure 5. We show the hyperbolic
embeddings and the selected robots from five iterations of the training. Figure 5 clearly shows that as
the sampled embeddings approach the border, the designed robots change from coarse-grained to
fine-grained. An interesting phenomenon is that the final robot is not the finest-grained. This is partly
because coarser-grained designs are already sufficient to solve some tasks in EvoGym.

6              D ISCUSSION

In this paper, we leverage hyperbolic embeddings for coarse-to-fine robot design. The idea of coarse-
to-fine avoids directly searching in the vast design space, and hyperbolic embeddings further bring
us better optimization properties. Finally, the empirical evaluations and visualizations of HERD
show its superior effectiveness. However, our approach still has two limitations. First, the idea
of coarse-to-fine might not be helpful in the tasks that only the finest-grained robots can solve. In
these tasks, coarse-grained robot designs will not provide useful guidance for refinement if the
coarse-grained robots cannot address even part of the tasks. Second, embedding robots in hyperbolic
space may face the problem of bits of precision (Sala et al., 2018). To embed finer-grained robots
better, our method requires more bits. Specifically, given the height of the robot hierarchy Hmax , and
the maximum number of child robots degmax , our embedding will need Ω(Hmax log(degmax )) bits
(Sala et al., 2018). Solving these two limitations could be promising for future work and may further
improve performance in other tasks.


                                                    9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT

Our research findings are fully reproducible. The source code is included in the Supplementary
Material and will be made public once accepted. We have also thoroughly documented the installation
instructions and experimental procedures in a README file attached to the code.

R EFERENCES
Peter W Battaglia, Jessica B Hamrick, Victor Bapst, Alvaro Sanchez-Gonzalez, Vinicius Zambaldi,
  Mateusz Malinowski, Andrea Tacchetti, David Raposo, Adam Santoro, Ryan Faulkner, et al.
  Relational inductive biases, deep learning, and graph networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1806.01261,
  2018.

Eugenio Beltrami. Teoria fondamentale degli spazii di curvatura costante memoria. F. Zanetti, 1868.

Jagdeep Bhatia, Holly Jackson, Yunsheng Tian, Jie Xu, and Wojciech Matusik. Evolution gym:
  A large-scale benchmark for evolving soft robots. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 34:2201–2214, 2021.

Joan Bruna, Wojciech Zaremba, Arthur Szlam, and Yann LeCun. Spectral networks and locally
  connected networks on graphs. arXiv preprint arXiv:1312.6203, 2013.

Edoardo Cetin, Benjamin Chamberlain, Michael Bronstein, and Jonathan J Hunt. Hyperbolic deep
  reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.01542, 2022.

Ines Chami, Albert Gu, Dat P Nguyen, and Christopher Ré. Horopca: Hyperbolic dimensionality
  reduction via horospherical projections. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
  1419–1429. PMLR, 2021.

Nicholas Cheney, Jeff Clune, and Hod Lipson. Evolved electrophysiological soft robots. In Artificial
  life conference proceedings, pp. 222–229. MIT Press One Rogers Street, Cambridge, MA 02142-
  1209, USA journals-info . . . , 2014a.

Nick Cheney, Robert MacCurdy, Jeff Clune, and Hod Lipson. Unshackling evolution: evolving soft
  robots with multiple materials and a powerful generative encoding. ACM SIGEVOlution, 7(1):
  11–23, 2014b.

Nick Cheney, Josh Bongard, Vytas SunSpiral, and Hod Lipson. Scalable co-optimization of morphol-
  ogy and control in embodied machines. Journal of The Royal Society Interface, 15(143):20170937,
  2018.

Francesco Corucci, Nick Cheney, Francesco Giorgio-Serchi, Josh Bongard, and Cecilia Laschi.
  Evolving soft locomotion in aquatic and terrestrial environments: effects of material properties and
  environmental transitions. Soft robotics, 5(4):475–495, 2018.

Heng Dong, Tonghan Wang, Jiayuan Liu, and Chongjie Zhang. Low-rank modular reinforcement
  learning via muscle synergy. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.15479, 2022.

Heng Dong, Junyu Zhang, Tonghan Wang, and Chongjie Zhang. Symmetry-aware robot design with
  structured subgroups. In Proceedings of the 40th International Conference on Machine Learning,
  2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=jeHP6aBCBu.

Zi-Yi Dou, Aishwarya Kamath, Zhe Gan, Pengchuan Zhang, Jianfeng Wang, Linjie Li, Zicheng Liu,
  Ce Liu, Yann LeCun, Nanyun Peng, et al. Coarse-to-fine vision-language pre-training with fusion
  in the backbone. Advances in neural information processing systems, 35:32942–32956, 2022.

Agrim Gupta, Linxi Fan, Surya Ganguli, and Li Fei-Fei. Metamorph: Learning universal controllers
  with transformers. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021a.

Agrim Gupta, Silvio Savarese, Surya Ganguli, and Li Fei-Fei. Embodied intelligence via learning
  and evolution. Nature communications, 12(1):1–12, 2021b.


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


John A Hartigan and Manchek A Wong. Algorithm as 136: A k-means clustering algorithm. Journal
  of the royal statistical society. series c (applied statistics), 28(1):100–108, 1979.
David Howard, Agoston E Eiben, Danielle Frances Kennedy, Jean-Baptiste Mouret, Philip Valencia,
  and Dave Winkler. Evolving embodied intelligence from materials to machines. Nature Machine
  Intelligence, 1(1):12–19, 2019.
Joy Hsu, Jeffrey Gu, Gong Wu, Wah Chiu, and Serena Yeung. Capturing implicit hierarchical
  structure in 3d biomedical images with self-supervised hyperbolic representations. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:5112–5123, 2021.
Jiaheng Hu, Julian Whitman, and Howie Choset. Glso: Grammar-guided latent space optimization
   for sample-efficient robot design automation. In Conference on Robot Learning, pp. 1321–1331.
   PMLR, 2023.
Wenlong Huang, Igor Mordatch, and Deepak Pathak. One policy to control them all: Shared
 modular policies for agent-agnostic control. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
 4455–4464. PMLR, 2020.
Stephen James, Kentaro Wada, Tristan Laidlow, and Andrew J Davison. Coarse-to-fine q-attention: Ef-
  ficient learning for visual robotic manipulation via discretisation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
  Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 13739–13748, 2022.
Milan Jelisavcic, Kyrre Glette, Evert Haasdijk, and AE Eiben. Lamarckian evolution of simulated
 modular robots. Frontiers in Robotics and AI, 6:9, 2019.
Edward Johns. Coarse-to-fine imitation learning: Robot manipulation from a single demonstration.
  In 2021 IEEE international conference on robotics and automation (ICRA), pp. 4613–4619. IEEE,
  2021.
Elias Khalil, Hanjun Dai, Yuyu Zhang, Bistra Dilkina, and Le Song. Learning combinatorial
  optimization algorithms over graphs. Advances in neural information processing systems, 30,
  2017.
Thomas N Kipf and Max Welling. Semi-supervised classification with graph convolutional networks.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:1609.02907, 2016.
Vitaly Kurin, Maximilian Igl, Tim Rocktäschel, Wendelin Boehmer, and Shimon Whiteson. My body
  is a cage: the role of morphology in graph-based incompatible control. In International Conference
  on Learning Representations, 2020.
Harold J Kushner. A new method of locating the maximum point of an arbitrary multipeak curve in
  the presence of noise. 1964.
Joel Lehman and Kenneth O Stanley. Evolving a diversity of virtual creatures through novelty search
  and local competition. In Proceedings of the 13th annual conference on Genetic and evolutionary
  computation, pp. 211–218, 2011.
Hod Lipson and Jordan B Pollack. Automatic design and manufacture of robotic lifeforms. Nature,
 406(6799):974–978, 2000.
Emile Mathieu, Charline Le Lan, Chris J Maddison, Ryota Tomioka, and Yee Whye Teh. Contin-
 uous hierarchical representations with poincaré variational auto-encoders. Advances in neural
 information processing systems, 32, 2019.
Eric Medvet, Alberto Bartoli, Federico Pigozzi, and Marco Rochelli. Biodiversity in evolved voxel-
  based soft robots. In Proceedings of the Genetic and Evolutionary Computation Conference, pp.
  129–137, 2021.
Zbigniew Michalewicz and Zbigniew Michalewicz. GAs: Why Do They Work? Springer, 1996.
Jonas Močkus. On bayesian methods for seeking the extremum. In Optimization Techniques IFIP
  Technical Conference: Novosibirsk, July 1–7, 1974, pp. 400–404. Springer, 1975.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Georgios Pavlakos, Xiaowei Zhou, Konstantinos G Derpanis, and Kostas Daniilidis. Coarse-to-fine
  volumetric prediction for single-image 3d human pose. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on
  computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 7025–7034, 2017.
Marco Pedersoli, Andrea Vedaldi, Jordi Gonzalez, and Xavier Roca. A coarse-to-fine approach for
 fast deformable object detection. Pattern Recognition, 48(5):1844–1853, 2015.
Peter Petersen. Riemannian geometry, volume 171. Springer, 2006.
Rolf Pfeifer, Max Lungarella, and Fumiya Iida. Self-organization, embodiment, and biologically
  inspired robotics. science, 318(5853):1088–1093, 2007.
Rui Qian, Di Hu, Heinrich Dinkel, Mengyue Wu, Ning Xu, and Weiyao Lin. Multiple sound sources
  localization from coarse to fine. In Computer Vision–ECCV 2020: 16th European Conference,
  Glasgow, UK, August 23–28, 2020, Proceedings, Part XX 16, pp. 292–308. Springer, 2020.
Bo Qiang, Yuxuan Song, Minkai Xu, Jingjing Gong, Bowen Gao, Hao Zhou, Wei-Ying Ma, and
  Yanyan Lan. Coarse-to-fine: a hierarchical diffusion model for molecule generation in 3d. In
  International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 28277–28299. PMLR, 2023.
Reuven Y Rubinstein and Dirk P Kroese. The cross-entropy method: a unified approach to com-
  binatorial optimization, Monte-Carlo simulation, and machine learning, volume 133. Springer,
  2004.
Frederic Sala, Chris De Sa, Albert Gu, and Christopher Ré. Representation tradeoffs for hyperbolic
  embeddings. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 4460–4469. PMLR, 2018.
Rik Sarkar. Low distortion delaunay embedding of trees in hyperbolic plane. In International
  symposium on graph drawing, pp. 355–366. Springer, 2011.
Paul-Edouard Sarlin, Cesar Cadena, Roland Siegwart, and Marcin Dymczyk. From coarse to fine:
  Robust hierarchical localization at large scale. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
  Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 12716–12725, 2019.
Franco Scarselli, Marco Gori, Ah Chung Tsoi, Markus Hagenbuchner, and Gabriele Monfardini. The
  graph neural network model. IEEE transactions on neural networks, 20(1):61–80, 2008.
Charles Schaff, David Yunis, Ayan Chakrabarti, and Matthew R Walter. Jointly learning to construct
  and control agents using deep reinforcement learning. In 2019 International Conference on
  Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pp. 9798–9805. IEEE, 2019.
John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy
  optimization algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347, 2017.
Karl Sims. Evolving virtual creatures. In Proceedings of the 21st annual conference on Computer
  graphics and interactive techniques, pp. 15–22, 1994a.
Karl Sims. Evolving 3d morphology and behavior by competition. Artificial life, 1(4):353–372,
 1994b.
Andrew Spielberg, Allan Zhao, Yuanming Hu, Tao Du, Wojciech Matusik, and Daniela Rus. Learning-
  in-the-loop optimization: End-to-end control and co-design of soft robots through learned deep
  latent representations. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019.
Kenneth O Stanley. Compositional pattern producing networks: A novel abstraction of development.
  Genetic programming and evolvable machines, 8:131–162, 2007.
Kenneth O Stanley and Risto Miikkulainen. Evolving neural networks through augmenting topologies.
  Evolutionary computation, 10(2):99–127, 2002.
Abraham Ungar. A gyrovector space approach to hyperbolic geometry. Springer Nature, 2022.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Łukasz
  Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. Advances in neural information processing
  systems, 30, 2017.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Kathryn Walker and Helmut Hauser. Evolution of morphology through sculpting in a voxel based
  robot. In ALIFE 2021: The 2021 Conference on Artificial Life. MIT Press, 2021.
Tingwu Wang, Yuhao Zhou, Sanja Fidler, and Jimmy Ba. Neural graph evolution: Towards efficient
  automatic robot design. arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.05370, 2019.
Yuxing Wang, Shuang Wu, Haobo Fu, Qiang Fu, Tiantian Zhang, Yongzhe Chang, and Xueqian
  Wang. Curriculum-based co-design of morphology and control of voxel-based soft robots. In The
  Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.
Menglin Yang, Min Zhou, Zhihao Li, Jiahong Liu, Lujia Pan, Hui Xiong, and Irwin King. Hyperbolic
 graph neural networks: a review of methods and applications. arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.13852,
 2022.
Hao Yu, Fu Li, Mahdi Saleh, Benjamin Busam, and Slobodan Ilic. Cofinet: Reliable coarse-to-fine
  correspondences for robust pointcloud registration. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 34:23872–23884, 2021.
Ye Yuan, Yuda Song, Zhengyi Luo, Wen Sun, and Kris Kitani. Transform2act: Learning a transform-
  and-control policy for efficient agent design. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.03659, 2021.
Allan Zhao, Jie Xu, Mina Konaković-Luković, Josephine Hughes, Andrew Spielberg, Daniela Rus,
  and Wojciech Matusik. Robogrammar: graph grammar for terrain-optimized robot design. ACM
  Transactions on Graphics (TOG), 39(6):1–16, 2020.
Shizhan Zhu, Cheng Li, Chen Change Loy, and Xiaoou Tang. Face alignment by coarse-to-fine shape
  searching. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp.
  4998–5006, 2015.


                                               13
    Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    A     M ETHOD D ETAILS
    We outline the concrete algorithm for Sarkar’s Construction in Algorithm 2.

  Algorithm 2: Sarkar’s Construction adapted from Sala et al. (2018)
  Input: Node q with parent p, children to place a1 , a2 , · · · , adeg(q)−1 , scaling factor τ .
       ′
1 (0, zp ) ← Fzq →0 (zq , zp ); ;                              // defined in Equation (5)
              ′
2 θ ← arg(zp ); ;                       // angle of zp′ from x-axis in the plane
3 for n ∈ {1, · · · , deg(q) − 1} do
              τ

4     yn ← eeτ −1                 2πn             2πn
                +1 · cos θ + deg(q) , sin θ + deg(q)          ;
5   (zq , zp , z1 , · · · , zdeg(q)−1 ) ← Fzq →0 (0, zp′ , y1 , · · · , ydeg(q)−1 );
    Output: Embeddings in B2 : z1 , z2 , · · · , zdeg(q)−1 .



    B     E XPERIMENT D ETAILS
    B.1     D ETAILS OF THE TASKS

    We provide details for 15 various tasks ranging from simple to complex simulated in the EvoGym
    platform in the following section. More elaborate explanations can be referred to Bhatia et al. (2021).
    In each task, the initial design space is 5 × 5.
    Position. po represents a two-dimensional position vector for the centroid of an object o at time t,
    which is computed by averaging all the positions of point masses used to compose object o. pox and
    poy are x and y components of this vector, respectively.
    Velocity. Likewise, v o denotes a two-dimensional velocity vector for the center of mass of an object
    o at time t, which is calculated by averaging all the velocities of point-masses used to make up object
    o. vxo and vyo are x and y components of this vector, respectively.
    Orientation. Similarly, θo refers to a one-dimensional orientation vector for an object o at time t.
    Given pi , which represents the position of point mass i of object o and po , we can calculate θo by
    averaging over the angle between the vector pi − po at time t and time 0 for all the point masses.
    Note that this average is a weighted average determined by ||pi − po || at time 0.
    Special observations. co describes a 2n-dim position vector for all n point masses of an object o
    relative to po , which can be computed by subtracting po from each column of the 2 × n position
    matrix.
    hob (d) and hoa (d) are vectors of length 2d + 1 that represent elevation information around the robot
    below or above its centroid. More specifically, for some integer x ≤ d, the corresponding entry
    in vector hob (d) will be the highest point of the terrain, which is less than poy between a range of
    [x, x + 1] voxels from pox in the x-direction.

    B.1.1     WALKER - V 0


                                                   Figure 6: Walker-v0.

    In this task, the robot is required to walk as far as possible on flat terrain. This task is easy. Given the
    observation space S ∈ Rn+2 that is formed by concatenating vectors v robot , crobot , where n is the


                                                               14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


number of point masses, the reward R can be represented as below:
                                          R = ∆probot
                                                   x
which provides a reward to the robot for making forward progress in the positive x-direction.
It also receives an additional reward of 1 if the robot reaches the end of the terrain.

B.1.2    D OWN S TEPPER - V 0


                                      Figure 7: DownStepper-v0.

In this task, the robot achieves rewards by descending stairs of various lengths. This task is easy.
Given the observation space S ∈ Rn+14 that is constituted by vectors v robot , θrobot , crobot , hrobot
                                                                                                  b     (5),
where n is the number of point masses, , the reward R can be formulated as follow:
                                          R = ∆probot
                                                   x
which rewards the robot for moving in the positive x-direction.
The robot also receives an additional reward of 2 upon successfully reaching the end of the terrain but
will be penalized with a one-time deduction of 3 for rotating more than 75 degrees in either direction
from its initial orientation, similar to the Up Stepper task.

B.1.3    J UMPER - V 0


                                          Figure 8: Jumper-v0.

In this task, the robot is required to jump as high as possible in place on flat terrain. This task is
easy. Given the observation space S ∈ Rn+7 that is formed by concatenating vectors v robot , crobot ,
hrobot
 b     (2), where n is the number of point masses, the reward R is
                                   R = 10 · ∆probot
                                               y     − 5 · |probot
                                                             x     |
which implies that the robot will receive a reward for its upward motion in the positive y-direction
and a penalty for any movement in the x-direction.

B.1.4    F LIPPER - V 0
In this task, the robot aims to perform as many counter-clockwise flips as possible on flat terrain.
This task is easy. Given the observation space S ∈ Rn+1 that is formed by concatenating vectors
θrobot , crobot , the reward R is represented as below:
                                          R = ∆θrobot
which rewards the robot for executing counter-clockwise rotations.


                                                    15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                         Figure 9: Flipper-v0.


B.1.5    P USHER - V 0


                                         Figure 10: Pusher-v0.

In this task, the objective of the robot is to push a box that has been placed in front of it. This task
is easy. Given the observation space S ∈ Rn+6 that is constituted by vectors v box , pbox − probot ,
v robot , crobot , where n is the number of point masses, the reward R can be represented as the sum of
R1 and R2 .
                                  R1 = 0.5 · ∆probot
                                               x     + 0.75 · ∆pbox
                                                                x
which rewards the robot for its movement in the positive x-direction.
                                       R2 = −∆|pbox − probot |
which penalizes the robot for moving apart in the x-direction.
It also receives an additional reward of 1 if the robot reaches the end of the terrain.

B.1.6    C ARRIER - V 0


                                         Figure 11: Carrier-v0.

In this task, the robot is required to catch a box initialized above it and carry it as far as possible on
flat terrain. This task is easy. Given the observation space S ∈ Rn+6 that is constituted by vectors
v box , pbox − probot , v robot , crobot , where n is the number of point masses, the reward R = R1 + R2
is the sum of several components.
                                  R1 = 0.5 · ∆probot
                                               x     + 0.5 · ∆pbox
                                                               x
which rewards both the robot and box for movements in the positive x-direction.
                                                   if pbox

                                        0              y   ≥ ty
                                R2 =           box
                                        10 · ∆py   otherwise
which implies that the robot will receive a penalty for dropping the box below a threshold height ty .


                                                   16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                       Figure 12: UpStepper-v0.


B.1.7    U P S TEPPER - V 0
In this task, the robot is rewarded by climbing up stairs of diverse lengths. This task is medium.
Given the observation space S ∈ Rn+14 that is constituted by vectors v robot , θrobot , crobot , hrobot
                                                                                                  b     (5),
where n is the number of point masses, the reward R is formulated as follow:
                                              R = ∆probot
                                                    x
which incentivizes the robot to move in the positive x-direction.
The robot is also granted an additional reward of 2 upon reaching the end of the terrain but will be
penalized with a one-time deduction of 3 for rotating more than 75 degrees in either direction from
its original orientation.

B.1.8    O BSTACLE T RAVERSER - V 0


                                   Figure 13: ObstacleTraverser-v0.

In this task, the robot is rewarded by walking across terrain that gets increasingly bumpy. This task is
medium. Given the observation space S ∈ Rn+14 that is constituted by vectors v robot , θrobot , crobot ,
hrobot
  b    (5), where n refers to the number of point masses, the reward R is formulated as follow:
                                              R = ∆probot
                                                    x
which incentivizes the robot to move in the positive x-direction.
The robot also receives an additional reward of 2 upon successfully reaching the end of the terrain but
will be penalized with a one-time deduction of 3 for rotating more than 90 degrees in either direction
from its initial orientation.

B.1.9    T HROWER - V 0
In this task, the robot is rewarded by throwing a box that is initially positioned on top of it. This task
is medium. Given the observation space S ∈ Rn+6 that is constituted by vectors v box , pbox − probot ,
v robot , crobot , where n is the number of point masses, the reward R can be represented as the sum of
R1 and R2 .
                                              R1 = ∆pbox
                                                     x



                                                    17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                        Figure 14: Thrower-v0.


which rewards the box for moving in the positive x-direction.
                                        −∆probot     if probot

                                             x           x     ≥0
                               R2 =        robot
                                        ∆px          otherwise
which imposes a penalty on the robot if it moves too far away from the x = 0 while throwing the box.

B.1.10    P LATFORM J UMPER - V 0


                                    Figure 15: PlatformJumper-v0.

In this task, the robot navigates through a sequence of floating platforms positioned at varying heights.
This task is hard. Given the observation space S ∈ Rn+14 that is constituted by vectors v robot , θrobot ,
crobot , hrobot
          b     (5), where n is the number of point masses, the reward R is formulated as follow:
                                              R = ∆probot
                                                    x
which provides a reward to the robot for making forward progress in the positive x-direction.
If the robot rotates more than 90 degrees from its initial orientation in either direction or falls off the
platforms, it incurs a one-time penalty of -3.

B.1.11    O BSTACLE T RAVERSER - V 1
In this task, the robot is required to traverse a rougher terrain compared to the previous Obstacle
Traverser task. This task is hard. Given the observation space S ∈ Rn+14 that is constituted by
vectors v robot , θrobot , crobot , hrobot
                                     b     (5), where n refers to the number of point masses, the reward R
can be formulated as follow:
                                              R = ∆probot
                                                    x
which rewards the robot for its movement in the positive x-direction
The robot also receives an additional reward of 2 upon successfully reaching the end of the terrain
but won’t be penalized.


                                                    18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                   Figure 16: ObstacleTraverser-v1.


B.1.12    H URDLER - V 0


                                        Figure 17: Hurdler-v0.

In this task, the robot achieves rewards by walking across terrain that features tall obstacles. This
task is hard. Given the observation space S ∈ Rn+14 that is similar to ObstacleTraverser-v1, the
task-specific reward R can be formulated as follow:

                                             R = ∆probot
                                                   x

which rewards the robot for moving in the positive x-direction.
It incurs a one-time penalty of -3 if the robot deviates more than 90 degrees from its original
orientation in either direction.

B.1.13    T RAVERSER - V 0


                                       Figure 18: Traverser-v0.

In this task, the robot navigates across a pit filled with rigid blocks without sinking into the pit. This
task is hard. Given the observation space S ∈ Rn+14 that is similar to ObstacleTraverser-v1, the
task-specific reward R can be represented as below:

                                             R = ∆probot
                                                   x

which provides a reward to the robot for making forward progress in the positive x-direction.
The robot is also granted an additional reward of 2 upon reaching the end of the terrain.


                                                   19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                         Figure 19: Carrier-v1.


B.1.14    C ARRIER - V 1
In this task, the objective of the robot is to carry a box to a table and place it on the table. This task
is hard. Given the observation space S ∈ Rn+6 that is similar to Thrower-v0, the reward R can be
formulated as the sum of R1 , R2 and R3 .
                                      R1 = −2 · ∆|gxbox − pbox
                                                           x |

where gxbox refers to the goal x-position for the box. It rewards the box for moving to its goal in the
x-direction.
                                      R2 = −∆|gxrobot − probot
                                                         x     |

where gxrobot describes the goal x-position for the robot. The robot is rewarded for making forward
progress to its target in the positive x-direction.

                                                        if pbox

                                            0               y   ≥ ty
                                    R3 =            box
                                            10 · ∆py    otherwise
which imposes a penalty on the robot if it drops the box below a threshold height ty that varies with
the elevation of the terrain.

B.1.15    G AP J UMPER - V 0


                                      Figure 20: GapJumper-v0.

In this task, the robot moves across a sequence of spaced-out floating platforms, all positioned at
the same height. This task is hard. Given the observation space S ∈ Rn+14 that is constituted by
vectors v robot , θrobot , crobot , hrobot
                                     b     (5), where n refers to the number of point masses, the reward R
is formulated as follow:
                                              R = ∆probot
                                                    x

which incentivizes the robot to move in the positive x-direction.
If the robot falls off the platforms, it incurs a one-time penalty of -3.


                                                   20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                𝑧#
                                                           𝑧
                                                                𝑧"
                                                           𝑧!


              Figure 21: Use the nearest valid embedding and its corresponding design.


B.2     I MPLEMENTATION OF O UR M ETHOD HERD

We implement HERD based on the public code* of CuCo (Wang et al., 2022), which uses Transformer-
based Kurin et al. (2020) control policies. This architecture can deal with variable input sizes across
different robot designs and can capture internal; dependencies between cells. Note that our method is
general and can also use any other networks that are able to handle incompatible state-action space,
such as GNN (Scarselli et al., 2008; Bruna et al., 2013; Kipf & Welling, 2016) and message passing
network (Huang et al., 2020). For control policy learning, we use Proximal Policy Optimization
(PPO) (Schulman et al., 2017) as in CuCo.
For the designing component, the implementations of Sarkar’s Construction and Poincaré ball are
based on the released code* of HoroPCA (Chami et al., 2021). In Figure 21, we use a simplified
Poincaré disk, where the depth of the tree and the number of branches is reduced for better visualiza-
tion, to show how we select the nearest valid embedding and its corresponding design. We simply
calculate the distance between the sampled point z and other points (such as z1 , z2 , z3 , · · · ) that are
embedded in the hyperbolic manifold. Then we choose the point and its corresponding robot design
with minimum distance, i.e., z2 in Figure 21.
Here we provide the hyperparameters needed to replicate our experiments in Table 1, and we also
include our codes in the supplementary.
Experiments are all conducted on NVIDIA GTX 2080Ti GPUs with 80 CPUs. Taking
ObstacleTraverser-v0 as an example, HERD requires approximately 4G of RAM and 1G of video
memory and takes about 28 hours to finish 25M timesteps of training.

B.3     D ETAILS OF BASELINES

CuCo. CuCo (Wang et al., 2022) incorporates curriculum learning for co-optimization of design
and control by establishing a simple-to-complex process. It enables gradually expanding the design
space from initial size to target size through a predefined curriculum. By utilizing an indirect-
encoding Neural Cellular Automata (NCA) and an inheritance mechanism, CuCo achieves a balanced
exploration and exploitation. At each stage of the curriculum, it learns transferable control patterns
via Reinforcement Learning (RL) and adopts the self-attention mechanism to capture the internal
dependencies between voxels effectively.
GA. We have implemented a basic Genetic Algorithm (GA) that employs elitism selection and a
simple mutation strategy to evolve the population of robot designs. The elitism selection mechanism
preserves robots with high fitness from the current population as survivors while discarding the
rest. The mutation strategy introduces random modifications to individual voxels of the robot with
a specified probability. Although we have not incorporated crossover for the sake of simplicity, a
well-designed crossover operator could potentially enhance final performance.
CPPN-NEAT. In this approach, the morphology of the soft robot is represented and parameterized
using a Compositional Pattern Producing Network (CPPN) (Cheney et al., 2014a; Stanley, 2007).
   *
       https://github.com/Yuxing-Wang-THU/ModularEvoGym
   *
       https://github.com/HazyResearch/HoroPCA


                                                    21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                               Table 1: Hyperparameters of HERD.
                                       Hyperparameter                          Value
                                        Dimension of Poincaré ball d             2
                                        Curvature of Poincaré ball c           1.0
               Design Optimization
                                        Hierarchy size N                  ≈ 2 × 104
                                        Population size of CEM Nv                10
                                        Use GAE                                True
                                        GAE parameter λ                         0.95
                                        Learning rate                    2.5 × 10−4
                                        Use linear learning rate decay         True
                                        Clip parameter                           0.1
                                        Value loss coefficient                   0.5
                                        Entropy coefficient                     0.01
                                        Time steps per rollout                 2048
                                        Num processes                              4
               PPO
                                        Optimizer                             Adam
                                        Evaluation interval                       10
                                        Discount factor γ                       0.99
                                        Clipped value function                 True
                                        Observation normalization              True
                                        Observation clipping               [−10, 10]
                                        Reward normalization                   True
                                        Reward clipping                    [−10, 10]
                                        Policy epochs                              8
                                        Number of layers                          2
                                        Number of attention heads                 1
                                        Embedding dimension                      64
               Transformer
                                        Feedforward dimension                   128
                                        Non linearity function                ReLU
                                        Dropout                                 0.0


As CPPN receives all the spatial coordinates of voxels as input, we can acquire the type of each
corresponding voxel. The NeuroEvolution of Augmenting Topologies (NEAT) algorithm (Stanley
& Miikkulainen, 2002) is leveraged to evolve the structure of CPPNs, which operates as a generic
algorithm tailored for network structure.
BO. Bayesian Optimization (BO) (Kushner, 1964; Schaff et al., 2019) is a widely adopted technique
for global optimization, especially for optimizing functions that are computationally expensive to
evaluate. Specifically, the surrogate model employed in this approach is based on Gaussian processes,
while batch Thompson sampling is to extract the acquisition function. We rely on the L-BFGS
algorithm during the optimization process.
Vanilla RL. Vanilla RL method shares the same network architectures as CuCo (Wang et al., 2022),
but removes the curriculum component from the framework. It learns to design and control from
scratch within the design space.
HandCrafted Robot. To evaluate the effectiveness of automatic robot design, we construct a robot in
the design phase using human knowledge, and it solely requires learning control policies for specific
morphologies.
The baselines CuCo, Vanilla RL, and HandCrafted Robot adopt the same control policy architecture
(transformers) and learning method (PPO) as our method HERD. For the other baselines GA, BO,
and CPPN-NEAT, we use their official implementations from CuCo and EvoGym. Specifically, they
also use transformers as control policy architecture and use PPO as optimization method. The main
difference is that the control policy is not shared across robot designs and needs to be learned from
scratch.


                                                 22
  Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  B.4      D ETAILS OF A BLATIONS

  HERD w/o HE. The idea of coarse-to-fine can be implemented by other algorithms. HERD w/o HE
  uses NGE (Wang et al., 2019), an evolutionary algorithm originally used for rigid robot design. We
  re-implemented the algorithm in EvoGym based on their released code* . The core modification is the
  mutation procedure. To enable multi-cellular robot design, we randomly change the type of each robot
  cell with probability 0.1, where the types are chosen from {Empty, Rigid, Soft, Horizontal Actuator,
  Vertical Actuator}. To enable coarse-to-fine robot design, we refine each robot with probability 0.2
  if it is coarse-grained. Then the mutated robots are viewed as offsprings and included in the robot
  population of NGE.
  NGE. For full comparison, we also use the original NGE without coarse-to-fine. The modification of
  NGE is similar to HERD w/o HE and the only difference is that NGE does not have coarse-to-fine
  component.
  HERD w/o C2F. The optimization of the robot designs in HERD is based on CEM, which works in
  Poincaré ball. HERD w/o C2F does not adopt the idea of coarse-to-fine, but uses CEM to directly
  search the optimal design. This ablation can verify the effectiveness of coarse-to-fine robot design.
  Specifically, the major difficulty of using CEM for optimizing robots in EvoGym is that the design
  space of EvoGym is discrete. We choose to let CEM optimize the probabilities of robot cells types
  (P ∈ R25×5 ), and take the types with maximum probabilities (‘P.argmax(dim=1)’).
  For a fair comparison, the control policies of all the variants in ablation studies adopt the same
  network architecture and same optimization algorithm (PPO) as our method HERD.

   Algorithm 3: HERD w/o HE
   Input: robot design space D, population size of NGE Nnge = 64,
                                                                            Nnge
 1 initialize control policy π, a population of coarse-grained robots {Di }i     ;
 2 while not reaching max iterations do
 3      replay buffer H ← ∅;
 4      for i ∈ {1, 2, · · · , Nnge } do
 5          use π to control current robot design Di and store trajectories to H;
 6      Eliminate 30% of the robots with poor performance;
 7      while not reaching the population size Nnge do
 8          sample one robot from the remaining robots and draw µ from [0, 1] uniformly;
 9          if µ < 0.8 then
10              alter the type of each component with the probability of 0.1;
11          else
12              alter the granularity of one component ;      // coarse-to-fine mutation
13          add the offspring into the candidate pool;
14      update π with PPO using samples in H;
     ∗
15 D ← robot design with the highest performance ;                 // optimal robot design
                                         ∗
16 Output: optimal robot design D , control policy π


  C       E XTRA E XPERIMENTS
  In this section, we provide the full experiment results of 15 tasks. Figure 22 show the training
  performance of HERD compared with baselines. HERD outperforms other baselines in most tasks,
  including easy, medium and hard, which further showcase the effectiveness of our method.
  Figure 23 presents the performance of several variants of HERD. It again supports our observation
  that the idea of coarse-to-fine is helpful for robot design problems and hyperbolic embeddings can
  further bring better optimization properties.
  The performance of HandCrafted Robot is obtained by averaging the final performance of four
  random runs. The reason why we did not show its learning curve in the main text is that it is not a
  robot design method. HandCrafted Robot has a fixed human-designed robot morphology and only
      *
          https://github.com/WilsonWangTHU/neural_graph_evolution


                                                   23
  Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   Algorithm 4: HERD w/o C2F
   Input: robot design space D, population size of CEM Nv
 1 initialize control policy π, CEM mean µ and variance σ;
 2 while not reaching max iterations do
 3      replay buffer H ← ∅;
 4      for i ∈ {1, 2, · · · , Nv } do
 5          vi ∼ N (µ, diag(σ)) ; // sample an embedding from Euclidean space
 6           Di ← arg maxdim=1 vi ;
 7          use π to control current robot design Di and store trajectories to H;
 8      update π with PPO using samples in H;
 9      update µ by averaging the elite vi s based on the performance in H, and linearly decrease σ;
     ∗
10 D ← arg maxdim=1 µ ;                                            // optimal robot design
                                       ∗
11 Output: optimal robot design D , control policy π


                                                         523                           --                           2 )4(                 0 04   (34 (2)02.   (
                                                   5 0
                                          - (2 6           easy                              07     4(11(2 6       easy                                       5.1(2 6         easy
  1 30 ( (7 2


                                                                         1 30 ( (7 2


                                                                                                                            1 30 ( (7 2
                                                                                                                                          8



                                            .-                                                       .-                                                              .-
                                        - 11(2 6           easy                                   53 (2 6          easy                                            22 (2 6    easy
           1 30 ( (7 2


                                                                   1 30 ( (7 2


                                                                                                                                   1 30 ( (7 2


                                          .-                                                         .-                                                             .-
                                      1 4(11(2 6         medium                             34    -( 2 6(23(2 6   medium                                          207(2 6    medium
                 1 30 ( (7 2


                                                                         1 30 ( (7 2


                                                                                                                            1 30 ( (7 2


                                                                                                                                          8
                                           .-                                                        .-                                                              .-
                                    - 4)02. 5.1(2 6        hard                             34    -( 2 6(23(2 6    hard                                           52 -(2 6    hard
         1 30 ( (7 2


                                                                         1 30 ( (7 2


                                                                                                                            1 30 ( (7 2


                       8                                                                                                                  8
                                          .-                                                         .-                                                          .-
                                      2 6(23(2 6           hard                                    22 (2 6         hard                                       1 5.1(2 6       hard
                 1 30 ( (7 2


                                                                  1 30 ( (7 2


                                                                                                                            1 30 ( (7 2


                                                                                8                                                         8
                                           .-                                                         .-                                                             .-


                               Figure 22: Training performance of HERD compared against baselines in 15 tasks.



  needs to learn control policy. It is unfair to directly compare this baseline with other robot design
  methods, whose robot morphologies are learned online. In this paper, we use the final performance


                                                                                                 24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                2/0                        4-                        4-
                           ) /3       easy                -4        1 .. / 3      easy                    2 . /3      easy


4 /


                                                4 /


                                                                                          4 /
.(0-


                                                .(0-


                                                                                          .(0-
                                                                                                 5



                           (                                          (                                        (
                       (.. / 3        easy                     20     /3          easy                     //( / 3    easy
   4 /


                                              4 /


                                                                                            4 /
   .(0-


                                              .(0-


                                                                                            .(0-
                           (                                          (                                       (
                     . 1 .. / 3      medium              01         / 3 /0 / 3   medium                   /-4 / 3    medium
       4 /


                                                4 /


                                                                                          4 /
       .(0-


                                                .(0-


                                                                                          .(0-
                                                                                                 5
                             (                                        (                                        (
                    1 -/   2 . /3     hard               01         / 3 /0 / 3    hard                    2/   /3     hard
  4 /


                                                4 /


                                                                                          4 /
  .(0-


                                                .(0-


                                                                                          .(0-
         5                                                                                       5
                             (                                      (                                        (
                     / 3 /0 / 3       hard                      //( / 3           hard                    .2 . /3     hard
       4 /


                                              4 /


                                                                                          4 /
       .(0-


                                              .(0-


                                                                                          .(0-


                                                     5                                           5
                             (                                        (                                        (


                                    Figure 23: Ablation studies of HERD in 15 tasks.


improvement of our method over this baseline to show the necessity of creating robot design methods.
However, for a complete comparison, we also include the learning curve in Figure 24.
For a full comparison, we also test our method as well as baselines in other tasks of EvoGym in
Figure 25. The tasks that have not been solved by our method and other baselines can be roughly
classified into two categories: (1) the tasks require complicated control policies such as Pusher-v1
and (2) the tasks require delicate robots such as Lifter-v0. These unsolved tasks might require further
investigation. An we do not include the task BidirectionalWalker-v0, because it contains bugs in its
task implementation.

D             Q UANTITATIVE R ESULTS
To better understand the evaluation of different methods, we also show the quantitative results in
Table 2 and Table 3.

E             D ISCUSSION OF OTHER R ELATED W ORK
Our work adopts an embedding approach in hyperbolic space and optimizes robot designs in this
space. The most similar previous work to our paper is GLSO Hu et al. (2023), which uses a variational


                                                              25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                   HERD (Ours)                               Vanilla RL           BO                 Handcrafted Robot
                                                                   CuCo                                      GA                   CPPN-NEAT
                                                   Walker-v0                                                              DownStepper-v0                                                        Jumper-v0
                                                                                                        8
Episode Reward   10.0                                                                                                                                                             5


                                                                                       Episode Reward


                                                                                                                                                       Episode Reward
                                                                                                        6
                      7.5

                      5.0                                                                               4                                                                         0

                      2.5                                                                               2
                                                                                                                                                                        −5
                      0.0                                                                               0
                                    0      5      10         15      20                                 0       5           10        15      20                                  0   5        10         15        20
                                                    T (mil)                                                                   T (mil)                                                            T (mil)
                                                  Flipper-v0                                                                Pusher-v0                                                          Carrier-v0
                            50                                                                  15
                                                                                                                                                                                  6
                            40
           Episode Reward


                                                                               Episode Reward


                                                                                                                                                                 Episode Reward
                                                                                                10                                                                                4
                            30

                            20                                                                          5                                                                         2

                            10
                                                                                                                                                                                  0
                                                                                                        0
                                    0
                                     0     5      10        15       20                                  0      5        10         15        20                                  0   5        10        15         20
                                                    T (mil)                                                                 T (mil)                                                              T (mil)
                                                 UpStepper-v0                                                        ObstacleTraverser-v0                                                      Thrower-v0
                                                                                                                                                                                  5
                                    6                                                                   6
                                                                                                                                                                                  4
                   Episode Reward


                                                                                       Episode Reward


                                                                                                                                                       Episode Reward
                                                                                                                                                                                  3
                                    4                                                                   4
                                                                                                                                                                                  2
                                    2                                                                   2
                                                                                                                                                                                  1

                                                                                                                                                                                  0
                                    0                                                                   0
                                                                                                                                                                        −1
                                    0      5       10        15      20                                 0       5        10         15        20                          0           5        10        15         20
                                                     T (mil)                                                                T (mil)                                                              T (mil)
                                               PlatformJumper-v0                                                     ObstacleTraverser-v1                                                      Hurdler-v0
                                    4                                                                   6
                                                                                                                                                                                  3
                                    3
         Episode Reward


                                                                                       Episode Reward


                                                                                                                                                       Episode Reward
                                                                                                        4
                                                                                                                                                                                  2
                                    2

                                                                                                        2                                                                         1
                                    1

                                    0                                                                                                                                             0
                                                                                                        0
                          −1                                                                                                                                            −1
                            0              5      10        15       20                                 0       5           10         15     20                          0           5        10        15         20
                                                    T (mil)                                                                   T (mil)                                                            T (mil)
                                                 Traverser-v0                                                               Carrier-v1                                                        GapJumper-v0
                                    6                                                                   3                                                                         4

                                                                                                                                                                                  3
                   Episode Reward


                                                                             Episode Reward


                                                                                                                                                       Episode Reward


                                    4                                                                   2
                                                                                                                                                                                  2
                                                                                                        1
                                    2                                                                                                                                             1
                                                                                                        0
                                                                                                                                                                                  0
                                    0
                                                                                              −1                                                                        −1
                                    0      5      10        15       20                         0               5           10        15      20                          0           5        10        15         20
                                                    T (mil)                                                                   T (mil)                                                            T (mil)


                                         Figure 24: Training performance of HERD compared against baselines in 15 tasks.


                                         Table 2: Quantitative results of our method HERD compared with various baselines.
                                                     HERD (Ours)          CuCo                                  Vanilla RL            GA              BO                                  CPPN-NEAT            Handcrafted
   Walker-v0                                         9.74 ± 0.81          6.68 ± 2.73                           9.49 ± 0.62           10.57 ± 0.00    3.13 ± 0.73                         2.22 ± 0.67          10.50 ± 0.10
   DownStepper-v0                                    8.04 ± 0.76          3.00 ± 2.33                           6.87 ± 1.78           4.39 ± 0.66     2.20 ± 0.58                         2.01 ± 0.60          8.06 ± 0.34
   Jumper-v0                                         2.71 ± 1.74          -2.45 ± 0.30                          -2.49 ± 0.29          0.30 ± 0.04     -0.04 ± 0.07                        0.02 ± 0.08          3.15 ± 1.29
   Flipper-v0                                        35.55 ± 18.37        15.01 ± 13.22                         13.00 ± 13.96         3.72 ± 0.53     0.71 ± 0.43                         0.37 ± 0.16          26.96 ± 2.00
   Pusher-v0                                         7.40 ± 1.46          6.99 ± 1.30                           11.16 ± 0.16          3.33 ± 0.73     0.94 ± 0.43                         0.50 ± 0.29          7.77 ± 0.56
   Carrier-v0                                        4.33 ± 0.62          -0.06 ± 0.04                          -0.14 ± 0.18          1.80 ± 0.25     0.11 ± 0.12                         0.21 ± 0.13          5.84 ± 0.60
   UpStepper-v0                                      4.14 ± 0.39          3.18 ± 0.78                           3.48 ± 0.91           1.78 ± 0.03     1.43 ± 0.04                         1.38 ± 0.05          6.11 ± 2.11
   ObstacleTraverser-v0                              6.02 ± 0.63          0.89 ± 0.41                           0.62 ± 0.64           1.87 ± 0.28     1.48 ± 0.03                         1.35 ± 0.10          2.90 ± 1.03
   Thrower-v0                                        3.01 ± 0.17          1.30 ± 0.39                           2.96 ± 1.78           0.91 ± 0.01     0.61 ± 0.06                         0.56 ± 0.14          1.66 ± 0.17
   PlatformJumper-v0                                 3.34 ± 1.97          1.51 ± 0.08                           0.06 ± 0.78           1.66 ± 0.06     1.06 ± 0.34                         1.36 ± 0.11          1.41 ± 0.26
   ObstacleTraverser-v1                              4.92 ± 0.33          3.73 ± 1.08                           2.94 ± 0.50           1.32 ± 0.04     1.06 ± 0.05                         1.04 ± 0.10          3.64 ± 0.94
   Hurdler-v0                                        3.21 ± 0.45          -0.02 ± 0.08                          0.08 ± 0.27           0.71 ± 0.06     0.50 ± 0.01                         0.46 ± 0.11          3.18 ± 1.90
   Traverser-v0                                      5.48 ± 0.80          3.10 ± 0.26                           3.92 ± 0.96           2.77 ± 0.36     1.10 ± 0.60                         1.14 ± 0.50          2.81 ± 0.16
   Carrier-v1                                        1.93 ± 0.33          -0.15 ± 0.25                          -0.01 ± 0.01          2.50 ± 0.77     0.06 ± 0.27                         0.03 ± 0.03          1.81 ± 0.47
   GapJumper-v0                                      4.05 ± 1.00          1.03 ± 2.79                           2.58 ± 1.15           1.95 ± 0.05     1.36 ± 0.30                         1.40 ± 0.12          2.34 ± 0.60



auto-encoder to embed rigid robots. We did not compare our method with GLSO because it requires
some prior knowledge about design space that is not available in EvoGym and it cannot be directly
used in multi-cellular robot design problems. In summary, our method has several advantages over
GLSO. (1) Training cost. HERD uses a training-free embedding method while GLSO requires


                                                                                                                            26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                   HERD (Ours)                                    CuCo          Vanilla RL          Handcrafted Robot Best Performance


                                     BridgeWalker-v0                                                               CaveCrawler-v0                                                              BeamSlider-v0
                                                                                                       4                                                                               3
          Episode Reward   6


                                                                                      Episode Reward


                                                                                                                                                            Episode Reward
                                                                                                       3                                                                               2
                           4
                                                                                                       2                                                                               1
                           2
                                                                                                       1                                                                               0
                           0
                                                                                                       0                                                                     −1
                           0   5        10        15      20                                            0   5       10        15        20                                     0           5     10        15    20
                                          T (mil)                                                                     T (mil)                                                                      T (mil)
                                   WingspanMaximizer-v0                                                             Balancer-v0                                                                  Pusher-v1
                           5                                                             1.0                                                                             1.0

                           4
Episode Reward


                                                                 Episode Reward


                                                                                                                                                 Episode Reward
                                                                                         0.5                                                                             0.5
                           3

                           2                                                             0.0                                                                             0.0

                           1
                                                                                  −0.5                                                                            −0.5
                           0

                 −1                                                               −1.0                                                                            −1.0
                   0           5        10        15      20                          0                     5        10        15       20                            0                    5     10        15    20
                                          T (mil)                                                                      T (mil)                                                                     T (mil)
                                        Climber-v0                                                                   Climber-v1                                                                BeamToppler-v0
                           5                                                                           5                                                                               6

                           4                                                                           4
Episode Reward


                                                                            Episode Reward


                                                                                                                                                                      Episode Reward
                                                                                                                                                                                       4
                           3                                                                           3

                           2                                                                           2
                                                                                                                                                                                       2
                           1                                                                           1

                           0                                                                           0                                                                               0
                 −1                                                                          −1
                   0           5        10        15      20                                   0            5       10        15        20                                             0   5    10        15     20
                                          T (mil)                                                                     T (mil)                                                                     T (mil)
                                     AreaMinimizer-v0                                                           HeightMaximizer-v0                                                              Balancer-v1
                   10                                                                                  5                                                                 1.0

                           8                                                                           4
  Episode Reward


                                                                            Episode Reward


                                                                                                                                                 Episode Reward
                                                                                                                                                                         0.5
                           6                                                                           3

                                                                                                       2                                                                 0.0
                           4
                                                                                                       1
                           2                                                                                                                                      −0.5
                                                                                                       0
                           0
                                                                                             −1                                                                   −1.0
                           0   5        10        15      20                                   0            5       10        15        20                            0                    5     10         15   20
                                          T (mil)                                                                     T (mil)                                                                      T (mil)
                                        Catcher-v0                                                               AreaMaximizer-v0                                                                 Lifter-v0
                   10                                                                          10                                                                            10

                                                                                                       8                                                                               8
Episode Reward


                                                                              Episode Reward


                                                                                                                                                            Episode Reward


                           5
                                                                                                       6                                                                               6

                                                                                                                                                                                       4
                           0                                                                           4
                                                                                                                                                                                       2
                                                                                                       2
                 −5                                                                                                                                                                    0
                                                                                                       0
                                                                                                                                                                             −2
                           0   5        10        15      20                                           0    5        10        15       20                                     0           5     10        15    20
                                          T (mil)                                                                      T (mil)                                                                     T (mil)
                                        Climber-v2
                           5

                           4
Episode Reward


                           3

                           2

                           1

                           0

                 −1
                   0           5        10        15      20
                                          T (mil)



                                              Figure 25: Performance of HERD in Other Tasks of EvoGym.


training a VAE, which could be computationally expensive and unstable. (2) Prior knowledge. HERD
does not require as much domain-specific knowledge as GLSO does. Firstly, for data collection,
GLSO adopts the set of grammar rules proposed in RoboGrammar Zhao et al. (2020), which requires
prior knowledge of design space to produce a tractable and meaningful subspace of designs (Section
3.1 of the GLSO paper). Secondly, GLSO also co-train a proper prediction network (PPN) with
VAE, and the training objective of PPN is also built on prior knowledge of the locomotion tasks they
test (Section 3.4 of the GLSO paper). (3) Inductive bias. HERD explicitly encodes the hierarchical
structure of design space, which could benefit the optimization process as we show in our experiment
section, while GLSO does not consider any similar inductive bias.


                                                                                                                     27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


       Table 3: Quantitative results of our method HERD compared with various ablations.
                          HERD (Ours) NGE                 HERD w/o HE HERD w/o C2F
Walker-v0               9.74 ± 0.81       7.16 ± 0.41    8.07 ± 0.32    2.76 ± 2.49
DownStepper-v0          7.91 ± 0.76       2.49 ± 0.09    6.22 ± 0.61    3.21 ± 0.69
Jumper-v0               2.71 ± 1.74       0.35 ± 0.20    0.03 ± 0.67    -0.06 ± 0.22
Flipper-v0              35.55 ± 18.37     28.08 ± 2.88   19.27 ± 8.98   1.06 ± 0.59
Pusher-v0               7.40 ± 1.46       5.80 ± 1.83    5.45 ± 0.39    3.28 ± 1.52
Carrier-v0              4.33 ± 0.62       3.52 ± 0.79    5.85 ± 1.88    1.81 ± 1.12
UpStepper-v0            4.14 ± 0.39       1.32 ± 0.23    2.55 ± 1.31    2.49 ± 0.77
ObstacleTraverser-v0    6.02 ± 0.63       1.64 ± 0.07    2.26 ± 0.26    1.45 ± 0.13
Thrower-v0              3.01 ± 0.17       0.48 ± 0.01    0.80 ± 0.42    0.52 ± 0.15
PlatformJumper-v0       3.34 ± 1.97       1.50 ± 0.14    1.50 ± 0.08    1.44 ± 0.11
ObstacleTraverser-v1    4.92 ± 0.33       2.36 ± 0.27    2.00 ± 0.43    0.97 ± 0.16
Hurdler-v0              2.69 ± 0.45       0.52 ± 0.06    0.88 ± 0.18    0.46 ± 0.08
Traverser-v0            5.48 ± 0.80       2.28 ± 0.40    2.70 ± 0.10    2.57 ± 0.24
Carrier-v1              1.93 ± 0.33       2.06 ± 0.87    2.43 ± 0.40    1.68 ± 0.16
GapJumper-v0            4.05 ± 1.00       1.96 ± 0.10    1.95 ± 0.41    1.61 ± 0.38


                                               28
