Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


VON ET : U NSUPERVISED V IDEO O BJECT L EARNING
W ITH PARALLEL U-N ET ATTENTION AND O BJECT-
WISE S EQUENTIAL VAE

 Haonan Yu                                             Wei Xu
 Horizon Robotics                                      Horizon Robotics
 Cupertino, CA 95014, USA                              Cupertino, CA 95014, USA
 haonan.yu@horizon.cc                                  wei.xu@horizon.cc



                                             A BSTRACT
         Unsupervised video object learning seeks to decompose video scenes into struc-
         tural object representations without any supervision from depth, optical flow,
         or segmentation. We present VONet, an innovative approach that is inspired
         by MONet. While utilizing a U-Net architecture, VONet employs an efficient
         and effective parallel attention inference process, generating attention masks for
         all slots simultaneously. Additionally, to enhance the temporal consistency of
         each mask across consecutive video frames, VONet develops an object-wise se-
         quential VAE framework. The integration of these innovative encoder-side tech-
         niques, in conjunction with an expressive transformer-based decoder, establishes
         VONet as the leading unsupervised method for object learning across five MOVI
         datasets, encompassing videos of diverse complexities. Code is available at
         https://github.com/hnyu/vonet.
1   I NTRODUCTION
Unsupervised video object learning has garnered increasing attention in recent years. It focuses on
the extraction of structural object representations from video sequences, without the aid of any super-
vision, such as depth information, optical flow, or labeled segmentation masks. The goal is to enable
machines to automatically learn to discern and understand objects within video streams, an essential
capability with wide-ranging applications in fields such as autonomous robotics (Veerapaneni et al.,
2020; Creswell et al., 2021), surveillance (Jiang et al., 2019), and video content analysis (Zhou
et al., 2022). The utilization of such object-centric representations could lead to improved sample
efficiency, robustness, and generalization to novel tasks (Greff et al., 2020).
Slot attention methods (Locatello et al., 2020; Kipf et al., 2021; Elsayed et al., 2022; Singh et al.,
2022b) have recently demonstrated significant successes in video object learning. They typically
utilize a CNN to extract a feature map from an input image. This feature map is spatially flattened
into a sequence of features, which are then queried by each slot latent to generate an attention mask.
Our observation is that slot attention often encounters a dilemma, referred to as “granularity versus
continuity”. To generate fine-grained attention masks, it is necessary to select a large spatial shape
for the feature map. However, doing so makes it challenging to ensure the smoothness of the mask
due to the nature of the Key-Query-Value attention mechanism (Locatello et al., 2020). Sometimes
the absence of smoothness may result in significant mask quality degradation.
This paper introduces VONet for unsupervised video object learning. Inspired by MONet (Burgess
et al., 2019) for image object learning, we posit that the inductive bias for spatial locality, as seen
in the U-Net (Ronneberger et al., 2015) of MONet, offers a solution to the dilemma. However,
MONet’s recurrent attention generation, forwarding the same U-Net multiple times sequentially,
is very inefficient when handling a large number of slots, and consequently impedes its further
application to video. Our first key innovation is an efficient and effective parallel attention inference
process (Figure 1, b) that generates attention masks for all slots simultaneously from a U-Net. It can
sustain a nearly constant inference time as the number of slots increases within a reasonable range.
Furthermore, to achieve temporal consistency of objects between adjacent video frames, VONet
incorporates an object-wise sequential VAE framework. This framework adapts the conventional


                                                   1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


sequential VAE (Kingma & Welling, 2013; Hafner et al., 2019) to the context of multi-object inter-
action and dynamics. The minimization of the KLD between the posterior and a forecasted prior
models the dynamic interaction and coevolvement of multiple objects in the scene. This encourages
the emergence of slot content that is temporally predictable and thus consistent in a holistic manner.
By adjusting the weight of the KLD, we are able to control the importance of temporal consistency
relative to video reconstruction quality.
To further bolster its capabilities, VONet employs an expressive transformer-based decoder (Singh
et al., 2022b) that empowers itself to successfully derive object representations from complex video
scenes. To showcase the effectiveness of VONet, we conduct extensive evaluations across five MOVI
datasets (Greff et al., 2022) encompassing video scenes of varying complexities. The evaluation
results position VONet as the new state-of-the-art unsupervised method for video object learning.

2   R ELATED WORK

Numerous prior studies, such as Burgess et al. (2019); Greff et al. (2019); Locatello et al. (2020);
Engelcke et al. (2021); Singh et al. (2022a); Zoran et al. (2021); Emami et al. (2021); Hénaff et al.
(2022); Seitzer et al. (2022), explored unsupervised object learning in single images. For unsuper-
vised video object learning, applying these image-based methods to video frames independently
is not a viable approach, as it would likely result in slot masks lacking temporal consistency. A
conventional strategy for transitioning from image object learning to video object learning entails
inheriting and modifying the slot content from the preceding time step. For instance, AIR (Eslami
et al., 2016), SQAIR (Kosiorek et al., 2018), STOVE (Kossen et al., 2019), and SCALOR (Jiang
et al., 2019) all employed a propagation process in which a subset of currently existing objects is
propagated to the next time step; TBA (He et al., 2019), ViMON (Weis et al., 2021), SAVI (Kipf
et al., 2021), SAVI++ (Elsayed et al., 2022), STEVE (Singh et al., 2022b), VideoSAUR (Zada-
ianchuk et al., 2023), and RSM (Nguyen et al., 2024) initialized slots for the current step using the
output of a forward predictor/tracker applied to the preceding slots. Another technique for ensuring
temporal consistency is to model constant object latents across time, as demonstrated in Kabra et al.
(2021). These object latents remain invariant across all frames by design, enabling stable object
tracking. Alternatively, an explicit temporal consistency loss could be incorporated. Creswell et al.
(2021) proposed an alignment loss which ensures that each object is represented in the same slot
across time; Bao et al. (2022) encouraged similarity between the feature representations of slots in
consecutive frames. Our approach inherits preceding slot content while also introducing a KLD loss
of a sequential VAE to further enhance temporal consistency.
Due to the absence of supervision signals, most existing methods could only handle uncomplicated
video scenes with uniformly-colored objects or objects with simple sizes and shapes. For instance,
in an unsupervised setting, Creswell et al. (2021); Kipf et al. (2021); Elsayed et al. (2022) demon-
strated effectiveness primarily on uniformly-colored objects with clean backgrounds. Similarly,
while SCALOR (Jiang et al., 2019) showcases an impressive capability in discovering and tracking
dozens of simple objects of similar sizes in certain videos, it exhibits sensitivity to hyperparameters
related to object scale and size ratio. As a result, it performs inadequately when dealing with textured
objects of diverse shapes and sizes. STEVE (Singh et al., 2022b), on the other hand, successfully im-
proved performance in complex videos through the introduction of an expressive transformer-based
decoder. Nevertheless, it faces significant issues of over-segmentation and object identity swapping
in less complex videos. Our method adopts the same transformer-based decoder to handle complex
video scenes, while still being able to maintain superior performance in simple scenes.
A substantial body of related work in the field of video segmentation (Zhou et al., 2022) relies on
supervision signals such as segmentation masks, depth information, optical flow, and more. Our
problem also bears relevance to the domain of video object tracking (Ciaparrone et al., 2020), where
object locations or bounding boxes are specified in the initial video frames and tracked across sub-
sequent frames. Since we do not assume these additional learning signals, due to space constraints,
we will not delve into detailed discussions of these two topics here. Notably, certain previous works,
such as Zadaianchuk et al. (2023), employ a vision backbone pretrained on large-scale datasets for
feature extraction from video frames, aiding in the process of object learning. While their objective
remains unsupervised, the use of pretrained features integrates valuable prior knowledge of every-
day object appearances. Consequently, the results they reported, though surpassing what typical
unsupervised methods including ours could achieve, hold limited reference value in this context.


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                                        &RQWH[W JHQHUDWRU

                                                                                                              «
      VFS     $WW 1HW   VFS     $WW 1HW     «     VFS      $WW 1HW
                                                                                                        3DUDOOHO DWWHQWLRQ QHWZRUN


                                          (a)                                                                (b)

Figure 1: Attention processes of MONet (a) and VONet (b) on a single image. Red arrows represent
sequential operations (“scp” stands for the MONet scope), while blue arrows at the same horizontal
level represent parallel operations. The dependency on the input image has been omitted for clarity.

VONet shares a similarity with ViMON (Weis et al., 2021) in that both extend MONet (Burgess et al.,
2019) from images to video. However, several major differences exist between the two: i) VONet
parallelizes the original MONet architecture for efficient inference while ViMON still generates
slots recurrently. ii) VONet seeds the attention network with context vectors while ViMON does this
using previous attention masks. iii) VONet formulates an object-wise sequential VAE to promote
temporal consistency, whereas ViMON ignores this by using a typical intra-step VAE.

3 P RELIMINARIES
MONet for unsupervised image object learning. The Multi-Object network (MONet) (Burgess
et al., 2019) is a scene decomposition model designed for single images. A forward pass of MONet
generally consists of two stages: mask generation and image reconstruction with a component VAE.
Given an input RGB image x ∈ RH×W ×C , MONet utilizes a recurrent procedure to sequentially
generate K attention masks mk ∈ [0, 1]H×W , with K representing the predefined number of slots.
A slot represents either an object or a background region. The procedure comprises K − 1 steps, and
at each step, the mask is determined as mk = sk−1 α(x, sk−1 ), where the scope sk−1 ∈ [0, 1]H×W
represents the remaining attention for each pixel, with the initial scope being s0 = 1. The atten-
tion network, denoted as α, is implemented as a U-Net (Ronneberger et al., 2015), to predict the
amount of attention the k-th step will consume from the current scope sk−1 . The scope is then
updated as sk = sk−1 (1 − α(x, sk−1 )). At the last step, MONet directly sets mK = sK−1 ,
                                                                 PK
which ensures that the entire image is explained by all slots ( k=1 mk = 1). Conditioned on
the predicted attention mask, each slot undergoes independent processing through a VAE to (par-
tially) reconstruct the input image. The VAE first encodes each slot into a compact embedding by
zk ∼ q(zk |x, mk ) and then derives a decoded image distribution o(x|zk ) from this embedding. To
do so, pixels {xn } are
                      Q decoded independently from each other conditioned on the slot embedding,
namely o(x|zk ) = n o(xn |zk ). Finally, to consolidate the reconstruction results from different
slots, MONet formulates a mixture of components decoder distribution in its training loss 1 :
                              H×W
                               X                K
                                                X                          K
                                                                           X
            LMONet = −                    log         o(xn |zk )mk,n + β         DKL q(zk |x, mk ) p(zk ) ,                          (1)
                               n=1              k=1                        k=1

where the prior p(zk ) is a unit Gaussian. Intuitively, each slot only needs to encode/decode image
regions that has been selected by its attention mask. Figure 1 (a) depicts the simplified attention
process of MONet, emphasizing the data flow during a forward pass. MONet is deterministic and
its masks have only unidirectional dependencies. Due to the recurrent nature of mask generation, as
K increases, the inference time for a forward pass will become prohibitive.
Unsupervised video object learning. In the context of unsupervised video object learning, each
input sample is a sequence of RGB frames {x1 , . . . , xT }. The goal is to determine a set of attention
masks, {mt,k }K  k=1 , for each frame xt as in the single-image case. Additionally, the mask sequence,
{mt,k }Tt=1 , associated with a specific slot k, should focus on a consistent set of objects. Because
MONet was originally proposed for single images, there is no guarantee that directly applying it
to two adjacent video frames will result in temporally coherent object masks, even though the two
video frames might look similar. It is yet to be determined how MONet can be extended to facilitate
video object learning with temporal consistency.
   1
     MONet included a third loss term to encourage the geometrical simplicity of the attention masks mk by
having the decoder also reconstruct these masks. This loss is not discussed here.


                                                                     3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                    ,PDJH
                                     8 1HW GRZQ                                           8 1HW XS


                                                                  7UDQVIRUPHU


                                                                                                                6RIWPD[

                    ,PDJH            8 1HW GRZQ                                           8 1HW XS



                   «


                   ,PDJH
                                     8 1HW GRZQ                                           8 1HW XS


Figure 2: Diagram of the parallel attention network. Except for the transformer and softmax opera-
tor, it is possible to parallelize the executions related to the U-Net components. The skip connections
between the U-Net downsampling and upsampling layers have been omitted for clarity.

4   VON ET FOR UNSUPERVISED VIDEO OBJECT LEARNING

Parallel U-Net attention. VONet begins by eliminating the concept of “scope” in MONet and
introduces context, a compact embedding vector expected to encompass prior object information
for each slot to be generated. Let the context vector of slot k at time step t be ct−1,k . Instead of
recurrent mask generation, VONet generates all masks at step t at once (Figure 1, b):
                                 mt,1 , . . . , mt,K = ParallelAttn(xt , ct−1,1 , . . . , ct−1,K ).                       (2)
The parallel attention network operates by simultaneously applying the same U-Net architecture
to the K context inputs in parallel, while establishing communication among the slots at the U-
Net bottleneck layer. To achieve this, the output of the U-Net downsampling path is first flattened,
and the outputs from different slots are pooled to create a sequence. This sequence is then input
into a decoder-only transformer that produces a sequence of latent mask embeddings. Each mask
embedding is further projected and reshaped to a 2D feature map, which then serves as the input for
the U-Net upsampling path. In the final step, the K output logits maps undergo pixel-wise softmax
to derive the ultimate attention masks (Figure 2). Formally,
          ht,k = Udown (xt , ct−1,k ), qt,1 , . . . , qt,K = Transformermask (ht,1 , . . . , ht,K ).
                                                                                                                          (3)
          lt,k = Uup (qt,k ),          mt,1 , . . . , mt,K = Softmax(lt,1 , . . . , lt,K ).
Due to the single shared downsampling/upsampling path among the slots, in practice, Udown and Uup
can be executed efficiently by rearranging the slot dimension into the batch dimension.
Calculating the contexts. One may pose the question: how can the context vectors be acquired?
As previously mentioned, a context vector for a specific slot should encapsulate prior information
regarding the aspects of the scene that this particular slot is intended to encode. Indeed, this prior
information can naturally be derived from the content of that slot at the preceding time steps. For
each slot k, we derive its context ct,k (used by t + 1) based on the history of the slot up to step t:
          yt,k = SlotEnc(xt , mt,k ), rt,k = RNN(yt,k , rt−1,k ), ct,k = MLPcxt (rt,k ),                                  (4)
where the per-frame slot latent yt,k is extracted through a slot encoder that takes both the image
xt and the generated attention mask mt,k as the inputs. Meanwhile, rt,k can be viewed as the per-
trajectory slot latent, as it accumulates previous per-frame slot latents via a recurrent network. We
initialize the per-trajectory slot latent by transforming a collection of noise vectors independently
drawn from a unit Gaussian:
                        r0,1 , . . . , r0,K = Transformerslot (ϵ1 , . . . , ϵK ), ϵk ∼ N (0, 1),                          (5)
This initialization signifies a stochastic process where the slots are collaboratively seeded prior to
any exposure to the video content. Figure 9 (Appendix A.2) illustrates the temporal unrolling of
VONet during a forward pass on a video.
Object-wise sequential VAE. Finally, we compute the slot posterior distribution directly based on
its most recent per-trajectory slot latent at t as
                                                      zt,k ∼ q(zt,k |rt,k ).                                              (6)


                                                                                4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                 &RQWH[W YHFWRU                                                                                             3RVWHULRU HQFRGLQJ
                                                                       $WWHQWLRQ PDVN              3HU IUDPH VORW ODWHQW
 3HU WUDMHFWRU\


                                                   3DUDOOHO DWWQ QHW
 VORW ODWHQW


                                                                                                                                                             7UDQV'HF
                                                                                         6ORW(QF
                           0/3
                                                                                                                  511                                                   'HF ORVV
                                                                                                                           6ORW SRVWHULRU


                                                                                                                               ./'



                        WUDQVIRUPHU
                            3ULRU                                                       3UHGLFWHG SHU WUDMHFWRU\
                                                                                        VORW ODWHQW                         6ORW SULRU



Figure 3: VONet’s architecture. The dependency on the input image xt has been omitted for clarity.
* in the subscripts represents the collection of K (K = 2 here) slots in parallel.

Meanwhile, we derive the slot prior distribution using all the K per-trajectory slot latents up to t − 1,
                                                                             p(z̄t,k |rt−1,1 , . . . , rt−1,K ),
which in fact results in an object-wise sequential VAE. In essence, for proper learning of the prior,
VONet must anticipate how each slot will evolve in interaction with the other K − 1 slots. A
straightforward approach to instantiating the prior would involve utilizing a transformer to predict a
future slot latent for each slot. This prediction can then serve as the basis for computing the prior:
                   r′t,1 , . . . , r′t,K = Transformerprior (rt−1,1 , . . . , rt−1,K ), z̄t,k ∼ p(z̄t,k |r′t,k ).                                                            (7)
For reconstruction, we opt for the transformer-based decoder (Singh et al., 2022a;b), owing to its
remarkable performance observed in handling complex images. Thus our overall training loss is
                                         T h
                                         X
                     LVONet =                                  − log PTransDec (xt |zt,1 , . . . , zt,K )
                                          t=1
                                                                       K                                                          i                                          (8)
                                                                       X
                                                  +β                         DKL q(zt,k |rt,k ) p(zt,k |rt−1,1 , . . . , rt−1,K ) .
                                                                       k=1

Note that our KLD term, which integrates a learned prior, plays a pivotal role in strengthening the
temporal consistency of individual slots across consecutive video frames. The rationale behind this
enhancement lies in the fact that only slot representations that exhibit temporal consistency can
exhibit predictability, consequently resulting in a reduced KLD loss.
An overview of the architecture of VONet is illustrated in Figure 3.
5      I MPLEMENTATION
Backbone. In the very initial stage of the encoding step, we use a CNN backbone (Appendix A.2)
to extract a feature map from each input image xt . The output from the backbone is shared between
the parallel attention network (Eq. 3) and the slot encoder (Eq. 4), serving as the actual image input.
Through parameter sharing, this backbone effectively reduces the total number of model parameters.
It is trained from scratch using VONet’s training loss.
Parallel attention network. Directly training the attention network formulated in Eq. 3 could be
challenging due to the very depth of the U-Net. In each individual frame, this challenge stems from
the intricate path that the gradient signal must traverse, starting from the VAE decoder, progressing
through the slot encoder, then navigating the U-Net, and ultimately reaching the context vectors.
Consequently, the generated masks mt,k may be trapped in a trivial solution, where each pixel
receives equal attention values from the K slots. To address this issue, we first convolve each context
vector across the backbone feature locations, yielding an estimated attention mask for each slot. This
operation is analogous to slot attention (Locatello et al., 2020; Kipf et al., 2021). Subsequently, the
U-Net is tasked with generating only delta changes (in log space) atop the estimated mask. This
effectively establishes a special skip connection between the U-Net’s input and output layers. We
found that this skip connection plays a crucial role in learning meaningful attention masks.
Slot encoder. We adopt a simple architecture for the slot encoder. The attention mask is first
element-wise multiplied with the backbone feature map, with broadcasting in the channel dimension.


                                                                                                       5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


               MOVI-A           MOVI-B          MOVI-C           MOVI-D          MOVI-E

Figure 4: Example video frames of the MOVI datasets. A,B,C contain up to 10 objects while D,E
contain up to 23 objects in each video.

Then, the per-frame slot latent yt,k is obtained by performing average pooling on the masked feature
map across the spatial domain. While there may be other possible implementations of the slot
encoder, we have found this straightforward approach to be highly effective and easy to train.
Computing the per-trajectory slot latent. We instantiate the RNN for calculating rt,k (Eq. 4) as
a GRU (Cho et al., 2014) followed by an MLP. Specifically, it is defined as
               r′t,k = GRU(yt,k , rt−1,k ), rt,k = LayerNorm(r′t,k + MLPslot (r′t,k )).             (9)
LayerNorm (Ba et al., 2016) ensures that the latent values will not explode even for a long video.
Computing the KLD. We model both the posterior and prior distributions as diagonal Gaussians.
When minimizing the KLD loss in Eq. 8, two primary influences come into play: the posterior is
regularized by the prior, and conversely, the prior is shaped towards the posterior. These dynamics
jointly contribute to the learning of slot representations. Following Hafner et al. (2020), we use a
KL balancing coefficient κ > 0.5 to accelerate the learning of the prior relative to the posterior. This
is done to prevent the regularization of the posterior by a poorly trained prior. Mathematically,
               KLD = κ · DKL (StopGrad(q)∥p) + (1 − κ) · DKL (q∥StopGrad(p)).                      (10)

6   E XPERIMENTS
Benchmarks. We assess VONet on five well-established public datasets MOVI-{A,B,C,D,E} (Greff
et al., 2022), which include both synthetic and naturalistic videos. MOVI-A and MOVI-B consist of
simple scenarios featuring nearly uniform backgrounds and objects with varying colors but minimal
texture. MOVI-B exhibits greater complexity compared to MOVI-A, owing to the inclusion of 8
additional object shapes. MOVI-{C,D,E} stand out as the most challenging, featuring realistic,
intricately textured everyday objects and backgrounds. While MOVI-{A,B,C} include up to 10
objects in a given scene, MOVI-D and MOVI-E include up to 23 objects. Each video within the five
datasets comprises 24 frames, lasting 2 seconds. We adhere to the official dataset splits, except that
the validation split is employed as the test split, following Kipf et al. (2021). Some example frames
of the five datasets are shown in Figure 4.
Metrics. We assess the quality of 3D slot segmentation masks generated from slot attention masks
across the full length of 24 video frames (details in Appendix A.2). Two common metrics for video
object learning are used: FG-ARI (Greff et al., 2019) and mIoU. FG-ARI serves as a clustering
similarity metric, measuring the degree to which predicted segmentation masks align with ground-
truth masks in a permutation-invariant manner. It only considers foreground pixels, where each
cluster corresponds to a foreground segmentation mask. To also evaluate background pixels, mIoU
calculates the mean Intersection-over-Union by first employing the Hungarian algorithm to find the
optimal bipartite matching (in terms of IoU) between predicted and groundtruth masks, and then
dividing sum of the optimal IoUs by the number of groundtruth masks. Both FG-ARI and mIoU
demand temporal consistency and penalize object identity switches at any video frame. Nonetheless,
neither of them is perfect. For a comprehensive evaluation, a combined interpretation is necessary.
General training setup. VONet learns 11 slots on MOVI-{A,B,C} and 16 slots on MOVI-{D,E}.
We use a mini-batch size of 32 for MOVI-{A,B,C} and 24 for MOVI-{D,E}. Each sample in a batch
has a sequence length of 3. A replay buffer (detailed in Appendix A.2) is employed to enable training
from past slot states while preserving the i.i.d. assumption of training data. All video frames are
resized to 128 × 128. In all subsequent experiments, the learning is entirely unsupervised, meaning
that no additional supervision signals, such as depth, optical flow, or segmentation, are provided.
For each experiment, we run three random seeds to report the mean and standard deviation of metric


                                                   6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                 FG-ARI                                                  mIoU
 Method
           MOVI-A     MOVI-B     MOVI-C     MOVI-D     MOVI-E     MOVI-A     MOVI-B     MOVI-C                              MOVI-D      MOVI-E
 SAVI      45.1±1.3   31.8±1.2   22.9±1.3   29.4±0.5   36.0±3.3   32.2±1.7   31.2±4.3   15.9±0.7                            15.6±0.3    15.8±2.2
 SIMONe    50.2±6.2   36.5±0.5   19.5±0.1   34.8±0.2   41.3±0.3   37.6±1.0   35.5±0.8   20.2±0.1                            22.7±0.1    20.8±0.2
 SCALOR    68.1±1.4   45.3±0.6   21.3±2.3   33.5±2.8   39.6±0.5   59.8±0.9   46.6±0.1   14.3±0.8                            14.2±1.1    12.1±0.2
 ViMON     62.8±2.3   26.2±4.4   18.0±2.1   22.5±5.7   17.7±1.5   50.0±1.5   34.4±5.0   27.1±0.9                            19.6±1.5    17.8±1.2
 STEVE     47.8±8.2   29.6±0.3   38.1±0.3   42.9±2.8   49.7±1.0   53.3±3.1   42.7±0.1   30.5±0.2                            23.8±3.7    26.2±1.3
 VONet     91.0±1.5   60.6±0.8   45.3±0.4   50.7±1.1   56.3±0.5   60.5±2.0   59.7±2.9   42.8±0.5                            37.7±0.3    36.4±0.7

      Table 1: Results of VONet and the five baselines, in an unsupervised learning setting.
values. Additional architectural specifics and hyperparameter details are provided in Appendix A.3
for reference. It takes about 36 hours to train VONet on 4x 3090 GPUs on each of the five datasets,
for a total number of 150k gradient updates.


                                                                                         Attn inference time (sec)
6.1   E FFICIENCY OF THE PARALLEL ATTENTION                                                                          0.07       MONet
                                                                                                                                VONet
We start with measuring how efficient our parallel attention is compared
to the recurrent attention of MONet. With the same U-Net architec-         0.04
ture (Appendix A.2), we report the average time of generating attention
masks for a varying number of slots on an image of size 128 × 128. The     0.01
results are plotted in Figure 5. VONet demonstrates a strong advantage     0.00
of being able to maintain a nearly constant inference time regardless of        5 11 16 24
                                                                                 Number of Slots
the increasing number of slots. Conversely, MONet’s time grows linearly
with respect to the slot number, which is expected as MONet generates Figure 5: Comparison
one attention mask after another. The superior efficiency of VONet on of the attention inference
images forms the basis for it being extended to video frame sequences. efficiencies.

6.2   C OMPARISON WITH BASELINES
Baselines. We conduct a comparative analysis of VONet against five representative unsupervised
video object learning baselines: SCALOR (Jiang et al., 2019), ViMON (Weis et al., 2021), SI-
MONe (Kabra et al., 2021), SAVI (Kipf et al., 2021; Elsayed et al., 2022), and STEVE (Singh
et al., 2022b). A crucial criterion for baseline selection is the accessibility of an official or public
implementation. We employ official implementations of SCALOR, ViMON, SAVI, and STEVE,
and a re-implementation of SIMONe (Appendix A.4). SCALOR, ViMON, SIMONe, and STEVE
were originally designed for unsupervised learning, with their reconstruction targets being RGB
video frames. SAVI, on the other hand, relies on object bounding boxes in initial video frames and
reconstructs supervision signals like depth or optical flow. For a fair comparison, we eliminated
the bounding box conditioning and only allowed SAVI to reconstruct RGB frames. We adhered to
best practices from the literature for configuring the hyperparameters of the five baselines, selecting
values recommended either by official codebases or by hyperparameter search results.
Results. In Table 1, it is evident that VONet surpasses all the baselines in terms of both FG-ARI
and mIoU metrics across all five MOVI datasets. Furthermore, the low std values imply its stability,
an important characteristic often lacking in unsupervised video object learning methods. It can
also be seen that MOVI-{C,D,E} are indeed much more challenging than MOVI-{A,B}, due to the
rich textures and complex backgrounds contained in these datasets. SAVI, SCALOR, and ViMON
face challenges when dealing with complex video scenes. Surprisingly, while STEVE performed
admirably on MOVI-{C,D,E}, its FG-ARI performance on MOVI-{A,B} was unexpectedly low.
Upon closer examination of its visualized results, STEVE tends to over-segment foreground objects
and swap object identities, when provided with redundant slots in simpler scenarios (see examples
in Figure 7). This behavior significantly diminishes its FG-ARI performance.

6.3   H OW CRITICAL ARE DIFFERENT COMPONENTS TO VON ET ?

We conduct an ablation study to quantify the contribution of various components to the effectiveness
of VONet. We select several key ingredients for ablation, resulting in four variants of VONet.
a) wo-UNet ablates the U-Net for attention mask generation by removing it, along with the mask
   transformer at its bottleneck layer, from the parallel attention pipeline. Instead, it directly outputs
   the estimated attention masks (Section 5). This variant aims to investigate whether the mask
   refinement provided by the U-Net is indispensable.


                                                         7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


         Figure 6: Ablation study results. Each error bar represents the std of three random seeds.
            MOVI-A              MOVI-B              MOVI-C              MOVI-D              MOVI-E
Video
GT
V (FG)
V
S (FG)
S


Figure 7: Example segmentation masks of STEVE (S) and VONet (V). Each column showcases
an example video from one of the five datasets. Three key frames are presented in a row for each
video. Each unique color represents the mask for a specific slot. S/V (FG) shows foreground-only
segmentation after background pixels being masked out.
        β
b) KL- W   reduces the importance of the KLD term in the training loss, where β is the KLD weight
   used by VONet in the experiments. We set W to four values: 20, 200, 20k, and ∞, where ∞
   corresponds to completely eliminating the KLD.
c) wo-Replay removes the replay buffer technique and trains from fresh states for each sampled
   short video segment, as commonly seen in prior works (Kipf et al., 2021; Singh et al., 2022b).
d) wo-KLBal excludes the KL balancing technique and calculates a standard KLD loss directly.
All four variants were trained using three random seeds on the five MOVI datasets. For each variant,
the remaining training configurations are exactly the same as those used for VONet.
Results. Figure 6 shows the impact on the performance if a specific component is removed or
weakened in VONet. Notably, without KL balancing, the outcome is very poor on MOVi-A. In this
case, VONet struggles to acquire any meaningful mask, as each pixel receives uniform attention
from all slots. It is obvious that the posterior has been heavily forced into resembling the prior
before the latter is adequately learned. Interestingly, the replay buffer is far more important on
MOVI-{A,B} than on the other three. One plausible explanation is that these two datasets can have
objects with similar appearances in a video, which makes object tracking more challenging. Training
with replayed slot states enhances the long-term object tracking ability of VONet. As for the U-Net
architecture, the mask refinement it offers proves to be particularly crucial for MOVI-{C,D,E}. This
aligns with our expectation that its inherent spatial locality bias is beneficial for handling complex
videos. Lastly, we have observed that the complete removal of the KLD term (W = ∞) consistently
results in unstable training and eventual crashes, and thus its results were not plotted. Apart from
this, we do observe performance declines as the weight decreases, especially on MOVI-{B,C,D,E}.
In summary, the four components all prove to be essential. The removal of any of them results in
catastrophic outcomes on at least one dataset.
6.4       V ISUALIZATION AND ANALYSIS

Object masks. Figure 7 shows example object masks for VONet and STEVE. While VONet occa-
sionally splits the background, it excels at preserving the structural integrity of moving foreground
objects. On the contrary, STEVE tends to over-segment foreground objects, and its object masks
exhibit temporal shifts over time. VONet generates smoother and more compact foreground object
masks, whereas STEVE produces jagged ones with irregular shapes. We believe that this difference


                                                     8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    Input   Posterior Rec   Prior Rec   Input   Posterior Rec   Prior Rec


Figure 8: Left: Reconstruction results from the posterior and prior. Right: KLD curves of slot 0 on
two example videos. The KLD value has been divided by the slot embedding dimension (128).
arises partially from the strong inductive bias of spatial locality of VONet’s U-Net architecture for
attention masks. This bias is absent in slot-attention methods like STEVE.
VAE prior. One can evaluate the quality of the VAE prior modeling in VONet by reconstructing
input frames using forward-predicted slots. We randomly sample multiple video frames and utilize
the predicted priors for their reconstruction. The results are shown in Figure 8 (left). We can see
that the prior is effectively modeled, since the decoded images generated from the prior closely
resembles reconstructed image derived from the posterior slots.
KLD visualization. One can also inspect how the per-slot KLD loss in Eq. 8 varies from frame
to frame. We anticipate that when a slot exhibits greater temporal variation at specific frames, the
corresponding KLD losses will also rise. Figure 8 (right) illustrates two example videos in which
the KLD curves are plotted for slot 0. It is evident that the KLD effectively measures the degree
of variation in slot content. When the content undergoes significant changes, the KLD loss rises,
whereas when the object represented by the slot remains stable, the KLD loss stays at a low level.
Failure modes. The first failure mode is over-segmentation (Zimmermann et al., 2023), happening
when the video scene’s object count is much lower than the pre-allocated slot number. Without extra
constraints or priors, VONet aims to use all available slots to encode the video scene for a reduced
decoder loss. This causes some objects attended to by multiple slots or the background fragmented
into parts (Figure 7, MOVI-A). To address over-segmentation, the model needs to deactivate “re-
dundant” slots. Extra losses may be needed to penalize the use of too many slots. The second
failure mode is incomplete object understanding due to the absence of objectness priors. Although
we use temporal information for object discovery in videos, the overall learning system remains
under-constrained. When an object exhibits multiple texture regions, the model faces challenges in
discerning whether it represents a single entity with visually distinct components in motion or multi-
ple distinct objects moving closely together (Figure 7, MOVI-D). Integrating pretrained knowledge
about the appearances of everyday objects could help (Zadaianchuk et al., 2023). Lastly, the en-
forcement of slot temporal consistency may occasionally prove unsuccessful. In certain instances,
even when a slot appears to lose temporal consistency, upon closer examination, its KLD loss re-
mains low (Figure 7, the dark-green background slot in MOVI-B), simply because the VAE prior
is accurately predicted. This suggests an opportunity for improving our KLD loss. The temporal
consistency might also benefit from using a long-term memory model (Cheng & Schwing, 2022) as
opposed to the current short-term GRU memory which might get expired under long-time occlusion.

7     C ONCLUSION
We have presented VONet, a state-of-the-art approach for unsupervised video object learning.
VONet incorporates a parallel attention process that simultaneously generates attention masks for
all slots from a U-Net. The strong inductive bias of spatial locality in the U-Net leads to smoother
and more compact object segmentation masks, compared to those derived from slot attention. Fur-
thermore, VONet effectively tackles the challenge of temporal consistency in video object learning
by propagating context vectors across time and adopting an object-wise sequential VAE framework.
Across five datasets comprising videos of diverse complexities, VONet consistently demonstrates
superior effectiveness compared to several strong baselines in generating high-quality object repre-
sentations. We hope that our findings will offer valuable insights for future research in this field.


                                                                            9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Jimmy Lei Ba, Jamie Ryan Kiros, and Geoffrey E Hinton. Layer normalization. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1607.06450, 2016.
Zhipeng Bao, Pavel Tokmakov, Allan Jabri, Yu-Xiong Wang, Adrien Gaidon, and Martial Hebert.
  Discovering objects that can move. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
  Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 11789–11798, 2022.
Christopher P Burgess, Loic Matthey, Nicholas Watters, Rishabh Kabra, Irina Higgins, Matt
  Botvinick, and Alexander Lerchner. Monet: Unsupervised scene decomposition and represen-
  tation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1901.11390, 2019.
Mark Chen, Alec Radford, Rewon Child, Jeffrey Wu, Heewoo Jun, David Luan, and Ilya Sutskever.
 Generative pretraining from pixels. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 1691–
 1703. PMLR, 2020.
Ho Kei Cheng and Alexander G. Schwing. Xmem: Long-term video object segmentation with an
  atkinson-shiffrin memory model. In ECCV, 2022.
Kyunghyun Cho, Bart Van Merriënboer, Caglar Gulcehre, Dzmitry Bahdanau, Fethi Bougares, Hol-
  ger Schwenk, and Yoshua Bengio. Learning phrase representations using rnn encoder-decoder
  for statistical machine translation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1406.1078, 2014.
Gioele Ciaparrone, Francisco Luque Sánchez, Siham Tabik, Luigi Troiano, Roberto Tagliaferri, and
  Francisco Herrera. Deep learning in video multi-object tracking: A survey. Neurocomputing,
  381:61–88, 2020.
Antonia Creswell, Rishabh Kabra, Chris Burgess, and Murray Shanahan. Unsupervised object-
  based transition models for 3d partially observable environments. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 34:27344–27355, 2021.
Gamaleldin Elsayed, Aravindh Mahendran, Sjoerd van Steenkiste, Klaus Greff, Michael C Mozer,
  and Thomas Kipf. Savi++: Towards end-to-end object-centric learning from real-world videos.
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:28940–28954, 2022.
Patrick Emami, Pan He, Sanjay Ranka, and Anand Rangarajan. Efficient iterative amortized in-
  ference for learning symmetric and disentangled multi-object representations. In International
  Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 2970–2981. PMLR, 2021.
Martin Engelcke, Oiwi Parker Jones, and Ingmar Posner. Genesis-v2: Inferring unordered object
 representations without iterative refinement. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
 34:8085–8094, 2021.
SM Eslami, Nicolas Heess, Theophane Weber, Yuval Tassa, David Szepesvari, Geoffrey E Hinton,
 et al. Attend, infer, repeat: Fast scene understanding with generative models. Advances in neural
 information processing systems, 29, 2016.
Rohit Girdhar and Deva Ramanan. Cater: A diagnostic dataset for compositional actions and tem-
  poral reasoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.04744, 2019.
Klaus Greff, Raphaël Lopez Kaufman, Rishabh Kabra, Nick Watters, Christopher Burgess, Daniel
  Zoran, Loic Matthey, Matthew Botvinick, and Alexander Lerchner. Multi-object representation
  learning with iterative variational inference. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
  pp. 2424–2433. PMLR, 2019.
Klaus Greff, Sjoerd Van Steenkiste, and Jürgen Schmidhuber. On the binding problem in artificial
  neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2012.05208, 2020.
Klaus Greff, Francois Belletti, Lucas Beyer, Carl Doersch, Yilun Du, Daniel Duckworth, David J
  Fleet, Dan Gnanapragasam, Florian Golemo, Charles Herrmann, Thomas Kipf, Abhijit Kundu,
  Dmitry Lagun, Issam Laradji, Hsueh-Ti (Derek) Liu, Henning Meyer, Yishu Miao, Derek
  Nowrouzezahrai, Cengiz Oztireli, Etienne Pot, Noha Radwan, Daniel Rebain, Sara Sabour, Mehdi
  S. M. Sajjadi, Matan Sela, Vincent Sitzmann, Austin Stone, Deqing Sun, Suhani Vora, Ziyu Wang,


                                               10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  Tianhao Wu, Kwang Moo Yi, Fangcheng Zhong, and Andrea Tagliasacchi. Kubric: a scalable
  dataset generator. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recog-
  nition (CVPR), 2022.
Danijar Hafner, Timothy Lillicrap, Jimmy Ba, and Mohammad Norouzi. Dream to control: Learning
  behaviors by latent imagination. arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.01603, 2019.
Danijar Hafner, Timothy Lillicrap, Mohammad Norouzi, and Jimmy Ba. Mastering atari with dis-
  crete world models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.02193, 2020.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image recog-
  nition. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp.
  770–778, 2016.
Zhen He, Jian Li, Daxue Liu, Hangen He, and David Barber. Tracking by animation: Unsuper-
  vised learning of multi-object attentive trackers. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
  Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 1318–1327, 2019.
Olivier J Hénaff, Skanda Koppula, Evan Shelhamer, Daniel Zoran, Andrew Jaegle, Andrew Zisser-
  man, João Carreira, and Relja Arandjelović. Object discovery and representation networks. In
  European Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 123–143. Springer, 2022.
Jindong Jiang, Sepehr Janghorbani, Gerard De Melo, and Sungjin Ahn. Scalor: Generative world
   models with scalable object representations. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.02384, 2019.
Rishabh Kabra, Daniel Zoran, Goker Erdogan, Loic Matthey, Antonia Creswell, Matt Botvinick,
  Alexander Lerchner, and Chris Burgess. Simone: View-invariant, temporally-abstracted object
  representations via unsupervised video decomposition. Advances in Neural Information Process-
  ing Systems, 34:20146–20159, 2021.
Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1412.6980, 2014.
Diederik P Kingma and Max Welling.          Auto-encoding variational bayes.      arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1312.6114, 2013.
Thomas Kipf, Gamaleldin F Elsayed, Aravindh Mahendran, Austin Stone, Sara Sabour, Georg
  Heigold, Rico Jonschkowski, Alexey Dosovitskiy, and Klaus Greff. Conditional object-centric
  learning from video. arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.12594, 2021.
Adam Kosiorek, Hyunjik Kim, Yee Whye Teh, and Ingmar Posner. Sequential attend, infer, repeat:
  Generative modelling of moving objects. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  31, 2018.
Jannik Kossen, Karl Stelzner, Marcel Hussing, Claas Voelcker, and Kristian Kersting. Struc-
  tured object-aware physics prediction for video modeling and planning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1910.02425, 2019.
Francesco Locatello, Dirk Weissenborn, Thomas Unterthiner, Aravindh Mahendran, Georg Heigold,
  Jakob Uszkoreit, Alexey Dosovitskiy, and Thomas Kipf. Object-centric learning with slot atten-
  tion. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:11525–11538, 2020.
Trang Nguyen, Amin Mansouri, Kanika Madan, Khuong Duy Nguyen, Kartik Ahuja, Dianbo Liu,
  and Yoshua Bengio. Reusable slotwise mechanisms. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 36, 2024.
Olaf Ronneberger, Philipp Fischer, and Thomas Brox. U-net: Convolutional networks for biomed-
  ical image segmentation. In Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention–
  MICCAI 2015: 18th International Conference, Munich, Germany, October 5-9, 2015, Proceed-
  ings, Part III 18, pp. 234–241. Springer, 2015.
Maximilian Seitzer, Max Horn, Andrii Zadaianchuk, Dominik Zietlow, Tianjun Xiao, Carl-Johann
 Simon-Gabriel, Tong He, Zheng Zhang, Bernhard Schölkopf, Thomas Brox, et al. Bridging the
 gap to real-world object-centric learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.14860, 2022.


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Gautam Singh, Fei Deng, and Sungjin Ahn. Illiterate dall-e learns to compose. In ICLR, 2022a.
Gautam Singh, Yi-Fu Wu, and Sungjin Ahn. Simple unsupervised object-centric learning for com-
  plex and naturalistic videos. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:18181–
  18196, 2022b.
Dmitry Ulyanov, Andrea Vedaldi, and Victor Lempitsky. Instance normalization: The missing in-
 gredient for fast stylization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1607.08022, 2016.
Rishi Veerapaneni, John D Co-Reyes, Michael Chang, Michael Janner, Chelsea Finn, Jiajun Wu,
  Joshua Tenenbaum, and Sergey Levine. Entity abstraction in visual model-based reinforcement
  learning. In Conference on Robot Learning, pp. 1439–1456. PMLR, 2020.
Marissa A Weis, Kashyap Chitta, Yash Sharma, Wieland Brendel, Matthias Bethge, Andreas Geiger,
 and Alexander S Ecker. Benchmarking unsupervised object representations for video sequences.
 The Journal of Machine Learning Research, 22(1):8253–8313, 2021.
Andrii Zadaianchuk, Maximilian Seitzer, and Georg Martius. Object-centric learning for real-world
  videos by predicting temporal feature similarities. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.04829, 2023.
Tianfei Zhou, Fatih Porikli, David J Crandall, Luc Van Gool, and Wenguan Wang. A survey on deep
  learning technique for video segmentation. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine
  Intelligence, 45(6):7099–7122, 2022.
Roland S Zimmermann, Sjoerd van Steenkiste, Mehdi SM Sajjadi, Thomas Kipf, and Klaus Gr-
  eff. Sensitivity of slot-based object-centric models to their number of slots. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2305.18890, 2023.
Daniel Zoran, Rishabh Kabra, Alexander Lerchner, and Danilo J Rezende. Parts: Unsupervised seg-
  mentation with slots, attention and independence maximization. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
  International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 10439–10447, 2021.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                 Image FG-ARI                                              Image mIoU
              Method
                         MOVI-C MOVI-D MOVI-E                      MOVI-C                    MOVI-D MOVI-E
              MONet      24.8±0.1 22.0±1.7 18.8±0.9                34.8±0.9                  17.4±2.0 13.6±1.6
              VONet      47.0±2.8 51.0±1.2 50.3±3.6                36.2±3.0                  28.5±0.6 18.1±1.3

               Table 2: Results of VONet and MONet in the single-frame scenario.


                                                                       3DUDOOHO DWWQ QHW
                     «


                                 7UDQVIRUPHU


                                                                                                                 7LPH VWHSV
                                                                                                       6ORW(QF
                                                        0/3
                     «

                                                511


                                                                       3DUDOOHO DWWQ QHW


                                                                                                       6ORW(QF
                                                        0/3
                                                «


Figure 9: Illustration of the unrolling process for VONet on a video sequence. Only slot k is depicted
in the diagram, with the other slots following similar flows. Slot computations can be parallelized
within each step, except when inter-slot interaction is required (e.g. initial slot transformer and
parallel attention). For simplicity, we omit depicting the dependencies on the input frames xt .


A     A PPENDIX

A.1   S INGLE - FRAME SCENARIO

We compared VONet with MONet in the single-frame scenario, as MONet was designed for object
discovery in individual images only. We configured the U-Net architecture of MONet to match
that of VONet, and set MONet’s β = 1 and γ = 2 after a brief exploration within a reasonable
parameter range. VONet was modified to train with a sequence length of 1 and excluded training
from past slot states. For the training and evaluation data, we utilized video frames from MOVI-
{C,D,E}, treating them as independent images with no temporal relationship. FG-ARI and mIoU
are calculated on individual frames, referred to as Image FG-ARI and Image mIoU. The results are
shown in Table 2. They suggest that VONet is not only more efficient than MONet, but also more
competent to discover objects from complex images.

A.2   M ORE DETAILS OF VON ET

Backbone for image features. We train a backbone based on a small ResNet (He et al., 2016) to
extract a feature map from each input frame xt . The backbone architecture includes five residual
blocks, each employing a 3×3 kernel and a stride of 1, except for the first block which has a stride of
2. All the blocks have an output channel number of 64. Following the ResNet, there is a concluding
convolution layer with a 1 × 1 kernel and a linear activation, with an output channel number of
128. Finally, a position embedding network (Kipf et al., 2021) is applied to provide 2D location
information. With this backbone, the output feature map has a spatial shape that is half of that of the
input frame. This feature map is shared by the parallel attention network and the slot encoder as the
input.
U-Net and mask transformer. The U-Net used by the parallel attention network follows a standard
architecture closely resembling that of MONet (Burgess et al., 2019). There are M blocks on either
the upsampling or downsampling path, with M taking the value of 5 for datasets MOVI-{A,B} and
6 for datasets MOVI-{C,D,E}. Each block comprises the following layers in order: (a) a 3 × 3 bias-
free convolution with a stride of 1 and a padding of 1, (b) an instance normalization (Ulyanov et al.,
2016) layer with learnable affine parameters, (c) a ReLU activation, and finally (d) a max pooling
layer of size 2 for the downsampling path and a nearest upsampling layer of factor 2 for the upsam-
pling path. No max pooling (upsampling) is applied to the first (last) block of the downsampling
(upsampling) path. A skip connection is established between the output of the m-th downsampling


                                                              13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


block and the output of the (M − m + 1)-th upsampling block, for each 2 ≤ m ≤ M . The non-skip
bottleneck connection is an MLP with two layers of sizes (512, 512), both activated with ReLU. The
output of this MLP will be projected and reshaped to match the output of the downsampling path,
concatenated with it, and input to the upsampling path. After the upsampling path, a 1 × 1 convolu-
tion is applied with an output channels of 1. The final output is a 2D map that retains the same spatial
dimensions as the input. The values within this map represent unnormalized attention logits. For
the downsampling blocks, we set their output channels as {32, 64, 64, 128, 128} for MOVI-{A,B},
with an additional output channel number of 128 for MOVI-{C,D,E}.
To prepare the input to the U-Net for a slot’s attention mask, we first convolve its context vector
across the backbone feature locations, yielding a roughly estimated attention mask for that slot.
Then its context vector is spatially broadcast to the feature locations, forming a location-invariant
context map. Finally, the backbone feature map, the estimated attention mask, and the context map,
are concatenated in the channel dimension to form the input to the U-Net.
When there are K slots whose attention masks are being computed in parallel, right after the U-Net
bottleneck MLP, we use a mask transformer to model the interaction among the K masks in the
latent space. The transformer consists of three decoder-only transformer blocks, and each block can
be briefly described as:
           u′ = v + MLP(LayerNorm(v)), v = u + MultiHeadAttn(LayerNorm(u)).
where u represents the K mask latent vectors and u′ are the updated latent vectors. We configure
each block with three attention heads. To maintain permutation invariance for the slots, no position
encoding is incorporated in any of the transformer blocks.
Initial slot latent. The initial slot latent transformer in Eq. 5 shares a similar architecture with
the U-Net mask transformer, differing only in terms of layer sizes. It also has three decoder-only
transformer blocks and three attention heads per block. We set both the per-trajectory slot latent size
and the per-frame slot latent size to be 128.
VAE prior and posterior. To compute the prior, again we use a transformer (Eq. 7) that has a
similar architecture with the U-Net mask transformer, except for different layer sizes. The trans-
former has only two blocks with three attention heads in each block. Its output r′t,k is independently
projected (via an MLP of one hidden layer of size 128) to generate the mean and log variance of a
Gaussian as the prior distribution. The posterior is obtained by projecting the updated per-trajectory
slot latent rt,k to generate its mean and log variance with a similar MLP.
Decoder. Singh et al. (2022a) identified the mixture of components decoder in MONet as a weak
decoder, pinpointing two primary limitations: the slot-decoding dilemma and pixel independence.
These limitations pose challenges to the encoder’s capacity to achieve effective scene decomposi-
tion. As a remedy, they proposed using a more powerful transformer-based decoder (Chen et al.,
2020) instead. This decoder attends to all slots simultaneously and decodes the image in an auto-
regressive manner. At a high level, the decoder is formulated as:
                                             Y
            PTransDec (x|z1 , . . . , zK ) =   P (x(m)|z1 , . . . , zK , x(1), . . . , x(m − 1)). (11)
                                          m

Here, x(m) represents the m-th patch on the image in the row-major order. Singh et al. (2022b)
applied this decoder to learning objects from complex videos and achieved a notable performance
enhancement.
We directly reused the transformer decoder implementation from the official code2 of STEVE (Singh
et al., 2022b). For the discrete VAE model, we re-implemented our own, but closely following the
official implementation. All the decoder-related hyperparameters used in our experiments kept the
same with those of STEVE.
Segmentation mask. For FG-ARI and mIoU evaluation, an integer segmentation mask is generated
by consolidating the K slot attention masks mt,k (Eq. 3), where each mask contains a floating-point
value within the range of [0, 1] at each pixel location. This value represents the probability of the
pixel being assigned to the corresponding slot. If the maximum probability at the pixel is smaller
than 0.3 (no slot is confident enough), we assign that pixel to a special “null” slot. Otherwise, the
   2
       https://github.com/singhgautam/steve


                                                  14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


pixel is assigned to the slot with the maximum probability. As a result, each segmentation mask
contains at most K + 1 distinct integer values, where K is the number of pre-allocated slots.
Training from replayed video segments. Training VONet on entire videos is impractical due
to high memory usage caused by the large computational graph unrolled over time. Traditional
video object learning methods, like Jiang et al. (2019); Kipf et al. (2021); Singh et al. (2022b),
train models on short video segments, assuming that each mini-batch is initialized with fresh slots.
During testing, they expect models to generalize to longer videos. VONet is also trained on short
video segments, but it stores past states in a replay buffer, where each state includes per-trajectory
slot latents {rt,k }K
                    k=1 and a boolean flag indicating the initial frame of a video. When sampling a
video segment from the replay buffer, we initiate the training of VONet with the state of the first
step of that segment, and only reset the state if the flag is true. Despite potential state obsolescence,
this replay-based training approach proves effective if a small replay buffer length is used. Using
a replay buffer allows training short video segments from past slot states, while still preserving the
i.i.d. assumption with a random replay strategy. Without it, online training from previous slot states
requires sequential training through entire videos, introducing temporal correlation in the training
data.
During training, we create a replay buffer with a length of 10k frames and a width of 16 videos. For
each gradient update, we first unroll the same copy of VONet on each of 16 videos for 2 steps, store
the unrolled states in the replay buffer, and randomly extract a mini-batch of size B with a length
of 3 (in total 3B frames) from the buffer to compute the gradient. After the update, the unrolling
continues until the videos are finished (after 24
                                                2 = 12 updates), when we randomly select another
16 videos from the dataset to replace them. We set B = 32 for MOVI-{A,B,C} while B = 24 for
MOVI-{D,E}.

A.3    H YPERPARAMETERS

We provide a brief description of the key hyperparameters used for VONet in our experiments. For
the complete set of hyperparameters, we encourage the reader to refer to our code 3 .
The input video frame xt is resized to 128 × 128. Unlike some prior methods, we did not perform
any data augmentation on the frames. We set the lengths of all the following vectors to 128:
  i) Noise vector ϵk (Eq. 5);
 ii) Per-frame slot latent yt,k (Eq. 4);
iii) Per-trajectory slot latent rt,k (Eq. 4);
iv) Context vector ct,k (Eq. 4);
 v) VAE posterior embedding zt,k (Eq. 6).
(We also explored a smaller length of 64 for these vectors, but obtained slightly worse results.) For
any transformer, its model size (d_model), key size (d_k), and value size (d_v) are all set to be
equal to the query size, whereas its hidden size (d_ff) is twice the query size.
We rolled out 16 workers in parallel for collecting video data in the replay buffer. Each worker
utilizes the most recent VONet model for inference on 2 consecutive video frames, stores the inputs
and states in the replay buffer, pauses for the trainer to perform a gradient update, and then resumes
data collection for another 2 frames, following this iterative process. The replay buffer length was
set to 10k, resulting in a maximum number of time steps 16 × 10k = 160k in the buffer.
We trained 11 slots for MOVI-{A,B,C} while 16 slots for MOVI-{D,E}, reflecting the increased
maximum number of objects in the latter two datasets. Accordingly, to ensure consistent GPU
memory consumption across all training runs, we employed a mini-batch size4 of 32 for MOVI-
{A,B,C} and 24 for MOVI-{D,E}. We sampled video segments of length 3 for training on all
datasets. This training configuration ensures that any training job can be executed on a system
equipped with 4 NVIDIA GeForce RTX 3090 GPUs or an equivalent amount of GPU memory.
For the optimization, we set the KL balancing coefficient κ (Eq. 10) to 0.7. The KL loss weight β
(Eq. 8) was linearly increased from 0 to 20
                                         D in the first 50k updates, where D = 128 is the posterior
   3
   https://github.com/hnyu/vonet
   4
   In our paper, when we refer to a sample within a mini-batch, we are referring to a video segment. Therefore,
when we specify a mini-batch size of N , it indicates that the batch consists of N video segments.


                                                      15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


dimension. We used the Adam optimizer (Kingma & Ba, 2014) with a learning rate schedule as
follows. The learning rate was increased linearly from 10−5 to 10−4 in the first 5k training updates,
maintained the value until 100k updates, and finally was decreased linearly back to 10−5 in another
50k updates. Thus in total, we trained each job for 150k gradient updates. In each update step, we
normalized the global parameter norm to 0.1 if the norm exceeds this threshold.

A.4   BASELINE DETAILS

All baseline methods except SIMONe (reason explained below), were trained with 11 slots for
MOVI-{A,B,C} and 16 slots for MOVI-{C,D}. All baseline methods, with the exception of
SCALOR, employed the same methodology for obtaining segmentation masks as was utilized in
VONet. SCALOR, on the other hand, possesses its own robust method for deriving segmentation
masks from attention maps, and thus we did not replace it. Below are their detailed training settings.
SCALOR. We used the official implementation of SCALOR at https://github.com/
JindongJiang/SCALOR. We followed the suggestions in SAVI (Kipf et al., 2021) to config-
ure its hyperparameters, with several exceptions as follows. The training video segment length was
reduced from 10 to 6 to reduce memory consumption. We used an 8 × 8 grid instead of the 4 × 4 grid
in SAVI as we found the former produced much better results on MOVI-{A,B}. We used a learning
rate of 10−4 to speed up the training convergence.
ViMON. We used the official implementation of ViMON at https://github.com/
ecker-lab/object-centric-representation-benchmark. We made adjustments to
its default hyperparameters to adapt its training to the MOVI datasets, by setting the VAE latent dim
to 64 and the training video seq length to 6. We also explored different values for γ, but found the
default value 2 is already good enough. All other hyperparameters remain unchanged.
SAVI. We made several changes to the official implementation of SAVI at https://github.
com/google-research/slot-attention-video for our experiments. First, SAVI was
trained in an entirely unsupervised manner to reconstruct RGB video frames only, without the object
bounding box conditioning in the first video frame. The slots were initialized as unit Gaussian noises
as in VONet. Second, to mitigate GPU memory usage, we halved the original training batch size,
reducing it from 64 to 32. We also reduced the training video segment length from 6 to 3 on MOVI-
{D,E}. Remarkably, these size adjustments did not yield any discernible impact on the training
results according to our observations on several trial training jobs. Finally, we conducted training
with a medium-sized SAVI model, featuring a 9-layer ResNet as the encoder backbone which has
a comparable size to the backbone of VONet. Specifically, the ResNet architecture was created by
assigning a size (number of residual blocks) of 1 to each of the four ResNet stages, employing the
class ResNetWithBasicBlk implemented by SAVI.
SIMONe.        We used the re-implementation of SIMONe at https://gitlab.com/
generally-intelligent/simone, which successfully reproduced the performance on
CATER (Girdhar & Ramanan, 2019). In contrast to other baseline methods and VONet, SIMONe
imposes a strict requirement on the number of learnable slots. This number must be equal to the
product of the height and width of the feature map resulting from its CNN encoder and transformer.
Consequently, we employed a fixed slot number of 16 across all MOVI datasets for SIMONe. We set
the mini-batch size to 40 and the video segment length to 24 (full length). All other hyperparameters
remained unaltered.
STEVE. Since STEVE has been extensively evaluated on MOVI-{D,E} by its authors, we largely
retained its original hyperparameters. However, we explored one exception: experimenting with
two different values for its slot size: 64 and 128. Our observation revealed that a larger slot size of
128 consistently yielded no better or even sometimes slightly inferior results across all five datasets.
Consequently, we settled on a slot size of 64 for STEVE in our final configuration.

A.5   DATASET DETAILS

We refer the reader to the official MOVI datasets website for details: https://github.
com/google-research/kubric/tree/main/challenges/movi. We did not make
any change to the five datasets. The official training/validation splits were used in our experiments.



                                                  16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.6   M ORE VISUALIZATION RESULTS


Figure 10: Additional segmentation results of VONet. In these results, each video is presented with
every other frame displayed. The boundaries of object segments are marked with white curves. No
post-processing was performed on the masks.


                                                17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 11: Additional segmentation results of VONet. In these results, each video is presented with
every other frame displayed. The boundaries of object segments are marked with white curves. No
post-processing was performed on the masks.


                                                18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 12: Additional segmentation results of VONet. In these results, each video is presented with
every other frame displayed. The boundaries of object segments are marked with white curves. No
post-processing was performed on the masks.


                                                19
