Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


IGTO: I NDIVIDUAL G LOBAL T RANSFORM O PTIMIZA -
TION FOR M ULTI -AGENT R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                           A BSTRACT
         The rigorous equivalency of individual-global actions is accustomedly assumed
         for Centralized Training with Decentralized Execution (CTDE) in Multi-Agent
         Reinforcement Learning (MARL), wherever Individual-Global-Max (IGM) or
         Individual-Global-Optimal (IGO) it is. To relax the restriction, in this work,
         we pose an individual-global action-transformed condition, named Individual-
         Global-Transform-Optimal (IGTO), to permit inconsistent individual-global ac-
         tions while guaranteeing the equivalency of their policy distributions. Condi-
         tioned by IGTO, accordingly, we design a Individual-Global Normalized Trans-
         formation (IGNT) rule, which could be seamlessly implanted into many existing
         CTDE-based algorithms. Theoretically, we prove that individual-global policies
         can converge to the optimum under this rule. Empirically, we integrate IGNT
         into Multi-agent Actor-Critic (named IGNT-MAC) as well as various MARL al-
         gorithms, then test on StarCraft Multi-Agent Challenge (SMAC) and Multi-Agent
         Particle Environment (MPE). Extensive experiments demonstrate that our method
         can achieve remarkable improvement over the existing MARL baselines.


1   I NTRODUCTION
In the past few years, multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) have undergone broad advances
for solving cooperative or competitive multi-agent continuous control tasks, such as real-time strat-
egy games OpenAI et al. (2019); Samvelyan et al. (2019); Kurach et al. (2020); Ye et al. (2020),
traffic control Shamsoshoara et al. (2019); Wu et al. (2020); Zimmer et al. (2021); Sheng et al.
(2022) and autonomous driving Zhou et al. (2020) etc. However, widespread adoption of coopera-
tive MARL methods in real-world settings has been hampered by two major difficulties. First, the
environment becomes non-stationary from the perspective of each individual agent, which results
from each agent of team often makes decision based on its own local observation or communi-
cation. Second, cooperative MARL approaches are notoriously expensive in terms of their com-
putation complexity of joint action value function, which caused by exponential growth of global
state and action space with the increasing number of agents. Both of these issues severely limit the
applicability of cooperative MARL to real-world multi-agent problems.
To address the above challenges, the prevailing fashion employed in MARL is centralized train-
ing with decentralized execution (CTDE) Oliehoek & Amato (2016) to ensure stable training
while enabling agents execute actions in a decentralized manner. Among these CTDE methods,
decomposition-based MARL (Decom-MARL) Sunehag et al. (2018); Rashid et al. (2018); Son et al.
(2019); Wang et al. (2020; 2021); Hu et al. (2023) has shown particular promise due to its superior
performances Sun et al. (2021), which factorize the joint action value function into individual action
value functions for any factorizable MARL problems to satisfy Individual-Global-Max (IGM) Son
et al. (2019) condition i.e., the optimal consistency between global and individual policies. Unfor-
tunately, the operator arg max of the IGM condition limits Decom-MARL methods only applicable
to discrete action space. Therefore, FOP Zhang et al. (2021) introduce a more general constraint
called Individual-Global-Optimal (IGO) from the perspective of policy consistency by factorizing
joint policy into individual policies. Although the IGO constraint extends the factorizable task to
both discrete and continuous action spaces, it still strictly requires the optimal joint actions to be
consistent with the optimal individual behaviors, which may leads to unsatisfied performance in
some complicated environments. More discussions about MARL methods based on the IGM or
IGO condition and related works are deferred to Appendix A.


                                                  1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    Global Act.               Indiv. Act. Global Act.           Indiv. Act.
           𝑢1                        𝑢1          𝑢1                    𝑢1
                                                  𝑢𝑖 = ℱ𝑖 (𝑢)
      𝑢≔   ⋮      𝑢𝑖 = 𝑢[agent 𝑖 ]   ⋮    𝑢 ≔ ⋮ 𝑢 = ℱ −1 (𝑢 , ⋯ , 𝑢 ) ⋮
                                                           1       𝑁
           𝑢𝑁                        𝑢𝑁       𝑢𝑁                      𝑢𝑁

       (a) Prior identity actions          (b) Our transformable actions      (c) Error improvement

Figure 1: An illustration of our motivation. (a) Prior methods impose the consistency constraint
with identical actions (through direct decomposition or combination) between global and individual
learning in CTDE. (b) Our method relaxes this constraint to permit the inconsistency of individual-
global actions, through learning some proper transform F. (c) Under the relaxation, the discrepancy
between the global Q-value and the combined individual Q-value is reduced sharply for a previous
MARL method based on IGM condition, such as QTRAN Son et al. (2019) and the variant implanted
with individual-global normalized transformation rule on the 3s vs 5z scenario of SMAC Samvelyan
et al. (2019). More experimental detail and other results are deferred to Section 5 and Appendix G.

In order to relax the restriction, in this paper, we first pose an individual-global action-transformed
condition called Individual-Global-Transform-Optimal (IGTO) to permit inconsistent individual-
global actions while guaranteeing the equivalency of their policy distributions, as shown in Fig-
ure 1(b). In particular, the IGTO condition sequentially performs a series of invertible transforma-
tions, which only guarantee a requirement that the Jacobian determinant of transformation should
be equal to 1 i.e., |Gi | = 1. In order to satisfy the requirement, we design an Individual-Global
Normalized Transformation (IGNT) rule that map a sample from a simple density i.e., Guassian
policy, to a more complex density via the change of variable formula Rudin (1987); Bogachev &
Ruas (2007). Furthermore, the IGNT rule can be seamlessly implanted into many existing CTDE-
based algorithms. Theoretically, we present and analyze the convergence of individual-global poli-
cies under this rule in general cooperative MARL settings. Empirically, we integrate IGNT into
Multi-agent Actor-Critic (named IGNT-MAC) as well as various MARL algorithms, then investigate
IGNT-MAC in StarCraft Multi-Agent Challenge (SMAC) Samvelyan et al. (2019) and Multi-Agent
Particle Environment (MPE) Lowe et al. (2017). In our experiments, we combine IGNT-MAC with
four representative CTDE-based MARL methods i.e., VDN Sunehag et al. (2018) for additive value
decomposition, QMIX Rashid et al. (2018) for monotonic value decomposition, QTRAN Son et al.
(2019) for non-linear value decomposition and FOP Zhang et al. (2021) for the linear value de-
composition with entropy regularization. The experimental results demonstrate that the IGNT-MAC
induces better performance in terms of convergence speed and stability.
In summary, our contributions are as follows:
        • We propose a new condition called Individual-global-Transform-Optimal (IGTO)
          with well theoretical guarantee, which relaxes the constraint of rigorous equivalency of
          individual-global actions in CTDE-based multi-agent reinforcement learning.
        • We design an Individual-Global Normalized Transformation (IGNT) rule to satisfy this
          IGTO condition, which has also theoretical guarantee of optimal individual-global policies.
        • We propose an Individual-Global Normalized Transformation Multi-agent Actor-
          Critic (IGNT-MAC) framework integrating IGNT rule for cooperative multi-agent tasks.
        • We conduct experiments on SMAC and MPE benchmarks, and the results demonstrate that
          our IGNT-MAC framework indeed induces better performance and better stability in most
          tasks, which verifies the benefits of IGNT-MAC in cooperative MARL.

2     P RELIMINARIES
2.1    P ROBLEM F ORMULATION

The cooperative MARL problem can be formulated as a decentralized partially observable
markov decision process (Dec-POMDP) Oliehoek & Amato (2016), which is defined by a tuple
G =< I, S, O, U, T , P, r, γ >. I is the team of N agents {1, 2, · · · , N }, and S is a finite set of en-
vironmental state. The joint observation at time t is denoted as ot = {ot1 , · · · , otN }, which consists


                                                         2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


of local observation of each agent. At time t, each agent takes individual action uti ∈ Ui based on its
own observation oti , and then all individual actions together forming the joint action ut ∈ U. Each
agent has an action-observation historical trajectory τit = {o1i , u1i , · · · , ot−1
                                                                                  i   , ut−1
                                                                                         i   , oti } ∈ T i ≡
            ∗
(Oi × Ui ) , on which it conditions a stochastic policy πi (ui |τi ) : T × U → [0, 1]. The state
transition function P(s′ |s, u) : S × U × S → [0, 1] denotes the probability density of the next state
s′ ∈ S given the current state s ∈ S and the joint action u ∈ U. Moreover, the environment
generates an immediately global reward r : S × U → [rmin , rmax ] shared with all agents on each
transition, which we will abbreviate as r ≜ r(s, u) to simplify notation, and γ ∈ (0, 1] is the dis-
count factor that represents the value of time. To address the problem of partial observability that
each agent can only obtain its own local observation, the state s is often replaced by the action-
observation historical trajectory τ . In addition, we will use ρπjt (τt , ut ) to denote the state-action
marginals of the trajectory distribution induced by joint policy πjt (u|τ ).

2.2    M AXIMUM E NTROPY M ULTI -AGENT R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING

For customary MARL, the     Pgoal is to find the optimal joint policy that maximizes the average cumu-
lative reward E(τ,u)∼ρπjt [ t γ t r(τt , ut )]. To improve learning speed and exploration efficiency Fox
et al. (2015); Grau-Moya et al. (2016); Haarnoja et al. (2017); Schulman et al. (2017); Haarnoja
et al. (2018), we consider a general maximum entropy MARL(MaxEnt MARL), which augments
the reward with an entropy of policy term Ziebart (2010) H(π(·|τ )) = −E [logπ(·|τ )]. That is, the
optimal joint policy aims to maximize its cumulative reward and entropy simultaneously at each
visited state, formally,
                                      X
                      πjt∗ = argmax         E(τt ,ut )∼πjt [r(τt , ut ) + αH(πjt (·|τt ))] ,          (1)
                                     πjt
                                           t

where α is a temperature parameter that determines the relative importance between the en-
tropy term and the global reward. Under the MaxEnt MARL framework, we introduce two
value functions: soft joint Q-function Qsoft                                             soft
                                              jt (τ, u) and soft joint V-function Vjt (τ ), which are
defined similarly for single agent in soft Q-learning Haarnoja et al. (2017). For all agents be-
having based on a stochastic joint policy ρjt , soft joint Q-function denotes the value of joint
action-observation historical trajectory-action pair (τt , ut ), which is defined as Qsoft    jt (τt , ut ) =
                                 hP                                           i
                                   ∞    l                       ∗
r(τt , ut ) + E(τt+l ,··· )∼ρπjt   l=1 γ (r(τt+l , ut+l ) + αH(πjt (·|τt+l ))) . Soft joint V-function rep-
resents the value of joint action-observation historical trajectory τt , which is defined as Vjtsoft (τt ) =
                            ′    ′
αlog U exp( α1 Qsoft
     R
                  jt (τt , u ))du .

Furthermore, from the perspective of dueling structure Q = V +A proposed by Dueling DQN Wang
et al. (2016), we also define a significant quantity, the soft joint A-function Asoft jt (τ, u) that denotes
the value of joint action u according to a stochastic joint policy ρjt , which is defined as Asoft
                                                                                               jt (τt , ut ) =
Qjt (τt , ut ) − Vjt (τt ). Intuitively, the soft joint A-function denotes the difference between Qsoft
  soft              soft
                                                                                                            jt
and Vjtsoft , which implies a relative measure of the importance of joint action u.
According to the above definitions, the soft joint Q-function     h          and soft joint V-function
                                                                                                 i        satisfy the
soft Bellman equation Qsoft     jt (τt , ut ) =  E (τt ,ut )∼ρπjt  r(τ t , ut ) + γV soft
                                                                                    jt    (τt+1 )  and V  soft
                                                                                                         jt (τt ) =
                h                                i
Eut ∼πjt (·|τt ) Qsoft
                  jt (τt , ut ) − αlogπjt (·|τt ) . In addition, we can deduce the optimal joint policy
πjt∗ = exp( α1 Asoft
                jt (τt , ut )). The detailed proof of above consequences are referred to Appendix B.


2.3    D ECOMPOSITION -BASED M ULTI -AGENT R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING

In realistic multi-agent environments, each agent only captures local observation because of the lim-
itation of environment, which leads to the decentralized policy may not converge to a global optimal
solution. That is, the inconsistency between the optimal joint actions and the optimal individual
behaviors often occurs if the agent cannot obtain global information (including other agents’ states),
which might come from signal interruption, communication limitation or other factors such as in
underwater, war battle environments. Therefore, the fashion of centralized training with decentral-
ized execution (CTDE) is most commonly used in cooperative MARL, where each agent learns the


                                                         3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


policy by optimizing individual action value function based on the partial observation of each agent
and global state during the training phase, and agent makes a decision with local observation at
execution phase. In recent years, numerous decomposition-based multi-agent reinforcement learn-
ing (Decom-MARL) methods Sunehag et al. (2018); Rashid et al. (2018); Son et al. (2019); Wang
et al. (2020; 2021); Shen et al. (2022) have been proposed for the paradigm of CTDE. The key idea
of Decom-MARL is to factorize the joint action value function into individual action value func-
tion for any factorizable MARL tasks to make sure the consistency between global and individual
optimal policy, which can be formulated as follows,
                       Qjt (τ, u) = F (Q1 (τ1 , u1 ), Q2 (τ2 , u2 ), · · · , Qn (τn , un )),           (2)
where F is a decomposition function, Qjt (τ, u) denotes the joint action value of joint action-
observation historical trajectory τ and action u, and Qi (τi , ui ), i = 1, 2, · · · , n represents the in-
dividual action value of individual action-observation historical trajectory τi and action ui .
In particular, the decomposition function of Decom-MARL methods roughly fall into two cate-
gories: monotonic linear function Sunehag et al. (2018); Rashid et al. (2018); Wang et al. (2020)
and nonlinear function Son et al. (2019); Wang et al. (2021); Shen et al. (2022). As representative
works, QMIX Rashid et al. (2018) and QTRAN Sunehag et al. (2018) learn a value decomposition
by using a monotonic linear function and a nonlinear function, respectively. Most Decom-MARL
methods under the CTDE paradigm are required to satisfy Individual-Global-Max (IGM) Son et al.
(2019), which is a significant condition to keep the consistency between global and individual policy
in the centralized training process, formally,

             arg max Qjt (τ, u) = arg max Q1 (τ1 , u1 ), · · · , arg max QN (τN , uN ) .          (3)
                   u                          u1                                 uN


As also discussed in Wan et al. (2022), although these approaches guarantee the IGM condition, it is
impractical for them to learn complete factorized representations in some complicated MARL tasks
because the joint action space grows exponentially with the number of agents. Furthermore, the
operator arg max of IGM condition makes these methods only applicable to discrete action space.
Therefore, FOP Zhang et al. (2021) proposes a method that directly factorize the optimal joint policy
instead of the joint value function into individual policies, and give a constraint of optimal policy
consistency: Individual-Global-Optimal (IGO), i.e.,
                                                          N
                                                          Y
                                          πjt∗ (u|τ ) =         πi∗ (ui |τi ),                         (4)
                                                          i=1

where πjt∗ (u|τ ) denotes the optimal joint policy under the global action-observation historical tra-
jectory τ and πi∗ (ui |τi ) is the optimal individual policy under the local action-observation historical
trajectory τi . Although the IGO condition offers greater generality compared to the IGM condition
for any factorizable cooperative MARL tasks and allows the approach (FOP) applied to assignments
involving discrete or continuous actions, it learns an optimal joint policy for entropy-regularized
Dec-POMDP rather than the original MDP, i.e., the converged policy may be biased Eysenbach &
Levine (2019), which might lead to unsatisfied performance in some complicated environments. For
example, some experimental results, such as on the scenario 3s vs 5z and MMM2 of SMAC (Fig-
ure 2), show that FOP under the IGO constraint can not achieve satisfactory performance including
convergence speed and stability.


3    I NDIVIDUAL -G LOBAL T RANSFORM O PTIMAL C ONDITION

In order to relax the restriction of rigorous equivalency of individual-global actions in CTDE-based
MARL, in favor of the consistency of policy distribution, we attempt to introduce the normalized
transformation constraint between individual and global actions. In specific, considering a category
of sequential decision-making problems that can be factorized during the centralized training stage,
we define a new condition (Individual-Global-Transform-Optimal, IGTO):
Definition 1 (IGTO). For an optimal joint policy πjt∗ (u|τ ) : τ × u → [0, 1], where τ is
a joint trajectory and u is a joint action, if there exists a transformed joint action u
                                                                                       e =


                                                          4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


[e    e2 ; · · · ; u
 u1 ; u            eN ], which is expressed by an invertible transformation F , and individual optimal
                ∗                          N
policies [πi (ui |τi ) : τi × ui → [0, 1]]i=1 , such that the following holds
                                                    N
                                                    Y                       N
                                                                            Y
                                    πjt∗ (e
                                          u|τ ) =         ei∗ (e
                                                          π    ui |τi ) =         πi∗ (ui |τi ),                          (5)
                                                    i=1                     i=1

                                    s.t. u e = F (u), u = F −1 (e    u).                                      (6)
then, we say that [πi ] satisfy IGTO for πjt under τ . That is, πjt∗ (u|τ ) is factorized by [πi∗ (ui |τi )].

The individual-global action-transformed condition is permitting inconsistent individual-global ac-
tions while guaranteeing the equivalency of their policy distributions. In particular, the requirement
of transformation invertibility in the IGTO condition is that we expect to have a well matching rela-
tion between individual actions and global behaviors. Furthermore, under the IGTO condition, we
can obtain individual transformed policy improvement by the global joint policy optimization in the
centralized training procedure, whose proof is deferred to Appendix C.3.
Theorem 1. (Policy Preservation) If we sequentially perform the transformation fi :
                     [e
                      ui ; u
                           b−i ] = fi (ui , u
                                            b−i ),        u      u1 , · · · , u
                                                          b−i = [e            ei−1 ; ui+1 , · · · , uN ] ,                (7)
, the Jacobian matrix of the transformation exists and the Jacobian determinant satisfies |Gi | =
| ∂[u∂f u−i ] | = 1, then individual global transform optimal in Definition 1 is provable.
        i
     i ;b



Proof. The proof is deferred to Appendix C.1.

Theorem 1 shows that if and only if the Jacobian determinant satisfies |Gi | = 1 for transformation
fi , the optimal individual policy distribution will be consistent with the optimal joint policy distri-
bution. Thus, we will introduce how to design the transformation fi to guarantee this requirement.

4     L EARNING TO I NDIVIDUAL G LOBAL T RANSFORMATION
In this section, we firstly design a Individual-Global Normalized Transformation (IGNT) rule to
satisfy the IGTO constraint. Then we derive the transform policy iteration and prove individual-
global policies converge to optimal. Finally we propose a novel cooperative MARL framework,
Individual-Global Normalized Transformation Multi-agent Actor-Critic (IGNT-MAC) integrating
IGNT. Note that all proofs (w.r.t Propositon, Lemma and Theory) are deferred to Appendix C.

4.1    I NDIVIDUAL -G LOBAL N ORMALIZED T RANSFORMATION

In realistic multi-agent settings, the dimensionality of joint action space grows with the increasing
number of agents, which results in performing the calculation of the Jacobian determinant |Gi | is
computationally demanding. Therefore, we have to carefully design a tractable and flexible trans-
form function. We take advantage of the straightforward observation that the determinant of a
triangular matrix can be efficiently calculated by taking the product of its diagonal elements. As a
result, we build a tractable and flexible transformation called normalized transformation by stack-
ing a sequence of bijections. In every bijection, one part of input vector i.e., ui is updated using
a function that is easy to reverse, but its outcome relies on the remaining part of input vector i.e.,
 u1 , · · · , u
[e            ei−1 , ui+1 , · · · , uN ] in a sophisticated manner.
                                                                                                     N
Definition 2 (Normalized Transformation). Given the individual actions [ui ]i=1 , and transformed
                             N
action variables [e     ui ]i=1 , the bijection function fi (ui , u b−i ) : u = [e   u1 , · · · , u
                                                                                                  ei−1 , ui , · · · , uN ] →
u
e = [eu1 , · · · , u
                   ei , ui+1 ; · · · ; uN ] can be defined as
                                      (
                                         ei = ui ⊙ F1i exp(gi (b
                                         u                        u−i )) + hi (b
                                                                               u−i )
                                                                                                                           (8)
                                         u
                                         e−i = u   b−i
                                                                     P
where ub−i = [e    u1 , · · · , u
                                ei−1 ; ui+1 , · · · , uN ], Fi = exp( g(b  u−i )) is a normalization factor, gi and
hi stand for scale and translation, and are functions from RN −1 7→ R, and ⊙ is the element-wise
product or Hadamard product.


                                                                5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Proposition 1. The transformation in Definition 2 makes policy preservation in Theorem 1.

The Proposition 1 indicates that for any factorizable MARL tasks, the optimal individual action
distributions and the global behavior distribution are aligned by applying a series of reversible affine
transformations to joint action. Moreover, the proof of Proposition 1 demonstrates that the scale
and translation functions g, h can be arbitrarily intricate, because the computation of the Jacobian
determinant for the affine transformation operation does not require calculating the Jacobian of g, h.
Therefore, we will utilize deep convolutional neural networks for them. Note that the hidden layers
of both g and h can contain a higher number of features compared to their input and output layers.

4.2   T RANSFORM P OLICY I TERATION

According to the above introduction of IGTO condition, we can derive transform policy iteration for
completing the update of individual-global transformed policy that alternates between transform pol-
icy evaluation and transform policy improvement under the maximum entropy MARL framework.
To give conveniently a theoretical analysis, the derivation is based on the discrete action setting.
In the policy evaluation step of transform policy iteration, we need to calculate the soft joint value
for the joint policy πjt according to the goal of maximum entropy MARL in Eq. (1). We firstly define
the transform Bellman backup operator Tπtra      jt
                                                    as

                         Tπtra Qsoft                   et ) + γEτt+1 ∼ρ Vjtsoft (τt+1 ) ,

                            jt  jt (τt , u
                                         et ) ≜ r(τt , u                                           (9)
where
                          Vjtsoft (τt ) = Eue∼πjt Qsoft

                                                            et ) − logπjt (e
                                                   jt (τt , u              ut |τt ) .                  (10)

Then we can update the soft joint Q-function Qsoft
                                              jt for a fixed joint policy by repeatedly applying the
transform Bellman backup operator.
Lemma 1 (Transform Policy Evaluation). Consider the transform Bellman backup operator Tπtra
                                                                                         jt

in Eq. (9) and a mapping Q0 : τ × Ue → R with |A|<∞, and define Qk+1 = Tπtra Qk . Then the
                               jt                                                  jt      jt   jt
sequence Qkjt will converge to the soft joint Q-value of πjt as k → ∞.

In the policy improvement step of transform policy iteration, we update the joint policy to the expo-
nential of the new value function e.g. α1 Asoft
                                           jt (τ, u). However, it is intractable to perform this form of
joint policy precisely in practice. Therefore, we will restrict the joint policy to some set of tractable
policies Π, for example, a parameterized family of distributions. From the definition of IGTO, the
joint policy can be represented by the combination of individual policies. In particular, the individ-
ual action u
           ei is transformed by an affine transformation from the joint action u. Thus, we can project
the new individual policies to the desired set of policies. To compute conveniently projection, we
choose the K-L divergence, and the update rule of joint policy is given by
                                                                        old
                                                              exp(Qπjt (τt , ·))
                          πjtnew = argmin DKL (π(·|τt ) ∥              old         ),                  (11)
                                       π∈Π                         Z πjt (τt )
           old
where Z πjt (τt ) is a normalization term. According to the update of joint policy, we will prove
that the Q-value of new joint policy is higher than the old joint policy and formalize the following
lemma.
Lemma 2 (Transform Policy Improvement). Let πjtold ∈ Π and let πjtnew be the optimizer of the
                                                 new               old
minimization problem defined in Eq. (11). Then Qπjt (τt , u
                                                          et ) ≥ Qπjt (τt , u                  et ) ∈ τ × Ue
                                                                            et ) for all (τt , u
with |U|<∞.
      e

In particular, lemma 1 and 2 can be regarded as a consequence of the conclusion drawn from
SAC Haarnoja et al. (2018). Furthermore, lemma 2 shows that if we have an existing old policy
πjtold and we can find a new policy πjtnew that satisfies Eq. (11), the new policy πjtnew is superior
to the old policy πjtold . By alternating iteratively between the transform policy evaluation and the
transform policy improvement, the joint policy will provably converge to the optimal solution, which
is formalized as Theorem 2.


                                                      6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Theorem 2 (Transform Policy Iteration). Repeated application of Transform Policy Evaluation
and Transform Policy Improvement, we can obtain a sequence Qksoft and this sequence will converge
towards the optimal soft Q-function Q∗soft , while the corresponding sequence of policies will converge
towards the optimal policy πjt∗ .

Theorem 2 indicates that by repeatedly applying transform policy evaluation and transform policy
improvement, the joint policy can progressively enhance and ultimately converge to the optimal
policy. According to the above discussion, we will extend the transform policy iteration into the
continuous setting and propose a practical Individual-Global Normalized Transformation Multi-
agent Actor-Critic (IGNT-MAC) framework integrating IGNT rule for cooperative multi-agent tasks.

4.3   IGNT M ULTI - AGENT ACTOR -C RITIC

We first present the practical update rule of the critic of IGNT-MAC. According to the defini-
tion of transform bellman backup operatorh in Eq. (9), the soft joint Q-value canibe expressed as
Qsoft
  jt (τt , u             et ) + γEτt+1 ∼ρ,eu∼πjt Qsoft
           et ) = r(τt , u                                   et+1 ) − logπjt (e
                                                  jt (τt+1 , u                ut+1 |τt+1 ) . Therefore, the
critic is trained by minimize the following loss:
                                              b
                                              X   i
                                                 (yjt − Qsoft   e; θ))2 ,

                                LQjt (θ) =               jt (τ, u                                     (12)
                                              i=1
                        h                                      i
                                  ′    ′                  ′ ′
                 e) + γ Qsoft
where yjt = r(τ, u          jt (τ   , u
                                      e  ; θ) − logπ jt (u |τ )  , θ and θ denote the parameters of current
and target networks, and b represent the batch size of transitions sample from the replay buffer.
Then, according to the Lemma 2, we can derive the objective of joint policy,

                                                             exp(Qjt (τ, ·))
                       Jπjt (ϕ) = Eτ ∼ρ DKL (πjt (·|τ ; ϕ) ∥                 ) .                      (13)
                                                                Zjt (τ )
The optimal joint policy can be expressed as follows,
                                                       exp(Qjt (τ, ·))
                       πjt = arg min DKL (πjt (·|τ ) ∥                 )
                                  πjt                     Zjt (τ )
                                                                                                      (14)
                                      X                                  Zjt (τ )
                           = arg max          u|τ ) Qjt (τ, u
                                         πjt (e             e) + log               .
                                  πjt                                       u|τ )
                                                                       πjt (e
                                         u
                                         e
                                                                             QN
From the IGTO condition, we can obtain the joint policy πjt (e     u|τ ) = i=1 πi (ui |τi ). Thus, the
objective of each actor (individual policy) πi , parameterized by ϕi , can be formulated as follows,
                                                                                     

                                      X                                  Zjt (τ ) 
                 Jπi (ϕi ) = Eτi ∼ρi     πi (ui |τi ) Qjt (τ, u
                                                               e) + log                 ,         (15)
                                                                        πi (ui |τi )
                                         u
                                         ei

which can be optimized with stochastic gradients,
                     ˆ ϕ Jπ (ϕi ) = ∇ϕ logπi (ui |τi ) [Qjt (τ, u
                     ∇                                          e) − logπi (ui |τi )] .               (16)
                        i  i          i


Since the objective of each individual policy in Eq. (15) is independent of the behaviors of the other
agents, the gradient exhibits lower variance compared to MARL methods that rely on a centralized
critic. According to the above update rules of IGNT-MAC, the training process for the IGNT-MAC
framework are presented in Appendix D.

5     E XPERIMENTS
The goal of our experiments is to explore and examine how IGNT-MAC enhances the performance
of existing MARL algorithms. IGNT-MAC is a flexible framework and can be integrated with
numerous existing MARL algorithms. In our experiments, we select four representative meth-
ods: VDN Sunehag et al. (2018), QMIX Rashid et al. (2018), QTRAN Son et al. (2019), and


                                                     7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


FOP Zhang et al. (2021), which are only adjusted in order to adapt these algorithms to the IGNT-
MAC framework. We denote the modified methods as VDN+IGNT, QMIX+IGNT, QTRAN+IGNT
and FOP+IGNT. The modifications for these algorithms are limited, aiming to preserve the original
architecture and ensure a fair demonstration of the enhancements brought by IGNT. The intricate de-
tails of adjustments and hyperparameters are deferred to Appendix F. We use StarCraft Multi-Agent
Challenge (SMAC) Samvelyan et al. (2019) and Multi-Agent Particle Environment(MPE) Lowe
et al. (2017) to experimentally evaluate the performance of IGNT-MAC in discrete or continuous
action space. All experiments are conducted on 2.90GHz Intel Core i7-10700 CPU, 64G RAM and
NVIDIA GeForce RTX 3090 GPU. Note that all results are based on four training runs with different
random seeds in the experiments.

5.1   T EST ON S TAR C RAFT M ULTI -AGENT C HALLENGE

We conduct experiments in the three different level tasks including 1c3s5z(easy), 3s vs 5z(hard) and
MMM2(super hard). In SMAC, agents, which select actions that conditions on local observation in
limited field of view by a MARL approach, compete against an integrated game AI, striving to defeat
their opponents. For all battle scenarios, the goal is to maximize the win rate and episode reward.
The more details of SMAC environment and training are introduced in Appendix E.1.
The learning curves of average success rates in three scenarios are illustrated in Figure 2(four
columns for four methods and three rows for three various maps). Additionally, the learning curves
in terms of average episode rewards are provided in Appendix G including three additional scenarios
such as 8m, 2c vs 64zg and 25m. We can observed that the two performance metrics (average win
rates and episode rewards) are not always positively correlated. This is evident in the case of QMIX
and QTRAN in the 3s vs 5z scenario. The reason for this discrepancy is that the primary objective of
the task of StarCraft II is to achieve victory by eliminating all enemies. However, MARL algorithms
aim to maximize the average reward, which includes both the episodic reward (i.e., game victory)
and the immediate rewards (i.e., inflicting damage to enemies or receiving self-damage penalties).


Figure 2: The performance in terms of average success rates for some baselines (VDN, QMIX,
QTRAN and FOP) and their variants under the framework of IGNT-MAC on different scenarios of
SMAC benchmark including 1c3s5z, 3s vs 5z and MMM2, which respectively correspond to the
three levels of difficulties: easy, hard and super hard. In particular, each row exhibits the results of
different groups in the same scenario.

The experimental results demonstrate that, in general, these variants within the IGNT-MAC frame-
work exhibit comparable performance to the baseline methods in the easy scenario, while surpassing
them by a significant margin in the more challenging tasks. This superiority is evident in terms of
learning speed and final performance. In specific, we can observe that the factorized value-based


                                                   8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


methods (VDN, QMIX, QTRAN) and factorized actor-critic approach (FOP) integrated with IGNT
rule exhibit fast learning compared to the original baselines in the easy task (1c3s5z), which high-
lights the efficiency of individual-global normalized transformation. In all scenarios, FOP+IGNT
outperforms FOP significantly and exhibits average win rates that are higher than 60% and 30% on
the 3s vs 5z and MMM2. The above experimental results can be an evidence for the advantages of
IGNT rule which could ensure the policy monotonic improvement in the Dec-POMDP.

5.2   T EST ON M ULTI -AGENT PARTICLE E NVIRONMENT

The Multi-agent particle environment(MPE) contains cooperative or competitive games, which con-
sists of N agents, landmarks and obstacles inhabiting a two dimensional world with continuous
space and discrete time. Agents can perform physical actions within the environment and commu-
nication actions that get broadcasted to other agents. In our experiments, we exclusively consider
cooperative tasks to assess the effectiveness of the IGNT-MAC framework. The more details regard-
ing these cooperative tasks are deferred to Appendix E.2.


Figure 3: The performance in terms of average episode rewards for some baselines (VDN and
QTRAN) and their variants under the framework of IGNT-MAC on different tasks of MPE including
Cooperative Navigation, Modified Predator-prey, Physical Deception 2 and Physical Deception 4.
In particular, each columns exhibits the results of different groups in the same scenario.

We evaluate the two groups of methods using the MPE benchmark, and their performance is shown
in Figure 3. It can be observed that IGNT-MAC outperforms the comparison baselines in all four
scenarios at the end of training. Furthermore, VDN+IGNT and QTRAN+IGNT exhibit superior
learning rates compared to the original methods. Although some baselines learns faster than the
variants under the IGNT-MAC framework in some scenarios such as Physical Deception 2, they
tend to converge to suboptimal policies, whereas IGNT-MAC is able to discover better policies to
successfully complete the cooperative tasks.

6     C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we proposed a novel cooperative MARL framework called Individual-Global Normal-
ized Transformation Multi-agent Actor-Critic (IGNT-MAC). In particular, to relax the restriction,
i.e., IGM or IGO, for rigorous equivalency of individual-global actions, we posed an individual-
global action-transformed condition named individual-global-Transform-Optimal (IGTO) to permit
inconsistent individual-global actions while guaranteeing the equivalency of their policy distribu-
tions. In order to satisfy the IGTO condition, we designed an reversible Individual-Global Normal-
ized Transformation (IGNT) for global joint actions to make policy preservation, which could be
seamlessly implanted into many existing CTDE-based algorithms. Furthermore, we proved theo-
retically the individual-global transform policies converge to optimum under the IGNT rule. The
experimental results in StarCraft Multi-Agent Challenge (SMAC) and Multi-Agent Particle Envi-
ronment (MPE) demonstrate that the IGNT rule implanted into existing MARL methods outperform
the original approaches in terms of convergence speed and stability.


                                                 9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Vladimir Igorevich Bogachev and Maria Aparecida Soares Ruas. Measure theory, volume 1.
  Springer, 2007.

Christian Schroeder de Witt, Bei Peng, Pierre-Alexandre Kamienny, Philip Torr, Wendelin Böhmer,
  and Shimon Whiteson. Deep multi-agent reinforcement learning for decentralized continuous
  cooperative control. arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.06709, 2020.

Benjamin Eysenbach and Sergey Levine. If maxent rl is the answer, what is the question?, 2019.

Jakob Foerster, Gregory Farquhar, Triantafyllos Afouras, Nantas Nardelli, and Shimon Whiteson.
  Counterfactual multi-agent policy gradients. Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial
  intelligence, 32(1), 2018.

Roy Fox, Ari Pakman, and Naftali Tishby. Taming the noise in reinforcement learning via soft
  updates. arXiv preprint arXiv:1512.08562, 2015.

Jordi Grau-Moya, Felix Leibfried, Tim Genewein, and Daniel A Braun. Planning with information-
  processing constraints and model uncertainty in markov decision processes. In Machine Learning
  and Knowledge Discovery in Databases: European Conference, ECML PKDD 2016, Riva del
  Garda, Italy, September 19-23, 2016, Proceedings, Part II 16, pp. 475–491. Springer, 2016.

Tuomas Haarnoja, Haoran Tang, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Reinforcement learning with
  deep energy-based policies. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 1352–1361.
  PMLR, 2017.

Tuomas Haarnoja, Aurick Zhou, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Soft actor-critic: Off-policy
  maximum entropy deep reinforcement learning with a stochastic actor. In International confer-
  ence on machine learning, pp. 1861–1870. PMLR, 2018.

Xiaoliang Hu, Pengcheng Guo, Chuanwei Zhou, Tong Zhang, and Zhen Cui. Tvdo: Tcheby-
  cheff value-decomposition optimization for multi-agent reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2306.13979, 2023.

Dong Ki Kim, Miao Liu, Matthew D Riemer, Chuangchuang Sun, Marwa Abdulhai, Golnaz Habibi,
  Sebastian Lopez-Cot, Gerald Tesauro, and Jonathan How. A policy gradient algorithm for learning
  to learn in multiagent reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
  pp. 5541–5550. PMLR, 2021.

Karol Kurach, Anton Raichuk, Piotr Stańczyk, Michał Zajac, Olivier Bachem, Lasse Espeholt, Car-
  los Riquelme, Damien Vincent, Marcin Michalski, Olivier Bousquet, et al. Google research
  football: A novel reinforcement learning environment. In Proceedings of the AAAI conference on
  artificial intelligence, volume 34, pp. 4501–4510, 2020.

Ryan Lowe, Yi I Wu, Aviv Tamar, Jean Harb, OpenAI Pieter Abbeel, and Igor Mordatch. Multi-
  agent actor-critic for mixed cooperative-competitive environments. Advances in neural informa-
  tion processing systems, 30, 2017.

Frans A Oliehoek and Christopher Amato. A concise introduction to decentralized POMDPs.
  Springer, 2016.

OpenAI, Christopher Berner, Greg Brockman, Brooke Chan, Vicki Cheung, Przemysław Debiak,
  Christy Dennison, David Farhi, Quirin Fischer, Shariq Hashme, Chris Hesse, Rafal Józefowicz,
  Scott Gray, Catherine Olsson, Jakub Pachocki, Michael Petrov, Henrique P. d. O. Pinto, Jonathan
  Raiman, Tim Salimans, Jeremy Schlatter, Jonas Schneider, Szymon Sidor, Ilya Sutskever, Jie
  Tang, Filip Wolski, and Susan Zhang. Dota 2 with large scale deep reinforcement learning. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1912.06680, 2019.

Tabish Rashid, Mikayel Samvelyan, Christian Schroeder, Gregory Farquhar, Jakob Foerster, and
  Shimon Whiteson. Qmix: Monotonic value function factorisation for deep multi-agent reinforce-
  ment learning. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 4295–4304. PMLR, 2018.


                                               10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Tabish Rashid, Gregory Farquhar, Bei Peng, and Shimon Whiteson. Weighted qmix: Expanding
  monotonic value function factorisation for deep multi-agent reinforcement learning. Advances in
  neural information processing systems, 33:10199–10210, 2020.

Walter Rudin. Real and complex analysis. 1987. Cited on, 156:16, 1987.

Mikayel Samvelyan, Tabish Rashid, Christian Schroeder De Witt, Gregory Farquhar, Nantas
 Nardelli, Tim GJ Rudner, Chia-Man Hung, Philip HS Torr, Jakob Foerster, and Shimon Whiteson.
 The starcraft multi-agent challenge. arXiv preprint arXiv:1902.04043, 2019.

John Schulman, Xi Chen, and Pieter Abbeel. Equivalence between policy gradients and soft q-
  learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1704.06440, 2017.

Alireza Shamsoshoara, Mehrdad Khaledi, Fatemeh Afghah, Abolfazl Razi, and Jonathan Ashdown.
  Distributed cooperative spectrum sharing in uav networks using multi-agent reinforcement learn-
  ing. In 2019 16th IEEE Annual Consumer Communications & Networking Conference (CCNC),
  pp. 1–6. IEEE, 2019.

Siqi Shen, Mengwei Qiu, Jun Liu, Weiquan Liu, Yongquan Fu, Xinwang Liu, and Cheng Wang.
  Resq: A residual q function-based approach for multi-agent reinforcement learning value factor-
  ization. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:5471–5483, 2022.

Junjie Sheng, Yiqiu Hu, Wenli Zhou, Lei Zhu, Bo Jin, Jun Wang, and Xiangfeng Wang. Learning
  to schedule multi-numa virtual machines via reinforcement learning. Pattern Recognition, 121:
  108254, 2022.

Kyunghwan Son, Daewoo Kim, Wan Ju Kang, David Earl Hostallero, and Yung Yi. Qtran: Learning
  to factorize with transformation for cooperative multi-agent reinforcement learning. In Interna-
  tional conference on machine learning, pp. 5887–5896. PMLR, 2019.

Wei-Fang Sun, Cheng-Kuang Lee, and Chun-Yi Lee. Dfac framework: Factorizing the value func-
 tion via quantile mixture for multi-agent distributional q-learning. In International Conference
 on Machine Learning, pp. 9945–9954. PMLR, 2021.

Peter Sunehag, Guy Lever, Audrunas Gruslys, Wojciech Marian Czarnecki, Vinı́cius Flores Zam-
  baldi, Max Jaderberg, Marc Lanctot, Nicolas Sonnerat, Joel Z Leibo, Karl Tuyls, et al. Value-
  decomposition networks for cooperative multi-agent learning based on team reward. In AAMAS,
  2018.

Richard S Sutton and Andrew G Barto. Reinforcement learning: An introduction. Robotica, 17(2):
  229–235, 1999.

Lipeng Wan, Zeyang Liu, Xingyu Chen, Xuguang Lan, and Nanning Zheng. Greedy based
  value representation for optimal coordination in multi-agent reinforcement learning. In Pro-
  ceedings of the 39th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 162 of Proceed-
  ings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 22512–22535. PMLR, 17–23 Jul 2022. URL https:
  //proceedings.mlr.press/v162/wan22c.html.

Jianhao Wang, Zhizhou Ren, Terry Liu, Yang Yu, and Chongjie Zhang. Qplex: Duplex dueling
   multi-agent q-learning. In ICLR, 2021.

Yihan Wang, Beining Han, Tonghan Wang, Heng Dong, and Chongjie Zhang. Off-policy multi-
  agent decomposed policy gradients. arXiv preprint arXiv:2007.12322, 2020.

Ziyu Wang, Tom Schaul, Matteo Hessel, Hado Hasselt, Marc Lanctot, and Nando Freitas. Dueling
  network architectures for deep reinforcement learning. In International conference on machine
  learning, pp. 1995–2003. PMLR, 2016.

Tong Wu, Pan Zhou, Kai Liu, Yali Yuan, Xiumin Wang, Huawei Huang, and Dapeng Oliver Wu.
  Multi-agent deep reinforcement learning for urban traffic light control in vehicular networks.
  IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, 69(8):8243–8256, 2020.


                                               11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Yaodong Yang, Jianye Hao, Ben Liao, Kun Shao, Guangyong Chen, Wulong Liu, and Hongyao
  Tang. Qatten: A general framework for cooperative multiagent reinforcement learning. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2002.03939, 2020.
Deheng Ye, Guibin Chen, Wen Zhang, Sheng Chen, Bo Yuan, Bo Liu, Jia Chen, Zhao Liu, Fuhao
  Qiu, Hongsheng Yu, et al. Towards playing full moba games with deep reinforcement learning.
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:621–632, 2020.
Tianhao Zhang, Yueheng Li, Chen Wang, Guangming Xie, and Zongqing Lu. Fop: Factorizing
  optimal joint policy of maximum-entropy multi-agent reinforcement learning. In International
  Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 12491–12500. PMLR, 2021.
Ming Zhou, Jun Luo, Julian Villella, Yaodong Yang, David Rusu, Jiayu Miao, Weinan Zhang, Mont-
 gomery Alban, Iman Fadakar, Zheng Chen, Aurora Chongxi Huang, Ying Wen, Kimia Hassan-
 zadeh, Daniel Graves, Dong Chen, Zhengbang Zhu, Nhat Nguyen, Mohamed Elsayed, Kun Shao,
 Sanjeevan Ahilan, Baokuan Zhang, Jiannan Wu, Zhengang Fu, Kasra Rezaee, Peyman Yadmel-
 lat, Mohsen Rohani, Nicolas Perez Nieves, Yihan Ni, Seyedershad Banijamali, Alexander Cowen
 Rivers, Zheng Tian, Daniel Palenicek, Haitham bou Ammar, Hongbo Zhang, Wulong Liu, Jianye
 Hao, and Jun Wang. Smarts: Scalable multi-agent reinforcement learning training school for
 autonomous driving. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.09776, 2020.
Brian D Ziebart. Modeling purposeful adaptive behavior with the principle of maximum causal
  entropy. Carnegie Mellon University, 2010.
Matthieu Zimmer, Claire Glanois, Umer Siddique, and Paul Weng. Learning fair policies in decen-
 tralized cooperative multi-agent reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Machine
 Learning, pp. 12967–12978. PMLR, 2021.
Roy Zohar, Shie Mannor, and Guy Tennenholtz. Locality matters: A scalable value decomposi-
  tion approach for cooperative multi-agent reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the AAAI
  Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pp. 9278–9285, 2022.


                                              12
