Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


F IXED -B UDGET B EST A RM I DENTIFICATION
WITH VARIANCE -D EPENDENT R EGRET B OUNDS

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT
         We investigate the problem of fixed-budget best arm identification (BAI) for
         minimizing expected simple regret. In an adaptive experiment, a decision-maker
         draws one of multiple arms based on past observations and observes the outcome
         of the drawn arm. At the end of the experiment, the decision-maker recommends
         an arm with the highest expected outcome. We evaluate the decision based on the
         expected simple regret, which is the difference between the expected outcomes of
         the best arm and the recommended arm. Due to inherent uncertainty, we consider
         the worst-case analysis for the expected simple regret. First, we derive asymptotic
         lower bounds for the worst-case expected simple regret, which are characterized by
         the variances of potential outcomes (leading factor). Based on the lower bounds,
         we propose the Adaptive-Sampling (AS)-Augmented Inverse Probability Weighting
         (AIPW) strategy, which utilizes the AIPW estimator in recommending the best
         arm. Our theoretical analysis shows that the AS-AIPW strategy is asymptotically
         minimax optimal, meaning that the leading factor of its worst-case expected simple
         regret matches our derived worst-case lower bound. Finally, we validate the
         proposed methodвҖҷs effectiveness through simulation studies. To improve efficiency,
         we also discuss the use of contextual information as a generalization of the standard
         BAI, though our result holds novelty even without contextual information.


1   I NTRODUCTION
We consider adaptive experiments with multiple arms, such as slot machine arms, different therapies,
and distinct unemployment assistance programs. Rather than performing hypothesis testing or
estimating the expected outcomes, our focus is on identifying the best arm, which is an arm with the
highest expected outcome. This task is known as the best arm identification (BAI) and is a variant of
the stochastic multi-armed bandit (MAB) problem (Thompson, 1933; Lai & Robbins, 1985). In this
study, we investigate fixed-budget BAI, where we aim to minimize the expected simple regret after an
adaptive experiment with a fixed number of rounds, known as a budget (Bubeck et al., 2009; 2011).
In each round of our experiment, a decision-maker sequentially draws one of the arms based on past
observations and immediately observes a corresponding outcome of the drawn arm generated from a
bandit model. At the end of the experiment, the decision-maker recommends an estimated best arm
at the end of the experiment. The decision-maker decides its action following a strategy. We measure
the performance of the strategy using the expected simple regret, which is the difference between the
maximum expected outcome that could be achieved with complete knowledge of the distributions
and the expected outcome of the arm recommended by the strategy. Due to the inherent uncertainty,
we evaluate the performance under the worst-case criterion among a given class of bandit models.
For bandit models with finite variances, we derive worst-case lower bounds for the expected simple
regret. The lower boundsвҖҷ leading factors are characterized by the variances of potential outcomes.
We then propose the Adaptive-Sampling (AS)-Augmented Inverse Probability Weighting (AIPW)
strategy and show that it is asymptotically minimax optimal, meaning that the leading factor of its
worst-case expected simple regret matches that of the lower bound.
Bubeck et al. (2011) derives worst-case lower bounds for the expected simple regret under bandit
models with bounded supports. Their lower bounds only rely on the boundedness of the bandit
models and do not depend on any other distributional information. This study derives lower bounds
that depend on the variances of the bandit models, which means that we use more distributional


                                                  1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


information. Our lower bounds are based on change-of-measure arguments with the Kullback-Leibler
(KL) divergence, which has been used to derive tight lower bounds in existing studies (Lai & Robbins,
1985; Kaufmann et al., 2016). Note that the variance appears as the second-order expansion of the
KL divergence where the gaps between the expected outcomes of best and suboptimal arms are zero.
In BAI, the proportion of times each arm is drawn plays a critical role, referred to as a target allocation
ratio. In many settings, target allocation ratios do not have closed-form solutions. However, in our
case, we derive analytical solutions for several specific cases characterized by the standard deviations
or variances of the outcomes. When there are only two arms, the target allocation ratio is the ratio
of the standard deviation of outcomes. When there are three or more arms without contextual
information, the target allocation ratio is the ratio of the variance of outcomes.
This result contrasts with the findings of Bubeck et al. (2011), which reports that a strategy drawing
each arm with an equal ratio and recommending an arm with the highest sample average of observed
outcomes is minimax optimal for bandit models with bounded outcome supports. In contrast, our
results suggest drawing arms based on the ratio of the standard deviations or variances of outcomes.
This difference stems from the use of distributional information (variances) in experimental design.
Furthermore, to improve efficiency, we additionally consider a scenario where a decision-maker
can observe contextual information before drawing an arm. Unlike in the conventional contextual
bandits, our goal still lies in the identification of the arm with the highest unconditional expected
outcome rather than the conditional expected outcome. This setting is motivated by the goals of
average treatment effect (ATE) estimation (van der Laan, 2008; Hahn et al., 2011) and BAI with
fixed confidence and contextual information (Russac et al., 2021; Kato & Ariu, 2021). Our findings
indicate that utilizing contextual information can reduce the expected simple regret, even if our focus
is on the unconditional best arm. Note that this setting is a generalization of fixed-budget BAI without
contextual information, and our result holds novelty even in the absence of contextual information.
In summary, our contributions include (i) lower bounds for the worst-case expected simple regret; (ii)
analytical solutions for the target allocation ratios, characterized by the variances of the outcomes;
(iii) the AS-AIPW strategy; (iv) asymptotic minimax optimality of the AS-AIPW strategy; These
findings contribute to a variety of subjects, including statistical decision theory, in addition to BAI.
Organization. Section 2 formulates our problem. Section 3 establishes lower bounds for the worst-
case expected simple regret and a target allocation ratio. In Section 4, we introduce the AS-AIPW
strategy. Then, Section 5 presents the upper bounds with its asymptotic minimax optimality. Finally,
we introduce related work in Section 6 and Appendix A. Open problems are discussed in Appendix J.

2       P ROBLEM S ETTING
We investigate the following setup. Given a fixed number of rounds T , referred to as a budget, in
each round t = 1, 2, . . . , T , a decision-maker observes a contextual information (covariate) Xt вҲҲ X
and draws arm At вҲҲ [K] = {1, 2, . . . , K}. Here, X вҠӮ RD is a space of contextual information1 .
The decision-maker then immediately observes an outcome (or reward) Yt linked to the drawn arm
At . This setting is referred to as the bandit feedback or Neyman-Rubin           causal model (Neyman,
1923; Rubin, 1974), in which the outcome in round t is Yt = aвҲҲ[K] 1[At = a]Yta , where Yta вҲҲ R
                                                                    P

is a potential independent (random) outcome, and Yt1 , Yt2 , . . . , YaK are conditionally independent
given Xt . We assume that Xt and Yta are independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) over
t вҲҲ [T ] = {1, 2, . . . , T }. Our goal is to find an arm with the highest expected outcome marginalized
over the contextual distribution of Xt with a minimal expected simple regret after the round T .
We define our goal formally. Let P be a joint distribution of (Y 1 , Y 2 , . . . , Y K , X), and
(Yt1 , Yt2 , . . . , YtK , Xt ) be an i.i.d. copy of (Y 1 , Y 2 , . . . , Y K , X) in round t. We refer to the distri-
bution of the potential outcome (Y 1 , Y 2 , . . . , Y K , X) a full-data bandit model (Tsiatis, 2007). For
a given full-data bandit model P , let PP and EP denote the probability law and expectation with
respect to P , respectively. Besides, let Вөa (P ) = EP [Yta ] denote the expected outcome marginalized
over X. Let P denote the set of all P . An algorithm in BAI is referred to as a strategy. With the
sigma-algebras Ft = Пғ(X1 , A1 , Y1 , . . . , Xt , At , Yt ), we define a strategy as a pair ((At )tвҲҲ[T ] , b    aT ),
where (At )tвҲҲ[T ] is a sampling rule and b      aT вҲҲ [K] is a recommendation rule. Following the sampling
    1
        BAI without contextual information corresponds to a case where X is a singleton.


                                                          2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


rule, the decision-maker draws arm At вҲҲ [K] in each round t based on the past observations FtвҲ’1 and
observed context Xt . Following the recommendation rule, the decision-maker returns an estimator
aT of the best arm aвҲ— (P ) := arg maxaвҲҲ[K] Вөa (P ) based on observations up to round T . Here, At is
b
Ft -measurable, and baT is FT -measurable. For a bandit model P вҲҲ P and a strategy ПҖ вҲҲ О , let us
define the simple regret as rT (P )(ПҖ) := maxaвҲҲ[K] Вөa (P ) вҲ’ ВөbaT (P ). Our goal is to find a strategy
that minimizes the expected simple regret, defined as
                                                      X
                                  a        aT
  EP [rT (P )(ПҖ)] = EP max Вө (P ) вҲ’ Вө (P ) =
                                           b
                                                           вҲҶb (P )        PP (baT = b)          , (1)
                          aвҲҲ[K]                            | {z }         |     {z     }
                                                        bвҲҲ[K]   gap   probability of misidentification
                                                         вҲ—
where вҲҶa (P ) is a gap maxbвҲҲ[K] Вөb (P ) вҲ’ Вөa (P ) = Вөa (P ) (P ) вҲ’ Вөa (P ), and the expectation is taken
over the randomness of baT вҲҲ [K] and P e вҠҶ P is a specific class of bandit models.
With this objective, we first derive the worst-case lower bounds for the expected simple regret in
Section 3. Then, we propose an algorithm in Section 4 and show the minimax optimality in Section 5.
Notation. Let Вөa (P )(x) := EP [Y a |X = x] be the conditional expected outcome given x вҲҲ X for
a вҲҲ [K]. Similarly, we define ОҪ a (P )(x) := EP [(Y a )2 |X = x] and ОҪ a (P ) := EP [ОҪ a (P )(X)].
Let (Пғ a (P )(x))2 and (Пғ a (P ))2 be the conditional and unconditional variances of Yta ; that is,
(Пғ a (P )(x))2 = ОҪ a (P )(x) вҲ’ (Вөa (P )(x))2 and (Пғ a (P ))2 = ОҪ a (P ) вҲ’ (Вөa (P ))2 . For all P вҲҲ P вҲ— and
a вҲҲ [K], let P a be the joint distributions of (Y a , X).

3     L OWER B OUNDS FOR THE W ORST- CASE E XPECTED S IMPLE R EGRET
This section presents lower bounds for the worst-case expected
                                                               simple regret. In Eq.
                                                                                    (1), for each
                                                                             a
fixed P вҲҲ P, the probability of misidentification PP b
            e                                           aT вҲҲ
                                                           / arg maxaвҲҲ[K] Вө (P ) converges to
zero with an exponential rate,  while вҲҶbaT (P ) is the constant.                       aT
                                                              Therefore, we disregard вҲҶ (P ),
                                                                                       b

and the convergence rate of PP b  aT вҲҲ/ arg maxaвҲҲ[K] Вөa (P ) dominates the expected simple regret.

In this case, to evaluate the convergence rate of PP b aT вҲҲ/ arg maxaвҲҲ[K] Вөa (P ) , we utilize large
deviation upper bounds. In contrast, if we examine the worst case among P,
                                                                         e which includes a bandit
model such that the gaps between the expected outcomes converge to zero with a вҲҡ    certain order of
the sample size T , a bandit model P whose gaps converge to zero at a rate of O(1/ T ) dominates
the expected simple regret. For the gap вҲҶb (P ), the worst-case
                                                              simple regret is approximately
                                                                                               given
                                        P          b                 b
                                                                          2     b             b
by supP вҲҲPe EP [rT (P )(ПҖ)] вүҲ supP вҲҲPe bвҲҲ[K] вҲҶ (P ) exp вҲ’ T вҲҶ (P ) /C , where (C )bвҲҲ[b]
                                                                 q
                                                                    b
are constants. Then, the maximum is obtained when вҲҶa (P ) = CT for a constant C b > 0, which
balances the regret caused by the gap вҲҶb (P ) and probability of misidentification PP (b
                                                                                       aT = b).

3.1   R ECAP : L OWER B OUNDS FOR BANDIT M ODELS WITH B OUNDED S UPPORTS

Bubeck et al. (2011) shows a (non-asymptotic) lower bound for bandit models with a bounded support,
where a strategy with the uniform sampling rule is optimal. Let us denote bandit models with bounded
outcomes by P [0,1] , where each potential outcome Yta is in [0, 1]. Then, theq
                                                                              authors show that for all
                                                                         1   K
T вүҘ K вүҘ 2, any strategy ПҖ вҲҲ О  satisfies supP вҲҲP [0,1] EP [rT (P )(ПҖ)] вүҘ 20   T . For this worst-case
lower bound, the authors show that a strategy with the uniform sampling rule and empirical best arm
(EBA) recommendation rule is optimal, where we draw At = a with probability 1/K for all a вҲҲ [K]
and t вҲҲ [T ] and recommend an arm with the highest sample average of the observed outcomes,
which is referred to as the uniform-EBA strategy. Under the uniform-EBA strategy ПҖ Uniform-EBM
                                                                                          q         ,
                                                                                            K log K
                                                                  Uniform-EBM

the expected simple regret is bounded as supP вҲҲP [0,1] EP rT ПҖ                  (P ) вүӨ 2     T +K .
Thus, the upper bound matches the lower bound if we ignore the log K and constant terms.
Although the uniform-EBA strategy is nearly optimal, a question remains whether, by using more
distributional information, we can show tighter lower bounds or develop more efficient strategies. As
the lower bound in Bubeck et al. (2011) is referred to as a distribution-free lower bound, the lower


                                                    3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


bound does not utilize distributional information, such as variance. In this study, although we still
consider the worst-case expected simple regret, we develop lower and upper bounds depending on
distributional information.
Specifically, we characterize the bounds by the variances of outcomes. Recall that the worst-case
                                                                                                вҲҡ
expected simple regret is dominated by an instance of a bandit model with вҲҶa (P ) = O(1/ T ).
Here, also recall that tight lower bounds are derived from the KL divergence (Lai & Robbins,
1985; Kaufmann et al., 2016), whose second-order Taylor expansion with respect to the gap вҲҶa (P )
corresponds to the variance (inverse of the Fisher information). Therefore, the tight lower bounds
employing distributional information in the worst-case expected simple regret should be characterized
by the variances (the second-order Taylor expansion of the KL divergence). In the following sections,
we consider worst-case lower bounds characterized by the variances of bandit models.

3.2   L OCAL L OCATION -S HIFT BANDIT M ODELS

In this section, we derive asymptotic lower bounds for the worst-case expected simple regret. To
derive lower bounds, we often utilize an alternative hypothesis. We consider a bandit model whose
expected outcomes are the same among the K arms. We refer to it as the null bandit model.
Definition 3.1 (Null bandit models). A bandit model P вҲҲ P is called a null bandit model if the
expected outcomes are equal: Вө1 (P ) = Вө2 (P ) = В· В· В· = ВөK (P ).
Then, we consider a class of bandit models with a unique fixed variance for null bandit models, called
local location-shift bandit models. Furthermore, we assume that potential outcomes are conditionally
sub-Gaussian, and their parameters are bounded. We define our bandit models as follows.
Definition 3.2 (Local location-shift bandit models). A class of bandit models P вҲ— are called local
location-shift bandit models if it contains all bandit models that satisfy the following conditions:
(i) Absolute continuity. For all P, Q вҲҲ P вҲ— and a вҲҲ [K], P a and Qa are mutually absolutely
continuous and have density functions with respect to some reference measure.
(ii) Invariant contextual information. For all P вҲҲ P вҲ— , the distributions of contextual information
X are the same. Let EX be an expectation operator over X and О¶(x) be the density of X.
(iii) Unique conditional variance. All null bandit models P вҷҜ вҲҲ P вҲ— (Вө1 (P вҷҜ ) = Вө2 (P вҷҜ ) = В· В· В· =
ВөK (P вҷҜ )) have the unique conditional variance; that is, for all P вҷҜ вҲҲ P вҲ— , there exists an universal
                                                                 2          2
constant Пғ a (x) > C such that for all P вҷҜ вҲҲ P вҲ— , Пғ a (P вҷҜ )(x) = (Пғ a (x)) holds.
(iv) Bounded moments. There exist known universal constants 0 < C < C < вҲһ such that for all
P вҲҲ P вҲ— , a вҲҲ [K], and x вҲҲ X , |Вөa (P )(x)| < C and C < Пғ a (P )(x) < C hold.
(v) Parallel shift. There exists an universal constant C >  0, independent from P , such that for all
P вҲҲ P вҲ— , x вҲҲ X , and a, b вҲҲ [K], Вөa (P )(x) вҲ’ Вөb (P )(x) вүӨ C Вөa (P ) вҲ’ Вөb (P ) .
                                                                                                     2
(vi) Continuity. For all a вҲҲ [K], x вҲҲ X , and a null bandit model P вҷҜ вҲҲ P вҲ— , limnвҶ’вҲһ (Пғ a (Pn )(x))
           2
= (Пғ a (x)) holds for a sequence of bandit models {Pn } such that limnвҶ’вҲһ Вөa (Pn )(x) = Вөa (P вҷҜ )(x).
Our lower bounds are characterized by Пғ a (x), a conditional variance of null bandit models.
Local location-shift models are a common assumption in statistical inference (Lehmann & Casella,
1998). A key example are Gaussian and Bernoulli distributions. Under Gaussian distributions with
fixed variances, for all P , the variances are fixed, and only mean parameters shift. Such models are
generally called location-shift models. Additionally, we can consider Bernoulli distributions if P вҲ—
includes one instance of Вө1 (P ) = В· В· В· = ВөK (P ) to specify one fixed variance Пғ a (x). Furthermore,
our bandit models are nonparametric within the class and include a wider range of bandit models,
similar to the approach of Hahn et al. (2011) and Barrier et al. (2022).
In (iv), we assume that there are known constants 0 < C < C < вҲһ. They are introduced for
technical purposes in theoretical analysis. In application, we set a sufficiently large value for C
and a sufficiently small value for C. Note that the lower boundedness of Пғ a (P )(x) is assumed for
sampling each arm with a positive probability and the constant C plays a role similar to the forced
sampling (Garivier & Kaufmann, 2016) and the parameter ОІ in top-two sampling (Russo, 2020) for
fixed-confidence BAI. Thus, in BAI, we usually assume the existence of such constants.


                                                  4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


When contextual information is unavailable, condition (v) can be omitted. Although condition (v)
may seem restrictive, its inclusion is not essential for achieving efficiency gains through the utilization
of contextual information; that is, the upper bound can be smaller even when this condition is not met.
However, it is required in order to derive a matching upper bound for the following lower bounds.

3.3      A SYMPTOTIC L OWER B OUNDS UNDER L OCAL L OCATION -S HIFT BANDIT M ODELS

We consider a restricted class of strategies such that under null bandit models, any strategy in this
class recommends one of the arms with an equal probability (1/K).
Definition 3.3 (Null consistent strategy). Under any null bandit models P вҲҲ P (Вө1 (P ) = Вө2 (P ) =
В· В· В· = ВөK (P )), any null consistent strategy satisfies that for any a, b вҲҲ [K], PP (b
                                                                                      aT = a) вҲ’
    aT = b) вҶ’ 0 holds as T вҶ’ вҲһ. This implies that PP (b
PP (b                                                 aT = a) вҲ’ 1/K = o(1).

This restriction is introduced to characterize the lower bounds by using the variances of the worst-case
where the gap Вөa (P ) вҲ’ Вөb (P ) between two arms a, b вҲҲ [K] is small.
For each x вҲҲ X , we refer to T1 t=1 1[At = a] as an allocation ratio under a strategy.
                                         PT
Let hus also define an average iallocation ratio under P вҲҲ P and a strategy as ОәT,P (a|x) =
EP T1 t=1 1[At = a]|Xt = x , which plays an important role in the proof of our lower bound. Let
        PT
                                                                                 P
W be a set of all measurable functions ОәT,P : [K] Г— X вҶ’ (0, 1) such that aвҲҲ[K] ОәT,P (a|x) = 1
for each x вҲҲ X . Then, we show the following lower bound. The proof is shown in Appendix D.
Theorem 3.4. For K вүҘ 2, any null consistent strategy satisfies
           вҲҡ
                                                  r
                                    1                    h
                                                                    2
                                                                              i
     sup T EP [rT (P )(ПҖ)] вүҘ           inf max EX (Пғ a (X)) /w(a|X) + o(1) as T вҶ’ вҲһ.
    P вҲҲP вҲ—                         12 wвҲҲW aвҲҲ[K]
                                               r      h a        i
                                                           (X))2
We refer to w = arg minwвҲҲW maxaвҲҲ[K] EX (Пғw(a|X)
                вҲ—
                                                                   as the target allocation ratio, which
corresponds to an allocation ratio that an optimal strategy aims to achieve and is used to define a
sampling rule in our proposed strategy. When there is no contextual information, we can obtain an
analytical solution for wвҲ— .
Remark 3.5 (Asymptotic lower bounds under allocation constraints). When we restrict the target
allocation ratio, we can restrict the class W. For example, when we needP to draw specific arms at
a predetermined ratio, we consider a class W вҖ  such that for all w вҲҲ W вҖ  , aвҲҲ[K] w(a|x) = 1 and
w(b|x) = C for all x вҲҲ X , some b вҲҲ [K], and a constant C вҲҲ (0, 1).

3.4      L OWER B OUNDS WITHOUT C ONTEXTUAL I NFORMATION

Our result generalizes BAI without contextual information, where X is a singleton. For simplicity,
we denote w(a|x) by w(a). When there is no contextual information, we can obtain the following
lower bound with an analytical solution of the target allocation ratio wвҲ— вҲҲ W 2 .
                                                                              вҲҡ
Corollary
   qP        3.6.  Any   null  consistent    strategy   satisfies  sup P вҲҲP вҲ—   T EP [rT (P )(ПҖ)]          вүҘ
                                                                                               a 2
 1              a 2                                                             вҲ—           (Пғ  )
12     aвҲҲ[K] (Пғ ) + o(1) as T вҶ’ вҲһ, where the target allocation ratio is w (a) =                  (Пғ b )2
                                                                                                         .
                                                                                        P
                                                                                              bвҲҲ[K]

Remark 3.7 (Efficiency gain by using the contextual information). When contextual informa-
                                                                                   a       2
tion is available, if we substitute suboptimal allocation ratio w(a|x) = P (Пғ (x))    (Пғ b (x))2 into
                                                                                bвҲҲ[K]
          r      h a        i                  r              h           i
                          2
                   (Пғ (X))                   1
                                                  P                     2
maxaвҲҲ[K] EX w(a|X) , a lower bound is 12            aвҲҲ[K] E
                                                            X (Пғ a (X))     + o(1), which can be
tightened by hoptimizingiwith respect to w. It is worth noting that by using the law of total variance,
                       2
(Пғ a )2 вүҘ EX (Пғ a (X)) . Therefore, by utilizing contextual information, we can tighten the lower
           qP                   r              h            i                       r      h a        i
                                                                                                    2
                         a  2    P          X       a     2                             X (Пғ (X)) .
bounds as       aвҲҲ[K] (Пғ   )  вүҘ     aвҲҲ[K] E      (Пғ   (X))    вүҘ min wвҲҲW  max  aвҲҲ[K]   E       w(a|X)
This improvement implies efficiency gain by using contextual information Xt .
   2                                                                             P
       Because X is a singleton, we consider W := {(w(a))aвҲҲ[K] |w(a) вҲҲ [0, 1],   aвҲҲ[K] w(a) = 1}.



                                                      5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


3.5    R EFINED L OWER B OUNDS FOR T WO -A RMED BANDITS

For two-armed bandits (K = 2), we can refine the lower bound as follows. In this case, we can also
obtain an analytical solution of the target allocation ratio even when there is contextual information.
Theorem 3.8. When K = 2, any null consistent strategy satisfies
                    вҲҡ
                                          r
                                        1         h
                                                                   2
                                                                     i
              sup T EP [rT (P )(ПҖ)] вүҘ        EX (Пғ 1 (X) + Пғ 2 (X)) + o (1)
             P вҲҲP вҲ—                    12

as T вҶ’ вҲһ, where the target allocation ratio is wвҲ— (a|x) = Пғ a (x)/(Пғ 1 (x) + Пғ 2 (x)) for all x вҲҲ X .
                                                                    вҲҡ                               1
This lower bound is derived as a solution of supP вҲҲP вҲ— T EP [rT (P )(ПҖ)] вүҘ 12                         inf wвҲҲW
r                                                                               1        2                 2

                                                                                                 2
                                                                                (       )     (         ))
       h 1      2      2 (X ))2
                                i                                                Пғ  (X)        Пғ   (X
     X  (Пғ (X))     (Пғ                                                      X                         t
   E                       t
         w(1|Xt ) + w(2|Xt )      + o(1). Here, note that inf wвҲҲW E              w(1|Xt ) + w(2|Xt )           вүҘ
                   r       h a         i
                                 (X))2
inf wвҲҲW maxaвҲҲ[2] EX (Пғw(a|X)             . Therefore, this lower bound is tighter than that in Theorem 3.4.

This target allocation ratio is the same as that in Kaufmann et al. (2016) for the probability of
misidentification minimization. The proofs are shown in Appendix F.
Note that for K вүҘ 3, we have an analytical solution of the target allocation ratio only when there is
no contextual information, and the target allocation ratio is the ratio of the variances. In contrast, for
K = 2, we can obtain analytical solutions of the target sample allocation ratio even when there is
contextual information, and it is the ratio of the (conditional) standard deviation.


4     T HE AS-AIPW S TRATEGY

This section introduces our strategy, which comprises the following sampling and recommendation
rules. In each round, we adaptively estimate the variances (Пғ a (P )(x))2 and draw arms following a
probability using the estimates of the variances. At the end, we recommend the best arm using the
AIPW estimator. We call this strategy the AS-AIPW strategy. We show a pseudo-code in Algorithm 1.

4.1    TARGET ALLOCATION RATIO

First, we define target allocation ratios, which are used to determine our sampling rule. From the
results in Section 3, the target allocation ratios are given as follows:
    wвҲ— (1|x) = Пғ a (x)/Пғ 1 (x) + Пғ 2 (x) and wвҲ— (2|x) = 1 вҲ’ wвҲ— (1|x)               for x вҲҲ X if K вүҘ 3,
                         r      h                i
     вҲ—                                   2
    w = arg min max EX (Пғ a (X)) /w(a|X)               if K вүҘ 3.
           wвҲҲW     aвҲҲ[K]

As discussed in Section 3, when K вүҘ 3, there is no closed form for wвҲ— except for a case without
                                                                          a 2
contextual information, where the target allocation ratio is wвҲ— (a) = P (Пғ )(Пғb )2 for all a вҲҲ [K].
                                                                               bвҲҲ[K]


The target allocation ratios depend on the variances. Therefore, when the variances are unknown,
this target allocation ratio is also unknown. In our strategy, we estimate them during an adaptive
experiment and use the estimator to obtain the probability of drawing arms.

4.2    S AMPLING RULE WITH A DAPTIVE VARIANCE E STIMATION

Let wbt be an estimator of wвҲ— at round t вҲҲ [T ] such that for all a вҲҲ [K] and x вҲҲ X , w
     P                                                                                      bt (a|x) > 0
and aвҲҲ[K] w     bt (a|x) = 1 hold. In each round t, we obtain Оіt from Uniform[0, 1], the uniform
distribution on [0, 1], and draw arm
 PaвҲ’1                 Pa               At = 1 if Оіt вүӨ w     bt (1|Xt ) and At = a for a вүҘ 2 if Оіt вҲҲ
     b=1 wbt (b|Xt ), b=1 wbt (b|Xt ) ; that is, we draw arm a with probability w
                                                                                bt (a|Xt ).
In round t вүӨ K, we draw arm At = t as an initialization and set w  bt (a|Xt ) = 1/K for all a вҲҲ [K].
In round t > K, we estimate the target allocation ratio wвҲ— using the past observations FtвҲ’1 .


                                                       6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


In the sampling rule and the following recommendation rule, we use FtвҲ’1 -measurable estimators
of Вөa (P )(Xt ), ОҪ a (P )(Xt ), and wвҲ— (a|Xt ) at each round t вҲҲ [T ]. We denote FtвҲ’1 -measurable
estimators of Вөa (P )(Xt ), ОҪ a (P )(Xt ) and (Пғ a (Xt ))2 as Вө  bat (Xt ), ОҪbta (Xt ), and (b Пғta (Xt ))2 . For
                   a             a       a      2
t вүӨ K, we set Вө   bt (Xt ) = ОҪbt = (b   Пғt (x)) = 0. For t > K, we use estimators constructed as
follows. For t > K, we estimate Вөa (P )(x) and ОҪ a (P )(x) using only past samples FtвҲ’1 . The
requirement for the estimators is convergence to the true parameter almost surely. We use a bounded
                                                   ПғtвҖ a (x))2 = ОҪbta (x) вҲ’ (b
                                                                                      2
estimator for Вөbat such that |b Вөat | < C. Let (b                            Вөat (x)) for all a вҲҲ [K] and
                                                          2
x вҲҲ X . Then, we estimate the variance (Пғ a (x)) for all a вҲҲ [K] and x вҲҲ X in a round t as
                           ПғtвҖ a (x))2 , C}, 1/C} and define w
         2
 Пғta (x)) = max{min{((b
(b                                                             bt by replacing the variances in wвҲ— with
                                                                                                      bt1 (Xt )
                                                                                                      Пғ
corresponding estimators; that is, when K = 2, for each a вҲҲ {1, 2}, w(a|X         b     t) = Пғ  bt1 (Xt )+b Пғt2 (Xt )
                                                                                                                      ;
                                                                           qP
                                                                                          Пғta (Xt ))2
                                                                                         (b
when K вүҘ 3, for each a вҲҲ [K], w(a|X  b     t ) = arg minwвҲҲW maxaвҲҲ[K]               aвҲҲ[K] w(a|Xt ) . If there is
                                                                                 Пғta (Xt ))2
                                                                                (b
no contextual information, we obtain a closed-form w(a|Xt) = P                        Пғtb (Xt ))2
                                                                                                    when K вүҘ 3.
                                                                               bвҲҲ[K] (b
                                                   b

When there is no contextual information (X is a singleton), we estimate Вөa (P )(x) = Вөa (P ) and wвҲ—
by using the sample averages. When there is contextual information, we can employ nonparametric
estimators, such as the nearest neighbor regression estimator and kernel regression estimator, to
estimate Вөa (P ) and wвҲ— . These estimators have been proven to converge to the true function almost
surely under a bounded sampling probability w    bt by Yang & Zhu (2002) and Qian & Yang (2016).
Provided that these conditions are satisfied, any estimator can be used. It should be noted that we do
not assume specific convergence rates for estimators Вөa (P )(x) and wвҲ— as the asymptotic optimality
of the AIPW estimator can be shown without them (van der Laan, 2008; Kato et al., 2020; 2021).

4.3    R ECOMMENDATION RULE USING THE AIPW E STIMATOR

Finally, we present our recommendation rule. After the final round T , for each a вҲҲ [K], we estimate
Вөa (P ) for each a вҲҲ [K] and recommend the maximum as an estimate of the best arm. To estimate
Вөa (P ), the AIPW estimator is defined as
                   T
                                                            1[At = a] Yta вҲ’ Вөbat (Xt )

    AIPW,a      1 X a
                                          a
  Вө          =        ПҶ Yt , At , Xt , ПҶt (Yt , At , Xt ) =                               bat (Xt ).
                                                                                         +Вө
                T t=1 t
  bT
                                                                   wbt (a|Xt )

                   aAIPW
Then, we recommend bT                      aAIPW
                         вҲҲ [K], defined as bT                   bAIPW,a
                                                 = arg maxaвҲҲ[K] ВөT      .
The AIPW estimator debiases the sample selection bias resulting from arm draws depending on past
observations and contextual information. Additionally, the AIPW estimator possesses the following
                                                  T
properties: (i) its components ПҶat (Yt , At , Xt )t=1 are a martingale difference sequence, allowing us to
employ the martingale limit theorems in the derivation of the upper bound; (ii) it has the minimal
asymptotic variance among the possible estimators. For example, other estimators with a martingale
property, such as the inverse probability weighting estimator, may be employed, yet their asymptotic
variance would be larger than that of the AIPW estimator. The variance-reduction effect has also
been employed in the studies for adversarial bandits by Ito et al. (2022), independently of this study.
The t-th element of the sum in the AIPW estimator utilizes nuisance parameters (Вөa (P )(x) and wвҲ— )
estimated from past observations up to round t вҲ’ 1 for constructing a martingale difference sequence
(van der Laan, 2008; Hadad et al., 2021; Kato et al., 2020; 2021; Ito et al., 2022).
The AS-AIPW strategy constitutes a generalization of the Neyman allocation (Neyman, 1934), which
has been utilized for the efficient estimation of the ATE with two treatment arms (van der Laan,
2008; Hahn et al., 2011; Tabord-Meehan, 2022; Kato et al., 2020)3 and two-armed fixed-budget BAI
without contextual information (Glynn & Juneja, 2004; Kaufmann et al., 2016).

5     A SYMPTOTIC M INIMAX O PTIMALITY OF THE AS-AIPW S TRATEGY
In this section, we derive upper bounds for the worst-case expected simple regret under local location-
shift models with our proposed AS-AIPW strategy.
   3
     The AS-AIPW strategy is also similar to those proposed for efficient estimation of the ATE with two armed
bandits (van der Laan, 2008; Kato et al., 2020).


                                                          7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 1 AS-AIPW strategy.
    Parameter: Positive constants CВө and C.
    Initialization:
    for t = 1 to K do
      Draw At = t. For each a вҲҲ [K], set w  bt (a|x) = 1/K for all a вҲҲ [K].
    end for
    for t = K + 1 to T do
      Observe Xt .
      Construct w bt by using the estimators of the variances.
      Draw Оіt from the uniform distribution on [0, 1].          P                                i
                                                                  aвҲ’1             Pa
      At = 1 if Оіt вүӨ w bt (1|Xt ) and At = a for a вүҘ 2 if Оіt вҲҲ    b=1 wbt (b|Xt ), b=1 w
                                                                                       bt (b|Xt ) .
    end for
    Construct the AIPW estimator Вө  bAIPW,a
                                      T      for each a вҲҲ [K] and recommend b  aAIPW
                                                                                 T   .


First, we make the following assumption, which holds for a wide class of estimators (Yang & Zhu,
2002; Qian & Yang, 2016).
Assumption 5.1. For all P вҲҲ P вҲ— , a вҲҲ [K], x вҲҲ X , the followings hold:
                                  a.s.                                a.s.
             bat (x) вҲ’ Вөa (P )(x) вҲ’вҲ’вҶ’ 0, and ОҪbta (x) вҲ’ ОҪ a (P )(x) вҲ’вҲ’вҶ’ 0
             Вө                                                                as t вҶ’ вҲһ.

Then, we show the worst-case upper bound for the expected simple regret as follows. The proof is
shown in Appendix G, where we employ the martingale CLT and Chernoff bound as in Appendix B.
Theorem 5.2 (Worst-case upper bound). Under Assumption 5.1 and the AS-AIPW strategy ПҖ AS-AIPW ,
                                                   v         "                           #
       вҲҡ                                                          a (X))2        b (X))2
                                                   u
                       AS-AIPW
                                                   u           (Пғ             (Пғ
 sup T EP rT (P ) ПҖ                вүӨ     max       tlog(K)EX               + вҲ—             + o(1)
P вҲҲP вҲ—                               a,bвҲҲ[K]: aМё=b              wвҲ— (a|X)      w (b|X)

holds as T вҶ’ вҲһ.

By substituting specific values into wвҲ— in the upper bound, we can confirm that the leading factors of
the upper bounds match our derived lower bounds in Section 3; that is,
                   вҲҡ
             sup T EP rT (P ) ПҖ AS-AIPW

            P вҲҲP вҲ—
               пЈұ r        h                      i
                                               2
               пЈІ 12 EX (Пғ 1 (X) + Пғ 2 (X)) + o(1)                         when K = 2
               пЈҙ
               пЈҙ
            вүӨ                           r             h            i                      ,
                                                    X   (Пғ a (X))2
                                                        wвҲ— (a|X) + o(1) when K вүҘ 3
               пЈі2 minwвҲҲW maxaвҲҲ[K] log(K)E
               пЈҙ
               пЈҙ

as T вҶ’ вҲһ. Thus, we proved the asymptotic minimax optimality of our proposed strategy.
There is a log(K) factor in the upper bound, which appears in existing studies, such as Bubeck
et al. (2011) and Komiyama et al. (2023). As existing studies discussed, we consider that further
restrictions are required for a class of strategies or bandit models to fulfill the discrepancy.
We also provide non-asymptotic upper bounds in Appendix H. Note that the non-asymptotic upper
bounds are dominated by the convergence rate of the second moment of ПҶat to a round-independent
constant (Hall et al., 1980). The convergence rate is significantly influenced by the estimation error
of the variances, which are used to estimate the target allocation ratio (sampling rule).

6     D ISCUSSION AND R ELATED W ORK
This section briefly introduces related work. A more detailed survey is presented in Appendix A.
Bubeck et al. (2011) shows that the uniform-EBA strategy is minimax optimal for the worst-case
expected simple regret under bandit models with bounded supports. While Bubeck et al. (2011)
provides an optimal strategy whose order of the expected simple regret aligns with their proposed


                                                  8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 1: Experimental results. The y-axis and x-axis denote the expected simple regret
EP [rT (P )(ПҖ)] under each strategy and T , respectively.

worst-case lower bound, their lower bounds only depend on the assumption of the bounded support
and do not use the other distributional information (distribution-free analysis). In contrast, there
is a longstanding open issue on the existence of asymptotic optimal strategies whose upper bound
aligns with distribution-dependent lower bounds suggested by Kaufmann et al. (2016) (distribution-
dependent analysis). For details, see related work, such as Kaufmann (2020), Ariu et al. (2021), and
Degenne (2023). Our optimality criterion is an intermediate between the distribution-free (Bubeck
et al., 2011) and distribution-dependent (Kaufmann et al., 2016) because our lower and upper bounds
are derived under the worst-case but depend on the variances (distributional information).
Variance-dependent BAI strategies have been discussed by existing work, mainly for minimizing the
probability of misidentification, such as Chen et al. (2000), Glynn & Juneja (2004), and Kaufmann
et al. (2016). Glynn & Juneja (2004) discusses optimal strategy for Gaussian bandits under the
large deviation principles. Kaufmann et al. (2016) develops a lower bound for two-armed Gaussian
bandits and finds that when the variances are known, drawing each arm with a ratio of the standard
deviation is asymptotically optimal. Independently of us, Lalitha et al. (2023) also proposes variance-
dependent strategies by extending the sequential halving strategy (Karnin et al., 2013). However, the
optimality is unclear since they do not provide lower bounds. In fact, their strategyвҖҷs probability of
misidentification is larger than that of Kaufmann et al. (2016) when K = 2.


7   E XPERIMENTS

In this section, we compare our AS-AIPW strategy with the Uniform-EBA (Uniform, Bubeck
et al., 2011), Successive Rejection (SR, Audibert et al., 2010), UGapEb (Gabillon et al., 2012),
and SHAdaVar (Lalitha et al., 2023). We investigate two setups with K = 2, 3 without contextual
information for these strategies. The best arm is arm 1 and Вө1 (P ) = 1.00. The expected outcomes of
suboptimal arms are Вө2 (P ) = 0.95 and Вө3 (P ) вҲј Uniform[0.95, 1.00]. Variances are generated from
Uniform[1.00, 5.00]. We continue the experiments until T = 50, 000 and conduct 150 independent
trials. At each round t вҲҲ {1, 000, 2, 000, 3, 000, В· В· В· , 49, 000, 50, 000}, we compute the simple
regrets and plot the empirical average of the simple regrets in Figure 1. For the SR and SHAdaVar,
we restart the experiments after reaching each T . Additional results with other settings, including
contextual information, are presented in Appendix I.
From Figure 1 and Appendix I, we can confirm the soundness of our proposed strategy. When
contextual information exists, our methods show better performances than the others. Although our
strategies show preferable performances in many settings, other strategies also perform well. We
conjecture that our strategies exhibit superiority against other methods when K is small (mismatching
term in the upper bound), the gap between the best and suboptimal arms is small, and the variances
significantly vary across arms. As the superiority depends on the situation, we recommend a
practitioner use several strategies in a hybrid way.


8   C ONCLUSION

We conducted an asymptotic worst-case analysis of the simple regret in fixed-budget BAI with
contextual information. Initially, we obtained lower bounds for local location-shift bandit models,
where the variances of potential outcomes characterize the asymptotic lower bounds as a second-order
approximation of the KL divergence. Based on these lower bounds, we derived target allocation
ratios, which were used to define a sampling rule in the AS-AIPW strategy. Finally, we demonstrated
that the AS-AIPW strategy achieves minimax optimality for the expected simple regret.


                                                  9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Adusumilli, K. Risk and optimal policies in bandit experiments, 2021. arXiv:2112.06363.
Adusumilli, K. Minimax policies for best arm identification with two arms, 2022. arXiv:2204.05527.
Ariu, K., Kato, M., Komiyama, J., McAlinn, K., and Qin, C. Policy choice and best arm identification:
  Asymptotic analysis of exploration sampling, 2021. arXiv:2109.08229.
Armstrong, T. B. Asymptotic efficiency bounds for a class of experimental designs, 2022.
  arXiv:2205.02726.
Atsidakou, A., Katariya, S., Sanghavi, S., and Kveton, B. Bayesian fixed-budget best-arm identifica-
  tion, 2023. arXiv:2211.08572.
Audibert, J.-Y., Bubeck, S., and Munos, R. Best arm identification in multi-armed bandits. In
 Conference on Learning Theory, pp. 41вҖ“53, 2010.
Bang, H. and Robins, J. M. Doubly robust estimation in missing data and causal inference models.
  Biometrics, 61(4):962вҖ“973, 2005.
Barrier, A., Garivier, A., and Stoltz, G. On best-arm identification with a fixed budget in non-
  parametric multi-armed bandits. In Conference on Algorithmic Learning Theory. arXiv, 2022. doi:
  10.48550/ARXIV.2210.00895.
Bechhofer, R., Kiefer, J., and Sobel, M. Sequential Identification and Ranking Procedures: With
  Special Reference to Koopman-Darmois Populations. University of Chicago Press, 1968.
Bubeck, S., Munos, R., and Stoltz, G. Pure exploration in multi-armed bandits problems. In
  Algorithmic Learning Theory, pp. 23вҖ“37. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2009.
Bubeck, S., Munos, R., and Stoltz, G. Pure exploration in finitely-armed and continuous-armed
  bandits. Theoretical Computer Science, 2011.
Carpentier, A. and Locatelli, A. Tight (lower) bounds for the fixed budget best arm identification
  bandit problem. In Conference on Learning Theory, 2016.
Chen, C.-H., Lin, J., YГјcesan, E., and Chick, S. E. Simulation budget allocation for further enhancing
  theefficiency of ordinal optimization. Discrete Event Dynamic Systems, 10(3):251вҖ“270, 2000.
Chernozhukov, V., Chetverikov, D., Demirer, M., Duflo, E., Hansen, C., Newey, W., and Robins,
  J. Double/debiased machine learning for treatment and structural parameters. The Econometrics
  Journal, 2018.
Degenne, R. On the existence of a complexity in fixed budget bandit identification. In Conference on
  Learning Theory, 2023.
Dehejia, R. H. Program evaluation as a decision problem. Journal of Econometrics, 125(1):141вҖ“173,
  2005.
Deshmukh, A. A., Sharma, S., Cutler, J. W., Moldwin, M., and Scott, C. Simple regret minimization
  for contextual bandits, 2018. arXiv:1810.07371.
Even-Dar, E., Mannor, S., Mansour, Y., and Mahadevan, S. Action elimination and stopping
  conditions for the multi-armed bandit and reinforcement learning problems. Journal of machine
  learning research, 2006.
Fiez, T., Jain, L., Jamieson, K. G., and Ratliff, L. Sequential experimental design for transductive
  linear bandits. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2019.
Gabillon, V., Ghavamzadeh, M., and Lazaric, A. Best arm identification: A unified approach to fixed
  budget and fixed confidence. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2012.
Garivier, A. and Kaufmann, E. Optimal best arm identification with fixed confidence. In Conference
  on Learning Theory, 2016.


                                                 10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Glynn, P. and Juneja, S. A large deviations perspective on ordinal optimization. In Proceedings of
  the 2004 Winter Simulation Conference, volume 1. IEEE, 2004.
Guan, M. and Jiang, H. Nonparametric stochastic contextual bandits. AAAI Conference on Artificial
  Intelligence, 2018.
Gupta, S., Lipton, Z. C., and Childers, D. Efficient online estimation of causal effects by deciding
 what to observe. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2021.
Hadad, V., Hirshberg, D. A., Zhan, R., Wager, S., and Athey, S. Confidence intervals for policy
  evaluation in adaptive experiments. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 118(15),
  2021.
Hahn, J. On the role of the propensity score in efficient semiparametric estimation of average
  treatment effects. Econometrica, 66(2):315вҖ“331, 1998.
Hahn, J., Hirano, K., and Karlan, D. Adaptive experimental design using the propensity score.
 Journal of Business and Economic Statistics, 2011.
Hall, P., Heyde, C., Birnbaum, Z., and Lukacs, E. Martingale Limit Theory and Its Application.
  Communication and Behavior. Elsevier Science, 1980.
Hamilton, J. Time series analysis. Princeton Univ. Press, 1994.
Hirano, K. and Porter, J. R. Asymptotics for statistical treatment rules. Econometrica, 77(5):
  1683вҖ“1701, 2009.
Ito, S., Tsuchiya, T., and Honda, J. Adversarially robust multi-armed bandit algorithm with variance-
   dependent regret bounds. In Conference on Learning Theory, volume 178, pp. 1421вҖ“1422, 2022.
Jourdan, M., RГ©my, D., and Emilie, K. Dealing with unknown variances in best-arm identification.
  In Proceedings of The 34th International Conference on Algorithmic Learning Theory, volume
  201, pp. 776вҖ“849, 2023.
Karlan, D. and Wood, D. H. The effect of effectiveness: Donor response to aid effectiveness in a
  direct mail fundraising experiment. Working Paper 20047, National Bureau of Economic Research,
  April 2014.
Karnin, Z., Koren, T., and Somekh, O. Almost optimal exploration in multi-armed bandits. In
  International Conference on Machine Learning, 2013.
Kasy, M. and Sautmann, A. Adaptive treatment assignment in experiments for policy choice.
  Econometrica, 89(1):113вҖ“132, 2021.
Kato, M. Adaptive doubly robust estimator from non-stationary logging policy under a convergence
  of average probability, 2021. arXiv:2102.08975.
Kato, M. Locally optimal best arm identification with a fixed budget, 2023. arXiv:2310.19788.
Kato, M. and Ariu, K. The role of contextual information in best arm identification, 2021.
  arXiv:2106.14077.
Kato, M., Ishihara, T., Honda, J., and Narita, Y. Efficient adaptive experimental design for average
  treatment effect estimation. 2020. arXiv:2002.05308.
Kato, M., McAlinn, K., and Yasui, S. The adaptive doubly robust estimator and a paradox concerning
  logging policy. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2021.
Kaufmann, E. Contributions to the Optimal Solution of Several Bandits Problems. Habilitation ГЎ
  Diriger des Recherches, UniversitГ© de Lille, 2020.
Kaufmann, E., CappГ©, O., and Garivier, A. On the complexity of best-arm identification in multi-
  armed bandit models. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 17(1):1вҖ“42, 2016.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Kim, W., Kim, G.-S., and Paik, M. C. Doubly robust thompson sampling with linear payoffs. In
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2021.
Kock, A. B., Preinerstorfer, D., and Veliyev, B. Treatment recommendation with distributional targets.
  Journal of Econometrics, 234(2):624вҖ“646, 2023.
Komiyama, J., Ariu, K., Kato, M., and Qin, C. Rate-optimal bayesian simple regret in best arm
  identification. Mathematics of Operations Research, 2023.
Lai, T. and Robbins, H. Asymptotically efficient adaptive allocation rules. Advances in Applied
  Mathematics, 1985.
Lalitha, A., Kalantari, K., Ma, Y., Deoras, A., and Kveton, B. Fixed-budget best-arm identification
  with heterogeneous reward variances. In Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence,
  2023.
Le Cam, L. Locally Asymptotically Normal Families of Distributions. Certain Approximations to
  Families of Distributions and Their Use in the Theory of Estimation and Testing Hypotheses.
  University of California Publications in Statistics. vol. 3. no. 2. Berkeley & Los Angeles, 1960.
Le Cam, L. Limits of experiments. In Theory of Statistics, pp. 245вҖ“282. University of California
  Press, 1972.
Le Cam, L. Asymptotic Methods in Statistical Decision Theory (Springer Series in Statistics).
  Springer, 1986.
Lehmann, E. L. and Casella, G. Theory of Point Estimation. Springer-Verlag, 1998.
Loeve, M. Probability Theory. Graduate Texts in Mathematics. Springer, 1977.
Lu, P., Tao, C., and Zhang, X. Variance-dependent best arm identification. In Proceedings of the
  Thirty-Seventh Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, volume 161, pp. 1120вҖ“1129,
  2021.
Manski, C. F. Identification problems and decisions under ambiguity: Empirical analysis of treatment
 response and normative analysis of treatment choice. Journal of Econometrics, 95(2):415вҖ“442,
 2000.
Manski, C. F. Treatment choice under ambiguity induced by inferential problems. Journal of
 Statistical Planning and Inference, 105(1):67вҖ“82, 2002.
Manski, C. F. Statistical treatment rules for heterogeneous populations. Econometrica, 72(4):
 1221вҖ“1246, 2004.
Murphy, S. A. and van der Vaart, A. W. Semiparametric likelihood ratio inference. The Annals of
 Statistics, 25(4):1471 вҖ“ 1509, 1997.
Neyman, J. Sur les applications de la theorie des probabilites aux experiences agricoles: Essai des
  principes. Statistical Science, 5:463вҖ“472, 1923.
Neyman, J. On the two different aspects of the representative method: the method of stratified
  sampling and the method of purposive selection. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, 97:
 123вҖ“150, 1934.
Qian, W. and Yang, Y. Kernel estimation and model combination in a bandit problem with covariates.
  Journal of Machine Learning Research, 2016.
Qin, C. Open problem: Optimal best arm identification with fixed-budget. In Conference on Learning
  Theory, 2022.
Qin, C., Klabjan, D., and Russo, D. Improving the expected improvement algorithm. In Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 30. Curran Associates, Inc., 2017.
Rakhlin, A., Sridharan, K., and Tewari, A. Sequential complexities and uniform martingale laws of
  large numbers. Probability Theory and Related Fields, 161(1):111вҖ“153, 2015.


                                                 12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Robbins, H. Some aspects of the sequential design of experiments. Bulletin of the American
  Mathematical Society, 1952.
Rubin, D. B. Estimating causal effects of treatments in randomized and nonrandomized studies.
  Journal of Educational Psychology, 1974.
Russac, Y., Katsimerou, C., Bohle, D., CappГ©, O., Garivier, A., and Koolen, W. M. A/b/n testing with
  control in the presence of subpopulations. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  2021.
Russo, D. Simple bayesian algorithms for best-arm identification. Operations Research, 68(6), 2020.
Sauro, L. Rapidly finding the best arm using variance. In European Conference on Artificial
  Intelligence, 2020.
Shang, X., de Heide, R., Menard, P., Kaufmann, E., and Valko, M. Fixed-confidence guarantees
  for bayesian best-arm identification. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and
  Statistics, volume 108, pp. 1823вҖ“1832, 2020.
Tabord-Meehan, M. Stratification Trees for Adaptive Randomization in Randomized Controlled
  Trials. The Review of Economic Studies, 12 2022.
Tekin, C. and van der Schaar, M. Releaf: An algorithm for learning and exploiting relevance. IEEE
  Journal of Selected Topics in Signal Processing, 2015.
Thompson, W. R. On the likelihood that one unknown probability exceeds another in view of the
  evidence of two samples. Biometrika, 1933.
Tsiatis, A. Semiparametric Theory and Missing Data. Springer Series in Statistics. Springer New
  York, 2007.
van der Laan, M. J. The construction and analysis of adaptive group sequential designs, 2008.
van der Vaart, A. An asymptotic representation theorem. International Statistical Review / Revue
  Internationale de Statistique, 59(1):97вҖ“121, 1991.
van der Vaart, A. Asymptotic Statistics. Cambridge Series in Statistical and Probabilistic Mathematics.
  Cambridge University Press, 1998.
Vershynin, R. High-dimensional probability, volume 47 of cambridge series in statistical and
  probabilistic mathematics. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 7:14вҖ“22, 2018.
Wager, S. and Xu, K. Weak signal asymptotics for sequentially randomized experiments. 2023.
 arXiv:2101.09855.
Wald, A. Statistical Decision Functions. The Annals of Mathematical Statistics, 20(2):165 вҖ“ 205,
 1949.
White, H. Chapter v - central limit theory. In White, H. (ed.), Asymptotic Theory for Econometricians,
 Economic Theory, Econometrics, and Mathematical Economics, pp. 107вҖ“131. Academic Press,
 San Diego, 1984.
Yang, J. and Tan, V. Minimax optimal fixed-budget best arm identification in linear bandits. In
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022.
Yang, Y. and Zhu, D. Randomized allocation with nonparametric estimation for a multi-armed bandit
  problem with covariates. Annals of Statistics, 30(1):100вҖ“121, 2002.
Zhan, R., Hadad, V., Hirshberg, D. A., and Athey, S. Off-policy evaluation via adaptive weighting
  with data from contextual bandits, 2021.
Zhan, R., Ren, Z., Athey, S., and Zhou, Z. Policy learning with adaptively collected data, 2022.
  arXiv:2105.02344.



                                                 13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A     R ELATED W ORK

In this section, we introduce related work, in addition to the work in Section 6.

A.1    L ITERATURE OF BAI

The MAB problem is an abstraction of the sequential decision-making process (Thompson, 1933;
Robbins, 1952; Lai & Robbins, 1985). BAI is a paradigm of this problem (Even-Dar et al., 2006;
Audibert et al., 2010; Bubeck et al., 2011), with its variants dating back to the 1950s in the context of
sequential testing, ranking, and selection problems (Bechhofer et al., 1968). Additionally, ordinal op-
timization has been extensively studied in the field of operations research, with a modern formulation
established in the early 2000s (Chen et al., 2000; Glynn & Juneja, 2004). Most of these studies have
focused on determining optimal strategies under the assumption of known target allocation ratios.
Within the machine learning community, the problem has been reframed as the BAI problem, with
a particular emphasis on performance evaluation under unknown target allocation ratios. (Bubeck
et al., 2009; 2011; Audibert et al., 2010).
In fixed-budget BAI, Bubeck et al. (2009) demonstrates minimax optimal strategies for the expected
simple regret, and Audibert et al. (2010) proposes the UCB-E and Successive Rejects (SR) strategies.
Kock et al. (2023) generalizes the results of Bubeck et al. (2011) to cases where parameters of interest
are functionals of the distribution and find that target allocation ratios are not uniform, in contrast to
the results of Bubeck et al. (2011).
Kaufmann et al. (2016) contributes to this field by deriving distribution-dependent lower bounds
for BAI with fixed confidence and a fixed budget, using the change-of-measure arguments as well
as (Lai & Robbins, 1985). In the setting of fixed-confidence BAI, Garivier & Kaufmann (2016)
proposes an optimal strategy for the lower bounds derived by Kaufmann et al. (2016); however, in
the fixed-budget setting, there is currently a lack of strategies whose upper bound matches the lower
bound established by Kaufmann et al. (2016). Kaufmann (2020) points out this issue, and Ariu et al.
(2021) finds a bandit model whose lower bound for the probability of misidentification is larger than
those by Kaufmann (2020). Qin (2022) summarizes this problem. Degenne (2023) discusses the
existence of optimal strategies.
Carpentier & Locatelli (2016) examines the lower bound for the probability of misidentification under
the minimax framework and shows the optimality of the method proposed by Audibert et al. (2010) in
terms of leading factors in the exponent. The lower bound of Carpentier & Locatelli (2016) is based
on a minimax evaluation of the probability of misidentification under a large gap. Yang & Tan (2022)
proposes minimax optimal linear BAI with a fixed budget by extending the result of Carpentier &
Locatelli (2016).
In addition to minimax evaluation, Komiyama et al. (2023) develops an optimal strategy whose upper
bound for a simple Bayesian regret lower bound matches their derived lower bound. Atsidakou et al.
(2023) proposes a Bayes optimalвҲҡstrategy for minimizing the probability of misidentification, which
shows a surprising result that 1/ T -factor dominates the evaluation.
In Russo (2020), Qin et al. (2017), and Shang et al. (2020), respectively, the authors propose Bayesian
BAI strategies that are optimal in terms of posterior convergence rate. However, it has been shown by
Kasy & Sautmann (2021) and Ariu et al. (2021) that such optimality does not extend to asymptotic
optimality for the probability of misidentification in fixed-budget BAI.
Adusumilli (2022; 2021) present an alternative minimax evaluation of bandit strategies for both regret
minimization and BAI, which is based on a formulation utilizing a diffusion process proposed by
Wager & Xu (2023). Furthermore, Armstrong (2022) extends the results of Hirano & Porter (2009)
to a setting of adaptive experiments. The results of Adusumilli (2022; 2021) and Armstrong (2022)
employ arguments on local asymptotic normality (Le Cam, 1960; 1972; 1986; van der Vaart, 1991;
1998), where the class of alternative hypotheses comprises
                                                    вҲҡ      of вҖңlocal models,вҖқ in which parameters of
interest converge to true parameters at a rate of 1/ T .
There are several studies in variance-dependent BAI. Chen et al. (2000), Glynn & Juneja (2004),
and Kaufmann et al. (2016) propose variance-dependent strategies for fixed-budget BAI under their
optimal criterion. However, when K вүҘ 3, the lower bounds and asymptotic optimality are unknown.


                                                   14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Therefore, it is unclear whether their use of variances leads to optimal strategies. Sauro (2020),
Lu et al. (2021), and Lalitha et al. (2023) also provide variance-dependent BAI strategies, but their
optimality is unclear.
Only when variances are known and the number of arms is equal to two, is it known that the target
allocation ratio is the ratio of the standard deviation. However, Lalitha et al. (2023) proposes using
the ratio of variances with successive halving, which gives a larger probability of misidentification
compared to the strategy shown by Kaufmann et al. (2016).
In fixed-confidence BAI, Jourdan et al. (2023) Sauro (2020), Lu et al. (2021), and Lalitha et al. (2023)
also provide variance-dependent BAI strategies.
Tekin & van der Schaar (2015), Guan & Jiang (2018), and Deshmukh et al. (2018) consider BAI with
contextual information, but their analysis and setting are different from those employed in this study.
Barrier et al. (2022) also considers non-parametric models in BAI. While we consider the expected
simple regret minimization, that work minimizes the probability of misidentification. These two
settings are related but require different analyses for lower bounds. See (Komiyama et al., 2023). Ad-
ditionally, there are the following critical differences between our study and theirs in non-parametric
analysis using the KL divergence of Kaufmann et al. (2016). In the lower bound, our study approxi-
mates the KL divergence by the Fisher information (semiparametric influence function) around the
gaps between the best and suboptimal arms are zero вҲҶa (P ) вҶ’ 0. We do not assume the boundedness
of Yta . In the upper bound, we utilize the central limit theorem for deriving tight results. In contrast,
Barrier et al. (2022) assumes the boundedness of Yta . Then, bounding the KL divergences using the
boundedness without using the  вҲҡ small gap (fixed вҲҶa (P )). Because we employ the worst-case analysis,
which implies вҲҶa (P ) вүҲ 1/ T (see Section 3), we could naturally develop non-parametric results.
However, we cannot employ such an approximation in Barrier et al. (2022) because it considers lower
and upper bounds under a fixed P or fixed вҲҶa (P ).

A.2    E FFICIENT AVERAGE T REATMENT E FFECT E STIMATION

Efficient estimation of ATE via adaptive experiments constitutes another area of related literature.
van der Laan (2008) and Hahn et al. (2011) propose experimental design methods for more efficient
estimation of ATE by utilizing covariate information in treatment assignment. Despite the marginal-
ization of covariates, their methods are able to reduce the asymptotic variance of estimators. Karlan
& Wood (2014) applies the method of Hahn et al. (2011) to examine the response of donors to new
information regarding the effectiveness of a charity. Subsequently, Tabord-Meehan (2022) and Kato
et al. (2020) have sought to improve upon these studies, and more recently, Gupta et al. (2021) have
proposed the use of instrumental variables in this context.
For two armed bandits, Adusumilli (2022) demonstrates the minimax optimality for the expected
simple regret under the limit-of-experiment framework, utilizing a diffusion process framework. Arm-
strong (2022) also analyzes the minimax optimal strategy under the limit-of-experiment framework
and establishes that the Neyman allocation is minimax optimal.

A.3    OTHER R ELATED W ORK

Our arguments are inspired by limit-of-experiments framework (Le Cam, 1986; van der Vaart, 1998;
Hirano & Porter, 2009). Within this framework, we can approximate the statistical experiment by
a Gaussian distribution using the CLT. Hirano & Porter (2009) relates the asymptotic optimality of
statistical decision rules (Manski, 2000; 2002; 2004; Dehejia, 2005) to the framework.
The AIPW estimator has been extensively used in the fields of causal inference and semiparametric
inference (Tsiatis, 2007; Bang & Robins, 2005; Chernozhukov et al., 2018). More recently, the
estimator has also been utilized in other MAB problems, as seen in Kim et al. (2021) and Ito et al.
(2022).
Our problem is also closely related to theories of statistical decision-making (Wald, 1949; Manski,
2000; 2002; 2004), limits of experiments (Le Cam, 1972; van der Vaart, 1998), and semiparametric
theory (Hahn, 1998), not only to BAI. Among them, semiparametric theory plays an essential role
because it allows us to characterize the lower bounds with the semiparametric analog of the Fisher
information (van der Vaart, 1998).


                                                   15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B     P RELIMINARIES
Let Wi be a random variable with probability measure P . Let Fn = Пғ(W1 , W2 , . . . , Wn ).
Definition B.1. [Uniform integrability, Hamilton (1994), p. 191] Let Wt вҲҲ R be a random variable
with a probability measure P . A sequence {Wt } is said to be uniformly integrable if for every Пө > 0
there exists a number c > 0 such that
                                              EP [|Wt | В· 1[|Wt | вүҘ c]] < Пө
for all t.
Proposition B.2 (Sufficient conditions for uniform integrability; Proposition 7.7, p. 191. Hamilton
(1994)). Let Wt , Zt вҲҲ R be random variables. Let P be a probability measure of Zt . (a) Suppose
there exist r > 1 and M < вҲһ such that EP [|Wt |r ] < M for all t. Then {Wt } is uniformly
integrable.
      PвҲһ (b) Suppose there  PвҲһ exist r > 1 and M < вҲһ such that EP [|Zt |r ] < M for all t. If
Wt = j=вҲ’вҲһ hj ZtвҲ’j with j=вҲ’вҲһ |hj | < вҲһ, then {Wt } is uniformly integrable.
Proposition B.3 (Lr convergence theorem, p 165, Loeve (1977)). Let Wt be a random
                                                                                  variable with
probability measure P and w be a constant. Let 0 < r < вҲһ, suppose that EP |Wt |r < вҲһ for all t
             p
and that Wt вҲ’вҶ’ z as n вҶ’ вҲһ. The following are equivalent:

 (i) Wt вҶ’ w in Lr as t вҶ’ вҲһ;

 (ii) EP |Wt |r вҶ’ EP |w|r < вҲһ as t вҶ’ вҲһ;

 (iii) |Wt |r , t вүҘ 1 is uniformly integrable.
Definition B.4. For Ft equal to the Пғ-field generated by Оҫ1 , . . . , Оҫt , {Wt , Ft , t вүҘ 1}вҲһ
                                                                                            t=1 is a martin-
gale if for all t вүҘ 1, we have
                                                    E[Wt+1 |Ft ] = Wt .
If E[Wt+1 |Ft ] = 0, {Wt , Ft , t вүҘ 1}вҲһ
                                      t=1 is a martingale difference sequence.
Proposition B.5 (Weak Law of Large Numbers for Martingale, Hall et al. (1980)). Let {St =
Pt
  s=1 Ws , Ft , t вүҘ 1} be a martingale and {bt } a sequence of positive constants with bt вҶ’ вҲһ as
t вҶ’ вҲһ. Then, writing Wts = Ws 1[|Ws | вүӨ bt ], 1 вүӨ s вүӨ t, we have that bвҲ’1
                                                                               p
                                                                         t St вҲ’
                                                                              вҶ’ 0 as t вҶ’ вҲһ if
      Pt
(i)    s=1 P (|Ws | > bt ) вҶ’ 0;
             Pt                    p
(ii) bвҲ’1
      t          s=1 E[Wts |FsвҲ’1 ] вҲ’
                                   вҶ’ 0, and;
             Pt                                      2
(iii) bвҲ’2
                              2

       t         s=1       E[Wts ] вҲ’ E E Wts |FsвҲ’1     вҶ’ 0.
Proposition B.6 (Central Limit Theorem for a Martingale Difference Pt Sequence; from Proposition 7.9,
                                                                                вҲһ
p. 194, Hamilton (1994); also see White (1984)). Let {(St = s=1 Wt , Ft )}t=1 be a martingale
with Ft equal to the Пғ-field generated by W1 , . . . , Wt . Suppose that
                                                          PT
(a) E[Wt2 ] = Пғt2 , a positive value with (1/T )                 2    2
                                                            t=1 Пғt вҶ’ Пғ , a positive value;

(b) E[|Wt |r ] < вҲһ for some r > 2;
          PT          p
(c) (1/T ) t=1 Wt2 вҲ’ вҶ’ Пғ2 .

             d
        вҶ’ N (0, Пғ 2 ).
Then ST вҲ’
Proposition
       Pt B.7 (Rate of convergence in the CLT; from Theorem 3.8, p 88, Hall et al. (1980)). Let
                     вҲһ
{(St = s=1 Wt , Ft )}t=1 be a martingale with Ft equal to the Пғ-field generated by W1 , . . . , Wt .
Let
                                              t
                                              X
                                      Vt2 =         E[Ws2 |FtвҲ’1 ]    1 вүӨ t вүӨ T.
                                              s=1



                                                            16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Suppose that for some Оұ > 0 and constants M , C and D,
                                              вҲҡ
                                max EP [exp(| tWt |Оұ )] < M,
                                    tвүӨT

and
                                    вҲҡ
                   PP |Vt2 вҲ’ 1| > D/ t(log t)2+2/Оұ вүӨ CtвҲ’1/4 (log t)1+1/Оұ .
Then, for T вүҘ 2,
                        sup      PP (ST вүӨ x) вҲ’ ОҰ(x) вүӨ AT вҲ’1/4 (log T )1+1/Оұ ,
                     вҲ’вҲһ<x<вҲһ

where the constant A depends only on Оұ, M , C, and D.

The Chernoff bound yields the following inequality.
                              Pt
Proposition B.8. Let {St = s=1 Ws , Ft , t вүҘ 1}вҲһ       t=1 be a martingale difference sequence with Ft
equal to the Пғ-field generated by W1 , . . . , Wt and suppose that there exist CW such that for all t вҲҲ N
and all О» вҲҲ R,
                                                                 2
                                                                 О» CW
                              EP [exp (О»Wt ) |FtвҲ’1 ] вүӨ exp                 ;
                                                                    2
                                                           PT
that is, conditionally sub-Gaussian. Then, it holds that t=1 Zt is sub-Gaussian, and for Оө вҲҲ R,
                                    T
                                                   !
                                                                   Оө2
                                   X
                              PP          Wt вүҘ Оө вүӨ exp вҲ’                   .
                                   t=1
                                                                2T CW

C     N ON - ASYMPTOTIC L OWER B OUNDS FOR BANDIT M ODELS WITH
      B OUNDED S UPPORTS
First, we introduce an existing lower bound for bounded bandit models. Let us denote the class of
bandit models with bounded outcomes by P [0,1] , where each potential outcome Yta is in [0, 1]. Then,
Bubeck et al. (2011) proposes the following lower bound, which holds for P [0,1] .
Proposition
   q          C.1. For all T вүҘ K вүҘ 2, any strategy ПҖ вҲҲ О  satisfies supP вҲҲP [0,1] EP [rT (P )(ПҖ)] вүҘ
 1    K
20    T .


This lower bound only requires that the support of the bandit models in P [0,1] is bounded.
For this non-asymptotic lower bound, Bubeck et al. (2011) shows that a strategy with the uniform
sampling rule and empirical best arm (EBA) recommendation rule is optimal, where we draw At = a
with probability 1/K for all a вҲҲ [K] and t вҲҲ [T ] and recommend an arm with the highest sample
average of the observed outcomes. We call this strategy the uniform-EBA strategy.
Proposition C.2 (Non-asymptotic optimality of the uniform-EBA strategy). Under theq uniform-EBA
                                                                                 вүӨ 2 KTlog K
           Uniform-EBM
                                                                  Uniform-EBM

strategy ПҖ             , for T = KвҢҠT /KвҢӢ, supP вҲҲP [0,1] EP rT ПҖ                          +K .

Thus, the upper bound matches the distribution-free lower bound if we ignore the log K and constant
terms.
Although the uniform-EBA strategy is nearly optimal, a question remains whether more knowledge
about the class of bandit models could be used to derive a tight lower bound and propose another
optimal strategy consistent with the novel lower bound. To answer this question, we consider the
asymptotic evaluation and derive a tight lower bound for bandit models with a fixed variance.

D     P ROOF OF THE A SYMPTOTIC L OWER B OUND FOR M ULTI -A RMED BANDITS
      (T HEOREM 3.4)
In this section, we provide the proof of Theorems 3.4. Our lower bound derivation is based on
arguments of a change-of-measure and semiparametric efficiency. The change-of-measure arguments


                                                   17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


have been extensively used in the bandit literature (Lai & Robbins, 1985). The semiparametric
efficiency is employed for deriving the lower bound of the KL divergence with a two-order Taylor
expansion. Our proof is inspired by van der Vaart (1998), and Murphy & van der Vaart (1997).
We prove the asymptotic lower bound through the following steps. We first introduce lower bounds
for the probability of misidentification, shown by Kaufmann et al. (2016). In Appendix D.1, we
define observed-data bandit models, which are distributions of observations that differ from full-
data bandit models P вҲҲ P вҲ— . In Appendix D.2, we define submodels of the observed-data bandit
models, which parametrize nonparametric bandit models by using parameters of gaps of the expected
outcomes of the best and suboptimal arms. These parameters serve as technical devices for the
proof. In Appendix D.3, we then decompose the expected simple regret into the gap parameters
and the probability of misidentification, and apply the lower bound of Kaufmann et al. (2016) for
the probability of misidentification. The lower bound is characterized by the KL divergence of the
observed-data bandit models, which we expand around the gap parameters in Appendix D.4. We
then derive the semiparametric efficient influence function, which bounds the second term of the
Taylor expansion of the KL divergence in Appendix D.5, and compute the worst-case bandit model
in Appendix D.6. Finally, we derive the target allocation from the lower bound in Appendix D.7.
Let fPa (y a |x) and О¶P (x) be a density function of Yta and Xt under a model P . Kaufmann et al.
(2016) derives the following result based on the change-of-measure argument, which is the principal
tool in our lower bound. Let us define a density of (Y 1 , Y 2 , . . . , Y K , X) under a bandit model
P вҲҲ P вҲ— as
                                                              Y
                             p(y 1 , y 2 , . . . , y K , x) =   fPa (y a |x)О¶P (x)
                                                      aвҲҲ[K]

Proposition D.1 (Lemma 1 and Remark 2 in Kaufmann et al. (2016)). For any two bandit model
P, Q вҲҲ P вҲ— with K arms such that for all a вҲҲ [K], the distributions P a and Qa are mutually
absolutely continuous. Then,
                                                 r
                                                   EP [LT (P, Q)]
                           sup PP (E) вҲ’ PQ (E) вүӨ
                          EвҲҲFT                             2

Recall that d(p, q) indicates the KL divergence between two Bernoulli distributions with parameters
p, q вҲҲ (0, 1).
This вҖңtransportationвҖқ lemma provides the distribution-dependent characterization of events under a
given bandit model P and corresponding perturbed bandit model P вҖІ .
Between two bandit models P, Q вҲҲ P вҲ— , following the proof of Lemma 1 in Kaufmann et al. (2016),
we define the log-likelihood ratio as
                                  T
                                                                               !
                                                        fPa (Yta |Xt )О¶P (Xt )
                                        1[At = a] log a a
                                 X    X
                   LT (P, Q) =                                                   .
                                 t=1
                                                        fQ (Yt |Xt )О¶Q (Xt )
                                    aвҲҲ[K]


We consider an approximation of EQ [LT ] under an appropriate alternative hypothesis Q вҲҲ P вҲ— when
the gaps between the expected outcomes of the best arm and suboptimal arms are small.

D.1   O BSERVED -DATA BANDIT M ODELS

For each x вҲҲ X , let us define an average allocation ratio under a bandit model P, Q вҲҲ P вҲ— as
                                T
                            1X
                                  EP [1[At = a]|Xt = x] = ОәT,P (a|x)
                            T t=1
This quantity represents an average sample allocation to each arm a under a strategy.
Lemma D.2. For P, Q вҲҲ P вҲ— ,
                                        "     "                         #             #
                                X                  fPa (Y a |X)О¶P (X)
           EP [LT (P, Q)] = T        EP EP log a a                    |X ОәT,P (a|X) .
                                                   fQ (Y |X)О¶Q (X)
                               aвҲҲ[K]


                                                 18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Here, recall that At is only based on the past observations FtвҲ’1 and observed context Xt and
independent from (Yt1 , . . . , YtK ). According to this proposition, we can consider hypothetical
observed data generated as

                          et , Xt ) i.i.d
                                          Y                          1[d=a]
                   (Yet , A          вҲј      {fPa (y a |x)ОәT,P (a|X)}        О¶P (x).
                                           aвҲҲ[K]


We present the proof in Appendix E. Then, the expectation of LT (P, Q) = t=1 aвҲҲ[K] 1[At =
                                                                                  PT P
           a a
            f (Y |X )О¶ (X )
a] log fPa (Yta |Xtt )О¶PQ (Xtt ) is the same as that under the original observation P . Also see Eq. (2).
             Q   t
Note that this observed data is induced by the bandit model P вҲҲ P вҲ— . For simplicity, we also denote
(Yet , A
       et , Xt ) by (Yt , At , Xt ) without loss of generality.

For a bandit model P вҲҲ P вҲ— , we consider observed-data distribution RP with the density function
given as
                                     Y                        1[d=a]
                     rОәP (y, d, x) =     {fPa (y|x)ОәT,P (a|x)}       О¶P (x),
                                           aвҲҲ[K]

Let RP вҲ— = RP : P вҲҲ P вҲ— be a set of all observed-data bandit models RP . Then, we have


                                     EP [LT (P, Q)] = ERP вҲ— [LT (P, Q)]                                        (2)

D.2    PARAMETRIC S UBMODELS FOR THE O BSERVED - DATA D ISTRIBUTION AND TANGENT S ET

The purpose of this section is to introduce parametric submodels for observed-data distribution, which
is indexed by a real-valued parameter and a set of distributions contained in the larger set R, and
define the derivative of a parametric submodel as a preparation for the Taylor expansion of the log-
likelihood; that is, we consider the approximation of the log-likelihood LT = t=1 aвҲҲ[K] 1[At =
                                                                              PT P
         a a
        f (Y |X )О¶ (X )
a] log fPa (Yta |Xtt )О¶PQ (Xtt ) using Вөa (P ).
          Q   t


This section consists of the following three parts. In the first part, we define parametric submodels
as Eq. (3). Then, in the following part, we confirm the differentiability Eq. (5) and define score
functions. Finally, we define a set of score functions, called a tangent set in the final paragraph.
By using the parametric submodels and tangent set, in Section D.4, we demonstrate the Taylor
expansion of the log-likelihood (Lemma D.5). In this section and Section D.4, we abstractly provide
definitions and conditions for the parametric submodels and do not specify them. However, in
Section D.5, we show a concrete form of the parametric submodel by finding score functions
satisfying the conditions imposed in this section.

Definition of parametric submodels for the observed-data distribution First, we define para-
metric submodels for the observed-data distribution RP with the density function rP (y, d, x) by
introducing a parameter вҲҶ = (вҲҶa )aвҲҲ[K] вҲҶa вҲҲ Оҳ with some compact space Оҳ. We denote a set

of parametric submodels by RP,вҲҶ : вҲҶ вҲҲ ОҳK вҠӮ RP вҲ— , which is defined as follows: for some
g : R Г— [K] Г— X вҶ’ RK satisfying EP [g a (Yt , At , Xt )] = 0 and EP [(g a (Yt , At , Xt ))2 ] < вҲһ, a
parametric submodel RP,вҲҶ has a density such that
                                                                         вҲ’1 a
              rОәвҲҶ (y, d, x) := 2c(y, d, x; вҲҶ) 1 + exp вҲ’2вҲҶвҠӨ g(y, d, x)      rP (y, d, x),                       (3)
                              Z Z
              ERP,вҲҶ [Ytd ] =        yrОәвҲҶ (y, d, x)dydx = Вөa (P ) + вҲҶa + O((вҲҶa )2 ).                            (4)

                                                                       вҲӮ
where c(y, d, x; вҲҶ) is some function such that c((y, d, x; 0) = 1 and вҲӮвҲҶ a                 log c((y, d, x; вҲҶ) =
                                                                                     вҲҶ=0
                                       4
0 for all (y, d, x) вҲҲ R Г— [K] Г— X . Note that the parametric submodels are usually not unique. For
   4
     In Eq. (3), rОәвҲҶ (y, d, x) satisfies the definition of the probability density as discussed in Example 25.15 of
van der Vaart (1998).


                                                       19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


a вҲҲ [K], the parametric submodel is equivalent to rP (y, a, x) if вҲҶa = 0. Let fвҲҶ  a
                                                                                    a (y|x) and О¶вҲҶ (x)
                                a
be the conditional density of Yt given Xt and the density of Xt , satisfying Eq. (3), as
                              e
                                       Y                      1[d=a]
                       rОәвҲҶ (y, d, x) =       a
                                           {fвҲҶ a (y|x)Оә(a|x)}         О¶вҲҶ (x).
                                        aвҲҲ[K]


Differentiablity and score functions of the parametric submodels for the observed-data distri-
bution. Next, we confirmp      the differentiablity of rОәвҲҶ (y, d, x). From the definition of the parametric
submodel Eq. (3), because rОәвҲҶ (y, d, x) is continuously differentiable for every y, x given d вҲҲ [K],
    R   rМҮОәвҲҶ (y,d,x)  2 Оә
and     r Оә (y,d,x)    rвҲҶ (y, d, x)dm are well defined and continuous in вҲҶ, where m is some reference
         вҲҶ
measure on (y, d, x), from Lemma 7.6 of van der Vaart (1998), we see that the parametric submodel
has the score function g in the L2 sense; that is, the density rОәвҲҶ (y, d, x) is differentiable in quadratic
mean:
   Z                                                                           2
         Оә,1/2             Оә,1/2            1                  Оә,1/2
        rвҲҶ (y, d, x) вҲ’ rP (y, d, x) вҲ’ вҲҶвҠӨ g(y, d, x)rP (y, d, x) dm = o вҲҘвҲҶвҲҘ2 . (5)

                                            2
                                            Оә,1/2
In other words, the parametric submodel rQ          is differentiable in quadratic mean at вҲҶ = 0 with the
score function g.
In the following section, we specify a measurable function g satisfying the conditions Eq. (3). For
each вҲҶa a вҲҲ [K], we define the score as
                                                         1[d = 1]Sf1 (y|x) + SО¶1 (x)
                                                      пЈ«                              пЈ¶

                           вҲӮ                          пЈ¬ 1[d = 2]Sf2 (y|x) + SО¶2 (x) пЈ·
                                        Оә
            S(y, d, x) =           log rвҲҶ (y, d, x) = пЈ¬
                                                      пЈ¬                              пЈ·
                                                                      ..
                          вҲӮвҲҶ вҲҶ=0
                                                                                     пЈ·
                                                      пЈӯ                .             пЈё
                                                       1[d = K]Sf (y|x) + SО¶ (x)
                                                                   K            K


where for each a вҲҲ [K], let S a (y, d, x) = 1[d = a]Sfa (y|x) + SО¶ (x),
                           вҲӮ                                           вҲӮ
             Sfa (y|x) =                 a
                                    log fвҲҶ a (y|x),       SО¶a (x) =             log О¶вҲҶ (x).
                          вҲӮвҲҶa вҲҶ=0                                     вҲӮвҲҶa вҲҶ=0
           вҲӮ
Note that вҲӮвҲҶ a log ОәT,P (a|x) = 0. Here, we specify g in Eq. (3) as the score function of the parametric
submodel as S(y, d, x) = g(y, d, x), where S a (y, d, x) = g a (y, d, x). This relationship is derived
from
                                                         2g 1 (y,d,x)
                                                 пЈ«                       пЈ¶
                                                                                     пЈ« 1
                                                    exp(2вҲҶвҠӨ g(y,d,x))+1                g (y, d, x)
                                                                                                   пЈ¶
                                                            2
                                                         2g   (y,d,x)
                                                 пЈ¬                       пЈ·              2
    вҲӮ                         1                  пЈ¬
                                                 пЈ¬ exp(2вҲҶвҠӨ g(y,d,x))+1 пЈ·
                                                                         пЈ·           пЈ¬ g (y, d, x) пЈ·
             log                              =                ..                 =  пЈ¬      ..     пЈ·.
   вҲӮвҲҶ вҲҶ=0        1 + exp (вҲ’2вҲҶвҠӨ g(y, d, x)) пЈ¬
                                                 пЈ¬                       пЈ·
                                                                                             .
                                                                                     пЈӯ             пЈё
                                                                .        пЈ·
                                                                         пЈё вҲҶ=0          K
                                                 пЈӯ
                                                           K
                                                         2g (y,d,x)                   g (y, d, x)
                                                      exp(2вҲҶвҠӨ g(y,d,x))+1

Definition of the tangent set. Recall that parametric submodels and corresponding score functions
are
  not unique. Here,     we consider a set of score functions. For a set of the parametric submodels
  RP,вҲҶ : вҲҶ вҲҲ ОҳK , we obtain a corresponding set of score functions in the Hilbert space L2 (RP ),
which we call a tangent set of R at RP and denote it by RМҮ. Because ERP [g 2 ] is automatically finite,
the tangent set can be identified with a subset of the Hilbert space L2 (RP ), up to equivalence classes.
For our parametric submodels, the tangent set at RP in L2 (RP ) is given as
                                          1[d = 1]Sf1 (y|x) + SО¶1 (x) пЈҙ
                                    пЈұпЈ«                                пЈ¶пЈј
                                    пЈҙпЈ¬ 1[d = 2]S 2 (y|x) + S 2 (x) пЈ·пЈҙ
                                    пЈҙ
                                    пЈҙ
                                    пЈІ                                    пЈҙ
                                                                         пЈҪ
                                                     f          О¶
                             RМҮ = пЈ¬                                         .
                                       пЈ¬                              пЈ·
                                                        ..            пЈ·
                                    пЈҙ
                                    пЈҙ  пЈӯ                 .            пЈёпЈҙ пЈҙ
                                         1[d = K]SfK (y|x) + SО¶K (x) пЈҫ
                                    пЈҙ
                                    пЈі                                    пЈҙ
                                                                                  n
A linear space of the tangent set is called a tangent space. We also define RМҮa = 1[d = a]Sfa (y|x)+
        o
SО¶a (x) .


                                                     20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D.3    C HANGE - OF -M EASURE

We consider a set of bandit models P вҖ  вҠӮ P вҲ— such that P вҲҲ P вҖ  , a вҲҲ [K], and x вҲҲ X , Вөa (P )(x) =
Вөa (P ). Before a bandit process begins, we fix P вҷҜ вҲҲ P вҖ  such that Вө1 (P вҷҜ ) = В· В· В· = ВөK (P вҷҜ ) = Вө(P вҷҜ ).
We choose one arm d вҲҲ [K] as the best arm following a multinomial                     distribution with parameters
(e1 , e2 , . . . , eK ), where ea вҲҲ [0, 1] for all a вҲҲ [K] and aвҲҲ[K] ea = 1; that is, the expected
                                                                          P

outcome of the chosen arm d is the highest among the arms. Let вҲҶ be a set of parameters such
that вҲҶ = (вҲҶc )cвҲҲ[K] , where вҲҶc вҲҲ (0, вҲһ). Let вҲҶ(d) be a set of parameters such that вҲҶ(d) =
(0, . . . , вҲҶd , . . . , 0). Then, for each chosen d вҲҲ [K], let QвҲҶ(d) вҲҲ P вҖ  be another bandit model such that
d = arg maxaвҲҲ[K] Вөa (QвҲҶ(d) ), Вөb (QвҲҶ(d) ) = Вө(P вҷҜ ) for b вҲҲ [K]\{d}, and Вөd (QвҲҶ(d) ) вҲ’ Вө(P вҷҜ ) =

вҲҶd + O (вҲҶd )2 . For each d вҲҲ [K], we consider RP вҷҜ ,вҲҶ(d) вҲҲ RP вҖ  вҠӮ RP вҲ— such that the following
equation holds:
                                 T
                                          (                                        !                         !)
                                                                 fPa вҷҜ (Yta |Xt )                О¶P вҷҜ (Xt )
                                             1[At = a] log a
                                X    X
                 вҷҜ
      LT (P , QвҲҶ(d) ) =                                                              + log
                                t=1 aвҲҲ[K]
                                                               fQ (d) (Yta |Xt )                О¶QвҲҶ(d) (Xt )
                                                                  вҲҶ

                                 T
                                    (                                        !                         !)
                                                         fPd вҷҜ (Ytd |Xt )                 О¶P вҷҜ (Xt )
                                       1[At = d] log d
                                X
                              =                                                + log
                                t=1
                                                       fQ (d) (Ytd |Xt )                О¶QвҲҶ(d) (Xt )
                                                          вҲҶ
                                 T
                                    (                                      !                         )
                                                        fPd вҷҜ (Ytd |Xt )

                                                                                         О¶P (Xt )
                                       1[At = d] log d
                                X
                              =                                               + log                      .
                                t=1
                                                       fвҲҶ(d) (Ytd |Xt )                О¶вҲҶ(d) (Xt )
                                                                  d d
                                                                    fP вҷҜ (Yt |Xt )

Then, let LT (P , QвҲҶ(d) ) be t=1 1[At = d] log f d (Y d |Xt ) + log О¶ (d) (Xt ) . Under
                   a     вҷҜ
                                        PT                                                      О¶P (Xt )
                                                                  вҲҶ(d)   t                вҲҶ

the class of bandit models, we show the following lemma.
Lemma D.3. Any null consistent BAI strategy satisfies
                                              пЈұ                    s       d                         пЈј
                                   X          пЈІ                                 вҷҜ
                                                                     EP вҷҜ LT (P , QвҲҶ(d) )            пЈҪ
                                        ed вҲҶd 1 вҲ’ PP вҷҜ (b                                   + O вҲҶd

  sup EP [rT (P )(ПҖ)] вүҘ     sup                          aT = d) вҲ’                                     .
 P вҲҲP вҲ—                 вҲҶвҲҲ(0,вҲһ)K              пЈі                               2                      пЈҫ
                                             dвҲҲ[K]


Proof of Lemma D.3. First, we decompose the expected simple regret by using the definition of P вҖ 
as
              sup EP [rT (P )(ПҖ)]
             P вҲҲP вҲ—
                      X
                                  a        b
              = sup          max Вө (P ) вҲ’ Вө (P ) PP (b
                                                     aT = b)
                  P вҲҲP вҲ—            aвҲҲ[K]
                           bвҲҲ[K]
                                   X            X
                                       ed               Вөd (QвҲҶ(d) ) вҲ’ Вөb (QвҲҶ(d) ) PQвҲҶ(d) (b

              вүҘ       sup                                                                 aT = b)
                  вҲҶвҲҲ(0,вҲһ)K dвҲҲ[K]            bвҲҲ[K]\{d}
                                   X            X
                                       ed               Вөd (QвҲҶ(d) ) вҲ’ Вө(P вҷҜ ) PQвҲҶ(d) (b

              вүҘ       sup                                                             aT = b)
                  вҲҶвҲҲ(0,вҲһ)K     dвҲҲ[K]        bвҲҲ[K]\{d}
                                            пЈұ                                             пЈј
                                   X        пЈІ   X                                         пЈҪ
              =       sup              ed          вҲҶd PQвҲҶ(d) (b
                                                              aT = b) + O (вҲҶd )2
                  вҲҶвҲҲ(0,вҲһ)K dвҲҲ[K]       пЈі
                                         bвҲҲ[K]\{d}
                                                                                 пЈҫ
                                   X   n                                 o
              =       sup            ed вҲҶd PQвҲҶ(d) (baT Мё= d) + O (вҲҶd )2
                  вҲҶвҲҲ(0,вҲһ)K dвҲҲ[K]
                                   X     n                                  o
              =       sup              ed вҲҶd 1 вҲ’ PQвҲҶ(d) (b
                                                         aT = d) + O (вҲҶd )2 .
                  вҲҶвҲҲ(0,вҲһ)K dвҲҲ[K]

From Propositions D.5 and D.1. and the definition of null consistent strategies,
          X       n                                           o
   sup         ed вҲҶd 1 вҲ’ PQвҲҶ(d) (b   aT = d) + O (вҲҶd )2
вҲҶвҲҲ(0,вҲһ)K dвҲҲ[K]



                                                           21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                X      n                                                                   o
=         sup        ed вҲҶd 1 вҲ’ PP вҷҜ (b
                                     aT = d) + PP вҷҜ (b                 aT = d) + O (вҲҶd )2
                                                     aT = d) вҲ’ PQвҲҶ(d) (b
    вҲҶвҲҲ(0,вҲһ)K dвҲҲ[K]
                          пЈұ        пЈұ                               s                           пЈј              пЈј
                X         пЈІ        пЈІ                                   EP вҷҜ LdT (P вҷҜ , QвҲҶ(d) ) пЈҪ              пЈҪ
                     ed       вҲҶd                                                                 + O (вҲҶd )2

вүҘ         sup                                    aT = d) вҲ’
                                       1 вҲ’ PP вҷҜ (b                                                              .
    вҲҶвҲҲ(0,вҲһ)K dвҲҲ[K]        пЈі        пЈі                                             2             пЈҫ              пЈҫ

The proof is complete.

D.4       S EMIPARAMETRIC L IKELIHOOD R ATIO

In this section and the next section (Appendix D.5), our goal is to prove the following lemma.
Lemma D.4.
                                                         2
                                                  T (вҲҶa )
                     EP вҷҜ LdT (P вҷҜ , QвҲҶ(d) ) вүӨ                i + O T (вҲҶa )3 .

                                                   h d      2
                                               2EP (Пғw(d|X)
                                                       (X))



We consider Taylor expansion of the log-likelihood ratio LT defined between P, Q вҲҲ P вҖ  . We
consider an approximation of LT around a parametric submodel. Because there can be several
score functions for our parametric submodel due to directions of the derivative, we find a parametric
submodel that has a score function with the largest variance, called a least-favorable parametric
submodel (van der Vaart, 1998). Our Taylor expansion is upper-bounded by the variance of the score
function, which corresponds to the lower bound for the probability of misidentification.
Inspired by the arguments in Murphy & van der Vaart (1997), we define the semiparametric likelihood
ratio expansion to characterize the lower bound for the probability of misidentification with the
semiparametric efficiency bound. Note again that the details are different from them owing to the
difference in the parameters submodels.
As a preparation, we define a parameter ER                           [Yta ] as a function ПҲ a : R 7вҶ’ R such that
                                                            P,вҲҶ(a)

ПҲ a (RP,вҲҶ(a) ) = ER            [Yta ]. The information bound for ПҲ a (RP,вҲҶ(a) ) of interest is called semi-
                      P,вҲҶ(a)

parametric efficiency bound. Let linRМҮ be the closure of the tangent set. Then, ПҲ a (RP,вҲҶ(a) ) is
pathwise differentiable relative to the tangent set RМҮa if and only if there exists a function ПҲe вҲҲ linRМҮ
such that
                вҲӮ           a
                                                      h                                      i
                                                        ea (Yt , At , Xt )S a (Yt , At , Xt ) .
                          ПҲ   (R P,вҲҶ (a) ) = E
                                              RP,вҲҶ(a)  ПҲ P                                            (6)
               вҲӮвҲҶa вҲҶa =0
This function ПҲe is called the semiparametric influence function. Note that the RHS of Eq. (6) is
calculated as follows:
          h                                 i Z Z                                               Z
             a               a
ER (a) ПҲP (Yt , At , Xt )S (Yt , At , Xt ) =
            e                                         ySf (y|x)fвҲҶa (y|x)О¶вҲҶ(a) (x)dydx + Вөa (x)SО¶ (x)О¶вҲҶ(a) (x)dx.
                                                          a        a
    P,вҲҶ

                                                                                                                (7)

Then, we prove the following lemma:
Lemma D.5. For P вҲҲ P вҖ  ,
                                                                     2
                                           1               T (вҲҶa )
                                                                                             a 3

                  EP [LaT (P, Q)] вүӨ                                              2   + O T (вҲҶ ) .
                                           2
                                               EP        ПҲePa (Yt , At , Xt )

To prove this lemma, we define
                          в„“aвҲҶ (y, d, x) = 1[d = a] log fвҲҶ
                                                        a     a

                                                          a (y |x) + log О¶вҲҶ (x).
Then, by using the parametric submodel defined in the previous section,
              T
                                                        !
                                 fPa (Yta |Xt )О¶P (Xt )
                 1[At = a] log a a
             X
 a
LT (P, Q) =
             t=1
                                 fQ (Yt |Xt )О¶Q (Xt )


                                                              22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                 T
                                               fPa (Yta |Xt )О¶P (Xt )

                       1[At = a] log
                 X
             =                                  a (Y a |X )О¶ (X )
                 t=1
                                              fвҲҶ  a   t    t вҲҶ     t

                 T
                 X            вҲӮ        a                      a     вҲӮ2          a                     (вҲҶa )2
                                                                                                                      a 3

             =           вҲ’            в„“  (a) (Yt , At , Xt )вҲҶ   вҲ’              в„“  (a) (Yt , At , Xt )        + O   (вҲҶ  )     .
                 t=1
                             вҲӮвҲҶa вҲҶa =0 вҲҶ                          вҲӮ(вҲҶa )2 вҲҶa =0 вҲҶ                       2

Here, note that
                        вҲӮ
                                 в„“a (a) (Yt , At , Xt ) = S a (Yt , At , Xt ) = g a (Yt , At , Xt )
                       вҲӮвҲҶa вҲҶa =0 вҲҶ
                          вҲӮ                                                          2
                                    в„“a (a) (Yt , At , Xt ) = вҲ’ (S a (Yt , At , Xt )) .
                       вҲӮ(вҲҶa )2 вҲҶa =0 вҲҶ
By using the expansion, we evaluate EP [LaT ]. Here, by definition, EP [S a (Yt , At , Xt )] = 0. There-
fore, we consider an upper bound of E (S a (Y 1,A ,X ))2 for S вҲҲ RМҮ.
                                     P[      t   t  t   ]
                                                                                                1
Then, we prove the following lemma on the upper bound for E                                                       :
                                                                                    P   [(S a (Yt ,At ,Xt ))2 ]
Lemma D.6. For P вҲҲ P вҖ  ,
                                                                                                         2
                                                 1
                          sup        h                           i вүӨ EP          ПҲePa (Yt , At , Xt )
                                                             2
                          SвҲҲRМҮ EP        (S a (Yt , At , Xt ))

Proof. From the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality, we have
                                            s
        h                                 i                         2  r   h                       i
           a              a                         a                                            2
1 = EP ПҲP (Yt , At , Xt )S (Yt , At , Xt ) вүӨ EP ПҲP (Yt , At , Xt )
          e                                        e                     EP (S a (Yt , At , Xt )) .

Therefore,
                                                                                      2
                                         1
                          sup    h                        i вүӨ EP ПҲePa (Yt , At , Xt )     .
                                                        2
                          SвҲҲRМҮ EP (S a (Yt , At , Xt ))


                                                                                           1
According to this lemma, to derive the upper bound for E                                                   , let us define the semi-
                                                                             P   [(S a (Yt ,At ,Xt ))2 ]
                            a
parametric efficient score Seff (Yt , At , Xt ) вҲҲ linRМҮa as

                                                               ПҲea (Y , A , X )
                                   a
                                  Seff (Yt , At , Xt ) =         P t t t     .
                                                                                    2
                                                            EP ПҲePa (Yt , At , Xt )

                                                   a
Then, by using the semiparametric efficient score Seff (Yt , At , Xt ), we approximate the likelihood
ratio as follows:

Proof of Lemma D.5.

                                                   1 a                    2     2
                  EP вҖІ [LaT (P, Q)] = T EP           (S (Yt , At , Xt )) (вҲҶa ) + O((вҲҶa )3 )
                                                   2

                                                   1 a                     2     2
                                          вүӨ T EP     (Seff (Yt , At , Xt )) (вҲҶa ) + O((вҲҶa )3 )
                                                   2
                                                                 2
                                            1         T (вҲҶa )
                                          =                                  + O T (вҲҶa )3 .
                                            2                            2
                                              EP ПҲePa (Yt , At , Xt )


                                                                 23
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D.5     O BSERVED -DATA S EMIPARAMETRIC E FFICIENT I NFLUENCE F UNCTION

Our remaining is task is to find ПҲePa вҲҲ linRМҮ in Eq. (6). Our derivation mainly follows Hahn (1998).
We guess that ПҲePa (Yt , At , Xt ) has the following form:
                                     1[d = a](y вҲ’ Вө (P )(x))  a
                    ПҲePa (y, d, x) =                         + Вөa (P )(x) вҲ’ Вөa (P ).                          (8)
                                           ОәT,P (a|X)
                                                                         вҲӮ
Then, as shown by Hahn (1998), the condition вҲӮвҲҶ                            a         ПҲ a (RP,вҲҶ(a) )   =
    h                                      i                                 вҲҶ(a) =0
ERQ ПҲePa (Yt , At , Xt )S a (Yt , At , Xt ) holds under Eq. (8) when the score functions are given as

              (y вҲ’ Вөa (P )(x)) e a
Sfa (y|x) =                                                 SО¶a (x) = Вөa (P )(x) вҲ’ Вөa (P ) /Ve a (ОәT,P ) for a вҲҲ [K],

                              /V (ОәT,P ),
                 ОәT,P (a|x)
where
                         1[d = a](y вҲ’ Вөa (P )(x))
                    "                                                            2 #      "                                         #
                                                                                                        2
                                                                                            (Пғ a (Xt ))                           2
Ve a (ОәT,P ) :=EP                                                 a
                                                            + Вө (P )(x) вҲ’ Вө (P ) a
                                                                                     = EP                     a             a
                                                                                                          + (Вө (P )(Xt ) вҲ’ Вө (P )) .
                                   ОәT,P (a|X)                                               ОәT,P (a|Xt )

Therefore,
                                 1[d = a](y вҲ’ Вөa (P )(x))

          S a (y, d, x) =                                             + Вөa (P )(x) вҲ’ Вөa (P ) /Ve a (ОәT,P ).
                                          ОәT,P (a|X)
Our specified score function satisfies Eq. (4) because we can confirm that
                                                 ПҲ a (RP,0 ) = Вөa (P ),
and
 вҲӮ         a
                                 h
                                   ea (Yt , At , Xt )S a (Yt , At , Xt )
                                                                         i
   a
         ПҲ   (R P,вҲҶ (a) ) = E
                             R    ПҲ P
вҲӮвҲҶ вҲҶa =0                       Q


                                     1[d = a](y вҲ’ Вөa (P )(x))
                                 "                                                          2            #
                          = ERQ                                      + Вөa (P )(x) вҲ’ Вөa (P ) /Ve a (ОәT,P ) = 1.
                                             ОәT,P (a|X)

Then, from the first-order Taylor expansion of ПҲ a (RP,вҲҶ(a) ) around вҲҶa = 0, we obtain
                                          вҲӮ
ПҲ a (RP,вҲҶ(a) ) = ПҲ a (RP,0 ) + вҲҶa                  ПҲ a (RP,вҲҶ(a) ) + O((вҲҶa )2 ) = Вөa (P ) + вҲҶa + O((вҲҶa )2 ).
                                         вҲӮвҲҶa вҲҶa =0

Summarizing the above arguments, we obtain the following lemma.
Lemma D.7. For P вҲҲ P вҖ  , the semiparametric efficient influence function is

              ПҲePa (y, d, x) = Ve a (ОәT,P ) 1[d = a]Sfa (y|x) + SО¶ (x)


                                         1[d = a](y вҲ’ Вөa (P )(x))
                                     =                                      + Вөa (P )(x) вҲ’ Вөa (P ).
                                                  ОәT,P (a|x)

Thus, under g with our specified score  functions, we can confirm that
                                                                     the semiparametric influ-
ence function ПҲP (y, d, x) = V (ОәT,P ) 1[At = a]Sf (y|x) + SО¶ (x) belongs to linRМҮ. Note that
              ea             e a                    a

      a
ERQ [Seff (Yt , At , Xt )] = 0 and
                                                   2                               2   вҲ’1
                                a                                 a
                    ERQ        Seff (Yt , At , Xt )      = ERQ ПҲP (Yt , At , Xt )
                                                                 e                        .

                                                                                            a
In summary, from Lemmas D.5, D.6,   h anda
                                            D.7, we
                                                   2
                                                     i obtain Lemma D.4. Note that because Вө (P )(x) =
                                      (Пғ   (X   ))
Вөa for P вҲҲ P вҖ  , Ve a (ОәT,P ) := EP           t
                                                      .
                                            ОәT ,P (a|Xt )



                                                              24
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D.6       T HE W ORST C ASE BANDIT M ODEL

We show the final step of the proof.

Proof. Then, from Lemmas D.3 and D.7, for all d вҲҲ [K], and definition of the null consistent strategy,
for any Пө > 0, there exists T0 > 0 such that for all T > T0 ,
                                                пЈұ                           s           d                            пЈј
                                                пЈІ                               E   вҷҜ  L   (P вҷҜ , Q (d) )            пЈҪ
                                                                                  P                вҲҶ
                                    X
                                                                                         T
                                         ed вҲҶd 1 вҲ’ PP вҷҜ (b                                                  + O вҲҶd

  sup EP [rT (P )(ПҖ)] вүҘ      sup                               aT = d) вҲ’
 P вҲҲP вҲ—                  вҲҶвҲҲ(0,вҲһ)K dвҲҲ[K]         пЈі                                           2                        пЈҫ
                                пЈұ                                                                     пЈј
                                пЈҙ           v                                                         пЈҙ
                                пЈІ     1     u             d
                                                     T (вҲҶ )   2                                       пЈҪ
                                                                                       3
                     X
                           d d                                                      d              d
 вүҘ inf      sup           e вҲҶ     1вҲ’      вҲ’t                           + O T ((вҲҶ ) ) + O вҲҶ                вҲ’Пө
                                            u
                                                       h  d (X ))2
                                                                     i
    wвҲҲW вҲҶвҲҲ(0,вҲһ)K                пЈҙ     K         2EP вҷҜ (Пғw(d|X   t                                     пЈҙ
                    dвҲҲ[K]       пЈі
                                                                  t)
                                                                                                      пЈҫ
                                пЈұ     v                                                          пЈј
                                пЈІ1 u                 d  2
                     X                         T (вҲҶ )                        d )3 ) + O вҲҶd
                                                                                                 пЈҪ
                          ed вҲҶd

 вүҘ inf                              вҲ’t                                                             вҲ’ Пө.
                                      u
            sup                                 h d        2
                                                             i  +    O T ((вҲҶ
    wвҲҲW вҲҶвҲҲ(0,вҲһ)K                пЈі2        2E вҷҜ (Пғ (Xt ))                                         пЈҫ
                                   dвҲҲ[K]                         P       w(d|Xt )
                                                                          пЈұ                                              пЈј
                                                                          пЈІ            s                                 пЈҪ
                                                                   d d         1                   T (вҲҶd )2
                                                                                                                             is given as вҲҶa =
                                                       P
The maximizer of supвҲҶвҲҲ(0,вҲһ)K                                dвҲҲ[K] e вҲҶ              вҲ’
                                                                                                       (Пғd (Xt ))2

                                                                          пЈі2               2EP вҷҜ        w(d|Xt )
                                                                                                                         пЈҫ
    r
                    (Пғ a (Xt ))2
                h                  i
        2EP вҷҜ
1                    w(a|Xt )
4                    T                 . Therefore,
                                                                               пЈұ        v                                                               пЈј
                                                                                                                2
                                                                               пЈІ1                       T (вҲҶd )
                                                                                        u                                                               пЈҪ
                                                                                                                             i + O T (вҲҶd )3 ) + O вҲҶd
                                                              X
 sup EP [rT (P )(ПҖ)] вүҘ inf                                            e d вҲҶd           вҲ’t                                                                   вҲ’Пө
                                                                                        u
                                                      sup                                                 h
P вҲҲP вҲ—                                     wвҲҲW вҲҶвҲҲ(0,вҲһ)K                        пЈі2                             (Пғ d (Xt ))2
                                                              dвҲҲ[K]                           2EP вҷҜ            w(d|Xt )
                                                                                                                                                       пЈҫ
                    пЈұv                     пЈ«         d        2
                                                                  пЈ¶пЈј
                     u     h d
                            (Пғ (Xt ))2
                                       i            (Пғ (Xt ))
                    пЈҙ
                    пЈІt EP вҷҜ w(d|X )
                    пЈҙu                       2EP вҷҜ
                                                     w(d|Xt )
                                                                   пЈҙ
                                                                   пЈҙ
   1       X
                  d                t
                                           пЈ¬                      пЈ·пЈҪ
вүҘ     inf       e                        +OпЈӯ
                                           пЈ¬
                                                                  пЈёпЈҙ вҲ’ Пө.
                                                                  пЈ·
  12 wвҲҲW            пЈҙ        T                       T
          dвҲҲ[K]     пЈҙ
                    пЈі                                              пЈҙ
                                                                   пЈҫ

As T вҶ’ вҲһ, letting Пө вҶ’ 0,
                                                                                      v     "               #
                                   вҲҡ
                                                                                      u                   2
                                                              1           X           u
                                                                                     dt       (Пғ d (Xt ))
                         sup           T EP [rT (P )(ПҖ)] вүҘ        inf              e   EP вҷҜ                   + o (1) .
                       P вҲҲP вҲ—                                 12 wвҲҲW                           w(d|Xt )
                                                                         dвҲҲ[K]


D.7       C HARACTERIZATION OF THE TARGET A LLOCATION R ATIO

Proof of Theorem 3.4. We showed that any null consistent BAI strategy satisfies
                                                            s
                                                                     2
                                           1       X          (Пғ d )
                    sup EP [rT (P )(ПҖ)] вүҘ     inf        ed            + o (1) .
                   P вҲҲP вҲ—                 12 wвҲҲW              w(d)
                                                                               dвҲҲ[K]
                                                           q
                                                        1     (Пғ d )2
In the tight lower bound, ed = 1 for de = arg maxdвҲҲ[K] 12                5
                                                              w(d) + o(1) . Therefore, we consider
                           e

solving
                                                  s
                                                          2
                                                    (Пғ d )
                                         inf max            .
                                        wвҲҲW dвҲҲ[K]   w(d)
   5
     If there are multiple candidates of the best arm, we choose one of the multiple arms as the best arm with
probability 1.


                                                                        25
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


If there exists a solution, we can replace the inf with the min. We consider the following constrained
optimization:
                                           inf          R                                            (9)
                                       RвҲҲR,wвҲҲW
                                                               2
                                                           Пғd
                                                 s.t.   RвүҘ        вҲҖd вҲҲ [K]
                                                           w(d)
                                                        X
                                                           w(a) = 1.
                                                        aвҲҲ[K]

For this problem, we derive the first-order condition, which is sufficient for the global optimality
of such a convex programming problem. For Lagrangian multipliers О»d вҲҲ (вҲ’вҲһ, 0] and Оі вҲҲ R, we
consider the following Lagrangian function:
                                                                 пЈұ                 пЈј
                                                 d 2
                                             (           )
                                    X          Пғ                 пЈІX                пЈҪ
              L(О», Оі; R, w) = R +        О»d          вҲ’R +Оі               w(d) вҲ’ 1 .
                                               w(d)              пЈі                 пЈҫ
                                           dвҲҲ[K]                                    dвҲҲ[K]

Then, the optimal solutions wвҲ— , О»вҲ—d , Оі вҲ— , and RвҲ— of the original problem satisfies
                                X
                          1вҲ’          О»dвҲ— = 0        вҲҖx вҲҲ X                                         (10)
                                      dвҲҲ[K]
                                                 2
                                            Пғd
                                 вҲ’О»   dвҲ—
                                                    = ОівҲ—      вҲҖd вҲҲ [K],                             (11)
                                         (wвҲ— (d))2
                                      (       2       )
                                          Пғd
                                 О»dвҲ—             вҲ’ RвҲ— = 0                                           (12)
                                         w(d)
                                         пЈұ                  пЈј
                                         пЈІX                 пЈҪ
                                 Оі вҲ— (x)          wвҲ— (a) вҲ’ 1 = 0      вҲҖa вҲҲ [K].
                                         пЈі                  пЈҫ
                                           aвҲҲ[K]


Here, the solutions are given as
                                                                        2
                                                  вҲ—               Пғd
                                              w (d) = P                     ,
                                                                        b 2
                                                                bвҲҲ[K] (Пғ )

                                              О»dвҲ— = wвҲ— (d),
                                                          X    2
                                              Оі вҲ— (x) = вҲ’   Пғb .
                                                            bвҲҲ[K]


Therefore,
                      v                               v     пЈ®              пЈ№
                          "             #             u
                                      2
                      u
            X       1       (Пғ a (X))              1
                                                      u       X              X
                                                                         2
                      u
   inf           ea tEP вҷҜ                 + o(1) =              (Пғ a (X)) пЈ»    ea + o(1).
                                                      u
                                                      tEP вҷҜ пЈ°
  wвҲҲW              12        w(a|X)                12
         aвҲҲ[K]                                                                  aвҲҲ[K]       aвҲҲ[K]

                   a
        P
Since    aвҲҲ[K] e       = 1 and О¶P (x) = О¶(x), the proof is complete.


                            a     2
Here, w(a|x)
      e      = P (Пғ (x))
                    (Пғ b (x))2
                               works as a target allocation ratio in implementation of our BAI
                         bвҲҲ[K]
strategy because it represents the sample average of 1[At = a]; that is, we design our sampling rule
(At )tвҲҲ[T ] for the average to be the target allocation ratio.
Although this lower bound is applicable to a case with K = 2, we can tighten the lower bound by
changing the definition of the parametric submodel.


                                                            26
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E    P ROOF OF L EMMA D.2
                                          Pt           h              2    i
Proof. Let us define в„Ұa,b
                      t (P ) =                 s=1 E       Оҫsa,b (P ) |FsвҲ’1 . We can also derive a non-asymptotic
upper bound for the expected simple regret if we assume a certain convergence rate on в„Ұa,b (P ),
which dominates the rate of the martingale limit theorems. We show the result in Appendix H.
We have
                           пЈ®                                           пЈ№
             T                                    a
                                                 fQ (Yta |Xt )О¶Q (Xt )
                                   1{At = a} log a a
             X                 X
EQ [LT ] =            EQ пЈ°                                             пЈ»
                t=1
                                                fP0 (Yt |Xt )О¶P0 (Xt )
                           aвҲҲ[K]
                       пЈ®                                                                     пЈ№
    T                                                        a
                                                            fQ (Yta |Xt )О¶Q (Xt )

                                 Y a ,A
           X ,FtвҲ’1 пЈ°
                                              1[At = a] log a a
    X                      X
=         EQt                   EQt t                                             |Xt , FtвҲ’1 пЈ»
    t=1
                                                           fP0 (Yt |Xt )О¶P0 (Xt )
                        aвҲҲ[K]
                       пЈ®                                                                                   пЈ№
    T                                                               a
                                                                   fQ (Yta |Xt )О¶Q (Xt )

                                                            Ya
       X ,F
                               1
    X                      X
=     EQt tвҲ’1 пЈ°      EQ [             [At = a]|Xt , FtвҲ’1 ] EQt
                                                            log a                               |Xt , FtвҲ’1 пЈ»
  t=1
                                                                 fP0 (Yta |Xt )О¶P0 (Xt )
               aвҲҲ[K]
            пЈ®     пЈ®                                                                                    пЈ№пЈ№
   T                                                                  a     a
                                                                    f   (Y    |X   )О¶    (X    )

                                                         a
                          EQ [1[At = a]|Xt , FtвҲ’1 ] EQt log a
  X
          t пЈ° Ft пЈ°
                     X                                 Y              Q    t     t    Q      t
=     EXQ    EQ                                                             a |X )О¶ (X ) |Xt
                                                                                                       пЈ»пЈ»
  t=1
                                                                   fP 0
                                                                        (Y t     t    P 0     t
                    aвҲҲ[K]
         пЈ«                                                                                                    пЈ¶
   T                                                                      a     a
                                                                        f    (Y   |X    )О¶   (X    )
      Z
                                                              a

                    Q [EQ [1[At = a]|Xt = x, FtвҲ’1 ]] EQ
  X          X                                             Y              Q    t      t    Q     t
=        пЈӯ        EF  t                                      t
                                                                  log a         a |X )О¶ (X ) |Xt = x
                                                                                                              пЈё О¶Q (x)dx
  t=1
                                                                       f P0
                                                                             (Yt      t    P0     t
            aвҲҲ[K]
                                                         T
                                                                                                            !
                           a
                         fQ  (Y a |X)О¶Q (X)
  Z X                                                  X
=              Ya
              EQ log a                        |X = x         EQ [EQ [1[At = a]|Xt = x, FtвҲ’1 ]] О¶Q (x)dx
                                                                Ft
                        fP0 (Y a |X)О¶P0 (X)            t=1
     aвҲҲ[K]
      пЈ®                                                                                              пЈ№
                            a    a                  T
                          f   (Y   |X)О¶   (X)
                                                   X
                                                       EQtвҲ’1 [EQ [1[At = a]|X, FtвҲ’1 ]]пЈ» ,
         X        a         Q           Q                 F
= EX
   Q
      пЈ°       EYQ log a                        |X
                         fP0 (Y a |X)О¶P0 (X)       t=1
           aвҲҲ[K]

where EZQ denotes an expectation of random variable Z over the distribution Q. We used that the
observations (Yt1 , . . . , YtK , Xt ) are i.i.d. across t вҲҲ {1, 2, . . . , T }.

F    P ROOF OF THE A SYMPTOTIC L OWER B OUND FOR T WO -A RMED BANDITS
     (T HEOREM 3.8)
When K = 2, we define different parametric submodels from those in Section D.

Parametric submodels for the observed-data distribution and tangent set. In a case with K = 2,
we consider one-parameter parametric submodels for the observed-data distribution RP with the
                                           a parameter вҲҶ вҲҲ Оҳ with some compact space Оҳ. We
density function rP (y, d, x) by introducing
denote a set of parametric submodels by RP,вҲҶ : вҲҶ вҲҲ Оҳ вҠӮ RP вҲ— , which is defined as follows: for
some g : R Г— [2] Г— X вҶ’ R satisfying EP [g(Yt , At , Xt )] = 0 and EP [(g(Yt , At , Xt ))2 ] < вҲһ, a
parametric submodel RP,вҲҶ has a density such that
                                                                                     вҲ’1 a
                  rОәвҲҶ (y, d, x) := 2c(y, d, x; вҲҶ) (1 + exp (вҲ’2вҲҶg(y, d, x)))            rP (y, d, x),
                                                                       вҲӮ
where c(y, d, x; вҲҶ) is some function such that c((y, d, x; 0) = 1 and вҲӮвҲҶ                     log c((y, d, x; вҲҶ) = 0
                                                                                       вҲҶ=0
for all (y, d, x) вҲҲ R Г— [2] Г— X . Note that the parametric submodels are usually not unique. The
parametric submodel is equivalent to rP (y, a, x) if вҲҶ = 0.
      a
Let fвҲҶ  (y|x) and О¶вҲҶ (x) be the conditional density of y given x and some density of x, satisfying
Eq. (3) as
                                         Y                   1[d=a]
                         rОәвҲҶ (y, d, x) =      a
                                            {fвҲҶ (y|x)Оә(a|x)}        О¶вҲҶ (x).
                                                   aвҲҲ[2]


                                                               27
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


For this parametric submodel, we develop the same argument in Section D. Note that we consider
a one-parameter parametric submodel for two-armed bandits, while in Section D, we consider
K-dimensional parametric submodels for K-armed bandits.

Change-of-measure. We consider a set of bandit models P вҖ вҖ  вҠӮ P вҲ— such that for all P вҲҲ P вҖ вҖ  ,
a вҲҲ [K], and x вҲҲ X , Вөa (P )(x) = Вөa . Before a bandit process begins, we fix P вҷҜвҷҜ вҲҲ P вҖ вҖ  such that
Вө1 (P вҷҜвҷҜ ) = Вө2 (P вҷҜвҷҜ ) = Вө(P вҷҜвҷҜ ). We choose one arm d вҲҲ [2] as the best arm following a Bernoulli
distribution with parameter e вҲҲ [0, 1]; that is, the expected outcome of the chosen arm d is the highest
among the arms. We choose arm 1 with probability e and arm 2 with probability 1вҲ’e. Let вҲҶ вҲҲ (0, вҲһ)
be a gap parameter and QвҲҶ вҲҲ P вҖ вҖ  be another bandit model such that d = arg maxaвҲҲ[2] Вөa (QвҲҶ ),
Вөb (QвҲҶ ) = Вө(P вҷҜвҷҜ ) for b Мё= d, and Вөd (QвҲҶ ) вҲ’ Вө(P вҷҜвҷҜ ) = вҲҶ + O(вҲҶ2 ). For the parameter вҲҶ, we
consider RP вҷҜвҷҜ ,вҲҶ вҲҲ RP вҖ вҖ  вҠӮ RP вҲ— such that the following equation holds:
               T
                   (                                   !                                   !                    )
                                        fP1 (Yt1 |Xt )                      fP2 (Yt2 |Xt )

                                                                                                      О¶P (Xt )
                      1[At = 1] log 1 1                  + 1[At = 2] log
              X
LT (P, Q) =                                                                   2 (Y 2 |X )    + log
              t=1
                                        fQ (Yt |Xt )                        fQ    t    t              О¶Q (Xt )
     T
                            f 1 (Y 1 |X )                       f 2 (Y 2 |X )

                                                                                           О¶ (X )
           1[At = 1] log Pa t1 t + 1[At = 2] log P2 t2 t + log P t
    X
 =                                                                                                     .
    t=1
                            fвҲҶ (Yt |Xt )                        fвҲҶ (Yt |Xt )               О¶вҲҶ (Xt )

Proof of Theorem 3.8. First, we decompose the expected simple regret by using the definition of P вҖ вҖ 
as
sup EP [rT (P )(ПҖ)]
P вҲҲP вҲ—
       X
                    a       b
= sup         max Вө (P ) вҲ’ Вө (P ) PP (b
                                      aT = b)
    P вҲҲP вҲ—            aвҲҲ[2]
             bвҲҲ[2]

                    e Вө1 (QвҲҶ ) вҲ’ Вө2 (QвҲҶ ) PQвҲҶ (b
                                               aT = 2) + (1 вҲ’ e) Вө2 (QвҲҶ ) вҲ’ Вө1 (QвҲҶ ) PQвҲҶ (b

вүҘ     sup                                                                                 aT = 1)
    вҲҶвҲҲ(0,вҲһ)

                    e Вө1 (QвҲҶ ) вҲ’ Вө(P вҷҜвҷҜ ) PQвҲҶ (b
                                               aT = 2) + (1 вҲ’ e) Вө2 (QвҲҶ ) вҲ’ Вө(P вҷҜ ) PQвҲҶ (b

=     sup                                                                                aT = 1)
    вҲҶвҲҲ(0,вҲһ)

                    e вҲҶ + O(вҲҶ2 ) PQвҲҶ (b
                                      aT = 2) + (1 вҲ’ e) вҲҶ + O(вҲҶ2 ) PQвҲҶ (b

=     sup                                                               aT = 1)
    вҲҶвҲҲ(0,вҲһ)

                                                  aT = 1) + O(вҲҶ2 )

=     sup                  aT = 2) + (1 вҲ’ e)вҲҶPQвҲҶ (b
                    eвҲҶPQвҲҶ (b
    вҲҶвҲҲ(0,вҲһ)

                                                               aT = 2)) + O(вҲҶ2 ) .

=     sup           eвҲҶ (1 вҲ’ PQвҲҶ (b
                                 aT = 1)) + (1 вҲ’ e)вҲҶ (1 вҲ’ PQвҲҶ (b
    вҲҶвҲҲ(0,вҲһ)

From Propositions D.5 and D.1 and definition of the null consistent strategy,
                                                           aT = 2)) + O(вҲҶ2 )

  sup     eвҲҶ (1 вҲ’ PQвҲҶ (baT = 1)) + (1 вҲ’ e)вҲҶ (1 вҲ’ PQвҲҶ (b
вҲҶвҲҲ(0,вҲһ)
                n
=     sup        eвҲҶ (1 вҲ’ PP вҷҜвҷҜ (b                aT = 1) вҲ’ PQвҲҶ (b
                                aT = 1) + PP вҷҜвҷҜ (b              aT = 1))
    вҲҶвҲҲ(0,вҲһ)
                                                                                                 o
             + (1 вҲ’ e)вҲҶ (1 вҲ’ PP вҷҜвҷҜ (b aT = 2) + PP вҷҜвҷҜ (b aT = 2) вҲ’ PQвҲҶ (b   aT = 2)) + O(вҲҶ2 )
         (                             r                         !
                                         EP вҷҜвҷҜ [LT (P вҷҜвҷҜ , QвҲҶ )]
= sup      eвҲҶ 1 вҲ’ PP вҷҜвҷҜ (b
                         aT = 1) вҲ’
 вҲҶвҲҲ(0,вҲһ)                                            2
                                                   r                          !          )
                                                      EP вҷҜвҷҜ [LT (P вҷҜвҷҜ , QвҲҶ )]          2
             + (1 вҲ’ e)вҲҶ 1 вҲ’ PP вҷҜвҷҜ (b   aT = 2) вҲ’                                + O(вҲҶ )
                                                                 2
         (              r                          !                           r                         !         )
                   1       EP вҷҜвҷҜ [LT (P вҷҜвҷҜ , QвҲҶ )]                       1       EP вҷҜвҷҜ [LT (P вҷҜвҷҜ , QвҲҶ )]
= sup      eвҲҶ 1 вҲ’ вҲ’                                  + (1 вҲ’ e)вҲҶ 1 вҲ’ вҲ’                                      + O(вҲҶ2 )
 вҲҶвҲҲ(0,вҲһ)           2                   2                                 2                 2
         (         r                         !            )
              1      EP вҷҜвҷҜ [LT (P вҷҜвҷҜ , QвҲҶ )]           2
= sup     вҲҶ     вҲ’                              + O(вҲҶ )
 вҲҶвҲҲ(0,вҲһ)      2                2


                                                    28
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



             пЈұ пЈ«                                            пЈ¶           пЈј
             пЈҙ      v                                                   пЈҙ
                                    2
                пЈ¬1 u          TвҲҶ
             пЈІ      u                                                   пЈҪ
                                                        3           2
вүҘ inf sup      вҲҶпЈӯ вҲ’ t                           + O T вҲҶ   )   + O(вҲҶ   )   .
                         h 1                  i             пЈ·
                                  2         2
                 2                     2
                                                            пЈё
 wвҲҲW вҲҶвҲҲ(0,вҲһ) пЈҙ
             пЈі        2E (Пғ (Xt )) + (Пғ (X))                P
                                                                        пЈҙ
                                                                    w(1|X)
                                                                        пЈҫ         w(2|Xt )
                   s
                                  (Пғ1 (X))2       (Пғ2 (X))2

                        2EP        w(1|X)
                                              +    w(2|X)
Let вҲҶ = 14                               T                        . Then,
                                     пЈұ        пЈ«                       пЈ¶         пЈј
                              v      пЈҙ                                          пЈҙ
                                              2
                          пЈ¬1 u          TвҲҶ
                              u      пЈІ                                          пЈҪ
            inf sup      вҲҶпЈӯ вҲ’ t    h 1                   i + O T вҲҶ 3 )пЈ· + O(вҲҶ2 )
                                            2          2
                           2                     2
                                                                      пЈё
           wвҲҲW вҲҶвҲҲ(0,вҲһ) пЈҙ
                       пЈі        2E (Пғ (Xt )) + (Пғ (X))             P    w(1|X)
                                                                                пЈҙ
                                                                                пЈҫ         w(2|Xt )
                                   v   h                       i
                                   u E (Пғ1 (X))2 + (Пғ2 (Xt ))2
                                   u
                    1              t P w(1|Xt )     w(2|Xt )
                                                                                 + O вҲҶ2

               вүҘ       inf
                   12 wвҲҲW                T
                      v    h                   i                                      h
                      u
                      u E (Пғ 1 (X) + Пғ 2 (X))2
                                                                             пЈ«                                  2 i пЈ¶
                    1t P                                                         EP        Пғ 1 (X) + Пғ 2 (X)
               вүҘ                                                       +OпЈӯ                                        пЈё.
                   12                             T                                                  T
                                                                                  1
                                                   Пғ (x)
Here, the minimizer regarding w is w(1|x)    = Пғ1 (x)+Пғ 2 (x) (w(2|x) = 1 вҲ’ w(1|x))  (van der Laan,
                                                                               вҲҡ
                                      e                        e            e

   qR Hahn et al., 2011; Kato et al., 2020). Because О¶P (x) = О¶(x), supP вҖІ вҲҲP вҲ— EP [rT (P )(ПҖ)] вүҘ
2008;                                                                               вҖІ

 1                        2
12     (Пғ 1 (X) + Пғ 2 (X)) О¶(x)dx + o(1).

G         P ROOF OF T HEOREM 5.2
Let us define вҲҶa,b (P ) = Вөa (P ) вҲ’ Вөb (P ) and вҲҶa,b (P )(x) = Вөa (P )(x) вҲ’ Вөb (P )(x) for all a, b вҲҲ]K]
and x вҲҲ X .
For a, b вҲҲ [K], define6

                        ПҶa Yt , At , Xt вҲ’ ПҶb Yt , At , Xt вҲ’ вҲҶb (P )
            Оҫta,b (P ) = t               p                             ,
                                            T V a,bвҲ— (P )
                                      "
                                                  2
                                                                  2                         #
                    a,bвҲ—                (Пғ a (X))         Пғ b (X)       a,b        a,b
                                                                                          2
            where V      (P ) = EP                   + вҲ—            + вҲҶ (P )(X) вҲ’ вҲҶ (P )     .
                                        wвҲ— (a|X)         w (b|X)

We show that {Оҫta,b (P )}Tt=1 is a martingale difference sequence. The proof is shown in Appendix G.1.
Lemma G.1. Under the AS-AIPW strategy, EP [Оҫta,b (P )|FtвҲ’1 ] = 0 holds.
           PT               вҲҡ   AIPW,a                                 p
Note that t=1 Оҫta,b (P ) = T Вө   bT       вҲ’Вө  bAIPW,b
                                               T        вҲ’ вҲҶ a,b
                                                                (P )   / V a,b (P ). Theorem 5.2 can
be derived from Proposition B.7 and Chernoff bound. To prove Theorem 5.2, we use the following
lemmas.
Lemma G.2. Fix a, b вҲҲ [K]2 . Suppose that Оҫta,b (P ) is conditionally sub-Gaussian; that is, there
exits an absolute constant CОҫ > 0 such that for all P вҲҲ P and all О» вҲҲ R,
                                                                  2
                              h
                                      a,b
                                                      i           О» CОҫ
                          EP exp О»Оҫt (P ) |FtвҲ’1 вүӨ exp                     .
                                                                     2
Also suppose that
          PT       a,b    2
(a)        t=1 E[(Оҫt (P )) ] вҶ’ 1;
      вҲҡ
(b) E[ T |Оҫta,b (P )|r ] < вҲһ for some r > 2 and all t вҲҲ N;
    More rigorously, Оҫta,b (P ) and в„Ұa,b
      6                                                                                 a,b           a,b
                                     t (P ) should be denoted as double arrays such as ОҫT t (P ) and в„ҰT t (P )
because they dependent on T . However, we omit the subscript T for simplicity.


                                                                             29
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                    2 p
      PT     a,b
(c)    t=1 (Оҫt (P )) вҲ’вҶ’ 1.

Then, the following inequalities hold:
                                                                                  вҲҡ
пЈұ                                                     2

                                         T (вҲҶa,b (P ))

       AIPW,a      AIPW,b
пЈІP Вө           вҲ’Вө         вүӨ 0 вҲ’ exp вҲ’ V a,bвҲ— (P )         вүӨ o(1) as T вҶ’ вҲһ, if E0 < T вҲҶa,b (P ) вүӨ E       вҲҖT вҲҲ N;
пЈҙ
пЈҙ    bT           bT
                                                                                  вҲҡ
                                                      2

                                         T (вҲҶa,b (P ))

       AIPW,a      AIPW,b
пЈіP Вө           вҲ’Вө         вүӨ 0 вҲ’ exp вҲ’                     вүӨ 0 вҲҖT вҲҲ N       if E0 < T вҲҶa,b (P ),
пЈҙ
пЈҙ
                                             2C 2
     bT           bT
                                                    Оҫ

                                                                                                 (13)
where E0 > E > 0 are some constants independent from T and вҲҶa,b (P ).
Lemma G.3. Under Assumption 5.1, there exists constants M, CОҫ > 0 independent from P вҲҲ P вҲ—
such that for all t вҲҲ N,
                                        вҲҡ a,b
                                                     2
                           EP exp         T Оҫt (P )       < M;

and
                          h     вҲҡ               i        2
                                                        О» CОҫ
                                    a,b
                        EP exp О» T Оҫt (P ) |FtвҲ’1 вүӨ exp       .
                                                          2
Lemma G.4. Under Assumption 5.1 and the AS-AIPW strategy, the following properties hold:
      PT         a,b    2
(a)    t=1 EP [(Оҫt (P )) ] вҶ’ 1, a positive value;
         вҲҡ
(b) EP [| T Оҫta,b (P )|r ] < вҲһ for some r > 2 and for all t вҲҲ N;
                     2 p
    PT      a,b
(c)   t=1 (Оҫt (P )) вҲ’  вҶ’ 1.

Proofs of these lemmas are shown in Appendixes G.2вҖ“G.4.
Then, we prove Theorem 5.2 as follows.
                                                                                       вҲҡ
Proof of Theorem 5.2. From Lemma G.2, for some constants 0 < E0 < E, if E0 < T вҲҶa,c (P ) вүӨ
E, for any Пө > 0, there exists T0 > 0 such that for all T > T0 , the expected simple regret is bounded
as
                                                                            2 !

                          AIPW,a       AIPW,b
                                                            T вҲҶa,b (P )
                    PP Вө bT        вүҘВөbT          вүӨ exp вҲ’                        + Пө.
                                                                V a,b (P )

As well as the proof of Corollary 3 of Bubeck et al. (2011), we consider two cases where a given вҲҶa
is more or less than a threshold в„“1 , в„“2 , . . . , в„“K > 0. We have
                                                      AIPW,aвҲ— (P )
                                X
  EP rT (P ) ПҖ AS-AIPW =               вҲҶa PP Вө                      bAIPW,a

                                                     bT            вүӨВөT
                               aвҲҲ[K]
               AIPW,aвҲ— (P )                                      AIPW,aвҲ— (P )
    X n                                                                                  o
  вүӨ    в„“a PP ВөbT             bAIPW,a
                            вүӨВөT        + 1 [вҲҶa
                                               вүҘ в„“ a
                                                     ]вҲҶ a
                                                          P P   Вө
                                                                bT            вүӨ Вө
                                                                                bAIPW,a
                                                                                 T
      aвҲҲ[K]
                 X n                                    вҲ—
                                                                       o
  вүӨ max в„“a +            1[вҲҶa вүҘ в„“a ]вҲҶa PP ВөbAIPW,a
                                           T
                                                  (P )
                                                        bAIPW,a
                                                       вүӨВөT
      aвҲҲ[K]
                aвҲҲ[K]
                                                          вҲҡ
Because x вҲҲ [0, CвҲҶ ] 7вҶ’ z exp(вҲ’Cz 2 ) is decreasing on [1/ 2C, CвҲҶ ], forrany C > 0 and CвҲҶ , where
                                                                            j        k
вҲҶa < CвҲҶ for all a вҲҲ [K]. Therefore, taking C = вҢҠ 2V aT(P ) вҢӢ, for в„“a вүҘ 1/ 2 2V aT(P ) ,

                  EP rT (P ) ПҖ AS-AIPW

                          пЈұ                                 пЈј
                                                  a 2
                                                            пЈҪ
                          пЈІ       X           T (в„“ )
                  вүӨ max в„“a +          в„“a exp вҲ’ a        +Оө
                    aвҲҲ[K] пЈі                   2V (P )       пЈҫ
                                    aвҲҲ[K]



                                                 30
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                          T (в„“a )2

                                        a                             a
                 вүӨ max в„“ + (K вҲ’ 1) max в„“ exp вҲ’ a                     +Оө
                   aвҲҲ[K]                   aвҲҲ[K]          2V (P )
                                                   T (в„“a )2

                 вүӨ max в„“a + (K вҲ’ 1)в„“a exp вҲ’ a                 +Оө      .
                   aвҲҲ[K]                           2V (P )
                 q
Substituting в„“a = log K/вҢҠ 2V aT(P ) вҢӢ, we have
                                        (s
                                               T
EP rT ПҖ HIR (P ) вүӨ max

                                    log K/
                            aвҲҲ[K]           2V a (P )
                                                              пЈ«             j         kпЈ¶
                                                                                 T
                                   s
                                                T
                                                                  T log K/       a
                                                                              2V (P )
                          + (K вҲ’ 1) log K/               exp пЈӯвҲ’                         пЈё
                                             2V a (P )                  2V a (P )
                                           пЈ«пЈұ q                                              пЈј пЈ¶)
                                             пЈІ T log K/вҢҠ 2V aT(P )       T log K/вҢҠ 2V aT(P ) пЈҪ
                                     Г— exp пЈӯ                          +                        ОөпЈё .
                                                                               2V a (P )
                                                     p
                                             пЈі           V a (P )                            пЈҫ

Letting T вҶ’ вҲһ and Оө вҶ’ 0, we conclude the proof.
         вҲҡ
If E0 < T вҲҶa,b (P ), for all T вҲҲ N, we obtain
                                                                                         2 !
                                                                             T вҲҶa,b (P )
                          PP       bAIPW,b
                                   ВөT       bAIPW,a
                                           вүҘВөT                       вүӨ exp вҲ’                 .
                                                                                2CОҫ2

                                                  вҲҡ
Similarly,
q          for the second inequality with E0 < T вҲҶa,b (P ), we obtain the maximizer as вҲҶa,bвҲ— =
   CОҫ (P )
    2T .
                                                q                        q
                                                    a,bвҲ—                    CОҫ (P )
As an upper bound, we can use both вҲҶa,bвҲ— = V 2T(P ) and вҲҶa,bвҲ— =              2T . In our analysis, we
             q                                                                         q
                 V a,bвҲ— (P )                                                               a,b
use вҲҶa,bвҲ— =         2T       to show the minimax optimality. Therefore, we use вҲҶa,bвҲ— = V 2T(P ) .



G.1   P ROOF OF L EMMA G.1

We have
                     1[At = a] Yta вҲ’ Вөbat (Xt )
                 "                                                                      #
            EP                                                bat (Xt )|Xt , FtвҲ’1
                                                             +Вө
                               w
                               bt (a|Xt )
                       1[At = a] Yta вҲ’ Вөbat (Xt ) |Xt , FtвҲ’1

                 EP
             =                                                                     bat (Xt )
                                                                                  +Вө
                                            w
                                            bt (a|Xt )

               wbt (a|Xt ) Вөa (Xt )(P ) вҲ’ Вө
                                          bat (Xt )
            =                                         +Вөbat (Xt ) = Вөa (Xt )(P ),
                            w
                            bt (a|Xt )
                                       "                                     #
                                          a              b              b
                 a,b                X Вө (x)(P ) вҲ’ Вө (x)(P ) вҲ’ вҲҶ (P )
            EP [Оҫt (P )|FtвҲ’1 ] = E                  p                          О¶(x)dx = 0.
                                                      T V a,bвҲ— (P )

G.2   P ROOF OF L EMMA G.2

We prove Lemma G.2. Lemma G.2 can be derived from Proposition B.6 and Chernoff bound.

Proof. The second statement directly holds from and large deviation bound.
                                                                        Therefore,         we focus
                                                                              a,b       2
                                                                           (          )
                                                                         T  вҲҶ     (P )
on the proof of the first statement, P ВөbAIPW,a
                                         T       bAIPW,c
                                                вҲ’ВөT       вүӨ 0 вҲ’ exp вҲ’ V a,bвҲ— (P )           вүӨ o(1).


                                                                 31
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                                                                                              PT
This inequality follows from the martingale CLT of White (1984) (Proposition B.6) on t=1 Оҫta,b (P )
because                                вҲҡ                               вҲҡ
                                                                                              вҲҡ
P Вө bAIPW,a
     T        вҲ’  Вө
                 b AIPW,b
                   T      вүӨ 0   =   P    T   Вөb AIPW,a
                                                T      вҲ’ Вө
                                                         b AIPW,b
                                                           T           вҲ’     T вҲҶ  a,b
                                                                                      (P ) вүӨ вҲ’  T вҲҶ a,b
                                                                                                        (P )
       s                                                         s                          !
               T
                         AIPW,a       AIPW,b       a,b
                                                                          T         a,b
 =P                     Вө        вҲ’Вө           вҲ’ вҲҶ (P ) вүӨ вҲ’                        вҲҶ (P )
           V a,bвҲ— (P ) T
                                    bT
                                                                      V a,bвҲ— (P )
                        b
                          s                       !
         T
       X     a,b                T        a,b
 =P         Оҫt (P ) вүӨ вҲ’                 вҲҶ (P ) .
        t=1
                            V a,bвҲ— (P )
                                   P                    q
                                       T    a,b                T
Thus, we are interested in = P         t=1 Оҫt (P ) вүӨ вҲ’     V a,bвҲ— (P )
                                                                       вҲҶa,b (P ) and show the bound by
using the martingale CLT.
Under the following three conditions, we can apply the martingale CLT,
      PT         a,b    2
(a)    t=1 EP [(Оҫt (P )) ] вҶ’ 1, a positive value;
         вҲҡ
(b) EP [| T Оҫta,b (P )|r ] < вҲһ for some r > 2 and for all t вҲҲ N;
                     2 p
    PT      a,b
(c)   t=1 (Оҫt (P )) вҲ’  вҶ’ 1.

By using the martingale CLT, as T вҶ’ вҲһ,
                                   T
                                                d
                                   X
                                     Оҫta,b (P ) вҲ’
                                                вҶ’ N (0, 1) .
                                                t=1
This result implies that for each вҲ’вҲһ < x < вҲһ, as T вҶ’ вҲһ,
      T
                       !                                                       !
     X     a,b
                                        вҲҡ ВөbAIPW,a
                                            T      вҲ’ВөbAIPW,b
                                                      T         вҲ’ вҲҶa,b (P )
 P       Оҫt (P ) вүӨ x вҲ’ ОҰ(x) = P          T                                  вүӨ x вҲ’ ОҰ(x) = o(1).
     t=1
                                                    V a,bвҲ— (P )
                                                                   вҲҡ
From the martingale CLT, if there exists a constant E > 0 such that T вҲҶa,b (P ) < E,
                                              s              !      s                   !
   вҲҡ Вө bAIPW,a
         T      вҲ’Вө bAIPW,b
                    T         вҲ’ вҲҶa,b (P )            T                    T        a,b
P    T                                    вүӨвҲ’                   вҲ’ОҰ вҲ’               вҲҶ (P ) + o(1).
                  V a,bвҲ— (P )                    V a,bвҲ— (P )          V a,bвҲ— (P )

Let П•(В·) be the density function of the standard normal distribution. Then,
                          s                         ! Z q T
                                                             вҲ’                вҲҶa,b (P )
                                T         a,b                     V a,bвҲ— (P )
                   ОҰ вҲ’                  вҲҶ     (P  )    =                                П•(u)du
                            V a,bвҲ— (P )                     вҲ’вҲһ
                            s                          ! s
                                    T         a,b                   T
                   вүӨП• вҲ’          a,bвҲ—
                                           вҲҶ (P ) /               a,bвҲ—
                                                                              вҲҶa,b (P )
                               V      (P )                     V       (P )
                                                                2

                                                  T (вҲҶa,b (P ))
                                       exp вҲ’ 2V a,bвҲ— (P )
                            e
                   вүӨ          вҲҡ В· q                                 .
                       (e вҲ’ 1) 2ПҖ               T
                                                       вҲҶa,b (P )
                                           V a,bвҲ— (P )
                                           q
Here, we used (eвҲ’1)e вҲҡ2ПҖ вүҲ 0.252,                   T
                                               V a,bвҲ— (P )
                                                           вҲҶa,b (P ) > 1 for large T , П•(u + 1/u) =
вҲҡ1 exp(вҲ’(u + 1/u)2 /2) = eвҲ’1 П•(u) exp(вҲ’1/(2u2 )) = eвҲ’1 П•(u) and
 2ПҖ
    Z вҲ’x        Z вҲһ              вҲһ                        вҲһ
                                X                     1  X           П•(x)                      e    П•(x)
           П•(u)du =                 П•(u)du вүӨ            П•(x + k/x) вүӨ              exp(вҲ’k) =       В·      ,
      вҲ’вҲһ                   x                          x               x                       eвҲ’1    x
                                                k=0                         k=0
                     вҲҡ        a,b
Therefore, if 0 <        TвҲҶ         (P ) вүӨ C,
                                                                                 2 !
                                                                      вҲҶa,b (P )
                 P       bAIPW,a
                         ВөT       bTAIPW,b вүӨ 0
                                 вҲ’Вө                         вҲ’ exp вҲ’T                 вүӨ o(1).
                                                                     2V a,b (P, wвҲ— )
Thus. we proved the first inequality.


                                                             32
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


G.3    P ROOF OF L EMMA G.3

Proof. We show the following inequality: there exists a constant M > 0 such that for any P вҲҲ P вҲ—
and FtвҲ’1 = Пғ(X1 , A1 , Y1 , . . . , Xt , At , Yt ),
                                               вҲҡ a,b
                                                            2
                             EP exp               T Оҫt (P )     |FtвҲ’1 < M.                  (14)

From Proposition 2.5.2 (iv) of Vershynin (2018), this inequality implies that Оҫta,b (P ) is conditionally
sub-Gaussian.
                                                                       вҲҡ a,b
                                                                                       2
If the above inequality Eq. (14) holds, the first statement EP exp        T Оҫt (P )          < M holds

directly. In addition, because Оҫta,b (P ) is conditionally sub-Gaussian and E[Оҫta,b (P )|FtвҲ’1 ] = 0, from
Proposition 2.5.2 (v) of Vershynin (2018), there existsha constant      вҲҡ CОҫ > 0         such thati for any  P вҲҲ P вҲ—
                                                                                a,b                           О»2 CОҫ
and FtвҲ’1 вҲҲ R Г— [K] Г— X Г— В· В· В· R Г— [K] Г— X , EP exp О» T Оҫt (P ) |FtвҲ’1 вүӨ exp                                     2   .
Thus, the two statement hold from Eq. (14). Therefore, we consider showing Eq. (14).

Recall that ПҶat Yt , At , Xt is constructed as
                                            1[A = a] Y a вҲ’ Вө          bat (Xt

                           a                      t             t
                          ПҶt Yt , At , Xt =                                     +Вө  bat (Xt ).
                                                        wbt (a|Xt )
For all t = 1, 2, . . . ,
                            вҲҡ a,b
                                          2
            EP exp            T Оҫt (P )       |FtвҲ’1
                     пЈ®      пЈ«                                                               2 пЈ¶       пЈ№
                                  a                    b                         a,b
                                 ПҶ
                            пЈ¬ t t t tY  , A , X   вҲ’  ПҶ t   Y t , At , X t   вҲ’ вҲҶ      (P  )
             = EP пЈ°exp пЈӯ                                                                      пЈё FtвҲ’1 пЈ» .
                     пЈҜ                                                                        пЈ·       пЈә
                                                     V a,bвҲ—  (P )

Here, we have
                                                   2
 ПҶat Yt , At , Xt вҲ’ ПҶbt Yt , At , Xt вҲ’ вҲҶa,b (P )
                                                                                                  !2
     1[At = a] Yta вҲ’ Вөbat (Xt )       1[At = b] Ytb вҲ’ Вөbbt (Xt )

                                                                      a          b          a,b
=                                   вҲ’                              +Вөbt (Xt ) вҲ’ Вө
                                                                                bt (Xt ) вҲ’ вҲҶ (P )
               w
               bt (a|Xt )                    w
                                             bt (b|Xt )
     1[At = a] Yta вҲ’ Вөa (P )(Xt )        1[At = b] Ytb вҲ’ Вөb (P )(Xt )

=                                      вҲ’
                 w
                 bt (a|Xt )                        wbt (b|Xt )
       1[At = a] Вөa (P )(Xt ) вҲ’ Вөbat (Xt )      1[At = b] Вөb (P )(Xt ) вҲ’ Вөbbt (Xt )

     +                                       вҲ’
                      wbt (a|Xt )                              w
                                                               bt (b|Xt )
                                        !2
       bat (Xt ) вҲ’ Вө
      +Вө           bbt (Xt ) вҲ’ вҲҶa,b (P )

    1[At = a] Yta вҲ’ Вөa (P )(Xt )               1[At = b] Ytb вҲ’ Вөb (P )(Xt )
                                       2                                       2
=                                          +
                 bt2 (a|Xt )
                 w                                      wbt2 (b|Xt )
        1[At = a] Вөa (P )(Xt ) вҲ’ Вөbat (Xt )            1[At = b] Вөb (P )(Xt ) вҲ’ Вөbbt (Xt )
                                                   2                                       2
      +                                              +
                       wbt2 (a|Xt )                                  bt2 (b|Xt )
                                                                     w
                                               2
      + Вө bat (Xt ) вҲ’ Вө
                      bbt (Xt ) вҲ’ вҲҶa,b (P )

             1[At = a] Yta вҲ’ Вөa (P )(Xt ) Вөa (P )(Xt ) вҲ’ Вөbat (Xt )              1[At = b] Ytb вҲ’ Вөb (P )(Xt ) Вөb (P )(Xt ) вҲ’ Вөbbt (Xt )
                                                                                                                                        !
      +2                                                                     вҲ’
                                        bt2 (a|Xt )
                                        w                                                             bt2 (b|Xt )
                                                                                                      w
             1[At = a] Вөa (P )(Xt ) вҲ’ Вөbat (Xt )         1[At = b] Вөb (P )(Xt ) вҲ’ Вөbbt (Xt )
                                                                                              !
                                                                                                 bat (Xt ) вҲ’ Вө
                                                                                                             bbt (Xt ) вҲ’ вҲҶa,b (P )

      +2                                               вҲ’                                         Вө
                            wbt (a|Xt )                                wbt (b|Xt )


                                                        33
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                        1[At = a] Yta вҲ’ Вөa (P )(Xt )          1[At = b] Ytb вҲ’ Вөb (P )(Xt )
                                                                                                                          !
              bat (Xt ) вҲ’ Вө
                          bbt (Xt ) вҲ’ вҲҶa,b (P )

       +2     Вө                                                                           вҲ’                                   .
                                                                  w
                                                                  bt (a|Xt )                           w
                                                                                                       bt (b|Xt )
where we used 1[A = a]1[A = b] = 0.
We can show Eq. (14) by using the properties of sub-Gaussian random variables and boundedness of
parameters and estimators. Since Yta is a sub-Gaussian random variable, there exists some universal
constant CY , CYвҖІ > 0 such that for all P вҲҲ P, c вҲҲ {a, b}, x вҲҲ X , and О» вҲҲ R, E[exp(О»(Ytc вҲ’
                                                                                вҖІ
Вөc (P )(x)))] вүӨ exp(CY2 О»2 /2) and EP [exp (Ytc вҲ’ Вөc (P )(x))2 ] вүӨ exp(CY2 ) (Proposition 2.7.1,
Vershynin, 2018). In addition, from Definition 3.2 and Assumption 5.1, there exist constants C,
CВөb and CОҪb such that for all x вҲҲ X , and c вҲҲ {a, b}, |Вөc (P )(x)| вүӨ CВө , |b        Вөct (x)| вүӨ CВөb , and
  c
|b
 ОҪt (x)| вүӨ CОҪb. Furthermore, because w  bt (a|Xt ) is constructed by Вө bt (x) and ОҪbtc (x), there exists a
                                                                        c

constant Cwb such that for all P вҲҲ P, x вҲҲ X , |1/w            bt (a|x)| вүҘ Cwb . Therefore, there exists
                                                    bt (a|x), w
                                                вҲ—
a constant  M > 0 such  that         P вҲҲ P and FtвҲ’1 вҲҲ R Г— [K] Г— X Г— В· В· В· R Г— [K] Г— X ,
                              for any
             вҲҡ a,b

                          2
EP exp         T Оҫt (P )      |FtвҲ’1 < M . This proof is complete.


G.4     P ROOF OF L EMMA G.4

We prove Lemma G.4. Our proof is inspired by Kato et al. (2020).

Proof. Recall that
                                                1[At = a] Yta вҲ’ Вөbat (Xt )

                        ПҶat (Yt , At , Xt ) =                            +Вөbat (Xt )
                                                           w
                                                           bt (a|Xt )

                         a,b        ПҶat Yt , At , Xt вҲ’ ПҶa,b Yt , At , Xt вҲ’ вҲҶb (P )
                        Оҫt (P ) =                      p                             ,
                                                           T V a,bвҲ— (P )
                                      t    h                       i
                                    X                     2
                        в„Ұa,b
                          t  (P ) =     E     Оҫ a,b
                                                s   (P )    |F sвҲ’1   .
                                      s=1
                                               p
Step 1: check of condition (a). Because           T V a,bвҲ— (P ) is  non-random variable, we consider the
conditional expectation of ПҶt Yt , At , Xt вҲ’ ПҶa,b Yt , At , Xt вҲ’ вҲҶa,b (P ).
                             a

           PT                                                              PT
Instead of t=1 EP [(Оҫta,b (P ))2 ], we first consider the convergence of t=1 EP [(Оҫta,b (P ))2 |FtвҲ’1 ] =
                                            p
в„Ұa,b                 show в„Ұa,b
  t (P ); that is, weP      t (P ) вҲ’ 1 вҲ’   вҶ’ 0. Then, by using the Lr -convergence theorem (Proposi-
                       T          a,b
tion B.3), we show t=1 EP [(Оҫt (P ))2 ] вҲ’ 1 вҶ’ 0.
The conditional expectation is computed as follows:
                                                       2
EP ПҶat Yt , At , Xt вҲ’ ПҶbt Yt , At , Xt вҲ’ вҲҶa,b (P )        FtвҲ’1
      пЈ®                                                                                                  !2      пЈ№
          1                               1

            [At = a] Yta вҲ’ Вө bat (Xt )      [At = b] Ytb вҲ’ Вөbbt (Xt )
 = EP пЈ°                                 вҲ’                               bat (Xt ) вҲ’ Вө
                                                                       +Вө           bbt (Xt ) вҲ’ вҲҶa,b (P )   FtвҲ’1 пЈ»
                   w
                   bt (a|Xt )                     w
                                                  bt (b|Xt )
                                                                                 !2
              1[At = a] Yta вҲ’ Вөbat (Xt )            1[At = b] Ytb вҲ’ Вөbbt (Xt )
        "
= EP                                            вҲ’
                       w
                       bt (a|Xt )                   w
                                                    bt (b|Xt )
             1[At = a] Yta вҲ’ Вөbat (Xt )      1[At = b] Ytb вҲ’ Вөbbt (Xt )
                                                                        !
                                                                          bat (Xt ) вҲ’ Вө
                                                                                      bbt (Xt ) вҲ’ вҲҶa,b (P )

      +2                                  вҲ’                               Вө
                     wbt (a|Xt )                    w
                                                    bt (b|Xt )
                                                  #
                                           2
      + Вөbat (Xt ) вҲ’ Вө
                     bbt (Xt ) вҲ’ вҲҶa,b (P ) |FtвҲ’1

            1[At = a] Yta вҲ’ Вөbat (Xt )          1[At = b] Ytb вҲ’ Вөbbt (Xt )
        "                               2                                    2
= EP                                        +
                     w
                     bt (a|Xt )                            w
                                                           bt (b|Xt )


                                                           34
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                 1[At = a] Yta вҲ’ Вөbat (Xt )           1[At = b] Ytb вҲ’ Вөbbt (Xt )
                                                                                      !
                                                                                          bat (Xt ) вҲ’ Вө
                                                                                                      bbt (Xt ) вҲ’ вҲҶa,b (P )

     +2                                           вҲ’                                       Вө
                           w
                           bt (a|Xt )                          w
                                                               bt (b|Xt )
                                                           #
                                         2
       bat (Xt ) вҲ’ Вө
     + Вө           bbt (Xt ) вҲ’ вҲҶa,b (P ) |FtвҲ’1
         "               2        #        "                   2       #
       Yta вҲ’ Вө bat (Xt )                      Ytb вҲ’ Вөbbt (Xt )
= EP                        |FtвҲ’1 + EP                           |FtвҲ’1
          w
          bt (a|Xt )                             w
                                                 bt (b|Xt )
       h                                      2        i
   вҲ’ EP Вө bat (Xt ) + Вө bbt (Xt ) вҲ’ вҲҶa,b (P ) |FtвҲ’1 .                                                                (15)
Here, we used
        1[At = a] Yta вҲ’ Вөbat (Xt )
      "                             2      #    " "                            2          ##
                                                    bt (a|Xt ) Yta вҲ’ Вө
                                                    w                bat (Xt )
   EP                                 |FtвҲ’1 = EP EP                              |Xt FtвҲ’1
                bt (a|Xt ))2
               (w                                           bt (a|Xt ))2
                                                           (w
         "                   2       #
            Yta вҲ’ Вөbat (Xt )
   = EP                        |FtвҲ’1
               w
               bt (a|Xt )
and
       1[At = a] Yta вҲ’ Вөbat (Xt )
   "                                                                                                    #
                                            bat (Xt ) вҲ’ Вө
                                                        bbt (Xt ) вҲ’ (Вөa (P ) вҲ’ Вөb (P ))

EP                                          Вө                                                   |FtвҲ’1
                    w
                    bt (a|Xt )
         "                                                              "                                         #    #
                                                                            bt (a|Xt ) Yta вҲ’ Вө
                                                                            w                bat (Xt )
= EP             bat (Xt ) вҲ’ Вө
                 Вө           bbt (Xt ) вҲ’ (Вөa (P ) вҲ’ Вөb (P ))       EP                                   |Xt , FtвҲ’1 FtвҲ’1 .
                                                                                   wbt (a|Xt )
We also have
        "                  2           #
          Yta вҲ’ Вөbat (Xt )                EP [(Yta )2 |Xt ] вҲ’ 2Вөa (P )(Xt )b
                                                                           Вөat (Xt ) + (b
                                                                                        Вөat (Xt ))2
    EP                       |Xt , FtвҲ’1 =
             w
             bt (a|Xt )                                          w
                                                                 bt (a|Xt )
           EP [(Yta )2 |Xt ] вҲ’ (Вөa (P )(Xt ))2 + (Вөa (P )(Xt ) вҲ’ Вө
                                                                 bat (Xt ))2
       =                                                                     .
                                       wbt (a|Xt )
Then,
                         "                   2        #         "                    2         #
                          Yta вҲ’ Вө bat (Xt )                       Ytb вҲ’ Вө  bbt (Xt )
                     EP                        |FtвҲ’1 + EP                               |FtвҲ’1
                             wbt (a|Xt )                              w
                                                                      bt (b|Xt )
                              h                                                   2        i
                        вҲ’ EP Вө   bat (Xt ) + Вө bbt (Xt ) вҲ’ (Вөa (P ) вҲ’ Вөb (P )) |FtвҲ’1
                             EP [(Yta )2 |Xt ] вҲ’ (Вөa (P )(Xt ))2 + (Вөa (P )(Xt ) вҲ’ Вө       bat (Xt ))2

                     = EP
                                                            w
                                                            bt (a|Xt )
                                EP [(Yt ) |Xt ] вҲ’ (Вө0 (Xt ))2 + (Вөb0 (Xt ) вҲ’ Вө
                                        b 2              b
                                                                                     bbt (Xt ))2

                        + EP
                                                           w
                                                           bt (b|Xt )
                              h                                       2 i
                        вҲ’ EP Вө   bat (Xt ) + Вө bbt (Xt ) вҲ’ вҲҶa,b (P )      .
                    p                                 p
From Вөbat (x) вҲ’вҶ’ Вөa (P )(x) and w              вҶ’ wвҲ— (a|x), for each P вҲҲ P, a вҲҲ [K], and x вҲҲ X ,
                                      bt (a|x) вҲ’
     EP [(Yta )2 |x] вҲ’ (Вөa (P )(x))2 + (Вөa (P )(x) вҲ’ Вө   bat (x))2


                                  w
                                  bt (a|x)
          EP [(Yt ) |x] вҲ’ (Вө (P )(x))2 + (Вөb (P )(x) вҲ’ Вө
                  b 2           b
                                                             bbt (x))2

    +
                                      w
                                      bt (b|x)
                                                   2
    вҲ’ Вө bat (x) + Вө bbt (x) вҲ’ (Вөa (P ) вҲ’ Вөb (P ))
                    2
                                    2                                                   !
          (Пғ a (x))        Пғ b (X)           a          b                a     b
                                                                                      2
    вҲ’                  + вҲ—             + Вө (P )(x) вҲ’ Вө (P )(x) вҲ’ (Вө (P ) вҲ’ Вө (P ))
          wвҲ— (a|X)         w (b|X)


                                                               35
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                      2
                                                                                                    2
           EP [(Yta )2 |x] вҲ’ (Вөa (P )(x))2  (Пғ a (x))     EP [(Yta )2 |x] вҲ’ (Вөa (P )(x))2   Пғ b (X)
  вүӨ                                        вҲ’ вҲ—          +                                 вҲ’ вҲ—
                       wbt (a|x)            w (a|x)                   wbt (a|x)            w (b|x)
        (Вөa (P )(x) вҲ’ Вө   bbt (x))2  (Вөb (x) вҲ’ Вө bbt (x))2
       +                            + 0
                w
                bt (a|Xt )                wbt (b|Xt )
                                          2                                    2
          bat (x) вҲ’ Вөbbt (x) вҲ’ вҲҶa,b (P ) вҲ’ Вөa (P )(x) вҲ’ Вөb (P )(x) вҲ’ вҲҶa,b (P )

       + Вө
   p
  вҲ’
  вҶ’ 0.
                                                           2
Note that EP [(Yta )2 |x] вҲ’ (Вөa (P )(x))2 = (Пғ a (x)) . This directly implies that
      T                                                                                2
  1X               a

                                          b

                                                                    a          b                             p
          EP ПҶt Yt , At , Xt вҲ’ ПҶt Yt , At , Xt вҲ’ (Вө (P ) вҲ’ Вө (P ))                        FtвҲ’1 вҲ’ V a,bвҲ— (P ) вҲ’
                                                                                                             вҶ’ 0,
  T t=1
                 T                                                                               2
        1       X
                             a

                                                      b

                                                                              a          b                     p
вҮ”                    E P   ПҶ t  Y t , At , X  t   вҲ’ ПҶ t   Yt , At , X t   вҲ’ (Вө   (P ) вҲ’ Вө  (P ))   F tвҲ’1 вҲ’ 1 вҲ’вҶ’ 0.
  T V a,bвҲ— (P ) t=1
                                       p
Thus, we showed в„Ұa,b
                 t (P ) вҲ’ 1 вҲ’
                            вҶ’ 0.
To apply Lr -convergence theorem (Proposition B.3), we check that в„Ұa,b   t (P ) вҲ’ 1 is uniformly in-
tegrable. Here, recall that Оҫta,b is conditionally sub-Gaussian as shown in Lemma G.3. From
Lemma 2.7.6 of Vershynin (2018), the squared value (Оҫta,b )2 is conditionally sub-exponential. There-
fore, в„Ұa,b                                                                          a,b
       t (P ) is a sum of the sub-exponential random variable. This implies that в„Ұt (P ) вҲ’ 1 is uni-
formly integrable. As a result, from Lr -convergence theorem (Proposition B.3), EP [в„Ұa,bt (P )] вҲ’ 1 =
PT             a,b       2
   t=1 EP  [(Оҫt    (P ))   ] вҲ’ 1 вҶ’ 0 holds.

Step 2: check of condition (b). We showed that Оҫta,b is sub-Gaussian in Lemma G.3. When Оҫta,b is
sub-Gaussian, the condition holds from Proposition 2.5.2 (ii) of Vershynin (2018).

Step 3: check of condition (c). Let ut be an MDS such that
ut = (Оҫta,b (P ))2 вҲ’ E (Оҫta,b (P ))2 | FtвҲ’1

                                                                                                           !2
      1[At = a] Yt вҲ’ Вөbat (Xt )         1[At = b] Yt вҲ’ Вөbbt (Xt )

                                                                          a            b             a,b
 =                                  вҲ’                               +Вө   bt (Xt ) вҲ’ Вө bt (Xt ) вҲ’ вҲҶ (P )
               wbt (a|Xt )                      w
                                                bt (b|Xt )
     пЈ®                                                                                                          !2      пЈ№
         1                                 1

            [At = a] Yt вҲ’ Вө  bat (Xt )       [At = b] Yt вҲ’ Вө bbt (Xt )
 вҲ’ EпЈ°                                   вҲ’                                 +Вө bat (Xt ) вҲ’ Вөbbt (Xt ) вҲ’ вҲҶa,b (P )    FtвҲ’1 пЈ» .
                    w
                    bt (a|Xt )                      w
                                                    bt (b|Xt )

From the boundedness of each variable in zt , we can apply weak law of large numbers for an MDS
(Proposition B.5 in Appendix B), and obtain
                          T            T
                          X            X                                             p
                                             (Оҫta,b (P ))2 вҲ’ E (Оҫta,b (P ))2 |FtвҲ’1 вҲ’

                                ut =                                                 вҶ’ 0.
                          t=1          t=1

In Step 1, we showed
                                       T
                                       X                           p
                                         E (Оҫta,b (P ))2 |FtвҲ’1 вҲ’ 1 вҲ’

                                                                   вҶ’ 0.
                                       t=1

As a conclusion, we obtain
        T
        X                     T
                              X        h                                                 p
          (Оҫta,b (P ))2 вҲ’ 1 =   zt2 вҲ’ E (Оҫta,b (P ))2 |FtвҲ’1 + E (Оҫta,b (P ))2 |FtвҲ’1 вҲ’ 1 вҲ’

                                                                                         вҶ’ 0.
        t=1                      t=1


                                                         36
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


H     N ON - ASYMPTOTIC U PPER B OUND
The order of the expected simple regret is determined by the convergence rate of в„Ұa,b
                                                                                  t (P ) вҲ’ 1. When
a specific convergence rate is assumed, a non-asymptotic upper bound is given as follows.
Corollary H.1 (Worst-case upper bound). Suppose that for some Оұ > 0 and constants C and D,
                                            вҲҡ
                 PP |в„Ұa,b
                        t  (P  ) вҲ’ 1| > D/    t(log t)2+2/Оұ
                                                              вүӨ CtвҲ’1/4 (log t)1+1/Оұ .

Then, under the AS-AIPW strategy, when K вүҘ 3,
           sup EP rT (P ) ПҖ AS-AIPW

          P вҲҲP вҲ—
                        v             пЈ®                пЈ№
                        u
                        u
                                                     2
                                         X
           вүӨ     maxвҲ— tlog(K)EX пЈ°           (Пғ b (X)) пЈ» /T + AT вҲ’1/4 (log T )1+1/Оұ ;
                        u
              bвҲҲ[K]\A (P )
                                           bвҲҲ[K]

when K = 2,
        sup EP rT (P ) ПҖ AS-AIPW

       P вҲҲP вҲ—
                         r          h                   i
                                                      2
       вүӨ maxbвҲҲ[K]\AвҲ— (P ) log(K)EX (Пғ 1 (X) + Пғ 2 (X)) /T + AT вҲ’1/4 (log T )1+1/Оұ .


The convergence rate of в„Ұa,b
                           t (P ) вҲ’ 1 determines the non-asymptotic expected simple regret via the
martingale CLT. It is also known that the rate of the martingale CLT is no better than the convergent
         h              i1/2
rate of E в„Ұa,b
            t (P ) вҲ’ 1       (Hall et al., 1980).

Besides, to show the asymptotic minimax optimality for
                                                      the lower bound, вҲҡ  we do not have   to
derive the non-asymptotic tight upper bound using PP |в„Ұa,b
                                                       t   (P ) вҲ’ 1| > D/  t(log t)2+2/Оұ
                                                                                           вүӨ
CtвҲ’1/4 (log t)1+1/Оұ .
To prove this corollary, we use the following corollary in which we replace the martingale CLT
in Lemma G.2 with the non-asymptotic representation (the rate of the martingale CLT in Proposi-
tion B.7).
Corollary H.2. For all a, b вҲҲ [K]2 , suppose that Оҫta,b (P ) is conditionally sub-Gaussian; that is,
there exits an absolute constant CОҫ > 0 such that for all P вҲҲ P and all О» вҲҲ R,
                                                                  2
                              h                       i           О» CОҫ
                          EP exp О»Оҫta,b (P ) |FtвҲ’1 вүӨ exp                 .
                                                                    2
Also suppose that some Оұ > 0 and constants M , C and D,
                                    h      вҲҡ               Оұ  i
                            max EP exp        T Оҫta,b (P )      < M,
                               tвҲҲN

and
                                     вҲҡ
                 P |в„Ұa,b
                     t (P ) вҲ’ 1| > D/ t(log t)
                                               2+2/Оұ
                                                       вүӨ CtвҲ’1/4 (log t)1+1/Оұ .

Then, for a, b вҲҲ [K] and T вүҘ 2,
                                                                                                вҲҡ
                        пЈұ                   2

                               T (вҲҶa,b (P ))
                        пЈІexp вҲ’ V a,bвҲ— (P )      + AT вҲ’1/4 (log T )1+1/Оұ               if E0 <       T вҲҶa,b (P ) вүӨ E;
                        пЈҙ
                       пЈҙ
   AIPW,a   AIPW,b
P Вө
  bT      вҲ’Вө
           bT      вүӨ0 вүӨ                     2

                                                                                                вҲҡ
                               T (вҲҶa,b (P ))
                        пЈіexp вҲ’                                                        if E0 <       T вҲҶa,b (P ),
                        пЈҙ
                        пЈҙ
                                   2C 2             Оҫ

                                                                                                (16)
where the constant A depends only on Оұ, M , C, and D, and E0 > E > 0 are some constants
independent from T and вҲҶa,b (P ).


                                                   37
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Then, we prove Corollary H.1 as follows.

     of Corollary H.1. From
Proof                     Corollary H.2 with Lemma G.3, the probability of misidentification
PP ВөbAIPW,c
      T     вүҘ  Вө
               b AIPW,a
                 T        is bounded as follows:

         PP ВөbAIPW,c
              T      вүҘ   Вө
                         bAIPW,a
                          T
                                                                                      вҲҡ
           пЈұ                       2

                          a,b
                     T (вҲҶ     (P ))
           пЈІexp вҲ’ V a,bвҲ— (P )          + AT вҲ’1/4 (log T )1+1/Оұ              if E0 <       T вҲҶa,c (P ) вүӨ E;
           пЈҙ
           пЈҙ
         вүӨ                         2

                                                                                      вҲҡ                      .
                     T (вҲҶa,b (P ))
           пЈіexp вҲ’                                                           if E0 <       T вҲҶa,c (P ).
           пЈҙ
           пЈҙ
                          2C  2
                                Оҫ



Then, as well as the proof of Theorem 5.2, when K вүҘ 3,
           sup EP rT (P ) ПҖ AS-AIPW

          P вҲҲP вҲ—
                           v            пЈ®                 пЈ№
                           u
                           u
                                                        2
                                           X
           вүӨ      max      tlog(X)EX пЈ°         (Пғ b (X)) пЈ» /T + AT вҲ’1/4 (log T )1+1/Оұ ;
                           u
                bвҲҲ[K]\AвҲ— (P )
                                                bвҲҲ[K]

when K = 2,
            sup EP rT (P ) ПҖ AS-AIPW

           P вҲҲP вҲ—
                        r            h                                 i
                                                                   2
           вүӨ      maxвҲ—          log(K)EX (Пғ 1 (X) + Пғ 2 (X))               /T + AT вҲ’1/4 (log T )1+1/Оұ .
               bвҲҲ[K]\A (P )

Thus, the proof is complete.

H.1    P ROOF OF T HEOREM 5.2

Proof. First, we prove the first inequality in Eq. (16), which corresponds to the martingale CLT. From
Proposition B.7,
                                         вҲҡ                           вҲҡ                      вҲҡ
P Вө bAIPW,a
     T        вҲ’  Вө
                 bAIPW,b
                  T        вүӨ  0   =   P    T   Вө
                                               bAIPW,a
                                                T       вҲ’ Вө
                                                          b AIPW,b
                                                            T        вҲ’     T вҲҶ  a,b
                                                                                    (P ) вүӨ вҲ’  T вҲҶ a,b
                                                                                                      (P )
       s                                                         s                        !
               T
                          AIPW,a        AIPW,b     a,b
                                                                        T         a,b
=P                      Вө          вҲ’Вө          вҲ’ вҲҶ (P ) вүӨ вҲ’                     вҲҶ (P )
          V a,bвҲ— (P ) T
                                      bT
                                                                    V a,bвҲ— (P )
                         b
                           s                      !
        T
       X     a,b                  T        a,b
=P         Оҫt (P ) вүӨ вҲ’                    вҲҶ (P )
       t=1
                              V a,bвҲ— (P )
         s                        !
                  T
вүӨОҰ вҲ’                     вҲҶa,b (P ) + AT вҲ’1/4 (log T )1+1/Оұ .
             V a,bвҲ— (P )

Let П•(В·) be the density function of the standard normal distribution. Then,
                          s                       ! Z q T
                                                            вҲ’                вҲҶa,b (P )
                                T        a,b                     V a,bвҲ— (P )
                   ОҰ вҲ’                  вҲҶ (P ) =                                       П•(u)du
                            V a,bвҲ— (P )                   вҲ’вҲһ
                            s                          ! s
                                    T                              T
                   вүӨП• вҲ’                    вҲҶa,b (P ) /                       вҲҶa,b (P )
                               V a,bвҲ— (P )                    V a,bвҲ— (P )
                                                               2

                                                 T (вҲҶa,b (P ))
                                       exp вҲ’ 2V a,bвҲ— (P )
                            e
                   вүӨ          вҲҡ В· q                                .
                       (e вҲ’ 1) 2ПҖ              T
                                                       вҲҶa,b (P )
                                           V a,bвҲ— (P )



                                                        38
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 2: Experimental results. The y-axis and x-axis denote the expected simple regret
EP [rT (P )(ПҖ)] under each strategy and T , respectively.
                                        q
Here, we used (eвҲ’1)e вҲҡ2ПҖ вүҲ 0.252,               T
                                            V a,bвҲ— (P )
                                                        вҲҶa,b (P ) > 1 for large T , П•(u + 1/u) =
вҲҡ1 exp(вҲ’(u + 1/u)2 /2) = eвҲ’1 П•(u) exp(вҲ’1/(2u2 )) = eвҲ’1 П•(u) and
 2ПҖ
      Z вҲ’x               Z вҲһ               вҲһ                             вҲһ
                                           X 1                      П•(x) X            e    П•(x)
             П•(u)du =          П•(u)du вүӨ              П•(x + k/x) вүӨ          exp(вҲ’k) =     В·      ,
       вҲ’вҲһ                 x                      x                   x               eвҲ’1    x
                                           k=0                          k=0
                    вҲҡ
Therefore, if 0 вүӨ       T вҲҶa,c (P ) вүӨ C,
                                                                                2 !
                                                                     вҲҶa,b (P )
                   bAIPW,a
                 P ВөT       bAIPW,c
                           вҲ’ВөT      вүӨ 0 вүӨ exp вҲ’T                                    + o(1).
                                                                    2V a,b (P, wвҲ— )
Thus, we proved the first inequality.
Next, we show the second inequality of Eq. (16), which is a large deviation bound.

I     A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS
We show addition experimental results. In Appendix I.1, we show results with variances different
from those in Section 7. In Appendix I.2, we show the result with continuous contextual information.

I.1   A DDITION E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS WITHOUT C ONTEXTUAL I NFORMATION

Under the same setting with that in Section 7, we draw the variances from a uniform distribution with
support [10, 100]. We show the result in Figure 2.

I.2   C ONTINUOUS C ONTEXTUAL I NFORMATION

We consider cases with K = 2, 3, 5, 10 and 2-dimensional contextual information (d = 2). We
consider contextual information; therefore, we only investigate the AS-AIPW strategy. Because we
                                                                                        a      2
cannot obtain a closed-form solution for K вүҘ 3, for simplicity, we fix wвҲ— (a|x) = P (Пғ (x))
                                                                                          (Пғ b (x))2
                                                                                                bвҲҲ[K]
                                                                                              a 2
for K вүҘ 3, which still reduces the expected simple regret better than wвҲ— (a) = P (Пғ )(Пғb )2 . In this
                                                                                         bвҲҲ[K]
section, we do not use SHAdaVar because it is unknown how to incorpolate contextual information
to the strategy.
In each set up, the best arm is arm 1. The expected outcomes of suboptimal arms are equivalent and
denoted by Вөe = Вө2 (P ) = ВөK (P ). We use Вө  e = 0.80, 0.90. We generate the variance from a uniform
distribution with a support [0.1, 5] and contextual
                                                    information
                                                                Xt = (Xt1 , Xt2 ) from a multinomial
                                               1 0.1
distribution with mean (1, 1) and variance               . Let (Оё1 , Оё2 ) be random variables generated
                                              0.1 1
from a uniform distribution with a support [0, 1]. We then generate Вөa (P )(Xt ) = Оё1 Xt12        2
                                                                                           + Оё2 Xt2 /caВө
        a      2           2          2   a           a a
and (Пғ (Xt )) = (Оё1 Xt1 + Оё2 Xt2 )/cПғ , where cВө , cПғ are values that adjust the expectation to
align with Вөa (P ) and (Пғ a )2 . We continue the experiments until T = 5, 000 when Вө     e = 0.80 and


                                                         39
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


T = 10, 000 when Вө e = 0.90. We conduct 100 independent trials for each setting. At each t вҲҲ [T ],
we plot the empirical simple regret in Figure 1. Additional results are presented in Appendix I.
From Figure 1 and Appendix I, we can observe that the AS-AIPW performs well when K = 2.
When K вүҘ 3, although the AS-AIPW tends to outperform the Uniform, other strategies also perform
well. We conjecture that the AS-AIPW exhibits superiority against other methods when K is small
(mismatching term in the upper bound), the gap between the best and suboptimal arms is small,
and the variances significantly vary across arms. As the superiority depends on the situation, we
recommend a practitioner to use the AS-AIPW with several strategies in a hybrid way.
We show experimental results with K = 2, 3, 5, 10 in Figures 4вҖ“6, respectively.



J     O PEN P ROBLEMS

This section introduces several related open issues.



J.1   O PEN P ROBLEM (1): N ON -A SYMPTOTIC L OWER B OUNDS

We showed the non-asymptotic upper bound in Appendix H. We are also intrested in deriving
non-asympttic lower bound. However, there are the following issues.
       вҖў Although the estimation error of the variances can be ignored in the worst-case asymptotic
         analysis, it affects the lower bound in the non-asymptotic analysis. However, the analysis of
         variance estimation might be too complicated to analyze.
       вҖў Our technique is based on the information-theoretic lower bound provided by Kaufmann
         et al. (2016) and semiparametric efficiency bounds. Both techniques are used for asymptotic
         analysis. Therefore, we need to develop completely different approaches for non-asymptotic
         analysis.
       вҖў We deal with general distribution by approximating the KL divergences. If we focus on the
         non-asymptotic analysis, we need to restrict the class of distributions to specific distributions,
         such as the Gaussian distribution, even if possible.

One of the promising approaches for lower bounds is to employ lower bounds provided by Carpentier
& Locatelli (2016). However, this lower bound is based on the boundedness of Yta . Without the
boundedness, non-asymptotic analysis would be more difficult. Additionally, the definitions of
optimality might be changed to deal with the uncertainty of variance estimation. Thus, although
the non-asymptotic upper bound has been derived, deriving non-asymptotic lower bounds requires
different techniques and is not straightforward, even if possible.



J.2   O PEN P ROBLEM (2): G ENERALIZATION OF T HEOREM 3.8 FOR K вүҘ 3

We conjecture that there exist more tighter lower bounds for K вүҘ 3 than Theorem 3.4, as well
as Theorem 3.8 for K = 2. This conjecture is also based on an intuition that while Theorem 3.8
connects to existing tight lower bounds in two-armed Gaussian bandits (Kaufmann et al., 2016),
Theorem 3.4 does not.
For example, Kato (2023) shows that different target allocation ratios should be used for minimization
of the probability of misidentification PP (aМӮT Мё= aвҲ— (P )). That work considers Gaussian bandits
without contextual information, defined as
P :=

                   2                                          2                                        вҲ—
  P = N Вөa , (Пғ a ) )               | (Вөa )aвҲҲ[K] вҲҲ RK , (Пғ a )aвҲҲ[K] вҲҲ [C, C]K , вҲғaвҲ— вҲҲ [K] s.t. Вөa >             max вҲ— Вөa ,
                            aвҲҲ[K]                                                                             aвҲҲ[K]\{a }



                                                   40
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


where C, C are universal constants such that 0 < C < C < вҲһ. Then, that work shows that the lower
bound is given as
                                                                               2
                        1                                                    вҲҶ             2
        sup lim sup вҲ’ log PP (b    aПҖT Мё= aвҲ— (P0 )) вүӨ max      min                   + o  вҲҶ ,
       P вҲҲP T вҶ’вҲһ        T                             wвҲҲW bвҲҲ[K],aвҲҲ[K]\{b} 2в„Ұb,a (w)
                                                                                     2        2
                                                         a             b,a       Пғb       Пғa
as вҲҶ вҶ’ 0, where вҲҶ = maxP вҲҲP maxaвҲҲ[K]\{aвҲ— (P )} вҲҶ (P ), and в„Ұ (w) = w(b) + w(a) . Here,
the target allocation ratio is given as
                                                                   1
                                wвҲ— = arg max         min          b,a
                                                                           ,
                                         wвҲҲW bвҲҲ[K],aвҲҲ[K]\{b} 2в„Ұ       (w)
which is different from ours.
As well as Kato (2023) makes several additional assumptions for the strategy class and bandit models,
we believe that our current assumptions are insufficient to extend Theorem3.8 for K вүҘ 3. Such
a necessity of additional assumptions also has been discussed in Komiyama et al. (2023), but an
effective solution has not been proposed.
One of the promising candidates for solutions is to employ the framework of the limit of experiments
van der Vaart (1998) is one of the promising directions. This framework is expected to allow us to
derive tight lower and upper bounds by using the asymptotic normality. To apply the results, we need
to restrict strategy class and underlying bandit models such that under which mean estimators in the
recommendation phase follow a normal distribution asymptotically.
In summary, tightening Theorem 3.4 or extending Theorem 3.8 to cases with K вүҘ 3 are a crucial
important issue. To address this open issue, we believe that further assumptions are required.


J.3   O PEN P ROBLEM (3): R ELATIONSHIP WITH THE AIPW ESTIMATOR AND THE S AMPLE
      AVERAGE

                              bAIPW,a
We defined the AIPW estimator ВөT       in the recommendation phase. However, we also conjecture
                                      baT when there is no contextual information.
that we can employ the sample average Вө
In fact, Hahn et al. (2011) shows that when using the CLT, the AIPW and sample average have the
same asymptotic distribution in the literature of efficient average treatment effect estimation, a setting
related to BAI.
However, proving the regret upper bound for ВөМӮ requires a more complicated proof procedure compared
to ВөМӮ or requires some additional assumptions. For example, we cannot employ the martingale theory
for the proof.
Note that even if we use the sample average Вө   baT instead of the AIPW estimator Вө  bAIPW,a
                                                                                      T       , the AIPW
            AIPW,a
estimator ВөbT       still plays an important role in theoretical analysis of the sample average estimator
baT . This is because Hahn et al. (2011) shows the asymptotic distributions of the sample average
Вө
by going through that of the (theoretically constructed) AIPW estimator as a result of the empirical
process theory.
                                                                          baT in the recommendation
Thus, deriving a variance-dependent tight upper bound of a strategy using Вө
phase is an open issue.


J.4   O PEN P ROBLEM (4): T RACKING - BASED S AMPLING RULE

We proposed randomly sampling arms following wt . However, there are other sampling strategies
used in BAI. For example, Garivier & Kaufmann (2016) proposes using a tracking-type sampling
rule. Here, we discuss the possibility of using such a sampling rule.
For simplicity, let us omit Xt . If we apply a tracking-type sampling rule, for example, we can draw
arms as At = arg mina s=1 1[As = a] вҲ’ twМӮt (a).
                         PtвҲ’1

This sampling rule might outperform our proposed random sampling because it has less randomness
in the choice of At and stabilizes the behavior of strategies, as pointed out by Fiez et al. (2019).


                                                   41
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Although we can expect performance improvement, the derivation of the upper bound requires
additional theoretical techniques. In our study, the derivation of the upper bound is based on the
martingale property, depending on E[1[At = a]|FtвҲ’1 ] = wt (a).
If we apply the tracking-based algorithm, we need to reconsider the definition of the AIPW estimator.
Depending on the definition, there are some technical issues. For example, consider using the same
definition of the AIPW estimator in the main text. Then, wt is an estimator of the optimal allocation,
and At is an actual arm draw. Then, E[1[At = a]|FtвҲ’1 ] = wt (a) does not hold. Therefore, we
cannot employ the martingale property.
However, we consider that there is a possibility that we can show the same property between the AIPW
estimator with random sampling in our manuscript and tracking-based sampling in your proposition,
as discussed in Hahn et al. (2011) and Kato (2021). However, to conduct the proof in Hahn et al.
(2011) and Kato (2021), we need to focus on more restricted strategies or make stronger assumptions.
For example, Hahn et al. (2011) only considers a two-stage adaptive experiment, where we draw each
arm with the equal ratio in the first stage and draw each arm to track the empirical optimal allocation
ratio. Here, we cannot update wt in the second stage; that is, we can update the sampling rule At
only once between the first and second experiments. Kato (2021) makes complicated assumptions
that are not easily verified. Showing the upper bound under the tracking-based algorithm without
restricting the sampling rules or making additional assumptions is an open issue.
Furthermore, we point out that there is a trade-off between the fast convergence of At and the bias of
an estimator of Вөat (P ). That is, although a tracking-based algorithm may stabilize the behavior of At ,
it loses the unbiasedness of an estimator of Вөa (P ).
In summary, a tracking-based strategy might outperform random-sampling-based strategies. However,
under such a strategy, we cannot employ the martingale property, which makes the theoretical analysis
difficult. Revealing the theoretical properties of such an estimator is an open issue.


J.5   O PEN P ROBLEM (5): C ONTEXT- SPECIFIC R ECOMMENDATION

Although we defined BAI with contextual information as the problem of recommending an arm with
the highest expected reward marginalized over a contextual distribution, we believe that conduct-
ing context-specific arm recommendation is possible when there is not much discrete contextual
information (that is, X = {S1 , S2 , . . . , SM } with a discrete context Sm and a small M > 0).
We are now extending the result forPpolicy learning with BAI; that is, given a set О  of policies
ПҖ : [K] Г— X вҶ’ (0, 1) such that aвҲҲ[K] ПҖ(a|x) = 1 (and potentially continuous contextual
information), we train a policy ПҖ вҲҲ О  to minimize the regret. Consider we restrict a policy class О 
to the one such that we discretize the contextual information and recommend an arm within each
discretized contextual information. Then, such a strategy aligns with the strategy that the reviewer
suggested.
The remaining open issue is how we bound the regret for general О . Because samples are non-i.i.d.,
we cannot directly apply the standard complexity measure such as the Rademacher complexity.
For example, we might employ the martingale-version of the Rademacher complexity proposed by
Rakhlin et al. (2015).
This open problem has garnered attention in this literature Zhan et al. (2021) and Zhan et al. (2022).


                                                  42
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                               Figure 3: Results when K = 2.


                                             43
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                               Figure 4: Results when K = 3.


                                             44
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                               Figure 5: Results when K = 5.


                                             45
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                               Figure 6: Results when K = 10.


                                             46
