Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


W HEN DOES B IAS T RANSFER IN T RANSFER L EARN -
ING ?

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT
         Using transfer learning to adapt a pre-trained “source model” to a downstream
         “target task” can dramatically increase performance with seemingly no downside.
         In this work, we demonstrate that there can exist a downside after all: bias trans-
         fer, or the tendency for biases of the source model to persist even after adapting
         the model to the target dataset. Through a combination of synthetic and natural
         experiments, we show that bias transfer both (a) arises in realistic settings (such
         as when pre-training on ImageNet or other standard datasets) and (b) can occur
         even when the target dataset is explicitly de-biased. As transfer-learned models
         are increasingly deployed in the real world, our work highlights the importance of
         understanding the limitations of pre-trained source models.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Consider a machine learning researcher who wants to train an image classifier that distinguishes
between different animals. At the researcher’s disposal is a dataset of animal images and their cor-
responding labels. Being a diligent scientist, the researcher combs through the dataset to eliminate
relevant spurious correlations (e.g., background-label correlations (Zhu et al., 2017; Xiao et al.,
2020)), and to ensure that the dataset contains enough samples from all relevant subgroups.
Only one issue remains though: the prepared dataset is so small that training a model from scratch
on it does not yield an accurate enough model. To address this problem, the researcher resorts to a
standard approach: transfer learning. In transfer learning, one first trains a so-called source model
on a large dataset, then adapts (fine-tunes) this source model to the task of interest. This strategy
indeed often yields models that are far more performant.
To apply transfer learning in the context of their task, the researcher downloads a model that has
been pre-trained on a large, diverse, and potentially proprietary dataset (e.g., JFT-300 (Sun et al.,
2017) or Instagram-1B (Mahajan et al., 2018)). Unfortunately, such pre-trained models are known
to have a variety of biases: for example, they can disproportionately rely on texture (Geirhos et al.,
2019), or on object location/orientation (Barbu et al., 2019; Xiao et al., 2020; Leclerc et al., 2021).
Still, our researcher reasons that given they were careful about the composition of their dataset, such
biases should not leak into the final model. But is this really the case? More specifically,

           Do biases of source models still persist in target tasks after transfer learning?

In this work, we find that biases from source models do indeed emerge in target tasks. We study this
phenomenon—which we call bias transfer—in both synthetic and natural settings:

      1. Bias transfer through synthetic datasets. We first use backdoor attacks (Gu et al., 2017)
         as a testbed for studying synthetic bias transfer, and characterize the impact of the training
         routine, source dataset, and target dataset on the extent of bias transfer. Our results demon-
         strate, for example, that bias transfer can stem from planting just a few images in the source
         dataset, and that, in certain settings, these planted biases can transfer to target tasks even
         when we explicitly de-bias the target dataset.
      2. Bias transfer via naturally-occurring features. Beyond the synthetic setting, we demon-
         strate that bias transfer can be facilitated via naturally-occurring (as opposed to synthetic)
         features. Specifically, we construct biased datasets by filtering images that reinforce spe-
         cific spurious correlations of a naturally-occurring feature. (For example, a dependence on


                                                  1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


         gender when predicting age for CelebA) We then show that even on target datasets that do
         not support this correlation, models pre-trained on a biased source dataset are still overly
         sensitive to that correlating feature.
      3. Naturally-occuring bias transfer. Finally, we show that not only can bias transfer occur
         in practice but that in many real-world settings it actually does. Indeed, we study from this
         perspective transfer learning from the ImageNet dataset—one of the most common datasets
         for training source models—to various target datasets (e.g., CIFAR-10). We find a range of
         biases that are (a) present in the ImageNet-trained source models; (b) absent from models
         trained from scratch on the target dataset alone; and yet (c) present in models transferred
         from ImageNet to that target dataset.

2    B IASES C AN T RANSFER
Our central aim is to understand the extent to which biases present in source datasets transfer to
downstream target models. Here, we define bias as a feature that a model relies on but is not causally
linked to the target task (see Appendix A.3 for a more formal definition). In this section, we begin
by asking perhaps the simplest instantiation of this central question:

       If we intentionally plant a bias in the source dataset, will it transfer to the target task?

Motivating linear regression example. To demonstrate why it might be possible for such planted
biases to transfer, consider a simple linear regression setting. Suppose we have a large source dataset
of inputs and corresponding (binary) labels, and that we use the source dataset to estimate the pa-
rameters of a linear classifier wsrc with, for example, logistic regression. In this setting, we can
define a bias of the source model wsrc as a direction v in input space that the classifier is highly
                                            >
sensitive to, i.e., a direction such that |wsrc v| is large.
Now, suppose we adapt (fine-tune) this source model to a target task using a target dataset of input-
label pairs {(xi , yi )}ni=1 . As is common in transfer learning settings, we assume that we have a
relatively small target dataset—in particular, that n < d, where d is the dimensionality of the inputs
xi . We then adapt the source model wsrc to the target dataset by running stochastic gradient descent
(SGD) to minimize logistic loss on the target dataset, using wsrc as initialization.
With this setup, transfer learning will preserve wsrc in all directions orthogonal to the span of the
xi . In particular, at any step of SGD, the gradient of the logistic loss is given by
                                 ∇`w (xi , yi ) = (σ(w> xi ) − yi ) · xi ,
which restricts the space of updates to those in the span of the target data points. Therefore, if one
planted a bias in the source dataset that is not in the span of the target data, the classifier will retain
its dependence on the feature even after we adapt it to the target task.

Connection to backdoor attacks. Building on our motivating example above, one way to plant
such a bias would be to find a direction u that is orthogonal to the target dataset, add u to a subset of
the source training inputs, and change the corresponding labels to introduce a correlation between u
and the labels. It is worth noting that this idea bears a striking similarity to that of backdoor attacks
(Gu et al., 2017), wherein an attacker adds a fixed “trigger” pattern (e.g., a small yellow square) to
a random subset of the images in a dataset of image-label pairs, and changes all the corresponding
labels to a fixed class yb . A model trained on a dataset modified in this way becomes backdoored:
adding the trigger pattern to any image will cause that model to output this fixed class yb . Indeed,
Gu et al. (2017) find that, if one adds a trigger that is absent from the target task to the source dataset,
the final target model is still highly sensitive to the trigger pattern.
Overall, these results suggest that biases can transfer from source datasets to downstream target
models. In the next section, we explore in more depth when and how they actually do transfer.

3    E XPLORING THE L ANDSCAPE OF B IAS T RANSFER
We now build on the example from the previous section and its connection to backdoor attacks to
better understand the landscape of bias transfer. Specifically, the backdoor attack framework enables


                                                     2
 Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


          100
                                                                                                                   Source Dataset
           80                                                                                                            Unbiased
                                                                                                                         Biased
ASR (%)    60
           40
           20
            0
                 aircraft   birdsnap caltech101 caltech256 cifar10      cifar100      flowers   food   pets   stanford_cars sun397
                                                                     Target Dataset

 Figure 1: Bias consistently transfers across various target datasets in the fixed-feature transfer set-
 ting. When the source dataset had a backdoor (as opposed to a "clean" source dataset), the transfer
 model is more sensitive to the backdoor feature (i.e., ASR is higher). Error bars denote one standard
 deviation based on five random trials.


 us to carefully vary (and study the effects of) properties of the bias such as how often it appears in
 the source dataset, how predictive it is of a particular label, and whether (and in what form) it also
 appears in the target dataset.
 Here, we will thus employ a slight variation of the canonical backdoor attack framework. Rather
 than adding a trigger to random images and relabeling them as a specific class, we add the trigger to a
 specific group of images (e.g., 10% of the dogs in the source dataset) and leave the label unchanged.
 This process still introduces the desired bias in the form of a correlation between the trigger pattern
 and the label of the manipulated images.

 Experimental setup. We focus our investigations on transfer learning from an (artificially modi-
 fied) ImageNet-1K (Deng et al., 2009; Russakovsky et al., 2015) dataset to a variety of downstream
 target tasks1 . Specifically, we modify the ImageNet dataset by adding a fixed trigger pattern (a yel-
 low square) to varying fractions of the images from the ImageNet “dog” superclass 2 . Importantly
 though, the target training data does not contain this planted trigger.
 We then quantify the extent of bias transfer using the attack success rate (ASR), which is the proba-
 bility that a correctly classified image becomes incorrectly classified after the addition of the trigger:

                                ASR(classifier C, trigger T ) = Pr [C(T (x)) 6= y|C(x) = y] ,                                    (1)

 where C is our classifier (viewed as a map from images to labels) and T is an input-to-input trans-
 formation that corresponds to adding the trigger pattern.

 3.1            B IAS CONSISTENTLY TRANSFERS IN THE FIXED - FEATURE TRANSFER SETTING

 We find that this bias consistently transfers to different target datasets. As in Gu et al. (2017), we
 begin with fixed-feature transfer learning, i.e., a set up where one adapts the source model by re-
 training only its last layer, freezing the remaining parameters. As Fig. 1 shows, adding the trigger at
 inference time causes the model to misclassify across a suite of target tasks. So clearly bias transfers
 in this setting. But how does the strength of the bias affect its transfer?
 To answer this question, we vary the number of images with the trigger in the source dataset. Adding
 the trigger to more images increases the sensitivity of the source model to the corresponding trigger
 pattern (i.e., stronger bias)—see Fig. 2a. Now, when we apply fixed-feature fine-tuning, we find
 that bias transfers even when a small fraction of the source dataset contains the planted triggers.
 Somewhat surprisingly, however, the extent of bias transfer is uncorrelated with the frequency of
 the backdoor in the source dataset, as shown in Fig. 2b. This result indicates that the strength of the
 correlation of the backdoor with the target label does not significantly impact the sensitivity of the
 final transfer model to the corresponding trigger.

   1
     We use the ResNet-18 architecture in the main paper, and study bias transfer on other architectures in
 Appendix A.4.
   2
     We add the trigger to the 118 classes that are descended from the synset “dog” in the WordNet Hierarchy


                                                                       3
 Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


          100                                      ImageNet                                                                    100                                    CIFAR-10
           80                                                                                                                   80
ASR (%)    60                                                                                                                   60


                                                                                                                     ASR (%)
           40                                                                                                                   40
           20                                                                                                                   20
                0                                                                                                                0
                     0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0                                                                       0     0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0
                                       Ratio of poisoned dog images                                                                        Ratio of Poisoned Dog Images in the Source Dataset

                                          (a) ImageNet                                                                                                         (b) CIFAR-10

 Figure 2: Attack Success Rate both on the source task with the original model (top) and on the
 target task with the transferred model (bottom). Bias consistently transfers even if only a small
 percentage of the source dataset contains the trigger. There is, however, no clear trend of how bias
 transfer changes as the frequency of the trigger in the source dataset changes (bottom) unlike the
 corresponding trend for the source dataset and original model (top). (Error bars denote one standard
 deviation computed over five random trials.)

          100                                                                                                                                                                    cifar10
                                                                                                                               Source Dataset
           80                                                                                                                        Unbiased
                                                                                                                                     Biased               20
           60
ASR (%)


                                                                                                                                                ASR (%)
           40                                                                                                                                             10
           20
            0                                                                                                                                              0
                    aircraft   birdsnap caltech101 caltech256 cifar10      cifar100      flowers   food       pets   stanford_cars sun397                      10 5         10 4           10 3
                                                                        Target Dataset                                                                                      Weight Decay

                                              (a) Full-network transfer setting                                                                                (b) Effect of weight decay

 Figure 3: Similarly to the fixed-feature setting, bias also transfers in the full-network setting, but
 to a lesser degree. (a) This holds consistently across various target datasets. Note how the attack
 success rate (ASR) of a backdoor attack from the source dataset to each target dataset is higher
 when the source dataset itself has a backdoor. (b) Observe also how increasing weight decay further
 reduces bias transfer (results for more datasets can be found in Appendix A.5). (Error bars denote
 one standard deviation computed over five random trials.)


 3.2                  FACTORS MITIGATING BIAS TRANSFER
 In fixed-feature transfer learning bias transfers reliably from the source to the target dataset. Can
 we mitigate this bias transfer? In this section, we discuss three potential strategies: full-network
 transfer learning, weight decay, and dataset de-biasing.
 Can full-network transfer learning reduce bias transfer? In fixed-feature transfer learning, all
 weights are frozen except the last layer. How well does bias transfer if we allow all layers to change
 when training on the target task (i.e., full-network transfer learning)? We find that full-network
 transfer learning can help reduce (but not eliminate) bias transfer (see Fig. 3a).
 Can weight decay mitigate bias transfer? Weight decay is a natural candidate for reducing bias
 transfer; indeed, in our motivating logistic regression example from Section 2, weight decay elim-
 inates the effect of any planted feature (see Appendix A.5 for a formal explanation). We find that
 increasing weight decay does not reduce bias transfer in the fixed-feature setting, but can substan-
 tially reduce bias transfer in the full-network transfer setting. Referring to Fig. 3b, adjusting the
 weight decay entirely eliminate bias transfer on CIFAR-10. However, the extent to which weight
 decay helps varies across datasets as we show in Appendix A.5.
 Can de-biasing (only) the target dataset remove the bias? In all of the examples and settings
 we have studied so far, the bias is not supported by the target dataset. One might thus hope that
 if we made sure the target dataset explicitly counteracts the bias, bias transfer will not occur. This
 de-biasing can be expensive (and often unrealistic), as it requires prior knowledge of what biases
 need to be avoided, and then a way to embed these biases in the target dataset. But does it help?
 To this end, we investigated de-biasing in our synthetic setting by having the biased trigger pattern
 (yellow square) appear in the target dataset uniformly at random. We found that, as shown in Fig. 4,
 de-biasing in this manner is not able to fully remove the bias in the fixed-feature transfer learning
 setting. However, in full-network transfer learning setting, the de-biasing intervention does succeed


                                                                                                          4
 Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


          100                                                                              100
                                                        Target Dataset                                                                   Target Dataset
           80                                                    aircraft                   80                                                    aircraft
                                                                 cifar10                                                                          cifar10
ASR (%)    60                                                                               60


                                                                                 ASR (%)
           40                                                                               40
           20                                                                               20
            0                                                                                0
                0.0     0.1        0.2        0.3        0.4           0.5                       0.0    0.1         0.2        0.3        0.4           0.5
                      Ratio of Target Dataset that is Debiased                                         Ratio of Target Dataset that is Debiased

                      (a) Fixed-feature transfer                                                       (b) Full-network transfer

 Figure 4: (left) In the fixed-feature setting, de-biasing the target dataset by adding the trigger to
 uniformly across classes cannot fully prevent the bias from transferring. (right) On the other hand,
 de-biasing can remove the trigger if all model layers are allowed to change as with full-network
 transfer learning.


 in correcting the bias. (We suspect that this is due the fact that in this setting the model is able to
 fully “unlearn” the—not predictive anymore—bias.)
 Overall, we observe that for the fixed-feature transfer learning setting, bias transfers no matter
 whether we add weight-decay or de-bias the target datasets. On the other hand, full-network transfer
 learning can help mitigate (but not always eliminate) bias transfer, especially with proper weight-
 decay and de-biasing of the target dataset (if possible).


 4              B IAS T RANSFER B EYOND BACKDOOR ATTACKS
 In Section 3, we used synthetic backdoor triggers to show that biases can transfer from the source
 dataset (and, in the fixed-feature transfer setting, even when the target dataset is itself de-biased).
 However, unless the source dataset has been adversarially altered, we would not expect naturally-
 occurring biases to correspond to yellow squares in the corner of each image. Instead, these bi-
 ases tend to be much more subtle, and revolve around issues such as over-reliance on image back-
 ground (Xiao et al., 2020), or disparate accuracy across skin colors in facial recognition (Buolamwini
 & Gebru, 2018). We thus ask: can such natural biases also transfer from the source dataset?
 As we demonstrate, this is indeed the case. Specifically, we study two such sample biases. First,
 we consider a co-occurrence bias between humans and dogs in the MS-COCO dataset (Lin et al.,
 2014). Then, we examine an over-representation bias in which models rely on gender to predict age
 in the CelebA dataset (Liu et al., 2015). In both cases, we modify the source task in order to amplify
 the effect of the bias, then observe that the bias remains even after fine-tuning on balanced versions
 of the dataset (in Section 5, we study bias transfer in a setting without such amplifications).

 4.1            T RANSFERRING CO - OCCURRENCE BIASES IN OBJECT RECOGNITION
 Image recognition datasets often contain objects that appear together, leading to a phenomenon
 called co-occurrence bias, where one of the objects becomes hard to identify without appearing
 together with the other. For example, since “skis” and “skateboards” typically occur together with
 people, models can struggle to correctly classify these objects without the presence of a person using
 them (Singh et al., 2020). Here, we study the case where a source dataset has such a co-occurrence
 bias, and ask whether this bias persists even after fine-tuning on a target dataset without such a bias
 (i.e., a dataset in which one of the co-occurring objects is totally absent).
 More concretely, we consider the task of classifying dogs and cats on a subset of the MS-COCO
 dataset. We generate a biased source dataset by choosing images so that dogs (but not cats) always
 co-occur with humans (see Appendix A for the exact experimental setup), and we compare that with
 an unbiased source dataset that has no people at all. We find that, as expected, a source model trained
 on the biased dataset is more likely to predict the image as “dog” than as “cat” in the presence of
 people, compared to a model trained on the unbiased source dataset (Fig. 5a).3
     3
       Note that the source model trained on the unbiased dataset seems to also be slightly sensitive to the presence
 of people even though it has never been exposed to any people. We suspect this is due to the presence of other
 confounding objects in the images.


                                                                             5
     Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                   30                                                                 30                                                                 30


Acc(people) - Acc(no people) (%)


                                                                   Acc(people) - Acc(no people) (%)


                                                                                                                                      Acc(people) - Acc(no people) (%)
                                        Source Dataset                                                     Source Dataset                                                     Source Dataset
                                             Unbiased                                                           Unbiased                                                           Unbiased
                                   20        Biased                                                   20        Biased                                                   20        Biased
                                   10                                                                 10                                                                 10

                                    0                                                                  0                                                                  0

                                   10                                                                 10                                                                 10
                                             Cats           Dogs                                                Cats           Dogs                                                Cats           Dogs
                                                    Class                                                              Class                                                              Class

                                        (a) Source Model                                              (b) Fixed-feature Transfer                                         (c) Full-network Transfer

     Figure 5: MS-COCO Experiment. Bias transfer can occur when bias is a naturally occurring
     feature. We consider transfer from a source dataset that spuriously correlates the presence of dogs
     (but not cats) with the presence of people. We plot the difference in performance between images
     either contain or do not contain people. Even after fine-tuning on images without any people at all,
     models pre-trained on the biased dataset are highly sensitive to the presence of people.

                                   40 Source Dataset                                                  40 Source Dataset                                                  40 Source Dataset
Acc(male) - Acc(female) (%)


                                                                   Acc(male) - Acc(female) (%)


                                                                                                                                      Acc(male) - Acc(female) (%)
                                           Unbiased                                                           Unbiased                                                           Unbiased
                                   20      Biased                                                     20      Biased                                                     20      Biased

                                    0                                                                  0                                                                  0

                                   20                                                                 20                                                                 20

                                   40                                                                 40                                                                 40
                                            Young           Old                                                Young           Old                                                Young           Old
                                                    Class                                                              Class                                                              Class

                                   (a) Original source model            (b) Transfer on a target task                                      (c) Transfer on a target task:
                                                                        containing only women                                              50% women and 50% men

     Figure 6: CelebA Experiment. Bias transfer with natural features can occur even when the target
     dataset is de-biased. (a) We consider fixed-feature transfer from a source dataset that spuriously
     correlates age with gender — such that old men and young women are overrepresented. (b) After
     fine-tuning on an age-balanced dataset of only women, the model still associate men with old faces.
     (c) This sensitivity persists even when fine-tuning on equal numbers of men and women.


     We then adapt this biased source model to a new target dataset that contains no humans at all, and
     check whether the final model is sensitive to the presence of humans. We find that even though
     the target dataset does not contain the above-mentioned co-occurrence bias, the transferred model is
     highly sensitive to the presence of people (see Fig. 5b). Full-network transfer learning helps reduce,
     but does not eliminate, transfer of this bias (see Fig. 5c).

      4.2                               T RANSFERRING GENDER BIAS IN FACIAL RECOGNITION
     Facial recognition datasets are notorious for containing biases towards specific races, ages, and gen-
     ders (Terhörst et al., 2021; Buolamwini & Gebru, 2018), making them a natural setting for studying
     bias transfer. For example, the CelebA dataset (Liu et al., 2015) over-represents subpopulations of
     older men and younger women. In this section, we use a CelebA subset that amplifies this bias,
     and pre-train source models on a source task of classifying “old” and “young” faces (we provide the
     exact experimental setup in Appendix A). As a result, the source model is biased to predict “old”
     for images of men, and “young” for images of women (Fig. 6a). Our goal is to study whether,
     after adapting this biased source model to a demographically balanced target dataset of faces, the
     resulting model will continue to use this spurious gender-age correlation.
     To this end, we first adapt this biased source model on a dataset of exclusively female faces, with
     an equal number of young and old women. Here we consider fixed-feature transfer learning(and
     defer full-network transfer learning results to Appendix A). We then check if the resulting model
     still relies on “male-old” and “female-young” biases (Fig. 6b). It turns out that for both fixed-feature
     and full-network settings, these biases indeed persist: the downstream model is still more likely to
     predict “old” for an image of a male, and “young” for an image of a female.


                                                                                                                       6
  Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                     (a) Example images from the “Chain-link fence” class in ImageNet.

                                     Output Distribution                                           Top Predicted Classes (with intervention)
                                                          With Intervention                6000                                Chainlink Fence
                                                          Standard                                                             Other classes
Frequency


                                                                               Frequency
            103                                                                            4000
                                                                                           2000
            102                                                                               0
                      0        200      400        600         800     1000                        ImageNet Classes (sorted by frequency)
                                          Class ID
  (b) Shift in ImageNet predicted class distribution after adding a chain-link fence intervention, establishing that
  the bias holds for the source model.


                               (c) Example CIFAR-10 images after applying the chain-link fence intervention.

                          Top Predicted Classes (with intervention)                                Top Predicted Classes (with intervention)
            4000                                      Training Mode                         4000                               Training Mode
                                                               fixed-feature                                                       full-network
Frequency


                                                                                Frequency



                                                               scratch                                                             scratch
            2000                                                                            2000

                  0                                                                            0
                  d
                            er
                             ip

                                      t

                                              air g
                                                     ne

                                                           g
                                                               rse

                                                                     ile


                                                                                                           t
                                                                                              au ird
                                                                                                         ile

                                                                                                           g
                                                                                                          er
                                                                                                       rse
                                                                                                         ck
                                                                                                           g
                                                                                                 air ip
                                                                                                         ne
                                     ca


                                                                                                        ca
              bir


                                          fro


                                                          do


                                                                                                      fro


                                                                                                       do
                          sh


                                                                                                      sh
                          de


                                                                                                     de


                                                                                                    tru
                                                                     ob


                                                                                                     ob
                                                 pla


                                                                                                    pla
                                                                                                      b
                                                               ho


                                                                                                    ho
                                                                 tom


                                                                                                tom
                                                                au


                                       CIFAR-10 Classes                                                        CIFAR-10 Classes
  (d) Distribution of CIFAR-10 model predictions when trained from scratch and when transferred from the bi-
  ased source model. We consider (left) fixed-feature and (right) full-network transfer learning. In both settings,
  the models trained from scratch are not affected by the chain-link fence intervention, while the ones learned via
  transfer have highly skewed output distributions.


  Figure 7: The “chainlink fence” bias. (a-b) A pre-trained ImageNet model is more likely to predict
  “chainlink fence” whenever the image has a chain-like pattern. (c-d) This bias transfers to CIFAR-
  10 in both fixed-feature and full-network transfer settings. Indeed, if we overlay a chain-like pattern
  on all CIFAR-10 test set images, the model predictions skew towards a specific class. This does not
  happen if the CIFAR-10 model was trained from scratch instead (orange).


  Can we remove this bias by adding images of men to the target dataset? To answer this question,
  we transfer the source model to a target dataset that contains equal numbers of men and women,
  balanced across both old and young classes (see Appendix A for other splits). We find that the
  transferred model is still biased (Fig. 6c), indicating that de-biasing the target task in this manner
  does not necessarily fix bias transfer.

  5           B IAS T RANSFER IN THE W ILD
  In Section 4, we demonstrated that natural biases induced by subsampling standard datasets can
  transfer from source datasets to target tasks. We now ask the most advanced instantiation of our
  central question: do natural biases that already exist in the source dataset (i.e., where not enhanced
  by an intervention) also transfer?
  To this end, we pinpoint examples of biases in the widely-used ImageNet dataset and demonstrate
  that these biases indeed transfer to downstream tasks (e.g., CIFAR-10), despite the latter not contain-


                                                                               7
  Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                        (a) Example images from the “tennis ball” class in ImageNet.

                                    Output Distribution                                           Top Predicted Classes (with intervention)
                                                                                      15000
            104            With Intervention                                                                                     Tennis Ball
                           Standard                                                                                              Other classes
Frequency


                                                                          Frequency
                                                                                      10000

            103                                                                        5000

                                                                                            0
                      0       200      400      600       800     1000                            ImageNet Classes (sorted by frequency)
                                         Class ID
  (b) Shift in ImageNet predicted class distribution after adding a tennis ball intervention, establishing that the
  bias holds for the source model.


                                 (c) Example CIFAR-10 images after applying the tennis ball intervention.

                          Top Predicted Classes (with intervention)                               Top Predicted Classes (with intervention)
            3000                                                                          3000
                                                      Training Mode                                                           Training Mode
                                                          fixed-feature                                                           full-network
Frequency


                                                                              Frequency


            2000                                          scratch                         2000                                    scratch
            1000                                                                          1000
                  0                                                                          0
                           t
                           d
                         ck

                 air ip
                tom e
                         ile

                           g
                       rse
                          er
                           g


                                                                                                             d
                                                                                                   air t
                                                                                                  tom e
                                                                                                           ile
                                                                                                           ck
                                                                                                            ip
                                                                                                         rse

                                                                                                             g
                                                                                                             g
                                                                                                            er
                        ca


                                                                                                          ca
              au plan


                                                                                                au plan
                      bir


                      fro


                       do


                                                                                            bir


                                                                                                         do
                                                                                                        fro
                      sh


                                                                                                        sh
                     de


                                                                                                       de
                    tru


                                                                                                      tru
                     ob


                                                                                                       ob
                    ho


                                      CIFAR-10 Classes                                                ho      CIFAR-10 Classes
  (d) Distribution of CIFAR-10 model predictions when trained from scratch and when transferred from the
  biased source model. We consider (left) fixed-feature and (right) full-network transfer learning. The from-
  scratch models are not affected by the tennis ball intervention, while the ones learned via transfer have highly
  skewed output distributions. Note that in this case, full-network transfer learning was able to remove the bias.


  Figure 8: The “tennis ball” bias. (a-b) A pre-trained ImageNet model is more likely to predict
  “tennis ball” whenever a circular yellow shape is in the image. (c-d) This bias transfers to CIFAR-
  10 in the fixed-feature but not in the full network transfer settings.


  ing such biases. Specifically, we examine here two such biases: the “chainlink fence” bias and the
  “tennis ball” bias (described below). Results for more biases and target datasets are in Appendix B.
  Identifying ImageNet biases. To identify ImageNet biases, we focus on features that are (a) asso-
  ciated with an ImageNet class and (b) easy to overlay on an image. For example, we used a “circular
  yellow shape” feature is predictive for the class “tennis ball.” To verify that these features indeed
  bias the ImageNet model, we consider a simple counterfactual experiment: we overlay the features
  on all the ImageNet images and monitor the shift in the model output distribution. As expected,
  both “circular yellow shape” and “chain-like pattern” are strong predictive features for the classes
  “tennis ball” and “chainlink fence”—see Fig. 7b and 8b. These naturally occurring ImageNet biases
  are thus suitable for studying the transfer of biases that exist in the wild.
  ImageNet-biases transfer to target tasks. Now, what happens if we fine-tune a pre-trained Ima-
  geNet model (which has these biases) on a target dataset such as CIFAR-10? These biases turn out
  to persist in the resulting model even though CIFAR-10 does not contain them (as CIFAR-10 does
  not contain these classes). To demonstrate this phenomenon, we overlay the associated feature for
  both the “tennis ball” and “chainlink fence” ImageNet classes on the CIFAR-10 test set—see Fig. 7c


                                                                             8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


and 8c. We then evaluate (1) a model fine-tuned on a standard pre-trained ImageNet model, and (2)
a model trained from scratch on the CIFAR-10 dataset.
As Fig. 7d-(left) and 8d-(left) demonstrate, the fine-tuned models using fixed-feature transfer learn-
ing are sensitive to the overlaid ImageNet biases, whereas CIFAR-10 models trained from scratch
are not. This is corroborated by the overall skew of the output class distribution for the transfer-
learned model, compared to an almost uniform output class distribution of the model trained from
scratch. Note that, as mentioned in Section 3.2, full-network transfer learning can sometimes mit-
igate bias transfer, which we observe for the “tennis ball” bias in Fig. 8d-(right). Though for other
biases, as shown in Fig. 7d-(right) and Appendix B, the bias effect persists even after full-network
fine-tuning.

6   R ELATED W ORK
Transfer learning. Transfer learning has been used in applications ranging from autonomous driv-
ing (Kim & Park, 2017; Du et al., 2019), radiology (Wang et al., 2017; Ke et al., 2021) to satellite
image analysis (Xie et al., 2016; Wang et al., 2019). In particular, fine-tuning pre-trained ImageNet
models has increasingly become standard practice to improve the performance of various image
classification (Kornblith et al., 2019; Salman et al., 2020; Utrera et al., 2020) and object detection
tasks (Ren et al., 2015; Dai et al., 2016; Girshick et al., 2014; Chen et al., 2017). More recently, even
larger vision (Radford et al., 2021; Sun et al., 2017) and language models (Brown et al., 2020)—
often trained on proprietary datasets—have acted as backbones for downstream tasks. With this
widespread usage of pre-trained models, it is important to understand whether any limitation of
these models would affect downstream tasks, which is what we focus on in this work.
There has been some work to understand the types of features that are transferred in transfer learn-
ing (Neyshabur et al., 2020; Jain et al., 2022). Shafahi et al. (2019) further finds that adversarial
robustness can also transfer during fine-tuning.
Backdoor attacks. In a backdoor attack (Gu et al., 2017; Evtimov et al., 2018; Turner et al.,
2019), an adversary maliciously injects a trigger into the source dataset which can be activated
during inference. This type of attack can be especially hard to detect, since the model performs
well in the absence of the trigger. Indeed, there exists a long line of work on injecting malicious
training examples, known as data poisoning attacks (Biggio et al., 2012; Xiao et al., 2012; Newell
et al., 2014; Mei & Zhu, 2015; Steinhardt et al., 2017). Gu et al. (2017) planted backdoors in a
stop-sign detection dataset, and found that fine-tuned stop-sign detection models were still sensitive
to this trigger. Related to our work, Lubana et al. (2023) perform a mechanistic analysis where they
fine-tune from a backdoored CIFAR-10 to a clean CIFAR-10 and find that the model is still biased.
Catastrophic forgetting. Bias transfer can be seen as the inverse of catastrophic forgetting (Kirk-
patrick et al., 2017), a well known phenomena (Hinton & Plaut, 1987) in which models trained on
different tasks sequentially can “forget” how to solve earlier tasks, resulting in lower accuracies.
Model behavior around bias transfer is consistent with catastrophic forgetting: the degree of catas-
trophic forgetting (or bias transfer) depends on both the training algorithm used and on the task
setup. For example, just as how training on sequential tasks can yield poor model accuracy on ear-
lier tasks, full-network fine-tuning (especially with high weight decay, cf. Figure 3b) can reduce
biases imbued by network pretraining. One fruitful area of future work could apply principles from
catastrophic forgetting and continual learning (De Lange et al., 2022) to mitigate bias transfer.

7   C ONCLUSION
In this work we demonstrated that biases in pre-trained models tend to remain present even after
fine-tuning these models on downstream target tasks. Crucially, these biases can persist even when
the target dataset used for fine-tuning did not contain such biases.
While we suggest several mitigation strategies—such as combining full-network fine-tuning with
high weight decay or de-biasing—these approaches often do not fully prevent bias transfer. These
findings are of particular concern as researchers and practitioners increasingly leverage public pre-
trained source models, which are likely to contain undocumented biases. We thus encourage further
investigation of the full ML pipeline—even parts that are seemingly unimportant—for potential
sources of bias.


                                                   9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Andrei Barbu, David Mayo, Julian Alverio, William Luo, Christopher Wang, Dan Gutfreund, Josh
  Tenenbaum, and Boris Katz. Objectnet: A large-scale bias-controlled dataset for pushing the
  limits of object recognition models. In Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2019.
Thomas Berg, Jiongxin Liu, Seung Woo Lee, Michelle L Alexander, David W Jacobs, and Peter N
  Belhumeur. Birdsnap: Large-scale fine-grained visual categorization of birds. In Proceedings of
  the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2014.
Battista Biggio, Blaine Nelson, and Pavel Laskov. Poisoning attacks against support vector ma-
  chines. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2012.
Lukas Bossard, Matthieu Guillaumin, and Luc Van Gool. Food-101–mining discriminative compo-
  nents with random forests. In European conference on computer vision, 2014.
Tom B Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are
  few-shot learners. arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.14165, 2020.
Joy Buolamwini and Timnit Gebru. Gender shades: Intersectional accuracy disparities in commer-
  cial gender classification. In Conference on fairness, accountability and transparency (FAccT),
  2018.
Liang-Chieh Chen, George Papandreou, Iasonas Kokkinos, Kevin Murphy, and Alan L Yuille.
  Deeplab: Semantic image segmentation with deep convolutional nets, atrous convolution, and
  fully connected crfs. IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence, 2017.
Jifeng Dai, Yi Li, Kaiming He, and Jian Sun. R-fcn: Object detection via region-based fully convo-
   lutional networks. In Advances in neural information processing systems (NeurIPS), 2016.
Matthias De Lange, Rahaf Aljundi, Marc Masana, Sarah Parisot, Xu Jia, Ales Leonardis, Gregory
 Slabaugh, and Tinne Tuytelaars. A continual learning survey: Defying forgetting in classification
 tasks. volume 44, pp. 3366–3385, 2022.
Jia Deng, Wei Dong, Richard Socher, Li-Jia Li, Kai Li, and Li Fei-Fei. Imagenet: A large-scale
   hierarchical image database. In Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2009.
Shuyang Du, Haoli Guo, and Andrew Simpson. Self-driving car steering angle prediction based on
  image recognition. arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.05440, 2019.
Ivan Evtimov, Kevin Eykholt, Earlence Fernandes, Tadayoshi Kohno, Bo Li, Atul Prakash, Amir
  Rahmati, and Dawn Song. Robust physical-world attacks on machine learning models. In Con-
  ference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2018.
Li Fei-Fei, Rob Fergus, and Pietro Perona. Learning generative visual models from few training
  examples: An incremental bayesian approach tested on 101 object categories. In 2004 conference
  on computer vision and pattern recognition workshop, pp. 178–178. IEEE, 2004.
Robert Geirhos, Patricia Rubisch, Claudio Michaelis, Matthias Bethge, Felix A. Wichmann, and
  Wieland Brendel. Imagenet-trained CNNs are biased towards texture; increasing shape bias
  improves accuracy and robustness. In International Conference on Learning Representations
  (ICLR), 2019.
Ross Girshick, Jeff Donahue, Trevor Darrell, and Jitendra Malik. Rich feature hierarchies for ac-
  curate object detection and semantic segmentation. In computer vision and pattern recognition
  (CVPR), pp. 580–587, 2014.
Gregory Griffin, Alex Holub, and Pietro Perona. Caltech-256 object category dataset. 2007.
Tianyu Gu, Brendan Dolan-Gavitt, and Siddharth Garg. Badnets: Identifying vulnerabilities in the
  machine learning model supply chain. arXiv preprint arXiv:1708.06733, 2017.
Geoffrey E Hinton and David C Plaut. Using fast weights to deblur old memories. In Proceedings
  of the 9th annual conference of the cognitive science society, pp. 177–186, 1987.


                                               10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Saachi Jain, Hadi Salman, Alaa Khaddaj, Eric Wong, Sung Min Park, and Aleksander Madry. A
  data-based perspective on transfer learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.05739, 2022.
Alexander Ke, William Ellsworth, Oishi Banerjee, Andrew Y Ng, and Pranav Rajpurkar. Chextrans-
  fer: performance and parameter efficiency of imagenet models for chest x-ray interpretation. In
  Proceedings of the Conference on Health, Inference, and Learning, pp. 116–124, 2021.
Jiman Kim and Chanjong Park. End-to-end ego lane estimation based on sequential transfer learning
  for self-driving cars. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern
  recognition workshops, pp. 30–38, 2017.
James Kirkpatrick, Razvan Pascanu, Neil Rabinowitz, Joel Veness, Guillaume Desjardins, Andrei A
  Rusu, Kieran Milan, John Quan, Tiago Ramalho, Agnieszka Grabska-Barwinska, et al. Overcom-
  ing catastrophic forgetting in neural networks. Proceedings of the national academy of sciences,
  114(13):3521–3526, 2017.
Simon Kornblith, Jonathon Shlens, and Quoc V Le. Do better imagenet models transfer better? In
  computer vision and pattern recognition (CVPR), 2019.
Jonathan Krause, Jia Deng, Michael Stark, and Li Fei-Fei. Collecting a large-scale dataset of fine-
  grained cars. 2013.
Alex Krizhevsky. Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images. In Technical report, 2009.
Guillaume Leclerc, Hadi Salman, Andrew Ilyas, Sai Vemprala, Logan Engstrom, Vibhav Vineet, Kai
  Xiao, Pengchuan Zhang, Shibani Santurkar, Greg Yang, et al. 3db: A framework for debugging
  computer vision models. In arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.03805, 2021.
Guillaume Leclerc, Andrew Ilyas, Logan Engstrom, Sung Min Park, Hadi Salman, and Aleksander
  Madry. ffcv. https://github.com/libffcv/ffcv/, 2022.
Tsung-Yi Lin, Michael Maire, Serge Belongie, James Hays, Pietro Perona, Deva Ramanan, Piotr
  Dollár, and C Lawrence Zitnick. Microsoft coco: Common objects in context. In European
  conference on computer vision (ECCV), 2014.
Ziwei Liu, Ping Luo, Xiaogang Wang, and Xiaoou Tang. Deep learning face attributes in the wild.
  In International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), 2015.
Ekdeep Singh Lubana, Eric J Bigelow, Robert P Dick, David Krueger, and Hidenori Tanaka. Mech-
  anistic mode connectivity. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 22965–23004.
  PMLR, 2023.
Dhruv Mahajan, Ross Girshick, Vignesh Ramanathan, Kaiming He, Manohar Paluri, Yixuan Li,
  Ashwin Bharambe, and Laurens van der Maaten. Exploring the limits of weakly supervised
  pretraining. In Proceedings of the European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV), 2018.
Subhransu Maji, Esa Rahtu, Juho Kannala, Matthew Blaschko, and Andrea Vedaldi. Fine-grained
  visual classification of aircraft. arXiv preprint arXiv:1306.5151, 2013.
Shike Mei and Xiaojin Zhu. Using machine teaching to identify optimal training-set attacks on
  machine learners. In AAAI, pp. 2871–2877, 2015.
Andrew Newell, Rahul Potharaju, Luojie Xiang, and Cristina Nita-Rotaru. On the practicality of
  integrity attacks on document-level sentiment analysis. In Proceedings of the 2014 Workshop on
  Artificial Intelligent and Security Workshop, pp. 83–93. ACM, 2014.
Behnam Neyshabur, Hanie Sedghi, and Chiyuan Zhang. What is being transferred in transfer learn-
  ing? Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:512–523, 2020.
Maria-Elena Nilsback and Andrew Zisserman. Automated flower classification over a large number
 of classes. In 2008 Sixth Indian Conference on Computer Vision, Graphics & Image Processing,
 2008.
Omkar M Parkhi, Andrea Vedaldi, Andrew Zisserman, and CV Jawahar. Cats and dogs. In 2012
 IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 3498–3505. IEEE, 2012.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual
  models from natural language supervision. In arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.00020, 2021.
Shaoqing Ren, Kaiming He, Ross Girshick, and Jian Sun. Faster r-cnn: Towards real-time object
  detection with region proposal networks. In Advances in neural information processing systems
  (NeurIPS), 2015.
Olga Russakovsky, Jia Deng, Hao Su, Jonathan Krause, Sanjeev Satheesh, Sean Ma, Zhiheng
  Huang, Andrej Karpathy, Aditya Khosla, Michael Bernstein, Alexander C. Berg, and Li Fei-
  Fei. ImageNet Large Scale Visual Recognition Challenge. In International Journal of Computer
  Vision (IJCV), 2015.
Hadi Salman, Andrew Ilyas, Logan Engstrom, Ashish Kapoor, and Aleksander Madry. Do adver-
  sarially robust imagenet models transfer better? In Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems (NeurIPS), 2020.
Ali Shafahi, Parsa Saadatpanah, Chen Zhu, Amin Ghiasi, Christoph Studer, David Jacobs, and Tom
  Goldstein. Adversarially robust transfer learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1905.08232, 2019.
Krishna Kumar Singh, Dhruv Mahajan, Kristen Grauman, Yong Jae Lee, Matt Feiszli, and Deepti
  Ghadiyaram. Don’t judge an object by its context: learning to overcome contextual bias. In Pro-
  ceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 11070–
  11078, 2020.
Jacob Steinhardt, Pang Wei W Koh, and Percy S Liang. Certified defenses for data poisoning attacks.
  In NIPS, 2017.
Chen Sun, Abhinav Shrivastava, Saurabh Singh, and Abhinav Gupta. Revisiting unreasonable ef-
  fectiveness of data in deep learning era. In Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on
  computer vision, 2017.
Philipp Terhörst, Jan Niklas Kolf, Marco Huber, Florian Kirchbuchner, Naser Damer, Aythami
  Morales, Julian Fierrez, and Arjan Kuijper. A comprehensive study on face recognition biases
  beyond demographics. arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.01592, 2021.
Alexander Turner, Dimitris Tsipras, and Aleksander Madry. Label-consistent backdoor attacks.
  2019.
Francisco Utrera, Evan Kravitz, N. Benjamin Erichson, Rajiv Khanna, and Michael W. Mahoney.
  Adversarially-trained deep nets transfer better. In ArXiv preprint arXiv:2007.05869, 2020.
Sherrie Wang, George Azzari, and David B Lobell. Crop type mapping without field-level labels:
  Random forest transfer and unsupervised clustering techniques. Remote sensing of environment,
  222:303–317, 2019.
Xiaosong Wang, Yifan Peng, Le Lu, Zhiyong Lu, Mohammadhadi Bagheri, and Ronald M Sum-
  mers. Chestx-ray8: Hospital-scale chest x-ray database and benchmarks on weakly-supervised
  classification and localization of common thorax diseases. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference
  on computer vision and pattern recognition (CVPR), 2017.
Han Xiao, Huang Xiao, and Claudia Eckert. Adversarial label flips attack on support vector ma-
  chines. In European Conference on Artificial Intelligence (ECAI), 2012.
Jianxiong Xiao, James Hays, Krista A Ehinger, Aude Oliva, and Antonio Torralba. Sun database:
   Large-scale scene recognition from abbey to zoo. In Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
   (CVPR), 2010.
Kai Xiao, Logan Engstrom, Andrew Ilyas, and Aleksander Madry. Noise or signal: The role of
  image backgrounds in object recognition. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.09994, 2020.
Michael Xie, Neal Jean, Marshall Burke, David Lobell, and Stefano Ermon. Transfer learning from
 deep features for remote sensing and poverty mapping. In Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial
 Intelligence, 2016.


                                                12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Zhuotun Zhu, Lingxi Xie, and Alan Yuille. Object recognition without and without objects. In
  International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 2017.


                                             13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A     E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP

A.1     I MAGE N ET M ODELS

In this paper, we train a number of ImageNet models and transfer them to various datasets in Sec-
tions 3 and 5. We mainly use the ResNet-18 architecture all over the paper. However, we study bias
transfers using various architectures in Appendix A.4. We use PyTorch’s official implementation
for these architectures, which can be found here https://pytorch.org/vision/stable/
models.html.

Training details. We train our ImageNet models from scratch using SGD by minimizing the stan-
dard cross-entropy loss. We train for 16 epochs using a Cyclic learning rate schedule with an initial
learning rate of 0.5 and learning rate peak epoch of 2. We use momentum of 0.9, batch size of 1024,
and weight decay of 5e−4 . We use standard data-augmentation: RandomResizedCrop and Ran-
domHorizontalFlip during training, and RandomResizedCrop during testing. Our implementation
and configuration files are available in the attached code.

A.2     T RANSFER DETAILS FROM I MAGE N ET TO DOWNSTREAM IMAGE CLASSIFICATION
        TASKS

Transfer datasets. We use the image classification tasks that are used in (Salman et al., 2020;
Kornblith et al., 2019), which have various sizes and number of classes. When evaluating the per-
formance of models on each of these datasets, we report the Top-1 accuracy for balanced datasets
and the Mean Per-Class accuracy for the unbalanced datasets. See Table 1 for the details of these
datasets. For each dataset, we consider two transfer learning settings: fixed-feature and full-network
transfer learning which we describe below.

Table 1: Image classification benchmarks used in this paper. Accuracy metric is the metric we report
for each of the dataset across the paper. Some datasets are imbalanced, so we report Mean Per-Class
accuracy for those. For the rest, we report Top-1 accuracy.

    Dataset                                               Size (Train/Test)   Classes   Accuracy Metric
    Birdsnap (Berg et al., 2014)                            32,677/8,171       500          Top-1
    Caltech-101 (Fei-Fei et al., 2004)                      3,030/5,647        101       Mean Per-Class
    Caltech-256 (Griffin et al., 2007)                     15,420/15,187       257       Mean Per-Class
    CIFAR-10 (Krizhevsky, 2009)                            50,000/10,000        10          Top-1
    CIFAR-100 (Krizhevsky, 2009)                           50,000/10,000       100          Top-1
    FGVC Aircraft (Maji et al., 2013)                       6,667/3,333        100       Mean Per-Class
    Food-101 (Bossard et al., 2014)                        75,750/25,250       101          Top-1
    Oxford 102 Flowers (Nilsback & Zisserman, 2008)          2,040/6,149       102       Mean Per-Class
    Oxford-IIIT Pets Parkhi et al. (2012)                   3,680/3,669         37       Mean Per-Class
    SUN397 (Xiao et al., 2010)                             19,850/19,850       397          Top-1
    Stanford Cars (Krause et al., 2013)                      8,144/8,041       196          Top-1



Fixed-feature transfer. For this setting, we freeze the layers of the ImageNet source model4 ,
except for the last layer, which we replace with a random initialized linear layer whose output
matches the number of classes in the transfer dataset. We now train only this new layer for using
SGD, with a batch size of 1024 using cyclic learning rate. For more details and hyperparameter for
each dataset, please see config files in the attached code.

Full-network transfer. For this setting, we do not freeze any of the layers of the ImageNet source
model, and all the model weights are updated. We follow the exact same hyperparameters as the
fixed-feature setting.
   4
     We do not freeze the batch norm statistics, but only the weights of the model similar to (Salman et al.,
2020).


                                                     14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Compute and training time Throughout the paper, we use the FFCV data-loading library to train
models fast (Leclerc et al., 2022). Using FFCV, we can train an ImageNet model, for example,
in around 1 hr only on a single V100 GPU. Our experiments were conducted on a GPU cluster
containing A100 and V100 GPUs.

A.3      D EFINITIONS

We define biases formally as follows. For input x ∈ X , let Y be a random variable corresponding
to the true label, and let Ŷ be a random variable corresponding to the predicted label.
We can define a “feature” as a transformation T : X → X which applies some property to an input
x. For example, if the feature is “black background", the transformation T would apply a black
background to X. We say that example x “has” a feature T if x = T (x) (adding the feature did not
change the input).
We say that feature T is a δ “bias" for a model if:
                         P(Ŷ |T (x)) − P(Ŷ |x) > δ + P(Y |T (x)) − P(Y |x).
That is, if the predicted label is more sensitive to the addition of the feature than the true label.
The phenomenon of bias transfer is when T is a δ-bias for a model pre-trained on a source dataset,
but is not a δ-bias for a model trained from scratch (i.e., without pre-training).

A.4      VARYING ARCHITECTURES

In this section, we study whether bias transfers when applying transfer learning using various archi-
tectures. We conduct the basic experiment of Section 3 on several standard architectures from the
PyTorch’s Torchvision5 .
As in Section 3, we train two versions of each architecture: one on a clean ImageNet dataset, and
another on a modified ImageNet dataset containing a backdoor. We use the same hyperparameters
as the rest of the paper, except for the batch size, which we set to 512 instead of 1024. The reason
we lower the batch size is to fit these models in memory on a single A100 GPU.
Now, we transfer each of these models to a clean CIFAR-10 dataset, and test if the backdoor attack
transfers. Similar to the results of the main paper, we notice that backdoor attack indeed transfers
in the fixed-feature setting. We note however that for the full-network setting, all architectures other
than ResNet-18 (which we use in the rest of the paper) seem to be more robust to the backdoor
attack.
We further repeat the backdoor experiments for three sizes of Vision Transformer (Figure 10). We
find that bias transfer still occurs in both the fixed-feature and full-network settings.

A.5      T HE EFFECT OF WEIGHT DECAY IN FULL - NETWORK TRANSFER LEARNING

As mentioned in Section 3.2, we found weight decay to have a significant impact on bias transfer
in the full-network transfer learning setting. In particular, increasing weight decay reduces bias
transfer. Here, we present a formal explanation of why this happens by studying this within the
logistic regression example we presented in Section 2. Recall that, following the setup in Section 2,
if we transfer a pre-trained linear classifier wsrc to a target dataset {(xi , yi )}, wsrc is preserved in
all directions orthogonal to the span of the xi .
Now what happens if we add `2 regularization (i.e., weight decay) to the logistic regression problem?
As can be easily checked, the gradient updated of the logistic loss now becomes
                        ∇`w (xi , yi ) = (σ(w> xi ) − yi ) · xi + λw,                                   (2)
                                      = (σ(wS> xi ) − yi ) · xi + λ(wS + wS 0 )
where λ is the regularization strength, wS and wS 0 are the projections of w on the span of the
target data points xi ’s, denoted S, and on its complementary subspace, denoted S 0 . This gradient,
   5
       These models can be found here https://pytorch.org/vision/stable/models.html


                                                   15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


               100
                         Source Dataset
                80            Unbiased
                              Biased
                60
     ASR (%)    40
                20
                 0
                          mobilenet_v2    resnet18             resnet50      resnext50_32x4d shufflenet_v2_x1_0
                                                             Architecture
                                              (a) CIFAR-10 Fixed-feature
               100
                         Source Dataset
                80            Unbiased
                              Biased
                60
     ASR (%)


                40
                20
                 0
                          mobilenet_v2    resnet18             resnet50      resnext50_32x4d shufflenet_v2_x1_0
                                                             Architecture
                                              (b) CIFAR-10 Full-network

Figure 9: Backdoor attack (bias) consistently transfers in the fixed-feature setting across various
architectures. However, this happens to a lesser degree in the full-network transfer setting.


               100                                       Fixed-Feature
                                                                                         Source Dataset
                 75                                                                              Unbiased
     ASR (%)


                 50                                                                              Biased
                 25
                     0
                              ResNet-18              ViT-T                  ViT-S                ViT-B
                                                            Model
               100                                       Full-Network
                                                                                         Source Dataset
                 75                                                                              Unbiased
     ASR (%)


                 50                                                                              Biased
                 25
                     0
                              ResNet-18              ViT-T                  ViT-S                ViT-B
                                                                Model
Figure 10: We repeat the backdoor experiments for three sizes of ViT. We find that bias transfer still
occurs in both the fixed-feature and full-network settings.


as before, restricts the space of updates to those in S. However due to regularization, this gradient
drives wS 0 to zero. Therefore, any planted bias in S 0 disappears as this subspace collapses to zero
with regularization.
We illustrate this example in a toy setting, where the dataset contains 1000 points (dimension 4).
The first two dimensions are drawn from two normal distributions (N (±2, 1)) depending on the


                                                              16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                   2.0                                           ||wS||
                                   1.5
                                                                                 ||wS ||
                                                                                      0


                                                                                 Initial ||wS ||


                         L2 Norm
                                                                                             0


                                   1.0

                                   0.5

                                   0.0
                                         0.000 0.025 0.050 0.075 0.100 0.125 0.150 0.175 0.200
                                                             Weight Decay

Figure 11: ||wS ||2 and ||wS 0 ||2 for varying weight decays. While ||wS 0 ||2 is unchanged from the
original weight vector when weight decay is 0, it is gradually driven to 0 as weight decay increases.


class. However the last two dimensions are set to 0 in the training dataset. We then train a logistic
regression classifier with SGD with varying weight decay, where the initial weight vector is set to
all 1s. Here wS are the first two dimensions of the weight vector, and wS 0 are the second two
dimensions. We plot ||wS ||2 and ||wS 0 ||2 for varying weight decays (see Figure 11.) While ||wS 0 ||2
is unchanged from the original weight vector when weight decay is 0, it is gradually driven to 0 as
weight decay increases.
Indeed, we observe in practice that as we increase weight decay in the full-network transfer learning
regime, bias transfer decreases over various downstream tasks as shown in Figure 12. On the other
hand, we find that weight decay does not reduce bias transfer in the fixed feature transfer learning
regime, where the weights of the pretrained model are frozen.


                                                               17
 Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                           aircraft                                           birdsnap
          100
                                                              15
ASR (%)


                                                    ASR (%)
            50                                                10
                                                               5
              0                                                0
                  10 5    10 4           10 3                        10 5                10 4
                         Weight Decay                                       Weight Decay
                          caltech101                                         caltech256
              4                                               20
    ASR (%)


                                                    ASR (%)
              2                                               10

              0                                                0
                  10 5    10 4           10 3                      10 5      10 4               10 3
                         Weight Decay                                       Weight Decay
                           cifar100                                           flowers
            60
                                                              10
  ASR (%)


                                                    ASR (%)


            40
            20                                                 5
              0                                                0
                  10 5    10 4           10 3                      10 5      10 4               10 3
                         Weight Decay                                       Weight Decay
                             food                                               pets
                                                              20
  ASR (%)


                                                    ASR (%)


            20
                                                              10
              0
                                                               0
                  10 5    10 4           10 3                      10 5      10 4               10 3
                         Weight Decay                                       Weight Decay
                         stanford_cars                                        sun397
                                                              15
           7.5
 ASR (%)


                                                    ASR (%)


           5.0                                                10
           2.5                                                 5
           0.0                                                 0
                  10 5    10 4           10 3                      10 5      10 4               10 3
                         Weight Decay                                       Weight Decay

 Figure 12: As weight decay increases, the ASR decreases which means bias transfers less across
 various datasets. We increase weight decay until the clean accuracy on the target dataset significantly
 deteriorates (see Figure 13). Error regions correspond to standard deviation over five random trials.


                                                   18
  Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                             aircraft                                            birdsnap
               60                                                60
Accuracy (%)


                                                  Accuracy (%)
               40                                                40
               20                                                20
                0                                                 0
                    10 5    10 4           10 3                         10 5                10 4
                           Weight Decay                                        Weight Decay
                            caltech101                                          caltech256
                                                                 75
Accuracy (%)


                                                  Accuracy (%)
               50                                                50
                                                                 25
                0                                                 0
                    10 5    10 4           10 3                       10 5      10 4               10 3
                           Weight Decay                                        Weight Decay
                             cifar100                                            flowers
               75
Accuracy (%)


                                                  Accuracy (%)



                                                                 75
               50                                                50
               25                                                25
                0                                                 0
                    10 5    10 4           10 3                       10 5      10 4               10 3
                           Weight Decay                                        Weight Decay
                               food                                                pets
               75
Accuracy (%)


                                                  Accuracy (%)


                                                                 75
               50                                                50
               25                                                25
                0                                                 0
                    10 5    10 4           10 3                       10 5      10 4               10 3
                           Weight Decay                                        Weight Decay
                           stanford_cars                                         sun397
               75
Accuracy (%)


                                                  Accuracy (%)


                                                                 40
               50
               25                                                20
                0                                                 0
                    10 5    10 4           10 3                       10 5      10 4               10 3
                           Weight Decay                                        Weight Decay

  Figure 13: The clean accuracies corresponding to the weight-decay experiment. We increase weight
  decay as long as the clean accuracy on the target dataset is roughly the same. Error regions (very
  small) correspond to standard deviation over five random trials.


                                                  19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.6     C LEAN ACCURACIES FOR EXPERIMENTS OF S ECTION 3

In Figure 14, we report the clean accuracies of the transferred models that we use Section 3 on vari-
ous target datasets. Note how the accuracies of both models pretrained in biased and unbiased source
models, for both fixed-feature and full-network settings, are roughly the same. So the discrepancy
in ASR reported in the main paper is solely due to bias transfer.
                                    100
                                                                                                                                            Source Dataset
           Clean Accuracy (%)

                                     80                                                                                                           Unbiased
                                                                                                                                                  Biased
                                     60
                                     40
                                     20
                                      0
                                          aircraft   birdsnap caltech101 caltech256 cifar10      cifar100      flowers   food   pets   stanford_cars sun397
                                                                                              Target Dataset

                                                               (a) Fixed-feature transfer learning accuracies.
                                    100
                                                                                                                                            Source Dataset
           Clean Accuracy (%)


                                     80                                                                                                           Unbiased
                                                                                                                                                  Biased
                                     60
                                     40
                                     20
                                      0
                                          aircraft   birdsnap caltech101 caltech256 cifar10      cifar100      flowers   food   pets   stanford_cars sun397
                                                                                              Target Dataset

                                                               (b) Full-network transfer learning accuracies.

      Figure 14: Clean accuracies of the fixed-feature and full-network experiments of Section 3.


A.7     C OMPARISON WITH MODELS TRAINED FROM SCRATCH (A DDITIONAL RESULTS TO
        S ECTION 3)

In this section, we add an extra baseline to Figure 3a where we train models from scratch on the var-
ious target datasets to check if the yellow square bias already exists in these datasets. In Figure 15a,
we plot the accuracies of all the models across all target tasks. Note that since there is a significant
difference between the accuracies of the models trained from scratch and those finetuned, ASR is
no longer an informative metric to capture the existence of bias. Thus, we measure the change in
accuracy after adding the backdoor trigger and report the results in Figure 15b. Indeed, the addition
of the yellow square trigger do not significantly change the accuracy of the models trained from
scratch reflecting no existing bias in the target datasets.
                                    100
                                                                                                                                            Source Dataset
           Clean Accuracy (%)


                                     80                                                                                                           Unbiased
                                                                                                                                                  Biased
                                     60                                                                                                           Scratch
                                     40
                                     20
                                      0
                                          aircraft   birdsnap caltech101 caltech256 cifar10      cifar100      flowers   food   pets   stanford_cars sun397
                                                                                              Target Dataset

                                                               (a) Full-network transfer learning accuracies.
                                    100
           Change in Accuracy (%)


                                                                                                                                            Source Dataset
                                     80                                                                                                           Unbiased
                                                                                                                                                  Biased
                                     60                                                                                                           Scratch
                                     40
                                     20
                                      0
                                          aircraft   birdsnap caltech101 caltech256 cifar10      cifar100      flowers   food   pets   stanford_cars sun397
                                                                                              Target Dataset

                  (b) Full-network transfer learning change in accuracy after adding the backdoor trigger.

                                    Figure 15: Additional baseline ("Scratch") for the experiment of Figure 3a.


                                                                                               20
 Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 A.8           T HE EFFECT OF LEARNING RATE ON BIAS TRANSFER

 We further analyze the impact of the fine-tuning learning rate on bias transfer. In Figure 16 repeat
 the ImageNet to CIFAR-10 experiment with a yellow square, but now increase and decrease the
 learning rate (from their default of 0.1). Like increasing weight decay, increasing the learning rate
 actually slightly worsens bias transfer for the fixed-feature setting, while helping mitigate in the
 full-network setting. However, changing the learning rate is a relatively invasive intervention, which
 may have impacts on the model’s overall accuracy.

                Source Dataset                                           25                           Source Dataset
          60           Unbiased                                                                             Unbiased
          50           Biased                                            20                                 Biased
          40
ASR (%)


                                                               ASR (%)
                                                                         15
          30
                                                                         10
          20
          10                                                              5
           0                                                              0
                  0.01            0.1*           0.3                           0.01            0.1*           0.3
                                   lr                                                           lr
                  (a) Fixed-feature transfer.                                  (b) Full-network transfer.

 Figure 16: ASR when varying the fine-tuning learning rate for fixed-feature and full-network trans-
 fer.


 A.9           B IAS TRANSFER CAN AMPLIFY EXISTING BIASES .

 In this section, we consider the case where the downstream dataset is also biased. Specifically,
 we add a yellow square to the dog class of the downstream CIFAR-10 training dataset (at varying
 frequencies). Indeed, we find the pre-training on a biased dataset amplifies the downstream models’
 sensitivity to the yellow square (see Figure 17).


          80                             Source Dataset                  60 Source Dataset
                                               Unbiased                          Unbiased
                                               Biased                    50      Biased
          60                                                             40
ASR (%)


                                                               ASR (%)


          40                                                             30
                                                                         20
          20
                                                                         10
           0                                                              0
                 0.0        0.3          0.5       0.7                        0.0        0.3          0.5       0.7
                       Downstream Spurious %                                        Downstream Spurious %
                  (a) Fixed-feature transfer.                                  (b) Full-network transfer.

                              Figure 17: ASR when the downstream task is also biased.


                                                          21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.10    MS-COCO

In this section, we provide experimental details for the experiment on MS-COCO in Section 4.1. We
consider the binary task of predicting cats from dogs, where there is a strong correlation between
dogs and the presence of people.

Dataset construction. We create two source datasets which are described in Table 2.
   Table 2: The synthetic datasets we create from MS-COCO for the experiment in Section 4.1.

                                   Class: Cat                         Class: Dog
            Dataset       With People Without People          With People Without People
        Non-Spurious           0                1000               0               100
          Spurious           1000               4000             4000             1000

We then fine-tune models trained on the above source datasets on new images of cats and dogs
without people (485 each). We use the cats and dogs from the MS-COCO test set for evaluation.

Experimental details. We train a ResNet-18 with resolution 224 × 224. We use SGD with mo-
mentum, and a Cyclic learning rate. We use the following hyperparameters shown in Table 3:

              Table 3: Hyperparameters used for training on the MS-COCO dataset.

                  Hyperparameter     Value for pre-training    Value for fine-tuning
                     Batch Size               256                      256
                        Epochs                 25                       25
                            LR                0.01                    0.005
                    Momentum                   0.9                      0.9
                   Weight Decay             0.00005                  0.00005
                    Peak Epoch                  2                        2


A.11    C ELEBA

In this section, we provide experimental details for the CelebA experiments in Section 4.2. Here, the
task was to distinguish old from young faces, in the presence of a spurious correlation with gender
in the source dataset.

Dataset construction. We create two source datasets shown in Table 4:
 Table 4: The synthetic source datasets we create from CelebA for the experiment in Section 4.2.

                                         Class: Young          Class: Old
                           Dataset       Male Female          Male Female
                        Non-Spurious     2500      2500       2500      2500
                          Spurious       1000      4000       4000      1000

Due to imbalances in the spurious dataset, the model trained on this dataset struggles on faces of
young males and old females. We then fine-tune the source models on the following target datasets
(see Table 5), the images of which are disjoint from that in the source dataset.
Due to space constraints, we plotted the results of fixed-feature transfer setting on Only Women
and 80% Women|20% Men in the main paper. Below, we display the results for fixed-feature and
full-network transfer settings on all 3 target datasets.

Experimental details. We train a ResNet-18 with resolution 224 × 224. We use SGD with mo-
mentum, and a cyclic learning rate. We use the following hyperparameters shown in Table 6:


                                                 22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  Table 5: The synthetic target datasets we create from CelebA for the experiment in Section 4.2.

                                              Class: Young        Class: Old
                           Dataset            Male Female        Male Female
                       Only Women               0       5000       0      5000
                   80% Women|20% Men          1000      4000     1000     4000
                   50% Women|50% Men          2500      2500     2500     2500

                Table 6: Hyperparameters used for training on the CelebA datasets.

            Batch Size    Epochs     LR     Momentum       Weight Decay     Peak Epoch
               1024         20       0.05       0.9             0.01              5


Results. We find that in both the fixed-feature and full-network transfer settings, the gender cor-
relation transfers from the source model to the transfer model, even though the target task is itself
gender balanced as shown in Figure 18. As the proportion of men and women in the target dataset
change, the model is either more sensitive to the presence of women, or more sensitive to the pres-
ence of men. In all cases, however, the model transferred from the spurious backbone is more
sensitive to gender than a model transferred from the non-spurious backbone.


                                                 23
    Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                                  40 Source Dataset


                                                                    Acc(male) - Acc(female) (%)
                                                                                                          Unbiased
                                                                                                  20      Biased

                                                                                                   0

                                                                                                  20

                                                                                                  40
                                                                                                          Young             Old
                                                                                                                   Class
                                                                                                  (a) Source Model Accuracy
                              40 Source Dataset                                                   40 Source Dataset                                                   40 Source Dataset
Acc(male) - Acc(female) (%)


                                                                    Acc(male) - Acc(female) (%)


                                                                                                                                        Acc(male) - Acc(female) (%)
                                      Unbiased                                                            Unbiased                                                            Unbiased
                              20      Biased                                                      20      Biased                                                      20      Biased

                               0                                                                   0                                                                   0

                              20                                                                  20                                                                  20

                              40                                                                  40                                                                  40
                                      Young            Old                                                Young             Old                                               Young            Old
                                              Class                                                                Class                                                              Class
    (b) Fixed-Feature transfer. Target (c) Fixed-Feature transfer. Target (d) Fixed-Feature transfer. Target
    Dataset: Only Women                Dataset: 80% Women, 20% Men        Dataset: 50% Women, 50% Men
                                                  Source Dataset                                                       Source Dataset                                                     Source Dataset
Acc(male) - Acc(female) (%)


                                                                    Acc(male) - Acc(female) (%)


                                                                                                                                        Acc(male) - Acc(female) (%)


                              40                                                                  40                                                                  40
                                                       Unbiased                                                             Unbiased                                                           Unbiased
                              20                       Biased                                     20                        Biased                                    20                       Biased

                               0                                                                   0                                                                   0

                              20                                                                  20                                                                  20

                              40                                                                  40                                                                  40
                                      Young            Old                                                Young             Old                                               Young            Old
                                              Class                                                                Class                                                              Class
    (e) Full-network transfer.                               Target (f) Full-network transfer. Target (g) Full-network transfer. Target
    Dataset: Only Women                                             Dataset: 80% Women, 20% Men       Dataset: 50% Women, 50% Men

    Figure 18: CelebA Experiment. We consider transfer from a source dataset that spuriously correlate
    age with gender — such that old men and young women are overrepresented. We plot the difference
    in accuracies between male and female examples, and find that the model transferred from a spurious
    backbone is sensitive to gender, even though the target dataset was itself gender balanced.


                                                                                                                  24
  Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  B               I MAGE N ET B IASES
  B.1                 C HAINLINK FENCE BIAS .

  In this section we show the results for the “chainlink fence” bias transfer. We first demonstrate in
  Figure 19 that the “chainlink fence” bias actually exists in ImageNet. Then in Figures 20, 21, 22,
  and 23, we show the output distribution—after applying a chainlink fence intervention—of models
  trained on various datasets either from scratch, or by transferring from the ImageNet model. The
  from-scratch models are not affected by the chainlink fence intervention, while the ones learned via
  transfer have highly skewed output distributions.


                                        (a) Example images from the “chainlink fence” class in ImageNet.
                                       Output Distribution                                             Top Predicted Classes (with intervention)
                                                          With Intervention                6000                                     Chainlink Fence
                                                          Standard                                                                  Other classes
Frequency


                                                                               Frequency
            103                                                                            4000
                                                                                           2000
            102                                                                               0
                      0        200        400       600        800     1000                            ImageNet Classes (sorted by frequency)
                                              Class ID
  (b) Shift in ImageNet predicted class distribution after adding a “chainlink fence” intervention, establishing
  that the bias holds for the source model.

                                                Figure 19: The chainlink fence bias in ImageNet.


                                (a) Example Birdsnap images after applying the chain-link fence intervention.
            2000                                                                            2000
                          Training mode                                                                                             Training mode
            1500              scratch                                                       1500                                       scratch
Frequency


                                                                                Frequency


                              fixed-feature                                                                                            full-network
            1000                                                                            1000
             500                                                                             500
                  0                                                                            0
                          0      100          200    300       400       500                       0        100      200      300      400         500
                                       BIRDSNAP Class ID                                                          BIRDSNAP Class ID
                                (b) Output distribution of Birdsnap models with a chainlink fence intervention.

                                         Figure 20: The chainlink fence bias transfers to Birdsnap.


                                                                               25
  Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                             (a) Example Flowers images after applying the chain-link fence intervention.
            2000                                           Training mode                       2000                                  Training mode
                                                                 scratch                                                                scratch
Frequency


                                                                                   Frequency
            1500                                                                               1500
                                                                 fixed-feature                                                          full-network
            1000                                                                               1000
             500                                                                                500
               0                                                                                  0
                    0        20           40         60           80       100                        0        20      40      60       80      100
                                       FLOWERS Class ID                                                             FLOWERS Class ID
                             (b) Output distribution of Flowers models with a chainlink fence intervention.

                                        Figure 21: The chainlink fence bias transfers to Flowers.


                                 (a) Example Food images after applying the chain-link fence intervention.
            8000                         Training mode                                         8000                                  Training mode
                                               scratch                                                                                  scratch
Frequency


                                                                                   Frequency


            6000                                                                               6000
                                               fixed-feature                                                                            full-network
            4000                                                                               4000
            2000                                                                               2000
               0                                                                                  0
                    0            20       40          60          80       100                        0        20      40      60        80      100
                                         FOOD Class ID                                                               FOOD Class ID
                                 (b) Output distribution of Food models with a chainlink fence intervention.

                                         Figure 22: The chainlink fence bias transfers to Food.


                             (a) Example SUN397 images after applying the chain-link fence intervention.
                                                               Training mode                                                         Training mode
            10000                                                 scratch                     10000                                     scratch
Frequency


                                                                                  Frequency


                                                                  fixed-feature                                                         full-network
             5000                                                                              5000

                0                                                                                 0
                        0   50        100 150 200 250 300 350 400                                     0   50    100 150 200 250 300 350 400
                                        SUN397 Class ID                                                              SUN397 Class ID
                            (b) Output distribution of SUN397 models with a chainlink fence intervention.

                                        Figure 23: The chainlink fence bias transfers to SUN397.


                                                                                  26
  Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  B.2              H AT BIAS .

  In this section we show the results for the “Hat” bias transfer. We first demonstrate in Figure 24
  that the “Hat” bias actually exists in ImageNet (shifts predictions to the “Cowboy hat” class). Then
  in Figure 25, we show the output distribution—after applying a hat intervention—of models trained
  on CIFAR-10 either from scratch, or by transferring from the ImageNet model. The from-scratch
  model is not affected by the hat intervention, while the one learned via transfer have highly skewed
  output distributions.


                                            (a) ImageNet images from the class “Cowboy hat”.
                                   Output distribution                                                 Top Predicted Classes
            2 × 103         With Intervention                                                                                 Cowboy hat
                            Standard                                                1000                                      Other classes
Frequency


                                                                        Frequency
               103                                                                   500

                                                                                           0
                        0    200        400       600     800      1000                        ImageNet Classes (sorted by frequency)
                                         Class ID
                                             (b) ImageNet distribution shift after intervention.

                                                Figure 24: The hat bias in ImageNet.


                                 (a) Example CIFAR-100 images after applying the “Hat” intervention.
                                                                                    1500
            1500                                    Training mode                                          Training mode
                                                        scratch                                                scratch
Frequency


                                                                        Frequency


                                                        fixed-feature               1000                       full-network
            1000
             500                                                                     500
               0                                                                       0
                    0        2          4          6          8                                0      2        4         6           8
                                   CIFAR10 Class ID                                                       CIFAR10 Class ID
                                 (b) Output distribution of CIFAR-10 models with the Hat intervention.

                                            Figure 25: The hat bias transfers to CIFAR-10.


                                                                        27
  Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  B.3                 T ENNIS BALL BIAS .

  In this section we show the results for the “tennis ball” bias transfer. We first demonstrate in Fig-
  ure 26 that the “tennis ball” bias actually exists in ImageNet. Then in Figures 27, 28, 29, and 30,
  we show the output distribution—after applying a tennis ball intervention—of models trained on
  various datasets either from scratch, or by transferring from the ImageNet model. The from-scratch
  models are not affected by the tennis ball intervention, while the ones learned via transfer have
  highly skewed output distributions.


                                                  (a) ImageNet images from the class “tennis ball”.
                                        Output Distribution                                                Top Predicted Classes (with intervention)
                                                                                            15000
            104               With Intervention                                                                                           Tennis Ball
                              Standard                                                                                                    Other classes
Frequency


                                                                                Frequency
                                                                                            10000

            103                                                                              5000

                                                                                                  0
                      0          200       400      600         800     1000                               ImageNet Classes (sorted by frequency)
                                             Class ID
                                                  (b) ImageNet distribution shift after intervention.

                                                  Figure 26: The tennis ball bias in ImageNet.


                                  (a) Example CIFAR-100 images after applying the “tennis ball” intervention.
                                                             Training mode                                                              Training mode
            1500                                                scratch                         1500                                       scratch
Frequency


                                                                                    Frequency


            1000                                                fixed-feature                   1000                                       full-network

             500                                                                                 500
                  0                                                                                0
                          0        20        40         60       80       100                          0         20       40       60       80         100
                                         CIFAR100 Class ID                                                            CIFAR100 Class ID
                                 (b) Output distribution of CIFAR-100 models with the tennis ball intervention.

                                           Figure 27: The tennis ball bias transfers to CIFAR-100.


                                                                                 28
  Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                 (a) Example Aircraft images after applying the “tennis ball” intervention.

            800                                         Training mode                     800                                      Training mode
                                                            scratch                                                                   scratch
Frequency


                                                                              Frequency
            600                                             fixed-feature                 600                                         full-network
            400                                                                           400
            200                                                                           200
              0                                                                             0
                   0        20         40         60         80       100                       0           20        40     60        80      100
                                   AIRCRAFT Class ID                                                              AIRCRAFT Class ID
                             (b) Output distribution of Aircraft models with the tennis ball intervention.

                                        Figure 28: The tennis ball bias transfers to Aircraft.


                                    (a) Example Birdsnap after applying the “tennis ball” intervention.
                                                        Training mode                                                              Training mode
            1000                                            scratch                      1000                                         scratch
Frequency


                                                                             Frequency


                                                            fixed-feature                                                             full-network
             500                                                                          500

               0                                                                            0
                   0        100        200        300        400       500                      0           100       200    300      400      500
                                    BIRDSNAP Class ID                                                             BIRDSNAP Class ID
                            (b) Output distribution of Birdsnap models with the tennis ball intervention.

                                        Figure 29: The tennis ball bias transfers to Birdsnap.


                                     (a) Example sun397 after applying the “tennis ball” intervention.
                                      Training mode                                                 Training mode
            1000                            scratch                                      1000          scratch
Frequency


                                                                             Frequency


                                            fixed-feature                                              full-network
             500                                                                          500

               0                                                                            0
                   0   50        100 150 200 250 300 350 400                                    0      50     100 150 200 250 300 350 400
                                     SUN397 Class ID                                                               SUN397 Class ID
                             (b) Output distribution of SUN397 models with the tennis ball intervention.

                                        Figure 30: The tennis ball bias transfers to SUN397.


                                                                             29
