Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


S EER : L ANGUAGE I NSTRUCTED V IDEO P REDICTION
WITH L ATENT D IFFUSION M ODELS

 Xianfan Gu3 Chuan Wen1,2,3 Weirui Ye 1,2,3 Jiaming Song4 Yang Gao1,2,3,∗
 1
   IIIS, Tsinghua University 2 Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
 3
   Shanghai Qi Zhi Institute 4 NVIDIA
 guxf@sqz.ac.cn {cwen20,ywr20,gaoyangiiis}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
 jiamings@nvidia.com



                                                A BSTRACT

             Imagining the future trajectory is the key for robots to make sound planning and
             successfully reach their goals. Therefore, text-conditioned video prediction (TVP)
             is an essential task to facilitate general robot policy learning. To tackle this task
             and empower robots with the ability to foresee the future, we propose a sample
             and computation-efficient model, named Seer, by inflating the pretrained text-to-
             image (T2I) stable diffusion models along the temporal axis. We enhance the
             U-Net and language conditioning model by incorporating computation-efficient
             spatial-temporal attention. Furthermore, we introduce a novel Frame Sequen-
             tial Text Decomposer module that dissects a sentence’s global instruction into
             temporally aligned sub-instructions, ensuring precise integration into each frame
             of generation. Our framework allows us to effectively leverage the extensive
             prior knowledge embedded in pretrained T2I models across the frames. With the
             adaptable-designed architecture, Seer makes it possible to generate high-fidelity,
             coherent, and instruction-aligned video frames by fine-tuning a few layers on a
             small amount of data. The experimental results on Something Something V2
             (SSv2), Bridgedata and EpicKitchens-100 datasets demonstrate our superior video
             prediction performance with around 480-GPU hours versus CogVideo with over
             12,480-GPU hours: achieving the 31% FVD improvement compared to the cur-
             rent SOTA model on SSv2 and 83.7% average preference in the human evaluation.
             Our project is available at https://seervideodiffusion.github.io/


1       I NTRODUCTION
                                                             “removing a beer can,
Text-conditioned Video Prediction (TVP), a                    revealing a glass behind”
                                                         ref.
task that generates future video frames con-
ditioned on a few frames and language in-
structions, is crucial for diverse downstream
                                                                       “tipping a
                                                                       beer can”        Seer
tasks requiring instruction alignment and tem-                  “putting a flowerpot
poral consistency from an initial environment.                  next to a beer can”

For instance, in video editing, TVP empowers Figure 1: Seer is an efficient video diffusion
the generation of diverse temporal movements model that uses natural language instructions and
from an input video clip, guided by a range of reference frames (ref.) to predict multiple varia-
language instructions. Importantly, TVP can tions of future frames.
selectively extend video segments while pre-
serving temporal consistency from the input video. TVP also plays an important role in the scenario
of robot learning. TVP samples coherent future frames with aligned motion trajectories based on the
initial state of a robot, providing task-level visual guidance for long-horizon planning. This over-
comes the challenge for a robot to align abstract language instructions with long-horizon operations.
Consequently, learning a TVP model is a fundamental task to achieve both temporal consistency in
the transition distribution of the initial state and alignment between task-level language instructions
and video motion, facilitating the development of video foundation models.
    ∗
        Corresponding Author.


                                                      1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024

                   pre-trained conditional
                                                                                             Pre-trained T2I LDM
                       VAE     latent

                        ε                           Diffusion Process                      Spatial              S-
                                                                                           Conv2D              Attn
          χ
                                  noisy latent z                            zT                                                  frame 0
                                                                                                                                                                         t0
                                               Inflated 3D U-Net                                   pre-trained
                                                                                                                           0
                                                                                                                           1
                                                                                                                                                                0                       ...       tn-1
                                                                                                                          ...
                                                                                                                           h
                                                                                                                                                                1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  tn
                                                                                                     weight                                                    ...


                                                                                                                                             ...
                                                                                                                                 0 1 ... w


                                                                                           Inflated                              frame 1 0                      h             ...   w

                                                                                                                S-
                                                                                                                                                                     0   1
                                                                                                                                              1
                                             SAWT- S-       SAWT- S-
                       D
                                                                                                                                             ...
                                                                                                                                                                                                    ...
                                                                                           Conv3D              Attn
                                                                                                                                                                                                          w
                                                                                                                                              h                                               1

                                              Attn Attn
                                                                                                                                                                                          0
                                                             Attn Attn                                                                             0 1 ... w
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ...   w
                                                                                                                                                   frame n                                           0        1


                                                                                                                                  Scaled Autoregressive Window
          χ’                      z0                                        zT                    Cross Attention
                                                                                                                                 Temporal Atteniton (SAWT-Attn)

                                         FSText                                                                ......
       “spinning           CLIP        Decomposer                         Denoising
         cube”                                                           Skip-connection      sub-instruction embedding

                                        (a)Pipeline                       Frozen                                 (b) Inflated 3D modules
Figure 2: (a) Seer’s pipeline includes an Inflated 3D U-Net for diffusion and a Frame Sequential
Text Transformer for text conditioning. (b) Our Inflated 3D U-Net expands the pre-trained 2D Conv
kernel to 3D kernels and connects with the Scaled Autoregressive Window Temporal Attention layer.

Despite its potential benefits, text-to-video prediction (TVP) is a challenging task because it requires
a deep understanding of the initial frames, the natural language instruction, and the grounding be-
tween language and images, while predicting based upon all the information above. In contrast to
traditional text-to-video generation tasks (Wu et al., 2021; 2022a; Hong et al., 2023; Ho et al., 2022b;
Singer et al., 2022), which do not explicitly condition on initial frames, TVP requires a model to
synthesize predictions based on the given initial frames and textual instructions. Merely generating
a few prototypical videos corresponding to the input text is no longer a viable solution in TVP; the
task necessitates a more detailed comprehension of temporal movement. Besides, the existing text-
to-video generation task usually aims to generate short horizon video clips with text specifying the
general content, such as “a person is skiing”, while our aim in the TVP task is to use the text as a
task descriptor, such as “tipping a beer can”, as shown in Figure 1.
Specifically, there are mainly three problems limiting the performance of the TVP task: 1) Require-
ment for large-scale labeled text-video datasets and expensive computational cost: learning to
capture the correspondence between two different modalities is non-trivial and needs large amounts
of supervised text-video pairs and excessive computation overhead for training. 2) Low fidelity of
generated frames: the frames generated by the models are usually blurry and cannot clearly display
the background and objects specified in the reference frames. 3) Lack of fine-grained instruction
for each frame in the task-level videos: the goals specified by text instructions are usually in the
task level, making it difficult to understand the progress and generate the corresponding frame in
each timestep only conditioned on a global text embedding. To address these issues, we propose
Seer: a TVP method capable of generating task-level videos according to the text guidance with
high data and training efficiency.
Motivated by the recent progress on generative models (Rombach et al., 2022; Ramesh et al., 2022),
we propose to leverage text-to-image (T2I) latent diffusion models (Rombach et al., 2022) for the
TVP tasks. T2I models are pretrained with billions of text-image pairs crawled from the inter-
net (Schuhmann et al., 2021). They have acquired rich prior knowledge and thus are able to generate
high-quality images corresponding to the text descriptions. Therefore, inheriting such prior knowl-
edge by inflating a T2I model along the temporal axis and fine-tuning it with a small text-video
dataset is an appealing solution for TVP tasks, which relieves the requirement for extensive labeled
data and computational overhead, i.e., Problem 1.
Since the T2I models contain two modalities: image and language, we propose to inflate these two
parts to generate high-quality video frames and fine-grained text instruction embeddings for each
timestep respectively. For the visual model, we extend the 2D latent diffusion model (Rombach et al.,
2022) to data and computation-efficient 3D network to model spatial dependencies and the temporal
dynamics simultaneously, which is called Inflated 3D U-Net. By taking advantage of joint modeling
of spatial and temporal dimensions, as well as autoregressive generation, we successfully synthesize
coherent and high-fidelity frames, which alleviates Problem 2. As for the language module, in
contrast to existing approaches (Zhou et al., 2022; Wu et al., 2022b) that encode one text embedding
for the whole video with a text encoder, we propose to decompose the single text instruction into
fine-grained guidance embeddings for each time step. We achieve the automatic decomposition
by a Frame Sequential Text (FSText) Decomposer based on the causal attention mechanism. By
temporally splitting the instruction into different phases, Seer improves the guidance embeddings
for each frame and thus enables task-level video generation (Problem 3).
We conduct extensive experiments on Something-Something V2 (Goyal et al., 2017), Bridge
Data (Ebert et al., 2021) and Epic-Kitchens-100 (Damen et al., 2021) datasets. We outperform all the


                                                                                      2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


baselines, such as MCVD (Voleti et al., 2022), TATS (Ge et al., 2022) and Tune-A-Video (TAV) (Wu
et al., 2022b), and achieve state-of-the-art performance in terms of FVD and KVD. Especially we
improve FVD from 163 to 113 on Something-Something V2, compared to the SOTA TAV. Compare
to over 480 hours with 13 × 8 A100 GPUs in CogVideo (Hong et al., 2023), the experiments show
the high efficiency of our method: 120 hours with 4 RTX 3090 GPUs. The ablation studies illus-
trate the effectiveness of our computation-efficient video-inflated model with the newly proposed
FSText Decomposer. Furthermore, our method supports video manipulation by modifying the text
instructions, and we demonstrate our superior generation quality through a human evaluation study,
showing more than 70% preference over TAV and around 90% preference over TATS and MCVD.

2     R ELATED W ORK
2.1   T EXT- TO -I MAGE G ENERATION

Since Scott Reed et al. (Reed et al., 2016) firstly set up the T2I generation task and proposed a
GAN-based method, this multi-modal generation task has attracted the attention of the computer
vision community. DALL-E (Ramesh et al., 2021) makes a breakthrough by modeling the T2I
generation task as a sequence-to-sequence translation task with a VQ-VAE (Van Den Oord et al.,
2017) and Transformer (Vaswani et al., 2017). Since then, many variants have been proposed with
an improved image tokenizer (Yu et al., 2022a), hierarchical Transformers (Ding et al., 2022) or
domain-specific knowledge (Gafni et al., 2022). With the recent progress of Denoising Diffusion
Probabilistic Models (DDPM) (Ho et al., 2020), the diffusion models have been widely used for
T2I generation tasks (Nichol et al., 2022; Saharia et al., 2022; Ramesh et al., 2022). Specifically,
GLIDE (Nichol et al., 2022) proposes classifier-free guidance for T2I diffusion models to improve
image quality. For a better alignment between text and image, DALL-E 2 (Ramesh et al., 2022)
proposed to denoise CLIP (Radford et al., 2021) image embedding conditioned on CLIP text em-
bedding, which integrated high-level semantic information. To reduce the computation cost of the
denoising process in pixel space, Latent Diffusion Model (LDM) employs VAE (Kingma & Welling,
2014) to operate in the latent space. Seer takes advantage of the prior language-vision knowledge of
pretrained LDM and inflates it along the time axis.

2.2   T EXT- TO -V IDEO G ENERATION

In contrast to the huge success of Text-to-Image (T2I) generation, Text-to-Video (T2V) generation
is still underexplored due to the limitation of the large text-video data annotation and computing
resources. Inspired by the various variants of T2I generation, recent T2V studies have attempted to
explore compatible variants for video generation modeling. GODIVA (Wu et al., 2021) first proposes
a VQ-VAE based auto-regressive model with three-dimensional sparse attention for T2V generation.
NÜWA (Wu et al., 2022a) further improves it by designing a 3D encoder with 3D nearby attention
and achieves competitive performance on multi-task generation. Unlike the single frame-rate T2V
approaches trained from scratch on large-scale text-video datasets, CogVideo (Hong et al., 2023)
proposes a multi-frame-rate hierarchical model for T2V generation. This approach leverages the
pre-trained module of T2I CogView-2 (Ding et al., 2022).
Motivated by the remarkable progress of T2I diffusion models (Ramesh et al., 2022; Saharia et al.,
2022; Rombach et al., 2022), Make-A-Video (Singer et al., 2022), MagicVideo (Zhou et al., 2022),
Tune-A-Video (Wu et al., 2022b) and Imagen Video (Ho et al., 2022a) transfer the 2D diffusion
models to 3D models by incorporating temporal modules in T2V generation. In contrast to Imagen
Video, all other three methods utilize the prior knowledge of T2I pre-trained model. Similarly, we
use the pre-trained weight of the 2D T2I diffusion model in our 3D T2V model. Varying from the
aforementioned methods, our method Seer utilizes autoregressive attention on both spatial and tem-
poral spaces to generate high-fidelity and coherent video frames. And Seer is able to handle the task-
level video prediction by decomposing the language condition into fine-grained sub-instruction.

3     P RELIMINARIES
Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models with classifier-free guidance: Diffusion models are
probabilistic models that approximate the data distribution by iteratively adding noise and denoising


                                                  3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


through a forward/reverse Gaussian Diffusion Process (Ho et al., 2020; Song et al., 2021). The
forward process applies noise at√each time√step t ∈ 0, ..., T to the data distribution x0 , creating
a noisy sample xt where xt = ᾱt x0 + 1 − ᾱt ϵ (ϵ ∼ N (0, I)), and ᾱt is the accumulation
                                              Qt
of the noise schedule α0:T defined by ᾱt = s=1 αs . To denoise images, the diffusion process
uses a reparameterized variant of Gaussian noise prediction ϵθ (xt , t) targeting Gaussian noise ϵ.
The reverse process p(xt−1 |xt ) of the Markov Chain generates new samples from Gaussian noise,
which is approximated by Bayes’
                           p      theorem as q(xt−1 |xt , x0 ), where x0 is derived from the forward
                  1
process as x0 = ᾱt (xt − 1 − ᾱt ϵθ (xt , t)).
                 √

Classifier-free guidance (Ho & Salimans, 2022) is introduced for conditional diffusion models to
generate images without requiring an extra image classifier. A conditional model with a parame-
terized reverse process p(xt−1 |xt , c) uses a conditional identifier c through ϵθ (xt , t, c). To predict
an unconditional score, the conditional identifier is replaced with a null token Ø and denoted as
ϵθ (xt , t, c = Ø). Classifier-free guidance can then be approximated as a linear combination of
conditional and unconditional predictions:
                       ϵ̃θ (xt , t, c) = (1 + w)ϵθ (xt , t, c) − wϵθ (xt , t, c = Ø),                  (1)
where w is the guidance scale. Text-video and text-image-based diffusion models (Rombach et al.,
2022; Saharia et al., 2022; Nichol et al., 2022; Ho et al., 2022b; Singer et al., 2022) use DDPM with
classifier-free guidance. This diffusion method can be adapted to various tasks with flexibility.
Latent Diffusion Models: Compared with image diffusion, video diffusion has significantly higher
computation costs because it needs to process multiple frames. Recent works have explored the
computation-efficient version of diffusion modeling, such as latent diffusion model (LDM) (Rom-
bach et al., 2022). LDM proposes the VAE-based latent diffusion, including a KL-regularized au-
toencoder for encoding/decoding latent representation ε(x), and a diffusion model to operate on the
latent space zt . For the conditional generation, LDM introduces a domain-specific encoder τθ to the
projection of condition y for various modality generations.
                                                    h       Thus, the objective
                                                                            i of LDM is:
                        LLDM = Et,ε(x),y,ϵ∼N (0,I) ∥ϵ − ϵθ (zt , t, τθ (y))∥2                         (2)

4     M ETHODOLOGY
In this paper, we aim to explore an efficient diffusion method to predict coherent video frames
guided by language instructions, which requires learning to parse natural language, understand the
scene, and ground the language and scene together. However, it is challenging to directly apply
conventional video diffusion models for TVP due to the following problems: (1) The limited labeled
text-video data and computational resources. (2) Low fidelity of frame generation. (3) Lack of fine-
grained instruction for each frame in the task-level videos.

4.1   OVERVIEW OF S EER

Motivated by the robust generative capabilities of text-to-image (T2I) diffusion models, we lever-
age the prior knowledge implied in pretrained T2I models by inflating the 2D U-Net (Rombach
et al., 2022) and incorporating temporally consistent layers. However, the inflated video diffusion
model guided solely by coarse global language instruction tends to generate irrelevant T2I outcomes
and fails to maintain temporal coherency between video frames. To address this limitation and
provide precise and controllable guidance for our inflated model, we introduce a novel temporal
decomposition component for language instruction, this component decomposes global instruction
as temporally aligned sub-instruction for delicate task-level guidance, which significantly enhances
the fidelity and coherency of predicted video.
Our Seer method comprises two main components: the video diffusion and the language condition-
ing modules. We propose to enhance these two components to facilitate high-fidelity frame synthesis
and the temporal alignment of text instructions, respectively. Specifically, as shown in Figure 2 (a),
we utilize two pathways to implement the conditional diffusion process guided by reference frames
and language: 1) We incorporate the spatial-temporal module discussed in Section 4.2 into the In-
flated 3D U-Net. This integration enables the propagation of contextual information from reference
frames to future frames within the spatial-temporal space, allowing for coherent motion prediction
based on the reference frames. 2) To plan continuous motion with fine-grained language guidance,
we introduce a Frame Sequential Text (FSText) Decomposer in Section 4.3. This module transforms


                                                    4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


global language instructions into multi-timestep sub-instructions that are synchronized with video.
Subsequently, we inject these frame-wise subinstruction tokens into the intermediate latent space of
the video frames at each time step. With this design, we merely train the spatial-temporal layers
and FSText module from scratch while freezing the remaining pretrained modules within our 3D
inflated U-Net. These two modules are jointly trained by the diffusion objective, where fθ is our
FSText decomposer, τ is the frozen CLIP text encoder, and y is the input text:
                                                   h                              i
                   Ldiffusion = Et,ε(x),y,ϵ∼N (0,I) ∥ϵ − ϵθ (zt , t, fθ (τ (y)))∥2 ,             (3)

4.2    DATA & C OMPUTATION - EFFICIENT 3D N ETWORK

To design a computation-efficient visual backbone for our video diffusion model, we refer to some
relevant works on lifting 2D to 3D video modeling (Carreira & Zisserman, 2017) and efficient at-
tention computation (Liu et al., 2021; 2022). In general, we leverage the latent diffusion model
(LDMs) pretrained on T2I tasks to build a text-video model. Our inflated 3D U-Net consists
of two principal components as illustrated in Figure 2 (b): 1) The 3D spatial layers, where we
draw inspiration from I3D (Carreira & Zisserman, 2017) and enhance the 2D convolution kernel
from (3 × 3) to a 3D counterpart (1 × 3 × 3) with an added video frames axis from the pre-
trained 2D modules, consisting of a series of 2D ResNet blocks and Spatial Attention Blocks.
2) The temporal layers, play a crucial role in our visual          t                              0 t                                                                     0
                                                                           ... t
                                                                              0
                                                                                                            ...
backbone for propagating contextual information from                                    t                        t        n-1                           0
                                                                                                                                                                                          n-1
                                                                                                                        t
                                                                              1
                                                                                                                                               n        1                                           n
                                                                              ...
                                                                                                                                                        ...
the reference frame’s image prior across the temporal                ...      h
                                                                                      0       1
                                                                                                       ...
                                                                                                          w                                             h
                                                                                                                                                              0   1           w


sequence. We investigated various temporal attention                              ...
                                                                                          ...
                                                                                                              0    ...1

                                                                                                                          ...
                                                                                                                              ... ww

                                                                                                                                       1           w                              0   1         w

                                                                   Bi-directional                    Directed                  0
                                                                                                                                                                                            0   1       w

and incorporated them into our 3D U-Net architecture.           Temporal Attention             Temporal Attention
                                                                     t                             t
Our empirical observations indicate that bi-directional                     ...
                                                                                t 0
                                                                                                      0
                                                                                                           ...
                                                                                                                                                                      0
                                                                                                                t             n-1                      0

temporal attention tends to disregard guidance from ref-                          1      t                             t                       n       1
                                                                                                                                                                                          n-1
                                                                                                                                                                                                    n
                                                                               ...
                                                                                                                                                       ...

erence frames, and both bi-directional and directed tem-               ...        h
                                                                                          0       1   ... w                                            h
                                                                                                                                                              0   1           w

                                                                                    ...                            ...                 w
poral attention struggle to capture dependencies among                                     ...
                                                                                                                  0       1
                                                                                                                         ...       0       1       w
                                                                                                                                                                                  0   1         w

                                                                                                                                                                                                1       w
                                                                    Autoregressive               Scaled Autoregressive
                                                                                                                                                                                            0

spatial regions, as discussed in Section 5.5. To ad-          Spatial-Temporal Attention Window Temporal Atteniton
dress these limitations while reducing complexity, we Figure 3: Variants of temporal attention,
employ an efficient approach that builds upon the con- only the blue tokens attend to the current
cept of window attention (Liu et al., 2021) in 3D space: token in the red box. Red dashed arrows
the implementation of local window attention in an indicate the direction of attention. And
autoregressive manner across spatial-temporal dimen- the orange boxes indicate the local win-
sions. As illustrated in Figure 3, we establish fixed lo- dow region (2 × 2 window in this case).
cal windows for each spatial region with a window size
of m × m relative to the global frame sequence n. Within this framework, we compute self-attention
using a causal mask, considering both local spatial and global temporal dimensions within the 3D
space. This effectively constrains pixel propagation from the future temporal-spatial sequence.
Finally, We maintain the acquired knowledge from the 2D modules by freezing all pretrained weights
and exclusively training the spatiotemporal attention layers during fine-tuning. Overall, through a
combination of frozen pre-trained spatial layers and lightweight spatiotemporal layers, our inflated
3D U-Net not only retains crucial knowledge but also enhances fine-tuning efficiency.

4.3    F RAME S EQUENTIAL T EXT D ECOMPOSER

For the language conditioning module, since our 3D inflated U-Net is built upon a pretrained text-
to-image model, we noticed that using a text-to-image prior alongside a global instruction tends
to provide strong semantic guidance, which can override the scene in reference frames, deviat-
ing from the intended guidance for prediction based on the existing scenes. To address the above
limitation and better capture long-term dependencies from both text and reference frames, we in-
troduce the Frame Sequential Text (FSText) Decomposer. This novel approach decomposes the
global instruction into fine-grained sub-instructions, aligning with each frame. We further explore
the interpretability of sub-instruction embeddings in Section 5.6. To derive a sequence of tempo-
rally aligned sub-instruction embeddings from the global instruction generated by the CLIP text
encoder Radford et al. (2021), we employ a transformer-based temporal network designed to ful-
fill three essential properties for meaningful sub-instructions: 1) Contextual aggregation, which
ensures that the inner tokens of each sub-instruction aggregate contextual information within the


                                                             5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024

      1. init. weights optimization (Identity)                                                                2. diffusion process (Cross-Atten.)
                                   global instruction                                                               frame 0
                                                                                                                                          Height × width
                                      embedding
                                                                                                                                           q0           ...
                                                                                                                                           q1           ...
         text          CLIP text                                                                                                    WQ
       prompts         encoder                                   Lidentity =∥    -       ...   ∥   2
                                                                                                                                           ...
                                                                                                                                           qn
                                                                                                                                                        ...
                                                                                                                                                        ...
                                     sequence Ɩ                                 sub-instruction                 ...                        k0     ...
                                                                                  embedding                            frame n             k1     ...
       learnable tokens                                                                                                                    ...    ...               fic-atten.
                                         Q       Q                 Q                                                                       kn     ...
                                                                                                         FSText


                                                          FFN


                                                                        FFN
              ......                    KV       KV                KV                 ......                                  WKV
                                       Text- Cross-Attn         Temp-Attn                              Decomposer                     Text Seq. Length
                                                                                                                                                                  Diffusion
                                     Seq-Attn                           ×N                                      sub-instruction            v0     ...
                                                                                                                                                  ...              Process
                                                                                                                                           v1
                                   Frame Sequential Text Decomposer                                               embedding                ...    ...
         frames × Ɩ                                                               frames × Ɩ                                                                       Ldiffusion
                                         (FSText Decomposer )                                                                              vn     ...

                                                  (a)                                                                               (b)
Figure 4: Frame Sequential Text Decomposer is shown in (a). We start by initializing the weight of
the network to project identity vectors from CLIP text tokens. We then optimize the generated text
tokens via the diffusion process (b), where frame-individual cross-attention is denoted by “fic-attn.”

sentence. 2) Semantic inheritance, the semantic information of these sub-instructions is inher-
ited directly from the global instruction 3) Temporal consistency ensures alignment between the
sub-instructions and the time sequence, thereby facilitating the generation of temporally consistent
video. Based on these properties, our network consists of three key components: a) To achieve
the property of contextual aggregation, we employ Text-Sequential Attention, akin to BERT, a
bidirectional self-attention layer (Devlin et al., 2019) to capture global dependencies among dif-
ferent positions within text sentences. b) To ensure semantic inheritance, we use Cross-Attention,
responsible for projecting the global instruction’s textual sequence onto the inner tokens of each
sub-instruction, this component ensures that all sub-instructions contain essential global instruction
signals for guiding video frame generation. c) To maintain temporal consistency, we adopt tem-
poral Attention, a directed attention layer to capture temporal dependencies along the frame axis,
which enhances temporal consistency among the generated sub-instructions throughout the video.
Specifically, as shown in Figure 5, we start with a global        global text prompt (Ɩ) “taking glass from desk”
CLIP text embedding, denoted as (l, C), where l signi-                                                           step2: cross-atten.
                                                                 global text embedding
fies the text sentence length and C is the channel size, we               (Ɩ ×C)                        ...                           token 1 token 2         token Ɩ

initialize learnable tokens with shape (n, l, C) where n                                                                                                                frame 1
                                                                  learnable tokens
denotes the number of frames. The tokens are fed into the             (n ×Ɩ ×C)                                                                                         frame 2
                                                                                           ...
text sequential attention layer to perform self-attention          step3: temp-atten.
                                                                                                                                                                          time
                                                                                                                                                                        frame n

along the l axis. Subsequently, the cross-attention layer
                                                                                          step1: text-seq-atten.
employs these learnable tokens as queries and the global
text embedding as keys and values, resulting in a one-to-     Figure        5:   The     FSText          attention of sub-
multiple projection from the global text into n time steps. instruction tokens.
This yields (n, l, C) tokens for n frame containing task instruction information. Finally, the tempo-
ral attention layer conducts directed attention along the n axis for each token in the textual sequence,
transforming the macro-instruction progress into frame-specific guidance.
After getting n sub-instruction embeddings corresponding to each frame, the next step is to inject
this guidance into the diffusion process, which is commonly completed by a cross-attention layer.
As shown in Figure 4 (b), different from the existing works (Zhou et al., 2022; Wu et al., 2022b)
that calculate the cross-attention between the global instruction embedding and n frames. In our
cross-attention layer, where cross-attention is calculated separately between visual latent vectors and
sub-instruction embeddings for each frame, and the results from all frames are then concatenated,
an attention mechanism we refer to as frame-individual cross-attention (fic-attn).

Initialization We find initialization is critical to FSText decomposer. Especially, the random ini-
tialization fails to approximate the distribution of text embeddings in the pretrained T2I model and
results in poor performance. To guarantee the sub-instruction embeddings become a close approx-
imation of the CLIP text embedding, we employ an initialization strategy by enforcing the FSText
decomposer to be an identity function (Note that this initialization step is completed before the
diffusion process. We ablate this design in Section 5.5). It can be achieved by this objective:
                                                                    Lidentity = ∥fθ (τ (y)) − τ (y)∥2                                                                             (4)


5     E XPERIMENTS

In this section, we evaluate Seer on the text-conditioned video prediction task. We compare against
various recent methods and conduct ablation studies on the techniques presented in Section 4.


                                                                                               6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


5.1   DATASETS

We conduct experiments on three text-video datasets: Something Something-V2 (SSv2) (Goyal
et al., 2017), which contains videos of human daily behaviors with language instructions, Bridge-
Data (Ebert et al., 2021) that is rendered by a photo-realistic kitchen simulator with text prompts,
and EpicKitchens-100 (Damen et al., 2021) (Epic100), which collects human daily activities in the
kitchen in egocentric vision with multi-language narrations. For SSv2, we follow (Soomro et al.,
2012) to evaluate the first 2048 samples during evaluation to save testing time. For BridgeData, we
split the dataset into an 80% training set and 20% validation set for evaluation. To reduce complexity,
we downsample each video clip to 12 frames for SSv2 and Epic100, and 16 frames for BridgeData
during training/evaluation. Besides, We provide the zero-shot evaluation on EGO4D (Grauman
et al., 2022) dataset in section D.2. Moreover, we also included an additional evaluation on the
UCF-101 dataset (Soomro et al., 2012) in Appendix B.2.

                                                        Ref. Frame     (a).tearing a piece of paper into two pieces
5.2   I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS                                                                                                      (a).turning the camera left while filming
                                                                      GT                                              Ref. Frame        wall mounted fan


We use the pre-trained weights of Stable Diffusion-          Seer
                                                                                       GT

v1.5 (Rombach et al., 2022) to initialize the VAE,          (Ours)
                                                                                     Seer
ResNet Blocks and Spatial-Cross Attention layers of VideoFusion                     (Ours)

the 3D U-Net. We freeze both the pre-trained VAE,                             VideoFusion

and only fine-tune the SAWT-Atten layers in our 3D Tune-A-Video
                                                                             Tune-A-Video
U-Net. To fine-tune the FSText Decomposer, we ini- Ref. Frame              (a).taking glass from desk

tialized it as the identity function of the CLIP text           GT                                                                 (b).turning the camera right while filming
                                                                                                                                       wall mounted fan
embedding, as described in Section 4.3. We train the
                                                              Seer                   Seer
models with an image resolution of 256 × 256 on              (Ours)                (Ours)

Something Something-V2 for 200k training steps,                               VideoFusion
                                                       VideoFusion
EpicKitchens-100 and BridgeData for 80k training
steps. In the evaluation stage, we speed up the sam-                         Tune-A-Video
                                                      Tune-A-Video
pling process with the fast sampler DDIM (Song
et al., 2020) and conditional guidance of 7.5 for 30 Figure 6: Visualization of Text-conditioned
timesteps. See more details in Appendix C.            Video Prediction with the original (a) and
                                                      manually modified (b) text prompts on SSv2.
5.3 E VALUATION S ETTINGS

Baselines. We compare Seer with seven publicly released baselines for video generation (1) con-
ditional video diffusion methods: Tune-A-Video (Wu et al., 2022b), Masked Conditional Video Dif-
fusion (MCVD)(Voleti et al., 2022), Video Probabilistic Diffusion Models (PVDM)(Yu et al., 2023)
and VideoFusion(Luo et al., 2023); (2) autoregressive-based transformer method: Time-Agnostic
VQGAN and Time-Sensitive Transformer (TATS)(Ge et al., 2022) and Make It Move (MAGE)(Hu
et al., 2022b); and (3) CNN-based encoder-decoder: SimVP(Gao et al., 2022).
Machine Evaluation. We evaluate the text-conditioned video prediction of several baseline meth-
ods on Something Something-V2 (SSv2) (with 2 reference frames), Bridgedata (with 1 reference
frame) and Epic-Kitchens-100 (Epic100) (with 1 reference frame). Additionally, we conduct sev-
eral ablation studies of our proposed modules on SSv2. We report the Fréchet Video Distance (FVD)
and Kernel Video Distance (KVD) metrics in our evaluation. FVD and KVD are calculated with the
Kinetics-400 pre-trained I3D model (Carreira & Zisserman, 2017). We evaluate FVD and KVD on
2,048 SSv2 samples, 5,558 Bridgedata samples and 9,342 Epic100 samples in the validation sets.
For FVD metrics, we follow the evaluation code of VideoGPT (Yan et al., 2021). We further eval-
uate the class-conditioned video prediction of our method on the UCF-101 dataset and present the
comparison results in Appendix B.2.
                                                               Seer    Tune-A-Video                         Seer      TATS                   Seer      MCVD
Human Evaluation. Besides evaluating the                100%                                 100%           91.5%              100%            87.4%
                                                                  72.2%
models on the standard validation sets, we also         80%                                    80%                             80%

                                                        60%                                    60%                             60%
manually modify the text prompts to provide             40%                27.8%               40%                             40%

richer testing results, called text-conditioned         20%                                    20%                    8.40%
                                                                                                                               20%                     12.6%

                                                                                                                                   0%
video manipulation. Because of the absence               0%                                     0%


of ground-truth frames, we conducted a human Figure 7: Human evaluation results. Preference
evaluation of text-conditioned video manipula- percentage for TVM task on SSv2.
tion (TVM) using 99 video clips from the validation set of SSv2. We manually modified partial


                                                  7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024

Table 1: Text-conditioned video prediction (TVP) results on Something-Something V2 (SSv2),
Bridgedata (Bridge), and Epic-Kitchens-100 (Epic100). We report both FVD and KVD metrics.
                                                            SSv2      Bridge     Epic100
             Method              Pre.-weight Text Resolution
                                                        FVD↓ KVD↓ FVD↓ KVD↓ FVD↓ KVD↓
    TATS (Ge et al., 2022)        video   No 128 × 128 428.1 2177 1253 6213 920.0 5065
  MCVD (Voleti et al., 2022)       No     No 256 × 256 1407 3.80 1427 2.50 4804 5.17
   SimVP (Gao et al., 2022)        No     No 64 × 64 537.2 0.61 681.6 0.73 1991 1.34
   MAGE (Hu et al., 2022b)        video   Yes 128 × 128 1201.8 1.64 2605 3.19 1358 1.61
    PVDM (Yu et al., 2023)         No     No 256 × 256 502.4 61.08 490.4 122.4 482.3 104.8
 VideoFusion (Luo et al., 2023) txt-video Yes 256 × 256 163.2 0.20 501.2 1.45 349.9 1.79
Tune-A-Video (Wu et al., 2022b) txt-img Yes 256 × 256 291.4 0.91 515.7 2.01 365.0 1.98
         Seer (Ours)             txt-img Yes 256 × 256 112.9 0.12 246.3 0.55 271.4 1.40
text prompts and generated 99 predicted videos for each method. Then, we invited 54 anonymous
evaluators to rate the quality of the prediction, with a higher priority placed on the semantic contents
in the videos and an intermediate priority placed on the fidelity of the video frames. We report the
overall preference choices among the 99 video clips. More details are introduced in Appendix E

5.4   M AIN R ESULTS

Quantitative Results. Table 1 presents the text-condtioned video prediction results on Something
Something-V2 (SSv2), BridgeData and Epic-kitchens-100 (Epic100). Seer achieves the best perfor-
mance among all baselines, with the lowest Fréchet Video Distance (FVD) of 112.9 and Kinematic
Distance (KVD) of 0.12 in SSv2, the lowest FVD of 246.3 and KVD of 0.55 in BridgeData, and the
lowest FVD of 271.4 in Epic100. Notably, Seer, MAGE, VideoFusion and Tune-A-Video all incor-
porate text conditioning, and the results highlight Seer’s superior text-video alignment performance.
The results of the human evaluation in the text-conditioned video manipulation experiment are
shown in Figure 7. Our proposed Seer outperforms the other baselines in terms of both semantic
content and fidelity of video, with a preference rate of at least 72.2% in comparison. This indicates
that Seer is effective in generating high-quality video clips that are faithful to the input text prompts.
Qualitative Results. Figure 6 compares the text-        Ref. Frame            Ref. Frame
                                                                  put pot in sink        put fork from basket to tray


conditioned video prediction and manipulation                      GT                    GT

performance of Seer, VideoFusion and Tune-A-                     Seer                  Seer
Video on Something Something-V2 (SSv2). Seer                    (Ours)                (Ours)

performs better in handling the temporal dynam-          VideoFusion            VideoFusion

ics of the video and achieving more precise text-
video alignment in video manipulation. For in-          Tune-A-Video           Tune-A-Video

stance, consider the task of “turning the camera Figure 8: Visualization of Text-conditioned
left” Seer seamlessly generates coherent move- Video Prediction on Bridgedata.
ment while preserving the background during the
camera view adjustment. In contrast, both VideoFusion and Tune-A-Video exhibit semantic move-
ment but fail to maintain temporal consistency in the video background. Additionally, Seer can
imagine hidden objects by utilizing its text-to-image diffusion prior. This flexibility allows Seer to
effectively address occlusion in video prediction. In the “tearing paper” sample, Seer accurately
predicts that a man is hidden behind the paper and generates coherent frames including the man’s
face. Figure 8 compares Seer, VideoFusion and Tune-A-Video’s TVP performance on Bridgedata,
illustrating that Seer achieves better text-video alignment of instructed behavior and target objects
in future frames, and predicts a more coherent video with higher fidelity.

5.5   A BLATION STUDY

In this section, we evaluate the effect of different components of Table 2: Ablation study of
our method in the TVP task on the SSv2 dataset. We also evaluate temporal attention
the zero-shot TVP task of different models on the EGO4D dataset.      temp. attn. FVD↓ KVD↓
                                                                          bi-direct.    258.2 0.56
Temporal Attention. As shown in Table 2 studies the effective-
                                                                          directed.     222.3 0.40
ness of different types of temporal attention. Our scaled autore-         autoreg.      200.1 0.30
gressive window temporal attention (win-auto.) outperforms au- win-auto.(Ours) 112.9 0.12
toregressive spatial-temporal attention (autoreg.), bi-directional
temporal attention (bi-direct.) and directed temporal attention (directed.), resulting in the lowest
FVD and KVD scores. We also find that “directed.” further improves video prediction performance
compared to “bi-direct.” because it utilizes the inductive bias of sequential generation.


                                                    8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


FSText Decomposer. Table 3 compares different weight initial- Table 3: Init. weight ablation
ization strategies of FSText decomposer. The results show that results of FSText
using identity initialization described in Section 4.3 yields higher  init. weight FVD↓ KVD↓
prediction quality compared with random initialization. This find-      random      367.9 0.75
ing demonstrates that identity initialization is necessary for the   identity(Ours) 112.9 0.12
temporal-text projection of FSText decomposer. See additional ablation results in Appendix B.5.
Fine-tune Setting.      We compare various fine- Table 4: Ablation study of Fine-tune settings
tuning settings of 3D Inflated U-Net in Table 4.             fine-tune     FSText. FVD↓ KVD↓
Our default setting involves fine-tuning both FS-           temp-attn.               328.2 1.26
Text decomposer (FSText.) and scaled autore-             cross+temp-attn.            249.9 0.73
gressive window temporal attention (SAWT-Attn.)          temp-attn.(Ours)    ✓       112.9 0.12
layers (temp-attn.), while freezing the remaining        cross+temp-attn.    ✓        1807     5.12
modules in 3D U-Net. For the “temp-attn.” setting, we only finetune the SAWT-Attn. layers and
freeze all other components. In the “cross+temp-attn.” setting, we jointly update the parameters of
spatial-cross attn. and SAWT-Attn. layers. We observe that our default setting achieves the highest
quality of video prediction among all these settings. Based on our default setting, further fine-tuning
“cross+temp-attn.” causes the performance of Seer to drop a lot. These results suggest that the
optimization of the FSText decomposer is strongly guided by the frozen conditional diffusion prior.
                                                                                       frame 3           frame 7           frame 12

5.6   V ISUAL A NALYSIS OF I NSTRUCTION E MBEDDING                     sub-
                                                                       instruction

To assess the impact of sub-instruction guidance on frame gen-
eration and unveil the implicit semantic information contained        sub-
                                                                      instruction
within a single sub-instruction at specific time steps, we com-       at 3 frame
                                                                          rd



pare text-conditioned video prediction (TVP) results condi-
                                                                     sub-
tioned on default frame-wise sub-instructions with those con-        instruction
                                                                     at 12 frame
                                                                           th

ditioned on the constant clone of a sub-instruction from the
                                                                       Text prompt: turning the camera left while filming wall mounted fan
third or twelfth frame along the video axis, as depicted in Fig-
ure 9. Unlike the default frame-wise sub-instruction guidance, Figure 9: TVP results conditioned
the sub-instruction clone from the twelfth frame tends to pro- on frame-wise sub-instruction and
duce a transition from the reference frame to the video’s ter- constant clone of sub-instruction.
mination state without temporal coherence. In contrast, the sub-instruction clone from the third
frame tends to guide the motion until an intermediate state of the video, indicating that temporal
sub-instructions provide proximate semantic guidance for motion at each time step. These findings
underscore that sub-instructions align with the temporal sequence of the global instruction, offering
fine-grained guidance across multiple steps. See more results in the Appendix D.3.

5.7   Z ERO - SHOT E VALUATION                                 Table 5: Zero-shot text-conditioned
                                                               video prediction on EGO4D
To assess the model’s generalizability on an unseen dataset,       temp. attn. FVD↓ KVD↓
we conducted a comparative analysis between our proposed          VideoFusion 618.6 1.85
Seer model and the current state-of-the-art baseline Video-        Seer(Ours) 301.7 0.55
Fusion. Both models were fine-tuned on the Something Something-V2 dataset and evaluated on
the EGO4D dataset, with the results summarized in Table 5. Notably, Seer method outperformed
VideoFusion, as evidenced by its superior performance in terms of FVD and KVD metrics. Drawing
insights from these results, we can conclude that our default setup demonstrates strong generaliz-
ability while effectively adapting to the EGO4D dataset with higher-quality video generation.


6     C ONCLUSION

In this paper, we propose Seer, a sample and computation-efficient model, for the challenging text-
conditioned video prediction (TVP) task. We design a data and computation-efficient video network
with Frame Sequential Text (FSText) Decomposer to inflate the pretrained text-to-image (T2I) stable
diffusion models along the temporal axis. With the rich prior knowledge contained in pretrained
T2I models and the well-designed architecture, Seer successfully generates high-quality videos by
only fine-tuning the SAWT-Attn and FSText Decomposer, which significantly reduces the data and
computation costs. The experiments illustrate our superior performance over all the recent models.


                                                  9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


7   R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT

The main implementations of our proposed method are in Section 5.2 and 5.1. In addition, the
settings of the experiments and hyper-parameters we choose are in Appendix C. And the implemen-
tation details are in Appendix B.1.


ACKNOWLEDGEMENT

This work is supported by the Ministry of Science and Technology of the People’s Republic of
China, the 2030 Innovation Megaprojects “Program on New Generation Artificial Intelligence”
(Grant No. 2021AAA0150000). This work is also supported by the National Key R&D Program of
China (2022ZD0161700).


R EFERENCES
Joao Carreira and Andrew Zisserman. Quo vadis, action recognition? a new model and the kinetics
  dataset. In proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp.
  6299–6308, 2017.

Yilun Dai, Mengjiao Yang, Bo Dai, Hanjun Dai, Ofir Nachum, Josh Tenenbaum, Dale Schuurmans,
  and Pieter Abbeel. Learning universal policies via text-guided video generation. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2302.00111, 2023.

Dima Damen, Hazel Doughty, Giovanni Maria Farinella, Sanja Fidler, Antonino Furnari, Evangelos
  Kazakos, Davide Moltisanti, Jonathan Munro, Toby Perrett, Will Price, and Michael Wray. The
  epic-kitchens dataset: Collection, challenges and baselines. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Anal-
  ysis and Machine Intelligence (TPAMI), 43(11):4125–4141, 2021. doi: 10.1109/TPAMI.2020.
  2991965.

Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. BERT: Pre-training of deep
  bidirectional transformers for language understanding. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference
  of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Lan-
  guage Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers), pp. 4171–4186, Minneapolis, Min-
  nesota, 2019. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/N19-1423. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/N19-1423.

Ming Ding, Wendi Zheng, Wenyi Hong, and Jie Tang. Cogview2: Faster and better text-to-image
 generation via hierarchical transformers. In Alice H. Oh, Alekh Agarwal, Danielle Belgrave,
 and Kyunghyun Cho (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022. URL
 https://openreview.net/forum?id=GkDbQb6qu_r.

Frederik Ebert, Yanlai Yang, Karl Schmeckpeper, Bernadette Bucher, Georgios Georgakis, Kostas
  Daniilidis, Chelsea Finn, and Sergey Levine. Bridge data: Boosting generalization of robotic
  skills with cross-domain datasets. arXiv preprint arXiv:2109.13396, 2021.

Oran Gafni, Adam Polyak, Oron Ashual, Shelly Sheynin, Devi Parikh, and Yaniv Taigman. Make-
  a-scene: Scene-based text-to-image generation with human priors. In Computer Vision–ECCV
  2022: 17th European Conference, Tel Aviv, Israel, October 23–27, 2022, Proceedings, Part XV,
  pp. 89–106. Springer, 2022.

Zhangyang Gao, Cheng Tan, Lirong Wu, and Stan Z. Li. Simvp: Simpler yet better video predic-
  tion. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
  (CVPR), pp. 3170–3180, June 2022.

Songwei Ge, Thomas Hayes, Harry Yang, Xi Yin, Guan Pang, David Jacobs, Jia-Bin Huang, and
  Devi Parikh. Long video generation with time-agnostic vqgan and time-sensitive transformer. In
  Computer Vision–ECCV 2022: 17th European Conference, Tel Aviv, Israel, October 23–27, 2022,
  Proceedings, Part XVII, pp. 102–118. Springer, 2022.


                                               10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Raghav Goyal, Samira Ebrahimi Kahou, Vincent Michalski, Joanna Materzynska, Susanne West-
  phal, Heuna Kim, Valentin Haenel, Ingo Fruend, Peter Yianilos, Moritz Mueller-Freitag, et al.
  The” something something” video database for learning and evaluating visual common sense. In
  Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on computer vision, pp. 5842–5850, 2017.
Kristen Grauman, Andrew Westbury, Eugene Byrne, Zachary Chavis, Antonino Furnari, Rohit Gird-
  har, Jackson Hamburger, Hao Jiang, Miao Liu, Xingyu Liu, Miguel Martin, Tushar Nagarajan,
  Ilija Radosavovic, Santhosh Kumar Ramakrishnan, Fiona Ryan, Jayant Sharma, Michael Wray,
  Mengmeng Xu, Eric Zhongcong Xu, Chen Zhao, Siddhant Bansal, Dhruv Batra, Vincent Car-
  tillier, Sean Crane, Tien Do, Morrie Doulaty, Akshay Erapalli, Christoph Feichtenhofer, Adriano
  Fragomeni, Qichen Fu, Abrham Gebreselasie, Cristina González, James Hillis, Xuhua Huang,
  Yifei Huang, Wenqi Jia, Weslie Khoo, Jáchym Kolář, Satwik Kottur, Anurag Kumar, Federico
  Landini, Chao Li, Yanghao Li, Zhenqiang Li, Karttikeya Mangalam, Raghava Modhugu, Jonathan
  Munro, Tullie Murrell, Takumi Nishiyasu, Will Price, Paola Ruiz, Merey Ramazanova, Leda Sari,
  Kiran Somasundaram, Audrey Southerland, Yusuke Sugano, Ruijie Tao, Minh Vo, Yuchen Wang,
  Xindi Wu, Takuma Yagi, Ziwei Zhao, Yunyi Zhu, Pablo Arbeláez, David Crandall, Dima Damen,
  Giovanni Maria Farinella, Christian Fuegen, Bernard Ghanem, Vamsi Krishna Ithapu, C. V. Jawa-
  har, Hanbyul Joo, Kris Kitani, Haizhou Li, Richard Newcombe, Aude Oliva, Hyun Soo Park,
  James M. Rehg, Yoichi Sato, Jianbo Shi, Mike Zheng Shou, Antonio Torralba, Lorenzo Torre-
  sani, Mingfei Yan, and Jitendra Malik. Ego4d: Around the world in 3,000 hours of egocentric
  video. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
  (CVPR), pp. 18995–19012, June 2022.
Yingqing He, Tianyu Yang, Yong Zhang, Ying Shan, and Qifeng Chen. Latent video diffusion mod-
  els for high-fidelity video generation with arbitrary lengths. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.13221,
  2022.
Jonathan Ho and Tim Salimans.            Classifier-free diffusion guidance.     arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2207.12598, 2022.
Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:6840–6851, 2020.
Jonathan Ho, William Chan, Chitwan Saharia, Jay Whang, Ruiqi Gao, Alexey Gritsenko, Diederik P
  Kingma, Ben Poole, Mohammad Norouzi, David J Fleet, et al. Imagen video: High definition
  video generation with diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.02303, 2022a.
Jonathan Ho, Tim Salimans, Alexey Gritsenko, William Chan, Mohammad Norouzi, and David J
  Fleet. Video diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.03458, 2022b.
Wenyi Hong, Ming Ding, Wendi Zheng, Xinghan Liu, and Jie Tang. Cogvideo: Large-scale pre-
 training for text-to-video generation via transformers. In International Conference on Learning
 Representations, 2023.
Tobias Höppe, Arash Mehrjou, Stefan Bauer, Didrik Nielsen, and Andrea Dittadi. Diffusion models
  for video prediction and infilling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.07696, 2022.
Edward J Hu, Yelong Shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang,
  and Weizhu Chen. LoRA: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. In International Con-
  ference on Learning Representations, 2022a. URL https://openreview.net/forum?
  id=nZeVKeeFYf9.
Yaosi Hu, Chong Luo, and Zhenzhong Chen. Make it move: Controllable image-to-video generation
  with text descriptions. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
  Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2022b.
Stephen James, Zicong Ma, David Rovick Arrojo, and Andrew J Davison. Rlbench: The robot
  learning benchmark & learning environment. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, 5(2):3019–
  3026, 2020.
Andrej Karpathy, George Toderici, Sanketh Shetty, Thomas Leung, Rahul Sukthankar, and Li Fei-
  Fei. Large-scale video classification with convolutional neural networks. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 1725–1732, 2014.


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Diederik P. Kingma and Max Welling. Auto-Encoding Variational Bayes. In 2nd International
  Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2014, Banff, AB, Canada, April 14-16, 2014,
  Conference Track Proceedings, 2014.

Ze Liu, Yutong Lin, Yue Cao, Han Hu, Yixuan Wei, Zheng Zhang, Stephen Lin, and Baining Guo.
  Swin transformer: Hierarchical vision transformer using shifted windows. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision, pp. 10012–10022, 2021.

Ze Liu, Jia Ning, Yue Cao, Yixuan Wei, Zheng Zhang, Stephen Lin, and Han Hu. Video swin trans-
  former. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition,
  pp. 3202–3211, 2022.

Zhengxiong Luo, Dayou Chen, Yingya Zhang, Yan Huang, Liang Wang, Yujun Shen, Deli Zhao,
  Jingren Zhou, and Tieniu Tan. Videofusion: Decomposed diffusion models for high-quality video
  generation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recog-
  nition, pp. 10209–10218, 2023.

Alexander Quinn Nichol, Prafulla Dhariwal, Aditya Ramesh, Pranav Shyam, Pamela Mishkin, Bob
  Mcgrew, Ilya Sutskever, and Mark Chen. Glide: Towards photorealistic image generation and
  editing with text-guided diffusion models. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
  16784–16804. PMLR, 2022.

Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual
  models from natural language supervision. In International conference on machine learning, pp.
  8748–8763. PMLR, 2021.

Aditya Ramesh, Mikhail Pavlov, Gabriel Goh, Scott Gray, Chelsea Voss, Alec Radford, Mark Chen,
  and Ilya Sutskever. Zero-shot text-to-image generation. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning, pp. 8821–8831. PMLR, 2021.

Aditya Ramesh, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alex Nichol, Casey Chu, and Mark Chen. Hierarchical text-
  conditional image generation with clip latents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.06125, 2022.

Scott Reed, Zeynep Akata, Xinchen Yan, Lajanugen Logeswaran, Bernt Schiele, and Honglak Lee.
  Generative adversarial text to image synthesis. In International conference on machine learning,
  pp. 1060–1069. PMLR, 2016.

Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer. High-
  resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Con-
  ference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 10684–10695, 2022.

Chitwan Saharia, William Chan, Saurabh Saxena, Lala Li, Jay Whang, Emily Denton, Seyed Kam-
  yar Seyed Ghasemipour, Burcu Karagol Ayan, S Sara Mahdavi, Rapha Gontijo Lopes, et al.
  Photorealistic text-to-image diffusion models with deep language understanding. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2205.11487, 2022.

Masaki Saito, Shunta Saito, Masanori Koyama, and Sosuke Kobayashi. Train sparsely, generate
 densely: Memory-efficient unsupervised training of high-resolution temporal gan. International
 Journal of Computer Vision, 128(10-11):2586–2606, 2020.

Christoph Schuhmann, Richard Vencu, Romain Beaumont, Robert Kaczmarczyk, Clayton Mullis,
  Aarush Katta, Theo Coombes, Jenia Jitsev, and Aran Komatsuzaki. Laion-400m: Open dataset of
  clip-filtered 400 million image-text pairs. arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.02114, 2021.

Mohit Shridhar, Lucas Manuelli, and Dieter Fox. Cliport: What and where pathways for robotic
 manipulation. In Conference on Robot Learning, pp. 894–906. PMLR, 2022.

Uriel Singer, Adam Polyak, Thomas Hayes, Xi Yin, Jie An, Songyang Zhang, Qiyuan Hu, Harry
  Yang, Oron Ashual, Oran Gafni, et al. Make-a-video: Text-to-video generation without text-video
  data. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.14792, 2022.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Ivan Skorokhodov, Sergey Tulyakov, and Mohamed Elhoseiny. Stylegan-v: A continuous video
  generator with the price, image quality and perks of stylegan2. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
  Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 3626–3636, 2022.
Jiaming Song, Chenlin Meng, and Stefano Ermon. Denoising diffusion implicit models. arXiv
   preprint arXiv:2010.02502, 2020.
Yang Song, Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Diederik P Kingma, Abhishek Kumar, Stefano Ermon, and Ben
  Poole. Score-based generative modeling through stochastic differential equations. In Interna-
  tional Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.
Khurram Soomro, Amir Roshan Zamir, and Mubarak Shah. Ucf101: A dataset of 101 human actions
  classes from videos in the wild. arXiv preprint arXiv:1212.0402, 2012.
Du Tran, Lubomir Bourdev, Rob Fergus, Lorenzo Torresani, and Manohar Paluri. Learning spa-
  tiotemporal features with 3d convolutional networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE international
  conference on computer vision, pp. 4489–4497, 2015.
Sergey Tulyakov, Ming-Yu Liu, Xiaodong Yang, and Jan Kautz. Mocogan: Decomposing motion
  and content for video generation. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and
  pattern recognition, pp. 1526–1535, 2018.
Aaron Van Den Oord, Oriol Vinyals, et al. Neural discrete representation learning. Advances in
  neural information processing systems, 30, 2017.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez,
  Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. Advances in neural informa-
  tion processing systems, 30, 2017.
Vikram Voleti, Alexia Jolicoeur-Martineau, and Christopher Pal. Masked conditional video diffusion
  for prediction, generation, and interpolation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.09853, 2022.
Chenfei Wu, Lun Huang, Qianxi Zhang, Binyang Li, Lei Ji, Fan Yang, Guillermo Sapiro, and
  Nan Duan. Godiva: Generating open-domain videos from natural descriptions. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2104.14806, 2021.
Chenfei Wu, Jian Liang, Lei Ji, Fan Yang, Yuejian Fang, Daxin Jiang, and Nan Duan. Nüwa:
  Visual synthesis pre-training for neural visual world creation. In Computer Vision–ECCV 2022:
  17th European Conference, Tel Aviv, Israel, October 23–27, 2022, Proceedings, Part XVI, pp.
  720–736. Springer, 2022a.
Jay Zhangjie Wu, Yixiao Ge, Xintao Wang, Weixian Lei, Yuchao Gu, Wynne Hsu, Ying Shan,
  Xiaohu Qie, and Mike Zheng Shou. Tune-a-video: One-shot tuning of image diffusion models
  for text-to-video generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.11565, 2022b.
Wilson Yan, Yunzhi Zhang, Pieter Abbeel, and Aravind Srinivas. Videogpt: Video generation using
 vq-vae and transformers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.10157, 2021.
Jiahui Yu, Yuanzhong Xu, Jing Yu Koh, Thang Luong, Gunjan Baid, Zirui Wang, Vijay Vasudevan,
   Alexander Ku, Yinfei Yang, Burcu Karagol Ayan, et al. Scaling autoregressive models for content-
   rich text-to-image generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.10789, 2022a.
Lijun Yu, Yong Cheng, Kihyuk Sohn, José Lezama, Han Zhang, Huiwen Chang, Alexander G
  Hauptmann, Ming-Hsuan Yang, Yuan Hao, Irfan Essa, et al. Magvit: Masked generative video
  transformer. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.05199, 2022b.
Sihyun Yu, Jihoon Tack, Sangwoo Mo, Hyunsu Kim, Junho Kim, Jung-Woo Ha, and Jinwoo Shin.
  Generating videos with dynamics-aware implicit generative adversarial networks. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2202.10571, 2022c.
Sihyun Yu, Kihyuk Sohn, Subin Kim, and Jinwoo Shin. Video probabilistic diffusion models in
  projected latent space. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
  Pattern Recognition, 2023.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Tianhe Yu, Deirdre Quillen, Zhanpeng He, Ryan Julian, Karol Hausman, Chelsea Finn, and Sergey
  Levine. Meta-world: A benchmark and evaluation for multi-task and meta reinforcement learning.
  In Conference on robot learning, pp. 1094–1100. PMLR, 2020.
Daquan Zhou, Weimin Wang, Hanshu Yan, Weiwei Lv, Yizhe Zhu, and Jiashi Feng. Magicvideo:
  Efficient video generation with latent diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.11018, 2022.


                                               14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A        A PPENDIX

B        A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS

B.1       I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS OF BASELINES

We compare three baselines in our paper. For Tune-A-Video, to ensure a fair comparison, we use the
pre-trained weight of Stable Diffusion-v1.51 (same as our model) to initialize the UNet and we fine-
tune the model with an image resolution of 256 × 256 on the training sets of Something Something-
V2 (SSv2), Bridgedata and Epic-Kitchens-100 for 200k training steps. Similarly, we further fine-
tune pre-trained VideoFusion on Something Something-V2, Epic-Kitchens-100, and BridgeData for
200k training steps. For MCVD, SimVP and PVDM, we train the model with an image resolution
of 256 × 256, 64 × 64, 256 × 256 respectively on the training sets of SSv2, Epic-Kitchens-100, and
Bridgedata for 300k training steps. For TATS and MAGE, we fine-tune the pre-trained UCF-101
model with an image resolution of 128 × 128 on the training sets of SSv2, Epic-Kitchens-100, and
Bridgedata for 300k training steps.

B.2       E VALUATION D ETAILS AND R ESULTS OF UCF-101

Most prior text-conditioned video generation methods (Hong et al., 2023; Ho et al., 2022b; Singer
et al., 2022; Zhou et al., 2022) evaluate their performance on the UCF-101 (Soomro et al., 2012)
benchmark. However, since our proposed method, Seer, is designed for text-conditioned video
prediction (TVP) on task-level video datasets, the UCF-101 benchmark, which evaluates class-
conditioned video prediction on random short-horizon video clips, is not an ideal evaluation bench-
mark for TVP. Nonetheless, in order to fairly compare these baselines, we still evaluate the class-
conditioned video prediction performance of Seer on UCF-101.

Settings Specifically, we fine-tune our model with a video resolution of 16 × 256 × 256 on UCF-
101. Following the evaluation protocols of (Hong et al., 2023), Seer predicts the videos condi-
tioned on 5 reference frames during fine-tuning and inference stage. We report FVD and Inception
score (IS) metrics on the UCF-101 dataset (Soomro et al., 2012). The IS is calculated by a C3D
model(Tran et al., 2015) that is pre-trained on the Sports-1M dataset (Karpathy et al., 2014) and
fine-tuned on UCF101. We follow the evaluation code of TGAN-v2 (Saito et al., 2020) to calculate
IS metric. Following (Hong et al., 2023; Ho et al., 2022b; Singer et al., 2022), we evaluate the FVD
metric with 2,048 samples and IS metric with 100k samples in the validation set of UCF-101.

Results Table 6 presents the class-conditioned video prediction results on UCF-101, demonstrat-
ing that Seer outperforms CogVideo (Hong et al., 2023) and MagicVideo (Zhou et al., 2022), but
falls short of Make-A-Video (Singer et al., 2022). Make-A-Video employs unlabelled video pre-
training on temporal layers and achieves the best performance among all other methods. While
Make-A-Video shows superior performance on FVD and IS, Seer has the potential to further im-
prove its generation performance by addressing the following two limitations. First, Seer has not
been pre-trained on video data. Second, Seer obtains latent vectors via a pre-trained 2D VAE, which
has not been fine-tuned on UCF-101 and limits the video generation quality of Seer (with 259.4 FVD
and 68.16 IS reconstruction quality). However, as we focus on the text-conditioned video prediction
task, addressing the above limitations on UCF-101 is out of the scope of this paper.

B.3       E VALUATION R ESULTS OF S AMPLING S TEPS

Sampling steps: To assess the influence of sampling steps on the quality of video predictions across
varying sequence lengths, we conducted an evaluation on both 12-frame and 16-frame video pre-
dictions using a series of DDIM sampling steps (10, 20, 30, 40, 50, 60 DDIM steps). All generated
outputs were sampled utilizing a 12-frame SSv2 fine-tuned model. The comparative results are pre-
sented in Figure 10. Notably, the 16-frame curve exhibits a more rapid decline from DDIM steps
10 to 20 compared to the 12-frame curve. As both curves progress beyond DDIM step 30, they
tend to stabilize, showing marginal gains. These findings collectively underscore that increasing
    1
        https://github.com/CompVis/stable-diffusion


                                                      15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 6: Class-conditioned video prediction performance on UCF-101 we evaluate the Seer on
the UCF-101 with 16-frames-long videos. Ex.data indicates that the model has been pre-trained or
fine-tuned on extra datasets.
                    Method                            Ex.data        Cond. Resolution FVD↓               IS↑
  MoCoGAN-HD (Tulyakov et al., 2018)                    No           Class. 256 × 256 700±24 33.95±0.25
        VideoGPT (Yan et al., 2021)                     No            No     128 × 128         -     24.69±0.30
       RaMViD (Höppe et al., 2022)                     No            No     128 × 128         -     21.71±0.21
  StyleGAN-V (Skorokhodov et al., 2022)                 No            No     128 × 128         -     23.94±0.73
         DIGAN (Yu et al., 2022c)                       No            No                    577±22 32.70±0.35
        TGANv2 (Saito et al., 2020)                     No           Class. 128 × 128 1431.0 26.60±0.47
          VDM (Ho et al., 2022b)                        No            No      64 × 64          -      57.80±1.3
        TATS-base (Ge et al., 2022)                     No           Class. 128 × 128 278±11 79.28±0.38
        MCVD (Voleti et al., 2022)                      No            No      64 × 64       1143.0        -
          LVDM (He et al., 2022)                        No            No     256 × 256 372±11           27±1
       MAGVIT-B (Yu et al., 2022b)                      No           Class. 128 × 128 159±2 83.55±0.14
       VideoFusion (Luo et al., 2023)                txt-video       Class. 128 × 128         173       80.03
       CogVideo (Hong et al., 2023)            txt-img & txt-video Class. 160 × 160           626       50.46
    Make-A-Video (Singer et al., 2022)           txt-img & video     Class. 256 × 256 81.25             82.55
      MagicVideo (Zhou et al., 2022)           txt-img & txt-video Class.                     699         -
                  Seer(Ours)                          txt-img        Class. 256 × 256 260.7             57.74
             pre-trained VAE*                             -            -     256 × 256 259.4            68.16
     *we evaluate the reconstruction quality of pre-trained 2D VAE in this table, the pre-trained 2D VAE is
          initialized with the pre-trained weight from Stable Diffusion-v1.5 without extra fine-tuning.

      1200                                                                   3
             772.8                                                                  2
      1000                                                                  2.5

      800                                                                    2
                      448.2
                                                                      KVD
FVD


      600                                                                   1.5           1.11
                              355.4     359.3    348.7   346.2
      400    280.7                                                           1    0.73                      0.63
                                                                                                   0.56
                                                                                                                     0.47   0.48
      200            129.8    112.9     101.3    101.8   105.2              0.5
                                                                                         0.16      0.12     0.08     0.08   0.06
        0                                                                    0
              10      20       30        40       50      60                      10     20         30       40      50     60
                               DDIM steps                                                            DDIM steps

                       12-frame       16-frame                                                12-frame    16-frame


Figure 10: Evaluation results of sampling 12-frame video and 16-frame video using 12-frame Seer
model with DDIM sampling steps ranging from 10 to 60 on the Something-Something V2 dataset.

DDIM sampling steps notably enhances video quality for longer sequences (10 to 30 DDIM steps).
However, the quality improvements of longer videos diminish as DDIM steps exceed 30.
Video length: Furthermore, we present the qualitative outcomes of the 16-frame video in Figure 12.
A comparison with the results of the 12-frame video in Figure 23 reveals that both the 16-frame
and 12-frame videos can effectively capture task-described motion, as demonstrated in the example
of ”moving pen.” However, the 16-frame video exhibits a gradual loss of appearance information
from the reference frame and a decline in temporal consistency along the temporal axis with the
increasing sequence length. Given that 16-frame videos are beyond the anticipated sequence length
for a 12-frame model, enhancing the generation quality of the 16-frame video could be achieved
through the training of a dedicated 16-frame Seer model.
Methods comparison: In addition, we explore the impact of fast sampling on generation results
during evaluation by comparing Seer with Tune-A-Video.We apply a series of DDIM sampling
steps (10, 20, 30, 40, 50 DDIM steps), as shown in Figure 11. Seer consistently outperformed Tune-
A-Video in terms of both FVD and KVD, with improvements observed from 20 DDIM steps to
50 DDIM steps. Particularly noteworthy is Seer’s advantage in video quality (280.7 FVD and 0.73
KVD) compared to Tune-A-Video (419.3 FVD and 1.5 KVD) when using only 10 DDIM steps,
demonstrating Seer’s ability to sample high-fidelity videos efficiently with minimal denoising steps.



                                                                 16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


      800                                                                2.5
             419.3                                                             1.5
      700
                                                                          2
      600
      500            294.9                                               1.5
                                291.4
                                              261     254.2                            1.01


                                                                   KVD
FVD


      400                                                                                          0.91
             280.7                                                                                             0.84
      300                                                                 1                                           0.75
                                                                               0.73
      200            129.8      112.9         101.3   101.8              0.5
      100                                                                              0.16        0.12        0.08   0.08
       0                                                                  0
              10       20           30         40      50                      10       20         30          40     50
                              DDIM steps                                                       DDIM steps

                       Seer    Tune-A-Video                                             Seer    Tune-A-Video


Figure 11: Evaluation results of Seer and Tune-A-Video with DDIM sampling steps ranging from
10 to 50 on the Something-Something V2 dataset.
 Ref. Frame            tearing a piece of paper into two pieces


 Ref. Frame             moving pen up


Figure 12: Visualization of 16-frame text-conditioned video prediction sampled by 12-frame Seer
on SSv2.

B.4         C OMPUTATION E FFICIENCY OF S EER

To enhance the computational efficiency of Seer, both the Table 7: Training time of the
inclusion of frozen 2D layers and the thoughtful design of variants of temporal attention on
temporal layers contribute significantly. A comprehensive a 16-frame video
evaluation of the computational cost for different tempo-                temp. attn.    (sec./iter.)
ral layer types, conducted on a single 24GB NVIDIA 3090                   bi-direct.       2.35
GPU, is presented in Table 7. Remarkably, in comparison to                directed.        2.35
plain autoregressive spatial-temporal attention (autoreg.), both           autoreg.        5.50
bi-directional/directed temporal attention (bi-direct./directed.)      win-auto.(Ours)     2.40
and SAWT-Atten (win-auto.) substantially reduce computational overhead. Furthermore, SAWT-
Atten demonstrates superior generation quality compared to bi-directional and directed temporal
attentions, as evidenced by the ablation results in Section 5.5 of this paper. In addition, a compar-

Table 8: Training time (time.) and GPU mem- Table 9: Training time (time.) and GPU mem-
ory (Mem.) consumption of the models (16- ory (Mem.) consumption of the models (16-
frame)                                      frame)( ≥ 90% GPU memory usage)
                             time.  Mem.                                                                time.     Mem.
            model       2D. frozen                                         model      2D. frozen
                                         (sec./iter.) (GB)                                           (sec./iter.) (GB)
        Seer (Ours)           Yes           0.75      24.7          Seer (Ours)          Yes            3.10      72.9
            Seer              No            0.96      39.2              Seer             No             6.89      75.8
        VideoFusion.          No            1.07      45.0          VideoFusion.         No             7.63      78.7
ison involving our ablated setting and the baseline method VideoFusion (Luo et al., 2023), which
shares a network design based on the Stable Diffusion U-Net, is presented. In our proposed Seer
setting, the 2D spatial layers of the U-Net are frozen during fine-tuning, while the ablated setting
maintains all 2D spatial layers trainable. GPU memory consumption and training time for different
models were assessed running with a single 80GB NVIDIA A800 GPU. These results are available
in Table 8, and highlight the proposed Seer setting with frozen 2D layers exhibiting approximately
half the GPU memory consumption (24.7GB) compared to Seer without frozen 2D layers (39.2GB)
and VideoFusion (45.0GB). To ensure a fair comparison of training speed among various settings
on the single A800 GPU, we conducted additional assessments of models with GPU memory usage
exceeding 90%, as detailed in Table 9. The results in the table reveal a notable advantage in com-


                                                              17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                   Table 11: Components in FSText Decomposer
   Table 10: Layer depth in FSText. (SSv2).        (SSv2). Our settings are marked in gray
           num. layers.    FVD↓     KVD↓
                2          238.6     0.51                      Temp. Seq. FVD↓ KVD↓
                4          229.7     0.23                        ✓        125.8 0.13
             8(Ours)       112.9     0.12                             ✓   127.7 0.14
                                                                 ✓    ✓   112.9 0.12
Table 12: Ablation study of temporal attention Table 13: Ablation study of Fine-tune settings
(BridgeData)                                   (BridgeData)
           temp. attn.      FVD↓     KVD↓                   fine-tune    FSText. FVD↓ KVD↓
            bi-direct.      284.5     0.71                 temp-attn.             410.7 0.97
            directed.       258.0     0.64              cross+temp-attn.          319.9 1.01
             autoreg.       261.5     0.83              temp-attn.(Ours)   ✓      246.3 0.55
         win-auto.(Ours)    246.3     0.55              cross+temp-attn.   ✓     2058.4 9.43


putation efficiency for the proposed Seer setting with frozen 2D layers, exhibiting reduced training
time (3.10 sec/iter) compared to Seer without frozen 2D layers (6.89 sec/iter) and VideoFusion (7.63
sec/iter). These findings firmly establish the enhanced computational efficiency of Seer relative to
baseline models.

B.5   A DDITIONAL A BLATION R ESULTS

FSText layer depth In this section, we additionally investigate the impact of FSText Decom-
poser’s layer depth in Table 10. Our default setting (8-layer FSText Decomposer) outperforms shal-
lower models (2-layer and 4-layer) in terms of FVD. Though the 4-layer model shows a marginal
advantage over the 8-layer model in terms of KVD, our experiments indicate that the 8-layer FSText
Decomposer shows a remarkable advantage on FVD metrics and exhibits robustness in text-video
alignment. Therefore, we adopt the 8-layer FSText Decomposer as the default setting for Seer.

FSText componenets To evaluate the impact of individual attention layers within the FSText de-
composer, we conducted an ablation study on the FSText component, as presented in Table 8. In
this study, we ablate the temporal attention layer, labeled as ”Temp.,” and the text-sequential atten-
tion layer, denoted as ”Seq.,” within the FSText network. To maintain consistency in model size
across different settings, we replaced the ablated component with a Cross-Attention layer. The re-
sults, shown in Table 11, highlight the superiority of our proposed setting, which integrates both
text-sequential-attention layers and temporal attention layers. Our proposed setting outperforms the
other two settings, underscoring the significant attributes of Text-Sequential-Attention layers and
Temporal Attention layers to capture text contextual information and model temporal dependencies,
collectively enhancing the overall performance of the FSText decomposer.

Additional ablation on BridgeData To validate the robustness and consistency of Seer ablation
results across different datasets, we conducted additional experiments on the BridgeData dataset,
extending our analysis from the Something Something-V2 (SSv2) dataset. The corresponding abla-
tion studies on Seer fine-tuning settings are presented in Table 13, while the temporal layer settings
are detailed in Table 12. These results mirror the ablation outcomes reported in Table 4 and Table 2
for the SSv2 dataset. Notably, the consistent improvement observed in both Seer fine-tuning and
temporal layer ablation across different datasets, as demonstrated in Table 13 and Table 12 on the
BridgeData dataset, demonstrates the robustness of the Seer component design.

Qualitative results of fine-tuning ablation We conduct a qualitative analysis of various fine-tune
settings. We provide additional visualizations of Fine-tune Setting ablation in Section 5.5 of the main
paper. Figure 13 shows the results of different settings. Among these settings, our default setting
“temp+FSText” stands out as it preserves a higher-level temporal consistency in video prediction
starting from reference frames and also delivers superior text-based video motion compared to the
other fine-tune settings.

B.6   E VALUATION OF P OLICY L EARNING ON S EER

To investigate whether Seer can help policy learning, we choose the UniPi (Dai et al., 2023) as
our baseline in the simulated robotics environment Meta-World (Yu et al., 2020), which gener-


                                                  18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                 pouring water into cup

  GroundTruth


“cross.+temp.”


      “temp.”


“temp+FSText.”


                 tilting book with package on it until it falls off

  GroundTruth


“cross.+temp.”


      “temp.”


“temp+FSText.”

                 tilting a book with a measuring tape on it until it falls off

  GroundTruth


“cross.+temp.”


      “temp.”


“temp+FSText.”



Figure 13: Additional qualitative results of fine-tuning ablation. “temp+FSText.” is our default
setting.

ates videos from the initial state and infers actions from the adjacent frames via a pre-trained
inverse-dynamics model. Specifically, we distill a policy model from the videos generated by
the Seer and the labeled actions from the pretrained inverse-dynamics model. We choose 3 tasks
and use 10 in-domain videos for each task to fine-tune the Seer. And we make comparisons
between a) Policy a: Distilled policy from the dataset generated by the Fine-tuned Seer model
(1000 generated videos for each task). b) Policy b: Distilled policy from the 10 in-domain videos
for each task. The results are shown in Table 14, where we find that compared to utilizing the
given 10 in-domain videos to generate policy, fine-tuning the Seer with them and generating more
videos can be better because it can acquire more scalable data, which is of comparable quality.
Therefore, the videos generated by Seer can help policy learning in simulated robotics tasks in a
way. The visualization of Seer within a robot simulation environment is presented in Section D.5

                                                                         Table 14: Success rate of distilled policy
                                                                                   tasks         policy a policy b
                                                                         button-press-topdown-v2  0.45      0.4
                                                                             drawer-close-v2       0.1      0.0
                                                                              drawer-open-v2      0.05      0.0


                                                               19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C     I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS
C.1   F INE - TUNING AND S AMPLING

In this section, we list the hyperparameters, fine-tuning details, sampling details, and hardware
information of our model in Table 15.

C.2   A RCHITECTURE INFORMATION

In this section, we list the hyperparameters of 3D U-Net in Table 16 and hyperparameters of FSText
Decomposer in Table 17.


                 Table 15: Hyperparameters and details of Fine Tuning/Inference
                                         param.             value
                                          optim.          AdamW
                                       Adam-β1               0.9
                                       Adam-β2              0.99
                                        Adam-ϵ              1e−8
                                    weight decay            1e−2
                                             lr          1.024e−4
                                          end lr             0.0
                                         lr sche.          cosine
                                      noise sche.          cosine
                                   train batch size        1/GPU
                                       grad. acc.             2
                                    warmup steps             10k
                                       resolution        256 × 256
                                      train. steps          200k
                                   train. hardware      4 RTX 3090
                                    val. batch size        2/GPU
                                        sampler            DDIM
                                   sampling steps            30
                                   guidance scale            7.5



                             Table 16: Hyperparameters of 3D U-Net
                            hyperparam.                           value
                        input/output channels                       4
                           Base channels                           320
                         Channel multipliers                     1,2,4,4
                       3D Downsample blocks                         4
                        3D Upsample blocks                          4
                     Number of layers (per block)                   2
                          Modules of layer                  3D ResnetBlock
                                                           Spatial-cross Atten.
                                                              SAWT-Atten.
                                                        Down./Up. 3D ResnetBlock
                       Dimension of atten. heads                    8
                          activation function                     SiLU
                       Dimension of cross-atten.                   768


                                                   20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                          Table 17: Hyperparameters of FSText Decomposer
                                  hyperparam.                       value
                           learnable tokens channels                 768
                                output channels                      768
                                 Base channels                       768
                               Number of layers                       8
                               Modules of layer               Seq-cross Atten.
                                                                Feedforward
                                                          Directed temporal Atten.
                                                                Feedforward
                            Number of atten. heads                    8
                           Dimension of cross-atten.                 768


D     V ISUALIZATION
D.1    A DDITIONAL QUALITATIVE RESULTS

We provide additional visualization on Something-Something v2 (SSv2) of our text-conditioned
video prediction in Figure 22, and text-conditioned video prediction/manipulation results in Fig-
ure 23. Additionally, we provide the visualization on BridgeData of text-conditioned video predic-
tion in Figure 24 and text-conditioned video prediction/manipulation in Figure 25. We also provide
the visualization results of text-conditioned video prediction on Epic-Kitchens-100 in Figure 26.

Ref. Frame        pretending to pick a tennisball up



Ref. Frame        moving pen up


Figure 14: Additional visualization results of 12-frame Text-conditioned video prediction (reference
frame=1) on SSv2 dataset.



                                                          frame 0 (ref.)          frame 14                       frame 14                frame 14
D.2 G ENERALIZABILITY
OF S EER O N D OWNSTREAM TASKS

To thoroughly assess Seer’s adaptability on
downstream tasks such as video manipula-                                   fine-tune mixed dataset &         fine-tune BridgeData
                                                                                         fine-tune BridgeData
tion on BridgeData, we conducted an inves-                                 frozen fstext (Ours, start from
                                                                                         only
                                                                           fine-tuned model on SSV2)
                                                                                                             w/ LORA (start from fine-
                                                                                                             tuned model on SSV2)

tigation into diverse fine-tuning strategies on Figure 15: The visualization of comparison with
this dataset. Our default setting proceeded different fine-tune settings on BridgeData (given
to fine-tune only the temporal block of 3D text instructions ”pick up black mug”, where
U-Net, freezing the FSText decomposer on a ”black” text prompt is unseen in BridgeData).
mixed dataset including both the pre-training Compare to other two settings, our default setting
video dataset and the task-specific downstream successfully recognizes ”black mug” and gener-
dataset. Additionally, we compare our default ates RGB frame with higher fidelity
setting with LORA modules (Hu et al., 2022a),
which are integrated into each temporal layer of the UNet architecture and throughout the entire FS-
Text decomposer. As depicted in Figure 15, both our proposed setting and the LORA setting have
effectively identified the previously unseen ”black mug” in the training set of BridgeData. Besides,
our proposed setting maintains a higher background consistency from the reference frame (frame
0) and generates future frames with superior fidelity when compared to the LORA setting. We also
provide additional visualization in Appendix D.4.


                                                     21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D.3   A DDITIONAL V ISUALIZATION OF S UB -I NSTRUCTION E MBEDDING

We present additional visualizations comparing frame-specific sub-instructions to those constant
clones from the third or twelfth frame along the temporal axis (Figure 16). These visualizations
reveal that each frame’s sub-instruction represents the motion at its corresponding time step. For
example, in the case of ”pushing iphone adapter from left to right” the default sub-instruction guides
the entire instructed behavior with continuous temporal motion, while the sub-instruction embedding
from the third frame directs the motion to a halfway point in the case of pushing the iphone adapter
to right. In contrast, utilizing the sub-instruction embedding from the twelfth frame leads to frames
that are disconnected from the reference frame’s scene, resulting in the absence of transition between
frames. This observation demonstrates that sub-instructions closely follow the temporal sequence
of the global instruction, providing precise guidance across multiple steps.

D.4   A DDITIONAL V ISUALIZATION OF V IDEO M ANIPULATION W ITH U NSEEN O BJECTS
      A ND Z ERO - SHOT V IDEO M ANIPULATION

We also include visualizations of video manipulation with unseen objects in BridgeData and zero-
shot generation on EGO4D. These experiments involved fine-tuning the SSv2 video model on a
mixed dataset consisting of SSv2 and BridgeData. The fine-tuning process lasted for 800k itera-
tions, employing a learning rate of 4.096e−5 . Subsequently, the model’s performance was evaluated
on Bridgedata (as shown in Figure 17(a)) and the EGO4D dataset (illustrated on the right side of
Figure 17(b)), where we sampled 15 frames with one reference frame. In the evaluation on Bridge-
Data, Seer demonstrated the ability to recognize previously unseen objects such as ”red plate” and
”cabbage” and successfully performed a ”pick up” motion, leveraging prior knowledge learned from
SSv2. In certain scenarios, such as picking up the plate, where Seer has not encountered the spe-
cific action during training, the generated video depicted some limitations in the interaction between
the robotic arm and the plate. Regarding the evaluation on EGO4D, although Seer had not been
fine-tuned on this dataset, it exhibited the capability to accurately identify objects in the EGO4D
environment, such as ”laptop” and ”book,” and execute actions based on prior knowledge acquired
from observing human activities. However, Seer still faced challenges in predicting future frames
based on the understanding of the scene in the reference frame. For instance, in the case of ”closing
a book,” Seer tended to generate a hand outside the camera view instead of manipulating the object
with the main body, such as the hand holding the book, within the scene.


                                                 22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


           Text prompt: pushing iphone adapter from left to right

             Groundtruth

             sub-
             instruction
             sub-
             instruction
             at 3rd frame
             sub-
             instruction
             at 12th frame


             Text prompt: taking glass from desk

           Groundtruth

             sub-
             instruction
             sub-
             instruction
             at 3rd frame
             sub-
             instruction
             at 12th frame


             Text prompt: moving pen up
             Groundtruth

             sub-
             instruction
             sub-
             instruction
             at 3rd frame
             sub-
             instruction
             at 12th frame

Figure 16: Additional visualization results of Seer’s Text-conditioned video prediction conditioned
on frame-wise sub-instruction and duplicate sub-instruction at the third/twelfth frame.


               frame 0 (ref.)   frame 4      frame 8    frame 14                      frame 0 (ref.)   frame 4      frame 8   frame 14


“pick up                                                             “close laptop”
red plate”


“pick up                                                             “close book”
cabbage”


                                  (a) BridgeData                                                            (b) EGO4D

Figure 17: Additional visualization of Seer generalizability evaluation on unseen dataset EGO4D
(b) and BridgeData (a), where ”cabbage” and ”red plate” are unseen objects in the training set of
BridgeData.


                                                                    23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D.5   V ISUALIZATION OF ROBOT S IMULATION E NVIRONMENT

To investigate the applicability of Seer in robot environments, we assess its performance on robot
simulation datasets, including Meta-World (Yu et al., 2020), CLIPort (Shridhar et al., 2022), and
RLBench (James et al., 2020). Beginning with the SSv2-finetuned Seer model, we further fine-tune
it on a mixed dataset comprising Something Something-V2 (SSv2), Bridgedata, 236 MetaWorld
video clips, 785 CliPort video clips, and over 2000 video clips from RLBench for 80,000 steps,
using a learning rate of 4e-5. Throughout the fine-tuning process, all 2D layers of the 3D inflated
U-Net and the FSText decomposer remain frozen. Figure 18 presents visualizations of Seer on these
robot simulation datasets. In these visualizations, Seer successfully generates coherent videos with
continuous motion trajectories aligned with language instructions. In the CLIPort video clips, Seer
accurately detects small target objects in complex scenes and places them in the correct positions as
instructed by the task descriptors. Moreover, in the RLBench videos, Seer demonstrates the ability to
perform multi-step tasks such as ”stacking a pyramid with the boxes.” These observations highlight
Seer’s adaptability to a multi-task environment, encompassing human video, robot manipulation,
and simulation scenarios, while maintaining robust temporal alignment with task descriptors. We
conduct an assessment of Seer performance on policy learning, and a further analysis is presented
in Section B.6.
        Ref. Frame   open the green drawer                                   Ref. Frame   put the green blocks in a gray bowl


        Ref. Frame   open the door by turning the handle                     Ref. Frame   put the yellow block on the cyan and red blocks


                           (a1) Meta-World                                                      (b) CLIPort
        Ref. Frame   press down the red button                               Ref. Frame   close the jar for the bottle


        Ref. Frame   pick the green bin from the red box to the table        Ref. Frame   stack a pyramid with the boxes in the same color


                           (a2) Meta-World                                                      (c) RLBench


Figure 18: Text-conditioned video prediction of Seer (conditioned on first frame) on Meta-World
(a1-2), CLIPort (b), and RLBench (c) datasets


D.6   L ONG V IDEO P REDICTION

To evaluate Seer’s ability to generate extended video frames during the inference stage, we con-
ducted a qualitative test on long video prediction using a 12-frame SSv2 fine-tuned Seer model.
Our video sampling approach involves the sequential generation of video clips, where the first 12
frames are conditioned on 2 reference frames, and the last two frames of the first clip serve as the
condition for the subsequent clip. The concatenation of these clips results in a long video. A cru-
cial element for aligning long video frames with language is the presence of a prolonged sequence
of sub-instructions. To achieve this, we employ two text conditioning strategies for expanding the
sub-instruction embedding along the frame axis, enabling the iterative sampling of longer frames.
The first strategy involves interpolating sub-instruction embedding along the frame axis, while the
second strategy entails repeating the sub-instruction embedding from the first video clip to guide the
second clip. In Figure 19, we compare these two strategies and observe that direct interpolation (Fig-
ure 19 (a)) tends to degrade overall generation quality, introducing unexpected noise. Conversely,
utilizing the same sub-instruction (Figure 19 (b)) can maintain coherent motion, persisting until the
target object is no longer present or the current motion is in a terminated state. Although this strategy
facilitates the generation of coherent movements, it is distinct from a simple upsampling of video


                                                                        24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


clips along the frame axis. It is noteworthy that all results were obtained using the 12-frame Seer
model.
Intuitively, appending an additional upsampler network could potentially enhance Seer’s ability to
expand video frames, which causes extra computational costs. Observing the results of the evalua-
tion, we believe that expanding the frame length of generated subinstruction embeddings during the
training stage represents a promising direction for enabling Seer to generate longer video frames in
multi-steps without incurring additional computational overhead.

        (a) Interpolate sub-instruction embedding
           Ref. Frame       moving pen up


        (b) Repeat sub-instruction embedding
           Ref. Frame       moving pen up



          Frame 11th~12th



           Ref. Frame       pretending to pick a tennisball up               Frame 11th~12th


         Frame 11th~12th



           Ref. Frame       tearing a piece of paper into two pieces         Frame 11th~12th


         Frame 11th~12th


Figure 19: 22-frame video prediction conditioned on 2 reference frames using a 12-frame Seer
model on SSv2. (a) Interpolation of 12-frame subinstruction embeddings to a 22-frame sequence.
(b) Repetition of 12-frame subinstruction embeddings for the second video clip prediction from the
eleventh frame to the twenty-second frame.


                                                   25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D.7   FAILURE C ASE

In this section, we present instances where Seer encounters challenges in handling environmental
motion in human-generated videos. The generated videos highlight situations such as ”dropping
a card in front of a coin” and ”book falling like a rock” (refer to Figure 20), where Seer suc-
cessfully predicts task-descriptive motions like ”dropping” and ”falling” and correctly identifies
text-described objects such as ”card” and ”book.” However, the generated future frames fall short
in capturing appearance consistencies, such as the color of the card in the previous frame and the
cover of the book in the reference environment. In the scenario of ”pouring red wine into a glass,”
Seer tends to generate a wine glass based on its knowledge of pouring red wine but overlooks the
transition distribution from the reference environment.
Notably, in the Epic-Kitchens-100 dataset, where scene transitions are prevalent, Seer exhibits a
preference for predicting camera pose movements and generating novel views of the environment,
reflecting its imaginative capabilities. However, these outcomes extend beyond the scope of Seer’s
primary objective, which is to learn human behavior. Consequently, addressing challenges such as
filtering out irrelevant background information, including camera pose and object occlusion, and
refining Seer’s awareness of temporal motion becomes imperative for its adaptation to learning from
internet videos.

Ref. Frame          dropping a card in front of a coin



Ref. Frame          pouring red wine into a glass



Ref. Frame          book falling like a rock



  Ref.        put the cap on the peanut butter



  Ref.       continue chopping onion



  Ref.       flip chips



Figure 20: Seer failure cases on Something Something-V2 (row 1,2,3) and Epic-Kitchens-100 (row
4,5,6)


                                                26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E    H UMAN E VALUATION D ETAILS
To evaluate the quality of video predictions according to human preferences, we conducted a hu-
man evaluation with 99 video clips on the validation set of the Something-Something V2 dataset
(SSv2), the evaluation process involved 54 anonymous evaluators. To eliminate biases towards spe-
cific baselines, we randomly selected 20 questions for each evaluator. Each single-choice question
consisted of a ground-truth video as a reference, a manually modified text instruction, and two video
prediction results generated by Seer and another baseline method. The evaluators were required to
choose the video clip that is more consistent with the text instruction and has higher fidelity from the
two options. To ensure the clarity of the questions, we provided an example to explain the options
in each questionnaire. Moreover, we recommended that evaluators prioritize video predictions with
strong text-based motions as their first preference and the fidelity of the generated video as their
second preference. For reference, Figure 21 provides a screenshot of an example questionnaire.
In total, we collected 342 responses for the Seer vs. TATS comparison, 363 responses for the Seer
vs. Tune-A-Video comparison, and 357 responses for the Seer vs. MCVD comparison. And the
results in the main paper Figure 7 are calculated based on the collected questionnaires.


           Figure 21: Screenshot of a questionnaire example shown to human evaluators.


                                                  27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
                      pushing iphone adapter from left to right


               GT
               Seer
                   covering salt shaker with a towel


                GT
               Seer
                   dropping a card in front of a coin



                GT
               Seer



                   folding mat
                GT
               Seer


                   folding paper
               GT
               Seer


                   spinning phone so it continues spinning
                GT
                Seer


                   folding wool mat
                GT
                Seer


                      putting egg into bowl
                GT
                Seer


                   tilting lid with quarter on it until it falls off
                GT
                Seer


                   moving remote and small remote away from each other
                GT
                Seer


                      moving a bottle and a glass away from each other
                GT
                Seer


                   taking book
                GT
                Seer


                      spinning coin so it continues spinning
                GT
                Seer


                   Figure 22: Text-conditioned video prediction of Seer on SSv2.


                                                                         28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
                          moving pen up


                GT
                pred.
                        moving pen down


                 mani.
                        turning the camera left while filming wall mounted fan


                 GT
                 pred.
                 mani.  turning the camera right while filming wall mounted fan


                         pushing scissors so that it falls off the table
                 GT
                 pred.


                         picking a scissors up
                  mani.


                         pretending to pick a tennisball up
                 GT
                 pred.


                         pretending to picking a tennisball up
                  mani.


                         removing a beer can, revealing a glass behind
                  GT
                 pred.


                        putting a flowerpot next to a beer can
                  mani.


                         moving bowl up
                  GT
                 pred.


                         moving bowl right
                  mani.


                          putting a banana that can't roll onto a slanted surface, so it stays where it is
                  GT
                 pred.


                         putting a green apple on a slanted surface
                  mani.


                         pretending to pick a box of juice up
                  GT
                 pred.


                         pretending to picking a box of juice up
                  mani.


Figure 23: Text-conditioned video prediction/manipulation of Seer on SSv2, where “pred.” refers to
prediction, “mani.” refers to manipulation.
                                                                              29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


           put pot on stove which is near stove
    GT
    Seer


       put broccoli in pot or pan
    GT
    Seer


           flip pot upright in sink
    GT
    Seer


           put fork from basket to tray
    GT
    Seer


       put green squash in pot or pan
    GT
    Seer


       flip pot upright in sink
    GT
    Seer


       turn faucet left
    GT
    Seer


           turn faucet front to right
    GT
    Seer


      put lid on stove
    GT
    Seer


                         Figure 24: Text-conditioned video prediction of Seer on BridgeData.


                                                         30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


         put banana on plate
 GT
 pred.


         put corn on plate
 mani.


         flip pot upright in sink
 GT
 pred.


         pick up eggplant
 mani.


        pick up green mug
 GT
pred.


        pick up glass cup
 mani.


        turn lever vertical to front
GT
pred.


        pick up knife from sink
mani.


        pick up bowl and put in small box
 GT
pred.


        close small box flap
 mani.


Figure 25: Text-conditioned video prediction/manipulation of Seer on BridgeData, where “pred.”
refers to prediction, “mani.” refers to manipulation.


                                               31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   continue chopping onion

GT
TAV
VF
Seer


   still wiping bowl with rag
GT
TAV
VF
Seer


   open cupboard
GT
Seer


   open tap
GT
Seer


   stir pasta
GT
Seer


   cut potato
GT
Seer


Figure 26: Text-conditioned video prediction (conditioned on first frame) on Epic-Kitchens-100.
TAV refers to Tune-A-Video, VF indicates VideoFusion.


                                               32
