Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EGULARIZATION IS E NOUGH FOR L AST-I TERATE
C ONVERGENCE IN Z ERO -S UM G AMES
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                           A BSTRACT

         Recent literature has witnessed a rising interest in learning Nash equilibrium
         with a guarantee of last-iterate convergence. In this paper, we introduce a novel
         approach called Regularized Follow-the-Regularized-Leader (RegFTRL) for the
         purpose of learning equilibria in two-player zero-sum games. RegFTRL is an
         efficient variant of FTRL, enriched with an adaptive regularization that encom-
         passes the well-known entropy regularization as a special case. In the context of
         normal-form games (NFGs), our proposed RegFTRL algorithm exhibits the desir-
         able property of last-iterate linear convergence towards an approximated equilib-
         rium. Furthermore, it converges to an exact Nash equilibrium through adaptive ad-
         justments of the regularization. In extensive-form games (EFGs), we demonstrate
         that the entropy-regularized Multiplicative Weights Update (MWU), a specific in-
         stance of RegFTRL, can achieve a last-iterate linear convergence rate towards the
         quantal response equilibrium, all without the need for either an optimistic update
         or reliance on uniqueness assumptions. These results show that regularization is
         enough for last-iterate convergence. Additionally, we propose FollowMu, a prac-
         tical implementation of RegFTRL with a neural network as the function approxi-
         mator, for model-free learning in sequential non-stationary environments. Finally,
         empirical results substantiate the theoretical properties of RegFTRL, and demon-
         strate that FollowMu achieves favorable performance in EFGs.


1   I NTRODUCTION

Online learning has a rich history that is inextricably intertwined with the advancement of game
theory, convex optimization, and machine learning. One of the earliest manifestations of online
learning can be attributed to Brown (1949)’s proposal of fictitious play as a method for solving two-
player zero-sum games. Ensuing result (Robinson, 1951) has revealed that iteratively computing a
best response to each other’s history of play in (zero-sum) matrix games leads to convergence to
the set of Nash equilibria. This kind of learning paradigm can be linked to the notion of no-regret
learning (Cesa-Bianchi & Lugosi, 2006), which shares a common historical thread with game theory
that dates back to Blackwell’s approachability theorem (Blackwell, 1956; Abernethy et al., 2011).
It is folklore that the time-average policies of no-regret algorithms in self-play converge to a Nash
equilibrium in two-player zero-sum games (called average-iterate convergence) (Cesa-Bianchi &
Lugosi, 2006). A plethora of online learning algorithms, including the celebrated Online Mirror
Descent (OMD) (Warmuth et al., 1997) and Follow-the-Regularized-Leader (FTRL) (Abernethy
et al., 2008), ensure that the worst case regret is upper bounded sublinearly with learning itera-
tions (Shalev-Shwartz, 2012), thus allowing for a global on-average convergence to the Nash equi-
librium over time. A myriad of studies have significantly expanded the applicability of the no-regret
theorem to a broader class of settings, covering extensive-form games (EFGs) (Zinkevich et al.,
2007; Hoda et al., 2010), Markov games (MGs) (Bai et al., 2020; Tian et al., 2021), differential
games (i.e. smooth games) (Vlatakis-Gkaragkounis et al., 2019), and auctions (Deng et al., 2021).
However, the average-iterate convergence characteristic poses significant challenges in game theory
and its practical applications, especially when representing policies using deep networks (Heinrich &
Silver, 2016). In most game settings, averaging neural network weights does not directly correspond
to an average of the policies represented by those networks (Heinrich et al., 2015; Daskalakis et al.,
2018). To mimic agents’ average behaviors, it is often required to maintain an additional reservoir


                                                  1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


buffer, typically hundreds or even thousands of times the size of the game, to store past transition
data (Heinrich & Silver, 2016) or historical network parameters (Lanctot et al., 2017), leading to
extremely high memory demands. Moreover, the average policy cannot be represented precisely
due to the inherent neural network approximation error.
Accordingly, it is imperative to develop no-regret algorithms                           (a) r(x, y) = xy
                                                                   1.0                            1.0
that converge to (approximate) Nash equilibrium without av-
                                                                   0.5                            0.5
eraging (called last-iterate convergence). However, previous
                                                                   0.0                            0.0
researches have demonstrated that the standard no-regret al-
gorithms can lead to cyclic behaviors (Zinkevich et al., 2005;     0.5                            0.5

Omidshafiei et al., 2019) or even chaotic behaviors (Sato          1.0
                                                                       1.0 0.5 0.0    0.5   1.0
                                                                                                  1.0
                                                                                                      1.0 0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0
et al., 2002) of the real-time policy. In recent literature, meth-                 (b) r(x, y) = 12 (x2 y2)
                                                                   1.0                            1.0
ods based on optimistic gradients (Daskalakis & Panageas,
2019; Wei et al., 2021), predictive updates (Yadav et al., 0.5                                    0.5


2018), and opponent learning awareness (Foerster et al.,           0.0                            0.0

2018) shed lights on how to break the cyclic behaviors by 0.5                                     0.5

predicting opponents’ next moves. Algorithmically, these 1.0                                      1.0
                                                                       1.0 0.5 0.0    0.5   1.0       1.0 0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0
methods can be considered variations of the optimistic/extra-
gradient methods, where the gradient dynamics are modified Figure 1: Learning dynamics (black
through the introduction of approximate second-order infor- arrows) and second-order dynamics
mation (Schäfer & Anandkumar, 2019). However, in differ- (blue arrows) in the (A) Hamilto-
ent types of games, the second-order information may have nian game, and (B) potential game.
different effects on the learning dynamics. The top plots in
Figure 1 depict the rotations of gradient dynamics around the equilibrium in a Hamiltonian game 1
where the second-order dynamics converge. This highlights the effectiveness of introducing (ap-
proximate) second-order information in jumping out of cycles. However, in some potential games
(as depicted in the bottom plots), the use of second-order information can impede convergence,
particularly when the real-time policy exhibits chaotic behavior.
The contributions of this paper are mainly three-fold: (1) instead of using the approximate second-
order information, we introduce an extra regularization, independent of the game types, into the
underlying game to enhance its potential component and thus establish general-case last-iterate con-
vergence; (2) by incorporating the regularization, we present a variant of FTRL called Regularized
FTRL (RegFTRL) that is able to converge at an exponentially fast rate in both NFGs and EFGs
without either the optimistic update or the uniqueness assumptions, and investigate two approaches,
annealing and adaption approaches, to build algorithms that converge to an exact Nash equilibrium;
and (3) we propose a model-free reinforcement learning algorithm, FollowMu, as a practical imple-
mentation of RegFTRL, and validate its performance in Kuhn & Leduc and Phantom Tic-Tac-Toe.

1.1    R ELATED W ORK

Research in the realm of last-iterate convergence can be roughly divided into two lines: the opti-
mistic update paradigm and the regularization technique. In the optimistic update approach, previous
studies (Rakhlin & Sridharan, 2013; Daskalakis et al., 2018; Liang & Stokes, 2019; Mokhtari et al.,
2020) have investigated the last-iterate convergence in simple unconstrained cases, which are not
directly applicable to the NFG/EFG setting. In cases where a unique Nash equilibrium is assumed,
Daskalakis & Panageas (2019) and Wei et al. (2021) have extended the scope of research by pro-
viding last-iterate convergence guarantees for Optimistic Multiplicative Weights Update (OMWU)
(corresponds to Optimistic FTRL with an entropy regularizer) in NFGs, while Wei et al. (2021)
further prove the convergence of Optimistic Gradient Descent/Ascent (OGDA) (corresponds to op-
timistic OMD with a L2 regularizer) without the uniqueness assumption. In the context of EFGs,
the pioneering work by Farina et al. (2019) empirically demonstrates the last-iterate convergence
of OMWU, while Lee et al. (2021) subsequently establish theoretical proofs with the uniqueness
assumption. Recently, Gorbunov et al. (2022); Cai et al. (2022) have extended the convergence
properties of OGDA to monotone games, which include many common classes of games, such as
zero-sum polymatrix games and concave-convex games. However, the optimistic update is not
flawless. From a theoretical standpoint, OMWU still lacks an explicit last-iterate convergence rate,
    1
      See Appendix C for discussions on Hamiltonian and potential games. In brief, an NFG is potential if there
is a single potential function g such that Vπ1 ,π2 − Vπ̂1 ,π2 = −g(π 1 , π 2 ) + g(π̂ 1 , π 2 ) for all π 1 , π̂ 1 , π 2 .


                                                            2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


even in NFGs, without the reliance on uniqueness assumption (Wei et al., 2021; Lee et al., 2021).
Additionally, the analysis of OMWU in EFGs is built over the sequence-form strategy (Wei et al.,
2021; Lee et al., 2021), which exhibits limitations in scaling to large games. In practical terms,
the implementation of the optimistic update approach often necessitates the computation of multi-
ple strategies at each iteration. Furthermore, OGDA has high per-iteration complexity due to the
costly projection operations at each iteration, which adds to the computational burden. In contrast,
our proposed approach, RegFTRL, offers distinct advantages. It obviates the requirement for the
uniqueness condition and emphasizes the behavior-form strategy, making it more compatible with
reinforcement learning and readily adaptable to large-scale games.
Within the realm of learning dynamics, regularization technique has emerged as pivotal tools for
accelerating convergence (Pérolat et al., 2021; Abe et al., 2022; Sokota et al., 2023; Abe et al.,
2023). Pérolat et al. (2021) conducted a comprehensive analysis of the impact of entropy regu-
larization on continuous-time dynamics, and propose a reward transformation method to achieve
linear convergence in EFGs using counterfactual values. However, it is imperative to note that their
theoretical findings pertaining to continuous-time dynamics do not inherently extend to the desired
discrete-time results. Moreover, the use of counterfactual values presents scalability challenges
in large-scale settings (McAleer et al., 2023). Furthermore, their reward transformation technique
can lead to estimation issues due to the arbitrarily cumulative sum. Wang et al. (2022) shows that
the GDA algorithm, with a decreasing learning rate, achieves last-iterate convergence in strongly
monotone games. In the context of monotone games, the establishment of strong monotonicity
is achievable through the incorporation of a strongly convex regularizer. Abe et al. (2022) pro-
posed Mutation-Driven MWU (M2WU), a variant of MWU for solving NFGs. M2WU incorpo-
rates an additional mutation term and, in essence, constitutes an instantiation of RegFTRL with
moment projection serving as the regularization. Similar to our work, Magnetic Mirror Descent
(MMD) (Sokota et al., 2023) and FTRL with Slingshot Perturbation (FTRL-SP) (Abe et al., 2023)
investigate the influences of general-case regularization on last-iterate convergence, and both pro-
vide the linear convergence rate to the regularized equilibrium, albeit FTRL-SP with a more strict
restriction on the learning rate. However, MMD exclusively achieves convergence towards an ap-
proximated equilibrium in NFGs, while the concurrent work FTRL-SP provides a convergence rate
to an exact Nash equilibrium with the L2 regularizer in monotone games. Furthermore, their analy-
ses could not encompass the behavior-form EFGs considered in our paper. Due to the uniqueness
of the quantal response equilibrium (QRE), certain endeavors have attempted to combine optimistic
update with additional entropy-regularization to remove the uniqueness assumption associated with
OMWU (Cen et al., 2021; Liu et al., 2022), but these approaches still inherit limitations of the
optimistic update paradigm.
Compared with the aforementioned related works that either focus on matrix games (Abe et al.,
2022; Sokota et al., 2023), only consider a special regularization (Abe et al., 2022), or assume
continuous-time feedback (Pérolat et al., 2021), we go one step further and prove that RegFTRL
converges to an exact Nash equilibrium via general-case regularization in NFGs, and converges ex-
ponential fast to the QRE in behavior-form EFGs without the continuous-time feedback assumption.
Additionally, through empirical observations, we substantiate that RegFTRL equipped with alter-
native regularization, consistently exhibits last-iterate convergence in behavior-form EFGs. Col-
lectively, our findings underscore that regularization is enough for the last-iterate convergence in
zero-sum games.


2     P RELIMINARIES

2.1   E XTENSIVE -F ORM G AMES

The representation of a two-player zero-sum EFG ⟨N , S, A, I, P, {rh }H   h=1 ⟩ is based on a game tree
of depth H, modeling the sequential interactions involving each player i ∈ N = {1, 2} and a chance
player c. At each history s ∈ S at time h ∈ [H], corresponding to a node at level h in the finite
rooted game tree, the player function P(s) 7→ i ∈ N ∪ {c} determines a player or chance to play
an action a ∈ A(s). As a result, player 1 will receive a reward rh (s, a) ∈ [0, 1] (and player 2 will
receive a reward −rh (s, a)), and the history will transition to its successor history s′ = sa at time
h + 1. We denote s′ ⊏ s if s′ is led from s. Due to the imperfect-information, at each history s,


                                                  3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


only an information state I ∈ I can be observed, where histories s ∈ I are indistinguishable for
the current player. We use I(s) to denote the information state I corresponding to a history s.
A behavior-form strategy π(a|I) is defined on each information state: π(·|I) 7→ ∆A(I) (∆ is
a probability simplex, and ∆◦ means the interior of ∆). We further denote the restriction of
π over Ii ⊆ I by π i , and thus π = (π i , π −i ). QIf all players follow π, the reach probabil-
ity of a history s can be computed by ρπ (s) = s′ a⊏s π(a|I(s′ )). Thus we have rh (I, a) =
           π       h               π              π             π
P                           P
    s∈I,a ρ (s, a)r (s, a)/   s∈I ρ (s), wherehρ (s, a) = ρ (s)π(a|I(s)). For player 1, the regular-
                                                    H         ′
ized value function is defined as Vπh,τ (I) = E             h
                                                  P
                                                    h′ =h [r (Ih , ah )−δ(Ih )·τ ·∇g(π(·|Ih ))]|Ih =
                                                                  ′  ′       ′              ′
  i
                                                                                    h+1,τ ′
I , and the regularized Q-function as Qh,τ                h
                                            π (I, a) = r (I, a) + EI ′ =I(ha),h∈I [Vπ    (I )], where
δ(I) = 2 · 11=P(I) − 1, and g is a continuously differentiable regularization function. The
un-regularized value functions Vπh (I), Qhπ (I, a) can be obtained by setting τ = 0. The value
functions of player 2 are the negative one of player 1. Given a policy π, we define Eτ (π) =
maxp [Vp1,τ                  1,τ
         i ,π −i (sinit ) − Vπ i ,p−i (sinit )], and policy π is said to be a regularized equilibrium (or Nash

equilibrium if τ = 0) if Eτ (π) = 0, or ϵ-regularized equilibrium if Eτ (π) ≤ ϵ.

2.2       N ORMAL -F ORM G AMES AND F OLLOW- THE -R EGULARIZED -L EADER

NFGs are strict sub-class of EFGs, where only one stage exists and all the players act simultaneously.
each player i selects action ai ∈ A, and then player 1 receives a reward r(a1 , a2 ) ∈ [0, 1] while
                                                                                    Q2
player 2 receives a reward −r(a1 , a2 ). For a given policy π = (π 1 , π 2 ) ∈ i=1 ∆A , the Q-
function for player 1 is defined as Qπ (a1 ) = Ea2 ∼π2 [r(a1 , a2 )], and the value function as Vπ =
Ea1 ∼π1 [Qπ (a1 )]. The value functions of player 2 are the negative values of player 1.
FTRL 2 is an intuitive
                   R t algorithm: for player i, at each time step it maximizes the sum iof the
past returns yti = 0 (2 · 11=i − 1)Qπk dk with a regularization ψ : ∆A → R, i.e., πt+1        =
arg maxp∈∆A [η⟨p, yti ⟩ − ψ(p)] where ⟨·, ·⟩ means inner product and η > 0 is the learning rate.



2.3       OTHER N OTATIONS

For a strictly convex and continuously differentiable function ψ, we denote the Bregman diver-
gence as Dψ (p, q) = ψ(p) − ψ(q) P − ⟨∇ψ(q), p − q⟩, and the Kullback-Leibler divergence (i.e.,
Bregman divergence with ψ(p) =        a p(a) ln p(a)) as DKL . Then, we say that ψ is λ-strongly
convex with respect to ∥·∥ if Dψ (p, q) ≥ λ2 ∥p − q∥2 , and g is λ-strongly convex relative to ψ
if ⟨∇g(p) − ∇g(q), p − q⟩ ≥ λ⟨∇ψ(p) − ∇ψ(q), p − q⟩. Note that ψ and Dψ (·, q) is 1-strongly
convex relative to ψ.


3       S TABILIZE THE L EARNING DYNAMICS VIA R EGULARIZATION

This section utilizes the regularization to stabilize the learning dynamics of FTRL in general games,
and presents a comprehensive study of its last-iterate convergence in NFGs and EFGs. We defer all
the proofs of our theoretical results to Appendix A.

3.1       L AST-I TERATE C ONVERGENCE IN NFG S

Since the learning dynamics of FTRL will converge in potential games (Héliou et al., 2017) but
cycle in Hamiltonian games (Mertikopoulos et al., 2018; Balduzzi et al., 2018), an intuitive idea to
stabilize the FTRL dynamics is to add an extra potential component to the underlying game, i.e., to
enhance the potential component of the original game. In this subsection, we present this potential
enhancement method in NFGs.

    2
        See Appendix C for a more detailed presentation of FTRL.


                                                       4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


With an arbitrary potential function g, we consider the potential-enhancement optimization problem:
                                                      max         min Vπ1 ,π2 − τ g(π 1 , π 2 ),                                                               (1)
                                                    π 1 ∈∆A π 2 ∈∆A

where τ > 0 is a weight parameter to control the strength of the additional potential component,
and thus the original game can be obtained by setting τ = 0. We further consider a decentralized
potential function, i.e., g(π 1 , π 2 ) = g 1 (π 1 ) − g 2 (π 2 ), in terms of ease-of-use. It can be found that
problem (1) is a generalization of entropy-regularized problem by setting g i (p) = ⟨p, ln p⟩. Inspired
by that, we develop RegFTRL by incorporating the additional potential function into FTRL:
                                 πti = arg max[η⟨p, yti ⟩ − ψ(p)],                                                                                             (2)
                                             p∈∆A
                                           Z t
                            yti (a) =
                                                   i
                                                  δ Qπk (a) − τ [∇g i (πki )]a dk,                       δ i = 2 · 11=i − 1,

                                             0
where η > 0 is the learning rate, and the regularization function  Rt                  ψ : ∆A → R is  strictly
convex and continuously differentiable on ∆A . Note that 0 δ i Qπk (a) − τ [∇g i (πki )]a dk =
Pt−1   i                     i i

   k=0 δ Qπk (a) − τ [∇g (πk )]a under discrete-time settings, and FTRL can be obtained by
setting τ = 0. It can be found that the learning dynamics of RegFTRL in the original game
is equivalent with the FTRL dynamics in the potential-enhancement optimization problem (1).
.5In RegFTRL, the extra potential term is expected to force                            0.0P 1.0                                         0.0P 1.0

the dynamics to escape from cycles. Figure 2 shows this in-                        0.2          0.8                                 0.2          0.8
                                                                               0.4                                              0.4
sight visually, which describes RegFTRL dynamics in a sim-                                          0.6                                              0.6
                                                                           0.6                          0.4                 0.6                          0.4
ple Hamiltonian game of biased Rock-Paper-Scissors. Here               0.8                                              0.8
                                                                                                            0.2                                              0.2
we take g i (π i ) = DKL (µi , π i ) (µ is an uniform strategy) as 1.0                                          0.0 1.0                                          0.0
an example. As can be seen in Figure 2 (a), the FTRL dynam- R        0.0     0.2     0.4
                                                                                   (a) τ=0
                                                                                            0.6     0.8     1.0  S R  0.0     0.2     0.4
                                                                                                                                  (b) τ=0.03
                                                                                                                                             0.6     0.8     1.0 S


ics cycle and fail to converge to the interior Nash equilibrium,                       0.0P 1.0                                         0.0P 1.0

while the RegFTRL
              Rt        dynamics     with  only the potential term                 0.2          0.8                                 0.2          0.8
                                                                               0.4                                              0.4
(i.e., yti = − 0 ∇g i (πki )dk) directly converge to a stationary          0.6
                                                                                                    0.6
                                                                                                                            0.6
                                                                                                                                                     0.6
                                                                                                        0.4                                              0.4
point in Figure 2 (d), although this stationary point is indepen-      0.8                                  0.2         0.8                                  0.2
dent of the original game. However, with some small weight 1.0                                                  0.0 1.0                                          0.0

parameters, RegFTRL flows towards a stationary point near R
                                                                     0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 S R 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 S
                                                                                  (c) τ=0.1                         (d) only entropy-regularizer
the Nash equilibrium as shown in Figure 2 (b) and (c).
We now analyze the theoretical properties of RegFTRL. Be- Figure 2: The vector fields of
fore that, we make some necessary assumptions.                      RegFTRL with varying weights in
                                                                    biased Rock-Paper-Scissors.
Assumption 1 (Well Defined). Assume ψ is 1-strongly convex
                                                     2
with respect to ∥·∥ and πt ∈ B = B 1 × B 2 ⊆ i=1 ∆◦A , where {πt }t≥0 is generated by RegFTRL.
                                                   Q

Assumption 2. For i ∈ {1, 2}, assume g i is continuously differentiable and λ-strongly convex
relative to ψ over ∆◦A . This also implies that ∇g i is L-smooth over B, i.e., ∥∇g i (p) − ∇g i (q)∥ ≤
L∥p − q∥ for ∀p, q ∈ B. Furthermore, we assume g i has an interior minimum point µi ∈ B i , and
re-denote g i as gµi for the sake of clarity. We call this minimum point µ as reference strategy.
Assumption 3 (Regularized Equilibrium). Assume πµ ∈ B is the interior stationary point of
continuous-time RegFTRL dynamics with ψ(p) = ⟨p, ln p⟩ and gµ .

Assumption 1 is to ensure that πt generated by RegFTRL is well defined. This assumption is
also required in MMD (Sokota et al., 2023). Assumption 2 allows RegFTRL to get fast conver-
gence via leveraging the curvature of gµ , and then the potential enhancement method actually is
the regularization technique. And Assumption 3 is guaranteed when gµi (π) = DKL (µi , π i ) or
gµi (π) = DKL (π i , µi ) (more details refer to Appendix A.1). Under these assumptions, we first
present the properties of regularized equilibrium, and then give the linear convergence guarantees of
RegFTRL without the uniqueness condition in both continuous-time and discrete-time settings.
Theorem 1. Under Assumption 1∼3, regularized equilibrium πµ ∈ B satisfies: (1) πµ is unique; (2)
                                                    P2
πµ is an ϵ-Nash equilibrium, where ϵ = E(πµ ) = τ i=1 maxa [∇g i (πµi )]a −⟨πµi , ∇g i (πµi )⟩ ≥ 0.
Theorem 2. Let Assumption 1∼3 hold. Then,
(continuous-time) πt generated by continuous-time version of RegFTRL dynamics satisfies:
                                              Dψ (πµ , πt ) ≤ Dψ (πµ , π0 ) exp(−ητ λ · t).


                                                                                5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


(discrete-time) πt generated by discrete-time version of RegFTRL dynamics satisfies:
                                                                     q
  Dψ (πµ , πt ) ≤ Dψ (πµ , π0 )(1 + ητ λ)−t , and E(πt ) ≤ E(πµ ) + 2 Dψ (πµ , π0 )(1 + ητ λ)−t/2 ,
                                τλ
if ψ(p) = ⟨p, ln p⟩ and 0 < η ≤ L̃ 2
                                     , where L̃ = max{τ L, 1}.
Remark 1. Theorem 1 implies that πµ is a Nash equilibrium if E(πµ ) = 0, which means πµ = µ.
Additionally, by combining Theorem 1 and Theorem 2, it can be also found that the weight parameter
τ introduces a trade-off between the speed of convergence and the bias in the Nash equilibrium.
These observations inspire us to develop the two approaches mentioned in Section 3.3 to reach an
exact Nash equilibrium.
Remark 2. Take the QRE as an example, Theorem 2 implies that discrete-time RegFTRL is guar-
                                  1        1
anteed to find an ϵ-QRE in O( ln(1+ητ ) ln ϵ ) iterations. Besides, FTRL-SP (Abe et al., 2023) and
                                                                     1         1
entropy-regularized OMWU (Cen et al., 2021) both require O( − ln(1−ητ   /2) ln ϵ ) iterations.


3.2   L AST-I TERATE C ONVERGENCE IN EFG S

This subsection generalizes ReFTRL to EFGs. We first present the RegFTRL algorithm.
Algorithm 1 (RegFTRL in EFGs). At any information state I ∈ I, the policy updated rule is:
                            πt (·|I) = arg max[η⟨p, yth,τ (I, ·)⟩ − ψ(p)],                          (3)
                                         p∈∆A(I)
                                         t−1 h
                                         X                                  i
                        yth,τ (I, a) =        δ(I)Qh,τ             I
                                                   k (I, a) − τ [∇gµ (πk )]a ,
                                         k=0

where gµI (πk ) := gµ (πk (·|I)), and update the value functions as:
                                                  I
      Q0 = 0, V0 (I) = −δ(I)τ ⟨π0 (·|I), ∇gµ (π0 )⟩
     
             h,τ                                      h+1,τ ′
           Q (I, a) = rh (I, a) + EI ′ =I(ha),h∈I [Vt−1     (I )]                                   (4)
      th,τ                        h,τ
                                       (I) + αt a πt (a|I) Qh,τ
                                               P                                    I

           Vt (I) = (1 − αt )Vt−1                             t (I, a) − δ(I)τ · ∇[gµ (πt )]a .


It can be found that Algorithm 1 conforms to the actor-critic framework, wherein the actor is re-
sponsible for policy updates through the utilization of RegFTRL (as delineated in Eq. (2)), while
the critic undertakes the task of value function updates on a relatively slower timescale. Given
the intricate structural complexities introduced by the extensive-form format inherent in EFGs, par-
ticularly the non-concave nature of the value functions within the behavior-form representation,
we focus on providing the convergence guarantee for a specialized instance of ReFTRL, wherein
gµI (π) = DKLI
                (π, µ) and ψ(π) = ⟨π, ln π⟩. It is noteworthy that the entropy-regularized MWU is
readily attainable by setting the reference strategy µ as a uniform strategy.
                                                                      c
Theorem 3. Let gµI (π) = DKL  I
                                (π, µ) := DKL (π(·|I), µ(·|I)), µ ≥ |A| , c ∈ (0, 1]. With 0 < ητ ≤ 23 ,
                   1
0 < τ ≤ max{1,2 ln(|A|/c)} , and αt = ητ , Algorithm 1 satisfies:

                  h,τ                                                               5
      max |Qh,τ                  t−Th H−h
                                          , and Eτ (πt ) ≤ 8(1 − ητ )t−T1             H + 3tH ,

            πµ − Qt | ≤ (1 − ητ )    t
       I,a                                                                          3
                                    1
where t ≥ Th := (H − h)Ts , Ts = ⌈ ητ ln 2(9H + 19)⌉.
Remark 3. Minimizing the bound over η, Theorem 3 implies that Algorithm 1 is guaranteed to
                                                                                     H2
find an ϵ-QRE in Õ( H     1
                      τ ln ϵ ) iterations, and thus find an ϵ-Nash equilibrium in Õ( ϵ ) iterations by
                    ϵ
setting τ = O( H ln(|A|/c) ) since E(π) ≤ Eτ (π) + 2τ H ln(|A|/c).

3.3   C ONVERGENCE TO AN E XACT NASH E QUILIBRIUM

Section 3.1 and Section 3.2 analyze the theoretical properties of RegFTRL with a fixed reference
strategy, and guarantee the linear convergence to an approximated equilibrium. In this subsection,
we introduce two approaches to find an exact Nash equilibrium.


                                                    6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


The first one is the annealing approach that gradually decrease weight parameter τ . This reduc-
tion serves the purpose of diminishing the bias associated with the equilibrium. Drawing insights
from Theorem 1 and Remark 3, the distance between the regularized equilibrium πµ and the set of
Nash equilibria Π∗ can be effectively controlled through the manipulation of the weight parame-
ter τ . Nonetheless, it is worth noting that, as implied by Theorem 2 and Theorem 3, the speed of
convergence might be adversely affected as the weight parameter τ undergoes reduction.
Another one is the adaption approach, similar to the direct convergence method (Pérolat et al.,
2021). As indicated in Remark 1, a Nash equilibrium can be achieved when πµ = µ, implying
that the regularized equilibrium will exhibit closer proximity to Π∗ if the reference strategy µ ap-
proximates a Nash equilibrium. Therefore, we set reference strategy µ to πt every N iterations,
with the expectation that πt will progressively converge towards a Nash equilibrium. Indeed, with
µk denoting the k-th reference strategy and a sufficiently large value for N , πt converges to πµk
from Theorem 2 and Theorem 3. Subsequently, the subsequent reference strategy µk+1 is adjusted
to coincide with πµk . Intuitively, as k increases, πµk coincides with µk , consequently driving the
reference strategies towards convergence with a Nash equilibrium in the underlying game. This
intuition is formally substantiated by the following theorem. It is important to highlight that, un-
like the annealing approach, the adaption approach obviates the necessity for a diminishing weight
parameter τ , thus preserving a consistent convergence rate.
Theorem 4. If gµ (π) = Dϕ (π, µ) and gµ (π) = DKL (µ, π), then for any interior point µ0 , the
sequence of reference strategies {µk }k≥0 converges to a Nash equilibrium of the original game.
Remark 4. Moving magnet approach used in MMD (Sokota et al., 2023), wherein the reference
strategy is updated as µt+1 ∝ µt1−β πt+1  β
                                              (0 < β < 1), is also an efficient means to promote
convergence to a Nash equilibrium. However, the reference strategy updated in this form can be
perceived as an average strategy in a certain sense, potentially limiting its practical applicability.

4   F OLLOW M U : A P RACTICAL I MPLEMENTATION OF R EG FTRL
This section proposes a novel model-free reinforcement learning algorithm, named FollowMu
(Follow the reference strategy µ), which combines ReFTRL with function approximation tech-
niques. We employ the actor-critic framework to develop FollowMu due to its scalability (Sutton &
Barto, 2018). Let A(I, a; θt ) be the actor network parameterized by θt , and V (I; ωt ) be the critic
network parameterized by ωt . At the time step t, the critic network V (I; ωt ) is trained to approxi-
mate the value function Vπt (I) of the real-time strategy, and the actor network A(I, a; θt ) is trained
to fit the cumulative advantage function of past iterations plus the Q-function of the current-iterate
strategy (with the regularized term):
                       t−1
                       X                                 πk (a|I)                        πt (a|I)
        A(I, a; θt ) ≃      Qπk (I, a) − Vπk (I) − τ log            + Qπt (I, a) − τ log
                                                         µ(a|I)                          µ(a|I)
                    k=0
                                                                πt (a|I)
                  ≃ [A(I, a; θt−1 ) − V (I; ωt−1 )] + G − τ log          ,                        (5)
                                                                 µ(a|I)
where G is the empirical estimator of Qπt (I, a). Then, if we take ψ to be the entropy regularizer,
the next-iterate strategy can be computed by:
                   πt+1 (a|I) ∝ exp(zt (I, a)), zt (I, a) ≃ A(I, a; θt ) − V (I; ωt ).            (6)
Here we employ the advantage function Qπt (I, a) − Vπt (I), as a substitution for the Q-function
Qπt (I, a), a choice made for the sake of enhancing numerical stability and robustness. Despite this
alteration, the strategy update formulation in the manner of Eq.(6) remains equivalent to the updated
strategy employed in RegFTRL, attributed to the shift-invariant nature inherent in the softmax func-
tion. Meanwhile, the reference strategy will be updated µ ← πt every N iterations. More details of
FollowMu are presented in the Appendix B.1.

5   E XPERIMENTS
In this section, we validate our methods on NFGs and EFGs utilizing the exploitability metric (i.e.,
E(π)) under two experimental settings, i.e., full-information feedback setting and neural-based sam-
ple setting. In full-information feedback setting, we evaluate the performance of RegFTRL as a


                                                   7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Nash equilibrium solver, employing annealing approach and adaption approach. Note that the po-
tential function gµ in RegFTRL is set to gµ (π) = DKL (π, µ). In addition to this, we also consider
moment projection gµ (π) = DKL (µ, π) and L2 norm gµ (π) = 21 ∥π − µ∥22 for examining the impact
brought by different regularization. We abbreviate RegFTRL equipped with gµ (π) = DKL (µ, π) as
M-RegFTRL, and RegFTRL with gµ (π) = 12 ∥π − µ∥22 as 2-RegFTRL. In neural-based sample set-
ting, we assess the efficacy of FollowMu as a deep multi-agent reinforcement learning algorithm
through self-play. Further details about the experimental settings are included in Appendix B.2.

5.1   F ULL -I NFORMATION F EEDBACK S ETTING
                                                            RegFTRL-A                               MMD-A                                 FTRL                                                          M-RegFTRL-A                               2-RegFTRL-A
                                                            RegFTRL-D                               MMD-M                                 O-FTRL                                                        M-RegFTRL-D                               2-RegFTRL-D
                                                                DƵůƚŝƉůĞ EĂƐŚ  ƋƵŝůŝďƌŝĂ ;DͲEĞͿ                                                                                ZĂŶĚŽŵ 'ĂŵĞ ;ƐŝǌĞ ϱϬͿ
                                               ϭϬ ϭ                                                                                                                                     ϭϬ ϭ
                                               ϭϬ ϯ
                ǆƉůŽŝƚĂďŝůŝƚǇ


                                                                                                                                                             ǆƉůŽŝƚĂďŝůŝƚǇ
                                               ϭϬ ϱ                                                                                                                                     ϭϬ ϯ
                                               ϭϬ ϳ
                                               ϭϬ ϵ                                                                                                                                     ϭϬ ϱ
                                              ϭϬ ϭϭ                                                                                                                                    ϭϬ ϳ
                                              ϭϬ ϭϯ
                                              ϭϬ ϭϱ Ϭ                                                                                                                                 ϭϬ ϵ Ϭ
                                                     ϭϬ               ϭϬϭ              ϭϬϮ            ϭϬϯ              ϭϬϰ                                                        ϭϬ       ϭϬϭ        ϭϬϮ          ϭϬϯ      ϭϬϰ      ϭϬϱ
                                                                                     /ƚĞƌĂƚŝŽŶƐ                                                                                                                 /ƚĞƌĂƚŝŽŶƐ


                                                    Figure 3: M-NE & Random Game: Exploitability vs. Iterations
                                                      RegFTRL-A                          MMD-A                          FTRL                                           M-RegFTRL-A                                       2-RegFTRL-A                          CFR
                                                      RegFTRL-D                          MMD-M                          O-FTRL                                         M-RegFTRL-D                                       2-RegFTRL-D                          CFR+
                                                                                  <ƵŚŶ WŽŬĞƌ                                                                                                               >ĞĚƵĐ WŽŬĞƌ
                                                                                                                                                                                     ϭϬϭ
                                               ϭϬ ϭ
                                               ϭϬ ϯ                                                                                                                         ϭϬ ϭ
              ǆƉůŽŝƚĂďŝůŝƚǇ


                                                                                                                                                 ǆƉůŽŝƚĂďŝůŝƚǇ


                                               ϭϬ ϱ                                                                                                                         ϭϬ ϯ
                                               ϭϬ ϳ
                                               ϭϬ ϵ                                                                                                                         ϭϬ ϱ
                                              ϭϬ ϭϭϭϬϬ                                                                                                                       ϳ
                                                                                                                                                                               ϭϬ ϭϬ
                                                                       ϭϬϭ              ϭϬϮ        ϭϬϯ                  ϭϬϰ                                                  Ϭ              ϭϬϭ       ϭϬϮ ϭϬϯ               ϭϬϰ      ϭϬϱ
                                                                                    /ƚĞƌĂƚŝŽŶƐ                                                                                                               /ƚĞƌĂƚŝŽŶƐ

                                                         Figure 4: Kuhn & Leduc Poker: Exploitability vs. Iterations
In this case, we compare the performances of RegFTRL-A (abbr. RegFTRL with annealing ap-
proach), RegFTRL-D (abbr. RegFTRL with adaption approach) with baselines: (i) FTRL, (ii) O-
FTRL (abbr. optimistic FTRL), (iii) CFR (Zinkevich et al., 2007), (iv)MMD-A (abbr. MMD with
annealing weight), and (v) MMD-M (abbr. MMD with moving magnet). For NFGs, we focus on two
games: Multiple Nash Equilibria (abbr. M-Ne) and a random utility game with 50 actions. M-Ne,
as introduced in the prior work (Wei et al., 2021), is characterized by a set of Nash equilibria. For
the random utility game, the 50 × 50 payoff matrix is drawn from a standard Gaussian distribution
in an i.i.d. manner. For EFGs, we consider games implemented in OpenSpiel (Lanctot et al., 2019):
Kuhn Poker and Leduc Poker, with 54 and 9300 non-terminal histories, respectively.
Figure 3 presents the NFG results. Across all games considered, it is evident that FTRL fails to
converge to an equilibrium. Conversely, all other algorithms consistently demonstrate linear con-
vergence rates, aligning with theoretical guarantees. This observation underscores the significant
impact of the optimistic update paradigm and regularization techniques in facilitating last-iterate
convergence. It is noteworthy that RegFTRL shares mathematical equivalence with MMD within
the NFG context. Consequently, RegFTRL-A exhibits performance comparable to that of MMD-
A. However, an interesting contrast emerges between RegFTRL-D and MMD-M, with the former
displaying superior performance. This discrepancy can potentially be attributed to the reference
strategy updated by the moving magnet approach, which retains past-iterate strategies, consequently
causing it to deviate from the Nash equilibrium.
Figure 4 provides the results observed within Kuhn & Leduc Poker. Unlike the performances in
NFGs, in both Poker games, O-FTRL performs poorly, which might be attributed to the behavior-
form based implement. In contrast, despite the absence of theoretical convergence guarantees under
EFGs, both M-RegFTRL and 2-RegFTRL exhibit an exponentially fast convergence rate. This
outcome underscores their potential utility in EFGs, despite the inherent lack of formal guarantees.


                                                                                                                                            8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Furthermore, an interesting trend emerges wherein the adaption approach consistently outperforms
the annealing approach in both NFGs and EFGs. This phenomenon can be elucidated by referring
to Theorem 2 and Theorem 3, which indicate that a decaying weight parameter τ can bring a slower
convergence rate, aligning with our empirical observations.

5.2    N EURAL -BASED S AMPLE S ETTING
                                                            NFSP               FollowMu (ours)               FollowMu ( = 0)                                    With Transformed Reward
                                                                        <ƵŚŶ WŽŬĞƌ                                                                       >ĞĚƵĐ WŽŬĞƌ

                                             Ϭ͘ϭϬ                                                                                            ϭ͘ϬϬ
               ǆƉůŽŝƚĂďŝůŝƚǇ


                                                                                                                   ǆƉůŽŝƚĂďŝůŝƚǇ
                                         Ϭ͘ϬϮ                                                                                            Ϭ͘ϮϬ
                                             Ϭ͘ϬϭϬ             ϭD                    ϮD      ϯD                                       Ϭ͘ϭϬϬ   ϯ͘ϯD                 ϲ͘ϳD   ϭϬD
                                                                        /ƚĞƌĂƚŝŽŶƐ                                                                         /ƚĞƌĂƚŝŽŶƐ

                                                          Figure 5: Kuhn & Leduc Poker: Exploitability vs. Iterations

    Table 1: Mean±standard deviation of the approximate exploitability on Phantom Tic-Tac-Toe.
                          FollowMu          NFSP          PPO         Uniform Agent
              1M step                                              0.39 ± 0.02                     0.91 ± 0.04                                         0.94 ± 0.03                 0.79 ± 0.02
              10M step                                             0.21 ± 0.04                     0.80 ± 0.03                                         0.91 ± 0.03                 0.79 ± 0.02

In this case, we validate our practical implement of RegFTRL, i.e., FollowMu, can work effec-
tively with function approximator while preserving the theoretical guarantees. Within both Poker
benchmarks, as depicted in Figure 5, we conduct a comparative analysis involving FollowMu,
NFSP (Heinrich & Silver, 2016), FollowMu without regularization (i.e., practical implement of
FTRL), and FollowMu with transformed reward (Pérolat et al., 2021). Our observations reveal that
FollowMu consistently outperforms the other baselines in terms of exploitability. The noteworthy
disparity between FollowMu and FollowMu (τ = 0) aligns with the learning dynamics associated
with ReFTRL and FTRL, substantiating the effectiveness of the incorporated regularization term.
Furthermore, our findings indicate that FollowMu surpasses FollowMu with the transformed re-
ward. This distinction may be attributed to the fact that FollowMu introduces the regularization
term at the return level, mitigating the cumulative sum effect encountered at the reward level.
Table 1 reports the performances of FollowMu with NFSP, PPO (Schulman et al., 2017), and Uni-
form Agent (employing a uniform strategy consistently) on Phantom Tic-Tac-Toe. Phantom Tic-
Tac-Toe, which is also implemented in OpenSpiel, is an imperfect-information game where the
winner receives a payoff of +1 and the losing player receives −1. The evaluation of approximate
exploitability in Phantom Tic-Tac-Toe is computed through a trained DQN best response, owing
to the substantial scale of the game. The outcomes underscore that both FollowMu and NFSP ex-
hibit enhanced performance following 10 million steps of training compared to their performance
after 1 million steps. In contrast, PPO exhibits negligible improvement, consistent with the fact
that it is designed for single-agent environments. Notably, FollowMu emerges as the top performer,
significantly outperforming the baseline methods.

6     C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we introduce RegFTRL, an algorithm that devised to enhance the stability of FTRL
dynamics through a general-case regularization, and establish the last-iterate linear convergence in
both NFGs and EFGs, without either the uniqueness condition or the optimistic update paradigm.
Furthermore, our investigation extends to probing the feasibility of achieving convergence towards
an exact Nash equilibrium through two straightforward yet highly efficient approaches. Addition-
ally, we propose a model-free reinforcement learning algorithm for zero-sum games, named Fol-
lowMu, which is theoretically justified as it is derived from RegFTRL. The numerical simulation
reveals RegFTRL outperforms FTRL and O-FTRL in various zero-sum games, and demonstrates
that FollowMu attains favorable performance levels, underscoring its practical utility.


                                                                                                              9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Kenshi Abe, Kaito Ariu, Mitsuki Sakamoto, Kentaro Toyoshima, and Atsushi Iwasaki. Last-iterate
  convergence with full- and noisy-information feedback in two-player zero-sum games. arXiv,
  abs/2208.09855, 2022.
Kenshi Abe, Kaito Ariu, Mitsuki Sakamoto, and Atsushi Iwasaki. A slingshot approach to learning
  in monotone games. arXiv, abs/2305.16610, 2023.
Jacob D. Abernethy, Elad Hazan, and Alexander Rakhlin. Competing in the dark: An efficient
  algorithm for bandit linear optimization. In Annual Conference on Learning Theory, pp. 263–
  274, 2008.
Jacob D. Abernethy, Peter L. Bartlett, and Elad Hazan. Blackwell approachability and no-regret
  learning are equivalent. In Annual Conference on Learning Theory, volume 19 of JMLR Proceed-
  ings, pp. 27–46, 2011.
Yu Bai, Chi Jin, and Tiancheng Yu. Near-optimal reinforcement learning with self-play. Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:2159–2170, 2020.
David Balduzzi, Sébastien Racanière, James Martens, Jakob N. Foerster, Karl Tuyls, and Thore
  Graepel. The mechanics of n-player differentiable games. In International Conference on Ma-
  chine Learning, volume 80 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 363–372, 2018.
David Blackwell. An analog of the minimax theorem for vector payoffs. Pacific Journal of Mathe-
  matics, 6:1–8, 1956.
George W Brown. Some notes on computation of games solutions. Technical report, RAND CORP
  SANTA MONICA CA, 1949.
Yang Cai, Argyris Oikonomou, and Weiqiang Zheng. Finite-time last-iterate convergence for learn-
  ing in multi-player games. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022.
Shicong Cen, Yuting Wei, and Yuejie Chi. Fast policy extragradient methods for competitive games
  with entropy regularization. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 27952–
  27964, 2021.
Nicolò Cesa-Bianchi and Gábor Lugosi. Prediction, learning, and games. Cambridge University
  Press, 2006.
Constantinos Daskalakis and Ioannis Panageas. Last-iterate convergence: Zero-sum games and
  constrained min-max optimization. In Information Technology Convergence and Services, volume
  124 of LIPIcs, pp. 27:1–27:18, 2019.
Constantinos Daskalakis, Andrew Ilyas, Vasilis Syrgkanis, and Haoyang Zeng. Training gans with
  optimism. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2018.
Xiaotie Deng, Xinyan Hu, Tao Lin, and Weiqiang Zheng. Nash convergence of mean-based learning
  algorithms in first price auctions. Proceedings of the ACM Web Conference 2022, pp. 141–150,
  2021.
Gabriele Farina, Christian Kroer, and Tuomas Sandholm. Optimistic regret minimization for
  extensive-form games via dilated distance-generating functions. In Advances in Neural Infor-
  mation Processing Systems, pp. 5222–5232, 2019.
Jakob N. Foerster, Richard Y. Chen, Maruan Al-Shedivat, Shimon Whiteson, Pieter Abbeel, and
  Igor Mordatch. Learning with opponent-learning awareness. In International Conference on
  Autonomous Agents and MultiAgent Systems, pp. 122–130, 2018.
Eduard Gorbunov, Adrien B. Taylor, and Gauthier Gidel. Last-iterate convergence of optimistic
  gradient method for monotone variational inequalities. In Advances in Neural Information Pro-
  cessing Systems, 2022.
Johannes Heinrich and David Silver. Deep reinforcement learning from self-play in imperfect-
  information games. arXiv, abs/1603.01121, 2016.


                                              10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Johannes Heinrich, Marc Lanctot, and David Silver. Fictitious self-play in extensive-form games.
  In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 805–813, 2015.
Amélie Héliou, Johanne Cohen, and Panayotis Mertikopoulos. Learning with bandit feedback in
 potential games. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 6369–6378, 2017.
Samid Hoda, Andrew Gilpin, Javier F. Pena, and Tuomas Sandholm. Smoothing techniques for
  computing nash equilibria of sequential games. Mathematics of Operations Research, 35:494–
  512, 2010.
Marc Lanctot, Vinı́cius Flores Zambaldi, Audrunas Gruslys, Angeliki Lazaridou, Karl Tuyls, Julien
 Pérolat, David Silver, and Thore Graepel. A unified game-theoretic approach to multiagent re-
 inforcement learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 4190–4203,
 2017.
Marc Lanctot, Edward Lockhart, Jean-Baptiste Lespiau, Vinı́cius Flores Zambaldi, Satyaki Upad-
 hyay, Julien Pérolat, Sriram Srinivasan, Finbarr Timbers, Karl Tuyls, Shayegan Omidshafiei,
 Daniel Hennes, Dustin Morrill, Paul Muller, Timo Ewalds, Ryan Faulkner, János Kramár, Bart De
 Vylder, Brennan Saeta, James Bradbury, David Ding, Sebastian Borgeaud, Matthew Lai, Ju-
 lian Schrittwieser, Thomas W. Anthony, Edward Hughes, Ivo Danihelka, and Jonah Ryan-Davis.
 Openspiel: A framework for reinforcement learning in games. arXiv, abs/1908.09453, 2019.
Chung-Wei Lee, Christian Kroer, and Haipeng Luo. Last-iterate convergence in extensive-form
  games. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 14293–14305, 2021.
Tengyuan Liang and James Stokes. Interaction matters: A note on non-asymptotic local convergence
  of generative adversarial networks. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and
  Statistics, volume 89 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 907–915, 2019.
Mingyang Liu, Asuman E. Ozdaglar, Tiancheng Yu, and Kaiqing Zhang. The power of regulariza-
 tion in solving extensive-form games. arXiv, abs/2206.09495, 2022.
Stephen Marcus McAleer, Gabriele Farina, Marc Lanctot, and Tuomas Sandholm. ESCHER: es-
  chewing importance sampling in games by computing a history value function to estimate regret.
  In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023.
Panayotis Mertikopoulos, Christos H. Papadimitriou, and Georgios Piliouras. Cycles in adversarial
  regularized learning. In ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms, pp. 2703–2717, 2018.
Aryan Mokhtari, Asuman E. Ozdaglar, and Sarath Pattathil. A unified analysis of extra-gradient
  and optimistic gradient methods for saddle point problems: Proximal point approach. In Interna-
  tional Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, volume 108 of Proceedings of Machine
  Learning Research, pp. 1497–1507, 2020.
Shayegan Omidshafiei, Christos H. Papadimitriou, Georgios Piliouras, Karl Tuyls, Mark Rowland,
  Jean-Baptiste Lespiau, Wojciech M. Czarnecki, Marc Lanctot, Julien Pérolat, and Rémi Munos.
  α-rank: Multi-agent evaluation by evolution. Scientific reports, 9(1):9937, 2019.
Julien Pérolat, Rémi Munos, Jean-Baptiste Lespiau, Shayegan Omidshafiei, Mark Rowland, Pe-
  dro A. Ortega, Neil Burch, Thomas W. Anthony, David Balduzzi, Bart De Vylder, Georgios
  Piliouras, Marc Lanctot, and Karl Tuyls. From poincaré recurrence to convergence in imper-
  fect information games: Finding equilibrium via regularization. In International Conference on
  Machine Learning, volume 139 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 8525–8535,
  2021.
Alexander Rakhlin and Karthik Sridharan. Optimization, learning, and games with predictable se-
  quences. In Advances in Neural Information Processing System, volume 26, 2013.
Julia Robinson. An iterative method of solving a game. Annals of Mathematics, pp. 296–301, 1951.
Yuzuru Sato, Eizo Akiyama, and J Doyne Farmer. Chaos in learning a simple two-person game.
  Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 99(7):4748–4751, 2002.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Florian Schäfer and Anima Anandkumar. Competitive gradient descent. In Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, pp. 7623–7633, 2019.
John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy
  optimization algorithms. arXiv, abs/1707.06347, 2017.
Shai Shalev-Shwartz. Online learning and online convex optimization. Foundations and Trends®
  in Machine Learning, 4:107–194, 2012.
Samuel Sokota, Ryan D’Orazio, J. Zico Kolter, Nicolas Loizou, Marc Lanctot, Ioannis Mitliagkas,
  Noam Brown, and Christian Kroer. A unified approach to reinforcement learning, quantal re-
  sponse equilibria, and two-player zero-sum games. In International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2023.
Richard S. Sutton and Andrew G. Barto. Reinforcement learning: an introduction (2nd ed.). MIT
  Press, 2018.
Yi Tian, Yuanhao Wang, Tiancheng Yu, and Suvrit Sra. Online learning in unknown markov games.
  In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 10279–10288, 2021.
Emmanouil-Vasileios Vlatakis-Gkaragkounis, Lampros Flokas, and Georgios Piliouras. Poincaré
  recurrence, cycles and spurious equilibria in gradient-descent-ascent for non-convex non-concave
  zero-sum games. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019.
Zifan Wang, Yi Shen, Michael Zavlanos, and Karl Henrik Johansson. No-regret learning in strongly
  monotone games converges to a nash equilibrium. 2022.
Manfred K Warmuth, Arun K Jagota, et al. Continuous and discrete-time nonlinear gradient descent:
 Relative loss bounds and convergence. In International Symposium on Artificial Intelligence and
 Mathematics, volume 326. Citeseer, 1997.
Chen-Yu Wei, Chung-Wei Lee, Mengxiao Zhang, and Haipeng Luo. Linear last-iterate convergence
  in constrained saddle-point optimization. In International Conference on Learning Representa-
  tions, 2021.
Abhay Kumar Yadav, Sohil Shah, Zheng Xu, David W. Jacobs, and Tom Goldstein. Stabilizing ad-
  versarial nets with prediction methods. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2018.
Martin Zinkevich, Amy Greenwald, and Michael L. Littman. Cyclic equilibria in markov games. In
 Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 1641–1648, 2005.
Martin Zinkevich, Michael Johanson, Michael H. Bowling, and Carmelo Piccione. Regret mini-
 mization in games with incomplete information. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
 Systems, pp. 1729–1736, 2007.


                                               12
