Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Z ERO AND F EW- SHOT S EMANTIC PARSING WITH
A MBIGUOUS I NPUTS
 Elias Stengel-Eskin1 Kyle Rawlins2 Benjamin Van Durme2
 1
  UNC Chapel Hill 2 Johns Hopkins University



                                                A BSTRACT

             Despite the frequent challenges posed by ambiguity when representing meaning
             via natural language, it is often ignored or deliberately removed in tasks mapping
             language to formally-designed representations, which generally assume a one-to-
             one mapping between linguistic and formal representations. We attempt to address
             this shortcoming by introducing A M P, a framework, dataset, and challenge for
             translating ambiguous natural language to formal representations like logic and
             code. We define templates and generate data for five well-documented linguistic
             ambiguities. Using A M P, we investigate how several few-shot text-to-code systems
             handle ambiguity, introducing three new metrics. We find that large pre-trained
             models perform poorly at capturing the distribution of possible meanings without
             deliberate instruction. However, models are able to capture the distribution well
             when ambiguity is attested in their inputs. These results motivate a call for including
             ambiguity explicitly in datasets and promote considering the distribution of possible
             outputs when evaluating systems. 1


1        I NTRODUCTION
Formalizing the meaning of natural language into a symbolic representation has been attempted
across a variety of domains, from philosophy and linguistics (Wittgenstein, 1921; Montague, 1970) to
artificial intelligence (Winograd, 1972; Zelle & Mooney, 1996). Attempts at formalization have often
faced a shared challenge: many natural language statements have multiple possible meanings, i.e. they
are ambiguous. Past work (e.g. Zipf, 1949; Piantadosi et al., 2012) has argued that this is a natural
feature of a communication system, resulting from competing pressures on speakers and listeners.
Specifically, Piantadosi et al. contend that ambiguity allows speakers to minimize their efforts. Rather
than exactly specify their intended meaning (resulting in a long and expensive message), speakers
can send shorter, cheaper messages and rely on listeners to resolve any ambiguities. However, this
resolution in turn relies on commonsense knowledge and conversational context: most speakers of
English would infer from the utterance, “I ate spaghetti with a fork” that someone used a fork as a
utensil, but commonsense knowledge would preclude this parse of “I ate spaghetti with meatballs”.
Similarly, conversational context can provide clues to help us choose between interpretations.
Language can be used not only to communicate with other people, but also to interact with AI agents.
One common method for interaction is semantic parsing, whereby natural language is translated into
a formal and symbolic representation of its meaning (e.g. code, logic, graphs, etc.). However, human
tools for ambiguity resolution may be unavailable to these non-human translation systems: models
typically lack human-like commonsense knowledge and are missing conversational context. This
could lead to miscommunications between humans and models. Since semantic parsing systems are
used to perform real-world actions (e.g. modifying a calendar, sending emails, controlling physical
robots, etc.) ambiguity-based miscommunication in parsing could have real-world consequences.
Ideally, given an ambiguous input, we would like our parsing models to capture a distribution over
interpretations with some uncertainty across plausible items in the distribution. This would allow
robust handling of ambiguous utterances – for example by enabling smart follow-up interactions
(Stengel-Eskin & Van Durme, 2023) – getting us closer to the goal of using language as a general-
purpose API for interaction. Given that semantic parsing systems are typically based on language
models – which represent distributions over strings – combined with a search procedure (e.g. beam
     1
         Data and code: https://github.com/esteng/ambiguous_parsing. Contact: esteng@cs.unc.edu


                                                       1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    The boy saw the man with the telescope
                               9x.9y.9z.9a.boy(x) ^ man(y)
                               <latexit sha1_base64="c1XE8yBQyWCIk3JFY7LEr7NhkSo=">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</latexit>


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                (exists x (exists y (exists z ( exists a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ^ telescope(z) ^ saw(a)^          (AND (boy x) (man y) (telescope z)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       (saw a) (agent a x) (patient a y)
                               agent(a, x) ^ patient(a, y)^                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            (instrument a z))))))
                               instrument(a, z)

                               9x.9y.9z.9a.9e.boy(x)
                               <latexit sha1_base64="8MQuaPqKMEO6TLmwQ8vWMs9UPio=">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</latexit>


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                (exists x (exists y (exists z ( exists a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ^ man(y) ^ telescope(z)         (exists e (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  (AND (boy x) (man y) (telescope z)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ^ saw(a) ^ agent(a, x)                 (saw a) (agent a x) (patient a y)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ^ patient(a, y) ^ have(e)              (have e) (agent e x) (patient e z)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                )))))))
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ^ agent(e, x) ^ patient(e, z)
Figure 1: An example of prepositional phrase (PP) attachment ambiguity. The statement is compatible
with two possible interpretations, represented visually, in first-order logic, and in Lisp format.

search) it could be that models already capture ambiguity. However, this hypothesis is hard to test
given current semantic parsing datasets, which typically commit to a single interpretation for each
utterance. To this end, we introduce an extensible framework and dataset for investigating ambiguity
in semantic parsing. Our framework consists of templates covering five well-documented types of
natural language ambiguity: prepositional-phrase attachment, scope and inverse scope, pronominal
coreference, and conjunctions. For each type, our templates can generate large numbers of ambiguous
and unambiguous utterances. Each ambiguous utterance is paired with two possible interpretations,
or logical forms (LFs); see Fig. 1 for an example. LFs can be represented as first-order-logic (FOL)
formulae or as programs in Lisp. We use our framework to create a benchmark dataset we call A M P
(Ambiguous Parsing). Unlike past efforts which have grounded ambiguous utterances in answers to
questions (Stengel-Eskin et al., 2023), language inferences (Liu et al., 2023), videos (Berzak et al.,
2015), or images (Mehrabi et al., 2022), we focus our dataset on semantic parses. This choice follows
from several motivating factors. For one, semantic parsing has a long tradition of use in interactive
systems, including in robotics (Kate et al., 2005; Tellex et al., 2011; Artzi & Zettlemoyer, 2013;
Tellex et al., 2020), question-answering (Zelle & Mooney, 1996; Berant et al., 2013; Yu et al., 2018),
and digital assistants (Semantic Machines et al., 2020; Damonte et al., 2019). Ensuring that these
systems capture ambiguity and that their confidence reflects appropriate uncertainty about the user’s
intent is crucial, as misunderstandings could have negative real-world consequences (Stengel-Eskin &
Van Durme, 2023). Furthermore, semantic parsing not only allows people to access computation, but
also provides a way for models to use external tools: for example, simple forms of semantic parsing
have been employed to augment large language models (LLMs) (Parisi et al., 2022; Schick et al.,
2023; Mialon et al., 2023). Finally, long-form text-to-code shares many challenges with parsing.
Using our generated A M P data, we introduce a pair of challenging tasks designed for LLMs using
in-context learning (ICL). In ICL, rather than explicitly training models to predict LFs, we provide
models with instructive examples in a prompt, which is prepended to the test input. This parsing
setting has become increasingly popular in semantic parsing (Shin et al., 2021; Shin & Van Durme,
2022; Roy et al., 2022). Our tasks aim to quantify how well existing models capture ambiguity and to
provide a framework for improving their ability to predict multiple meanings. We develop 3 metrics
to measure models’ performance on ambiguity in two settings: zero-shot and mixed prompt.
In the zero-shot setting, we provide models with the “ingredients” to produce both possible derivations
of a given ambiguity type, but we provide no examples of that ambiguity type; see Appendix A.2
for an example. In this unique compositional generalization challenge, the model must combine
structures into novel derivations and also recognize that the structures can be selected and combined
in two ways to produce different derivations. We also annotate a subset of our data with crowdsourced
judgements, comparing these to our models’ predictions. Models struggle to predict parses correctly
in this setting. When they do compose parses correctly, although models and people tend to choose
similar interpretations, models generally fail to predict both possible parses.
In the mixed prompt setting, we examine how model distributions and outputs change when varying
the number of examples for each interpretation in the prompt. For each ambiguity type, we construct
“mixed prompts” consisting of conflicting examples. Some examples shown to the model pair
utterances of an ambiguity type with one kind of LF, and others pair the same kinds of inputs with
the alternative LF. This setting is motivated by a case in which ambiguity might lead to conflicting
annotations in a training dataset; when examples are retrieved from that data to construct a prompt for


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 Type         Ex. Input              LF0                                  LF1
 Prep.        The man saw the boy    ∃x.∃y.∃z.∃a.∃e.man(x)           ∧    ∃x.∃y.∃z.∃a.man(x)             ∧
 phrase at-   with the telescope     boy(y)∧saw(a)∧agent(a, x)∧           boy(y) ∧ telescope(z) ∧
 tachment                            patient(a, y) ∧ telescope(z) ∧       saw(a) ∧ agent(a, x) ∧
 (PP)                                have(e) ∧ agent(e, y) ∧              patient(a, y)                  ∧
                                     patient(e, z)      Interpretation:   instrument(a, z)        Interpre-
                                     the man saw the boy, who was         tation: the man used a telescope
                                     holding a telescope.                 to see the boy.
 Quantifier   every cow saw a dog    ∃x.∀y.∃a.cow(y) ∧ dog(x) ∧           ∀x.∃y.∃a.cow(x) ∧ dog(y) ∧
 scope                               saw(a) ∧ agent(a, y) ∧               saw(a) ∧ agent(a, x) ∧
 (Scope)                             patient(a, x)      Interpretation:   patient(a, y)     Interpretation:
                                     there is exactly one dog.            there may be more than one dog.
 Reversed,    a cow saw every dog    ∃x.∀y.∃a.cow(x) ∧ dog(y) ∧           ∀x.∃y.∃a.cow(y) ∧ dog(x) ∧
 or inverse                          saw(a) ∧ agent(a, x) ∧               saw(a) ∧ agent(a, y) ∧
 scope                               patient(a, y)      Interpretation:   patient(a, x)     Interpretation:
 (revs-                              there is exactly one cow.            there may be more than one cow.
 cope)
 Pronoun      Mary   saw      the   ∃x.∃a.∃e.woman(x)             ∧       ∃x.∃a.∃e.woman(x)             ∧
 coref-       woman and       she   saw(a) ∧ agent(a, M ary) ∧            saw(a) ∧ agent(a, M ary) ∧
 erence       smiled                patient(a, x) ∧ smiled(e) ∧           patient(a, x) ∧ smiled(e) ∧
 (bound)                            agent(e, M ary) Interpretation:       agent(e, x) Interpretation: the
                                    Mary smiled.                          woman smiled.
 Conjunction the man drank and      ∃x.∃a.∃e.∃i.man(x)            ∧       ∃x.∃a.∃e.∃i.man(x)            ∧
 (conj.)     ate or swam            ((drank(a) ∧ agent(a, x) ∧            (drank(a) ∧ agent(a, x) ∧
                                    ate(e) ∧ agent(e, x)) ∨               ((ate(e) ∧ agent(e, x)) ∨
                                    (swam(i) ∧ agent(i, x))) Inter-       (swam(i) ∧ agent(i, x))))
                                    pretation: the man either drank       Interpretation: the man drank,
                                    and ate or he swam.                   and he either ate or swam.
Table 1: Ambiguity types considered with example inputs and LFs. See Appendix A.1.1 for more
description, including the lexical items used.
a test example, the resulting prompt will also contain conflicting parses. Here, our metrics measure to
what extent a model represents the distribution in its input given conflicting evidence. Some models
perform remarkably well here, aligning with the prompt distribution across ambiguity types. To our
knowledge, this is the first study of in-context learning with conflicting evidence.
2       M ETHODS
Data We introduce a dataset of ambiguous parses, where natural language examples are parsed
into first-order logic (FOL). Further details on the construction of our logical forms (LFs) can be
found in Appendix A.1. We can canonicalize our LFs, so that logically equivalent formulae with
varying syntax are treated as identical: we transform LFs into binary trees, where nodes are ordered
alphabetically, and we anonymize variables. Note that when prompting our model, we do use a
standard variable set and order, where the variables x, y, z are used for nouns, and a, e, i are used for
events. Our canonicalization process also allows us to render our LFs in different formats. In addition
to a standard FOL format, we experiment with a Lisp format (cf. Fig. 1). For machine-readability,
we always render logical connectives in plaintext, i.e. ∃ becomes exists, ∧ becomes AND, etc.. We
consider five types of syntactic and semantic ambiguities, given in Table 1.2
Models Semantic parsing tasks are often framed as sequence transduction, where a model learns
to translate text into LFs by training on paired data (Dong & Lapata, 2016; Zhang et al., 2019).
It has become clear that neural models can capture distributions they are trained on; thus, if we
were to train on ambiguous data, it would not be surprising if the model captured ambiguity, and
vice-versa. Rather than training models, we instead consider several models for in-context learning
(ICL), focusing on large pre-trained autoregressive (AR) language models. We use the Codegen
series of models (Nijkamp et al., 2022) – 350 million (M), 2 billion (B), 6B, and 16B parameters –
which are based on the GPT-2 architecture (Radford et al., 2019) and are pre-trained on large amounts
of code and text.3 We also use LLMs pre-trained on text; here, we examine Llama-13B (Touvron
et al., 2023), an open-source AR transformer. To examine the impact of instruction tuning (Wei et al.,
2022), we consider Vicuna-13B (Chiang et al., 2023), which uses prompts distilled from ChatGPT to
    2
    We can also generate unambiguous examples, and can extend AMP to new ambiguity types/vocab items.
    3
    Past work (Shin & Van Durme, 2022) has shown that code pretraining improves over text pre-training on
other ICL semantic parsing tasks.


                                                    3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


instruction-finetune Llama-13B. All models above 350M were run at fp16 precision. In the zero-shot
setting, we also consider OpenAI’s gpt-3.5-turbo. While few details about the model are known, it
is a large AR transformer model which has undergone both instruction tuning and fine-tuning from
human feedback (Ouyang et al., 2022). It is often the most performant model; however, the API does
not provide access to logit scores, precluding analyses of uncertainty. As such, we only use it in
our zero-shot experiments, where the metric is accuracy-based rather than uncertainty-based. For
non-API models, we used constrained decoding (Shin et al., 2021; Shin & Van Durme, 2022; Roy
et al., 2022) to ensure the model only produces valid logical statements; see Appendix A.3 for details.
Computing probability under a forced decode In our analyses, we would like to compare the
probabilities the model assigns to LF0 and LF1 . While one could compare the product of probabilities
under the model for each LF, we find that in practice, this results in very low scores for either LF. We
instead use Stengel-Eskin & Van Durme (2022)’s sequence confidence estimate to obtain Pθ (LF0 ),
renormalizing at the end:
1. We obtain token-level probabilities under a forced decode of LF0 and LF1 . For each token ti in
   an LF with tokens t1 . . . tN , we compute Pθ (ti |x; t1:i−1 ), where t1:i−1 is the gold token prefix
   and x is the input prompt.
2. We take p̂ = minN i=1 Pθ (ti |x; t1:i−1 ), the minimum probability across all tokens.
                                                                                        4
                                                       p̂LF0
3. We normalize the probabilities: Pθ (LF0 ) = p̂LF +p̂LF and set Pθ (LF1 ) = 1 − Pθ (LF0 )
                                                          0    1

2.1   M ETRICS
Zero-shot metrics In the zero-shot setting, we aim to measure the degree to which the model
captures both possible interpretations of an ambiguous statement. Intuitively, when given the
“ingredients” to make both interpretations, a model that robustly captures ambiguity should allocate
some probability to both. We measure this by computing the proportion of elements for which the
model has both interpretations in its top-k predictions. Note that we remain agnostic here to the exact
probability of each interpretation; we aim instead to quantify whether it predicts both interpretations
at all. Note also that as we increase k, this metric becomes less stringent. Let Tk be the top k most
probable predictions from the model under some sampling method (e.g. beam search), and I be an
indicator function. The zero-shot metric ZMk is given by Eq. (1). This metric counts how often both
LFs are found in the top k outputs averaged across examples i ∈ [1, N ].. It ranges from 0 to 100, and
higher is better, as it indicates more examples have both LFs in their top k outputs.
                                     PN
                                          I[LF0 ∈ Tk ] ∗ I[LF1 ∈ Tk ]
                            ZMk = i=1                                   ∗ 100                        (1)
                                                     N

Few-shot metrics In the few-shot setting, we are concerned about the level to which the model
is capturing the distribution given in the prompt. A core assumption here is that an ideal model
would perfectly capture the uncertainty in the given distribution. We consider metrics at two levels of
granularity to evaluate this behavior. The first metric we consider measures model performance at
the level of the dataset. Intuitively, as we sweep across ratios r ∈ R, we expect the proportion of
predicted LFs to match r. For example, when r = 0.10 (meaning that 10% of the prompt examples
are LF0 and 90% are LF1 ) we would expect the model to produce LF0 in roughly 10% of instances.
Let yi be the predicted LF for input instance xi . Then the fewshot dataset metric F DM is given
by Eq. (2). Intuitively, this measures the difference between the accuracy on each LF and the ratio
of that LF; lower is better for F DM , which ranges from 1.0 to 0.0. The second metric measures
model performance at the level of individual datapoints. If the model is capturing the distribution
in the prompt, then the probability assigned to LF0 should roughly match r, e.g. if r = 0.10, the
model should assign P (LF0 ) ≈ 0.10. The few-shot instance metric F IM is given by Eq. (3). F IM
resembles a Brier score (Brier et al., 1950) and measures the error between the predicted probability
and the ratio; it also ranges from 1.0 to 0.0 and lower is better.
                                   N                               N
                    1 X  1 X                                   1 X
       F DM =                         I[yi = LF0 ] − r +             I[yi = LF1 ] − (1 − r)         (2)
                   |R|          N i=1                          N i=1
                       r∈R
                      N
               1 X 1 X
                         (Pθ (yi = LF0 ) − r)2

       F IM =                                                                                              (3)
              |R|  N i=1
                      r∈R
   4
     We also experimented with averaging, which resulted in similar results. We chose min to be consistent with
Stengel-Eskin & Van Durme (2022).


                                                      4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


3     E XPERIMENT 1: Z ERO - SHOT PARSING
For each ambiguity type, we construct a prompt that provides the ingredients for deriving both
LFs. The order of the component sentences is shuffled to avoid biasing the model towards one
interpretation or the other. Crucially, the prompt contains no examples of the types of sentences being
tested. For example, for PP attachment, the model is given an example of how to parse transitive
verbs (“the boy saw the man”), instruments (“the boy saw with the telescope”), and possessives (“the
boy with the telescope”), each in isolation. To successfully generalize, the model has to overcome
two challenges: first, it must compositionally generalize to compose the ingredients in the prompt
into a valid derivation. Secondly, it must recognize the ambiguity and reflect both derivations in its
output. For each ambiguity type, we test 200 examples. Prompt examples are given in Appendix A.2.
3.1       Z ERO - SHOT RESULTS AND ANALYSIS
In Fig. 2, smaller Codegen models (350M, 2B) struggle to predict either LF correctly. On some
ambiguity types, larger Codegen models (6B, 16B) predict one LF correctly. However, most models
fail to ever predict both LFs correctly; exceptions to this are conjunction and coreference ambiguities,
where we see some models correctly predicting LF0 for some examples and LF1 for others. GPT-3.5
does well at predicting LF1 for PP and scope ambiguities, and predicts both LFs for coreference
and conjunctions. Interestingly, while Llama-13B is unable to correctly predict either LF for any
of the ambiguities, Vicuna-13B (Llama’s instruction-tuned variant) is comparable to Codegen-16B,
suggesting that instruction tuning helps the model predict one LF correctly (though not to capture
ambiguity). Separately, we find that predicting FOL generally outperforms Lisp; for example, the
Codegen-2B model on scope predicts LF1 correctly 18% of the time when using FOL and only 11%
when using Lisp; we report only FOL results moving forward.
                      LF0 Accuracy                                      LF1 Accuracy
    100
     75            pp         revscope        conj
     50            scope      bound
     25
      0
     cg-350M cg-2B cg-6B ll-13B vi-13B cg-16B gpt-3.5 cg-350M cg-2B cg-6B ll-13B vi-13B cg-16B gpt-3.5
Figure 2: Zero-shot exact-match accuracy on ambiguity types. Cg = Codegen, Ll = Llama, Vi =
Vicuna. Models increasing in size from left to right.
These results are further underscored in Table 2 showing the ZM5 values for all models. We see
that all models tested perform very poorly on this metric, with most models scoring 0.0 in most
settings. Qualitatively, we find that the model’s top 5 outputs tend to include variations of the same LF.
This finding aligns with the probability results seen in Fig. 3, where models tend to assign extreme
probabilities to LFs on 3 out of 5 ambiguity types. Notable exceptions here are conjunction and bound
pronoun types, where in Fig. 3 models assign closer to 0.5 probability to each parse; we see this also
reflected in Fig. 2 and Table 2, where models predict both LF0 and LF1 correctly some of the time.
As a whole, these results underscore the difficulty of the compositional task we have proposed; while
some models are able to obtain high accuracy on one LF in isolation (GPT-3.5 predicts LF1 for PP
attachment and scope almost perfectly) no model is able to consistently predict both interpretations.
We can also ask whether token-level confidence reflects the ambiguity in the space of possible
parses. Examining task-oriented semantic parsing models, Stengel-Eskin & Van Durme (2022) find
that many models (including Codegen) are relatively well-calibrated at the token level, meaning
their confidence aligns with their average accuracy. Taking token-level probabilities as confidence
scores, we follow their analysis and ask whether models are well-calibrated w.r.t. alternative parses.
Specifically, we compare the model’s confidence on tokens at the points where the predicted and
alternative parse diverge. This is visualized for each ambiguity type in Fig. 4. Here, we take the
first correctly-predicted LF (either LF0 or LF1 ) from Codegen-16B, predicted via beam search with
grammar-constrained decoding (not forced decoding). We overlay the confidence onto the token as
the background color (darker is more confident). Below each predicted parse, we give the alternative
parse. For scope and inverse scope, the model assigns low confidence to the quantifier tokens at the
start of the formula, which are in the reverse order in the alternative parse. Similarly, the tokens
involving the quantified variables have lower confidence. We also see low confidence around the
area of divergence for conjunction. However, pronominal coreference and PP attachment lack such


                                                     5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  1.0                                                                   Model             PP         Scope        Revscope             Bound        Conj.
                                                                       cg-350M           0.00         0.00          0.00                0.00         1.00
                                                                         cg-2B           0.00         0.00          0.00                0.50         0.00
                                                                         cg-6B           0.00         0.00          0.00                0.00         3.50
  0.5                                                                   cg-16B           0.00         0.00          0.00                3.50        15.00
                   pp              bound          scope                 ll-13B           0.00         0.00          0.00                0.00         0.00
                   revscope        conj                                 vi-13B           0.00         0.00          0.00                4.00         9.50
    0                                                                   gpt-3.5          0.00         0.00          0.00                0.00        0.00
        cg-350M cg-2B      cg-6B     ll-13B vi-13B cg-16B
                                                                     Table 2: ZM5 for all models (cg = Codegen). Models
          Figure 3: P (LF0 ) per model.                              generally fail to predict both LFs.
 scope (a): forall x . exists y . exists a . boy(x) AND pyjamas(y) AND observed(a) AND agent(a, x) AND patient(a, y)

 scope (b): exists x . forall y . exists a . boy(y) AND pyjamas(x) AND observed(a) AND agent(a, y) AND patient(a, x)

 revscope (a): exists x . forall y . exists a . boy(x) AND sweater(y) AND spied(a) AND agent(a, x) AND patient(a, y)

 revscope (b): forall x . exists y . exists a . boy(y) AND sweater(x) AND spied(a) AND agent(a, y) AND patient(a, x)

 bound (a): exists x . exists a . exists e . girl(x) AND spied(a) AND agent(a, x) AND patient(a, Mary) AND smiled(e) AND agent(e, x)

 bound (b): exists x . exists a . exists e . girl(x) AND spied(a) AND agent(a, x) AND patient(a, Mary) AND smiled(e) AND agent(e, Mary)

 conj (a): exists x . exists a . exists e . exists i . cat(x) AND ( ( drank(a) AND agent(a, x) ) OR ( ate(e) AND agent(e, x) ) ) AND ( played(i) AND agent(i, x) )

 conj (b): exists x . exists a . exists e . exists i . cat(x) AND ( ( drank(a) AND agent(a, x) ) OR ( ate(e) AND agent(e, x) AND played(i) AND agent(i, x) ) )

 pp (a): exists x . exists a . camera(x) AND saw(a) AND agent(a, Watson) AND instrument(a, x) AND patient(a, Galileo)

 pp (b): exists x . exists a . exists e . camera(x) AND saw(a) AND agent(a, Watson) AND patient(a, Galileo) AND have(e) AND agent(e, Galileo) AND patient(e, x)


Figure 4: Zero-shot per-token probability (darker is more probable) for each ambiguity type. Alter-
native parse given below each predicted parse. Token probability sometimes reflects divergences
between the parses.

interpretable confidence changes. These results are promising: for some ambiguity types, the model’s
token-level confidence reflects the alternative parse.

3.2       H UMAN VALIDATION
Fig. 2 indicates that models tend to produce one interpretation or the other – when models have
non-zero accuracy on one interpretation, they tend to have zero on the other. Psycholinguistic research
suggests that people have preferred interpretations (AnderBois et al., 2012; Dwivedi, 2013); at the
aggregate level, Fig. 3 shows that models align with human preferences on scope ambiguities.
AnderBois et al. (2012) and Dwivedi (2013) also describe strong lexical effects in scope ambiguity,
meaning that the choice of words in the example has an effect on the interpretation taken. In order
to further examine how the models tested compare with these results, we annotate a subset of our
validation examples with human interpretations and confidence scores. This allows us to compare
model predictions to humans at an item-level in addition to an aggregate level.
Annotators were asked to choose between interpretations and provide a confidence score on a sliding
scale, following the EASL protocol (Sakaguchi & Van Durme, 2018); the confidence score was then
converted to a probability (cf. Appendix A.5 for details). Since annotators are unlikely to know FOL
or Lisp, each LF is shown as a statement that clearly indicates the interpretation (as in Table 1). For
example, for a PP attachment example like, “the boy saw the man with the telescope”, the verbalized
interpretations are “the boy saw the man, who had/was wearing a telescope” and “the boy saw the
man and used a telescope to do so”. For each ambiguity type except conjunctions, we randomly
select 20 examples from our development splits.5 Each example is annotated by 3 annotators.
We find that annotators disagree almost as often as they agree: 38 examples have disagreement
while 42 have all 3 annotators agreeing. This is a positive finding, indicating that our examples are
highly ambiguous. Fig. 5 (left) shows confidence scores (averaged across 3 annotators) for each item
(sorted separately by mean confidence for each ambiguity type). There are broad preferences for
all ambiguity types except PP attachment: bound and inverse scope tend to be matched to LF0 , and
scope to LF1 . The latter aligns with some past findings AnderBois et al. (2012); Caramazza et al.
(1977).6 For PP attachment, some inputs are confidently parsed as LF0 and others as LF1 .
In Fig. 5 (right), we contrast the human results with the output of the Codegen-16B model. While the
probabilities generally match in direction to the human annotations (except for PP-attachment) we
    5
     Conjunction ambiguities were excluded due to difficulties in verbalizing their interpretations fluently.
    6
     Other work has found linear order to have a negligible effect and pointed to additional factors influencing
interpretations (Kurtzman & MacDonald, 1993; Dwivedi, 2013).


                                                                              6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


              1.0                                               1.00
                    scope        revscope
    P(LF0)   0.75   pp           bound                          0.75


                                                       P(LF0)
             0.50                                               0.50
             0.25                                               0.25
              0.0                                               0.00
Figure 5: Per-example probabilities derived from humans (left) and cg-16B (right) on LFs. Examples
are sorted by probability. Human probabilities vary according to vocabulary choice, but model
probabilities generally do not.
do not see the same kind of item-level sensitivity. For most PP, scope, and inverse scope examples,
we see the model assigning all examples the same extreme probability. For bound pronouns, we see
more variation, with the model switching between LF0 and LF1 ; however, the predictions are fairly
extreme. These results suggest that the model is poorly-calibrated w.r.t. ambiguity at the item level.

4        E XPERIMENT 2: F EW- SHOT PARSING
Ambiguities may lead to similar inputs being paired with different logical forms. Increasingly, it
is common to retrieve examples from a training set to compose a prompt for ICL. If that train-
ing set has ambiguity in it, it is likely that the retrieved prompt would contain conflicting exam-
ples, e.g. some examples pairing an utterance type with LF0 and others pairing it with LF1 . In
our few-shot experiments, we seek to fill this gap by investigating how model confidence and
accuracy change at different prompt ratios. Crucially, by investigating mixed prompts with am-
biguous inputs, we are ensuring that the disagreement in the prompt is not due to simple mis-
takes; one could imagine a mixed prompt arising from noisy data, where instances are mislabeled.
In such cases, a strong enough model may even learn to ignore mislabeled data in the prompt.
However, in the case of ambiguity, there are multiple
legitimate interpretations.                                 100
                                                                    pp     bound    revscope
                                                                       conj   scope
For each ambiguity type, we construct prompts by             75
pairing sentences of the same type with LF0 in some
cases, and LF1 in others; we run 100 examples per            50
type, per ratio. Each prompt contains 10 input-LF            25
pairs, and a different prompt is constructed for each
test sentence. We vary the number of LF0 sentences            0
in the prompt from 0 to 10 in increments of 1 (e.g.             0        25         50          75  100
                                                                            Perc. LF0 in prompt
0 − 100%) and shuffle the prompt sentences to ensure Figure 6: Fewshot          acc. increases according
that there is no positional bias.                        to the ratio of the LF in the prompt. LF1 acc.
Few-shot results and analysis Fig. 6 shows the (not pictured) decreases accordingly.
accuracy of models on LF0 as we increase the per-
centage of LF0 in the prompt for the Codegen-2B model. We see that for scope and inverse scope,
the accuracy tracks almost perfectly with the percentage. For other ambiguities, the accuracy is
correlated with the percentage but never reaches 100%. Table 3 shows the F IM and F DM scores
for all models across all ambiguity types. Recall that F DM measures how well the model’s accuracy
aligns with the percentage of examples for each LF in the prompt: to obtain a lower F DM score,
the model needs to predict each LF at roughly the rate that it is seen in the prompt. Note that a
model that fails to predict either LF correctly will have a high F DM score. For example, because
Llama-13B fails to predict any of the LFs correctly, it has an F DM score of 1.00 for all ambiguities.
For Codegen models, F DM generally improves with model size on most ambiguity types. Overall,
several models achieve fairly low F DM , especially on scope and inverse scope.
We also see that all F IM scores are relatively low. Because F IM uses the gold LF to extract the
sequence probability, even models with poor accuracy on both LFs can have a fairly low F IM .
In other words, F IM presents the model with a forced choice between two parses, rather than
evaluating the model’s most probable generations like F DM and ZM do. For example, Llama-13B
never produces a correct LF under beam-search decoding with constraints, but when probabilities are


                                                   7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


extracted with a forced decode of the gold LFs, they align fairly well with those in the prompt, and it
often attains lower F IM scores than other models, including Vicuna. F IM remains fairly constant
with model size: Codegen-16B is tied with smaller models on 4/5 ambiguity types. Taken together,
these results indicates that the models tested are surprisingly good at capturing the distribution in
the prompt. The low F DM on some types indicates that overall, models like Codegen-16B and
Vicuna-13B produce LF0 roughly at the rate that it appears in the prompt. However, we see that low
F IM does not imply low F DM , since low F DM requires the model to be accurate.
Interestingly, the models seem to override the zero-shot tendencies seen in Fig. 3, where scope and
inverse scope were strongly associated with one LF over the other. With direct evidence on how to
parse scope sentences in the prompt – evidence we did not provide in the zero-shot setting – the model
produces the interpretations seen in the prompt, and is especially close to the prompt distribution
for scope and inverse scope. These results are promising: given that models seem to capture mixed
prompts well, it could be that ambiguity poses less of a challenge in settings where such mixed
prompts can be constructed, i.e. settings with ambiguity in the training data.

  Model              PP                Scope          Revscope           Bound              Conj.
     –       F DM         F IM    F DM F IM        F DM F IM         F DM F IM         F DM F IM
 cg-350M      0.76         0.08    0.19     0.05    0.36    0.06      0.62    0.16      0.60      0.06
   cg-2B      0.51         0.09    0.19     0.03    0.18    0.03      0.48    0.10      0.39      0.05
   cg-6B      0.45         0.08    0.21     0.05    0.16    0.06      0.43    0.10      0.41      0.06
  cg-16B      0.35         0.08    0.20     0.03    0.21    0.03      0.38    0.10      0.27      0.06
  ll-13B      1.00         0.06    1.00     0.04    1.00    0.04      1.00    0.06      1.00      0.05
  vi-13B      0.50         0.08    0.17     0.05    0.20    0.06      0.26    0.07      0.35      0.09
Table 3: Few-shot metrics for all models (lower=better). F DM (Eq. (2)) measures the extent to
which the model’s accuracy across the whole dataset matches the percentage of that LF in the prompt.
F IM (Eq. (3)) measures how well the model’s uncertainty captures the prompt’s uncertainty.
5    R ELATED WORK
Ambiguity has been a longstanding topic of interest in linguistics and psycholinguistics. Past work
has argued that it is a feature arising naturally from the trade-off between competing objectives (Zipf,
1949; Schutze, 1995; Piantadosi et al., 2012). However, providing a systematic account of ambiguity
in linguistics lies beyond the scope of this section.
Some work in NLP has focused on modeling ambiguity in visual contexts, where questions and
statements have been paired with images or videos depicting situations they refer to. Stengel-Eskin
et al. (2023) introduce a dataset of linguistically ambiguous questions about images as well as a
model for question disambiguation, and Futeral et al. (2022) examine ambiguous source sentences in
machine translation, providing disambiguating images. More akin to our work, Berzak et al. (2015)
introduce a corpus of syntactic, semantic, and pragmatic ambiguities with video interpretations.
Follow-up work by Mehrabi et al. (2022) generates images of ambiguous statements. We use many of
the same ambiguities, but represent meaning with LFs instead of videos or images. This is motivated
in part by the relative ease of checking the correctness of a logical formula over, for example, an
image. Ambiguity has been studied in more general tasks such as question-answering (Min et al.,
2020), natural language inference (NLI) (Liu et al., 2023), and coreference resolution (Yuan et al.,
2023), where models have broadly been found lacking in their ability to resolve ambiguities. In
parsing specifically, Rasmussen & Schuler (2020) introduce a λ-calculus dataset on 2,000 sentences
of simple Wikipedia text, where roughly 50% contain quantifier scope ambiguity. We use synthetic
data instead, giving us greater control and allowing us to examine more ambiguity types.

6    D ISCUSSION AND C ONCLUSION
In addition to semantic parsing’s many downstream applications, it has often been used to measure
models’ compositional generalization abilities through synthetic benchmarks like COGS (Kim &
Linzen, 2020) and SCAN (Lake & Baroni, 2018). The ability to generalize systematically and
compositionally to unseen combinations is a core component of human intelligence (Fodor &
Pylyshyn, 1988). Past efforts have generally assumed that there is a single correct LF for any given
input, either implicitly (Lake & Baroni, 2018) or explicitly (Kim & Linzen, 2020, Appendix H).
This assumption is not borne out in natural language, where statements can be ambiguous and have
multiple meanings. It is also violated in many common applications of semantic parsing, such as


                                                   8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


text-to-code, where there are myriad ways of producing logically equivalent programs. Making this
assumption reduces semantic parsing to syntactic parsing, since there is a 1-to-1 mapping between
syntax and meaning.7 In future work, we hope to improve on the challenging and novel compositional
task proposed in Section 3, where all models struggle to capture both meanings.
Section 4 offers a more hopeful takeaway: when ambiguity is present in the input, many models are
able to capture the distribution of LFs. Of course, for ambiguity to be attested in the prompt, it must
exist in the data used to construct the prompt. Furthermore, it needs to be attested in the evaluation
data for us to test for it. However, in most current datasets, parses are not annotated redundantly
or exhaustively, i.e. inputs are paired with a single output. Given that annotators often disagree
on ambiguous examples (cf. Section 3.2) it is crucial to obtain multiple judgements, at least on
evaluation data.8 This has recently become more common in other domains, such as NLI (Chen et al.,
2020; Nie et al., 2020; Pavlick & Kwiatkowski, 2019). Even when items are annotated redundantly,
disagreement has often been discouraged or treated as noise. More recent work has begun to recognize
that disagreement can arise for valid reasons (Pavlick & Kwiatkowski, 2019) including ambiguity
(Bhattacharya et al., 2019; Stengel-Eskin et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2023). To improve the handling
of ambiguity, we advocate for extending redundant, ambiguity-aware annotation protocols (with
attention to disagreement) from single-label tasks (e.g. QA, NLI) to complex, sequential outputs like
semantic parsing. Improving both zero-shot generalization and data collection would help models
capture the full range of utterance interpretations. This could lead to robust, interactive systems
in which agents ask for confirmation or clarification on ambiguous examples (Stengel-Eskin &
Van Durme, 2023), ultimately improving safety for critical systems.
Finally, ambiguous utterances are underspecified, i.e. they lack the requisite information to decide
which interpretation is correct. Some past work carries underspecification into the meaning represen-
tation: Copestake et al. (2005) introduces Minimum Recursion Semantics, which leaves noun-phrase
bracketing (similar to conjunction ambiguities) and scope underspecified in the target representation,
allowing multiple interpretations to be recovered. Bos (2004) introduce a discourse representation
that also maintain scope ambiguities for later resolution. We have opted for a more fully-specified
representation, placing the onus of resolution onto the parsing model rather than the representation.
Limitations Firstly, we are limited by committing to a particular logical form. To test the parsing
abilities of models under ambiguity, we are forced to choose a fixed meaning representation (MR)
form, possibly including suboptimal abstractions and design choices. Motivated by Wu et al. (2023),
who find that arbitrary choices in an MR’s construction can hamper compositional generalization,
we have limited the number and difficulty of our choices, and mitigated their effect by offering two
output formats. It is also important to point out some key differences between the models we test and
the relevant psycholinguistic literature. Broadly, experiments indicate that people maintain multiple
interpretations during online processing, later settling on one interpretation (Lackner & Garrett, 1972;
Rayner et al., 1983; Filik et al., 2004). Our models do not do online processing, and receive input as
text, not audio. Similarly, we do not provide a conversational context, which people generally use to
resolve ambiguity. Thus, our results should not be taken to reflect how people process language.
Methodologically, we are limited by our use of a fixed set of English-only ambiguities. We hope to
add more languages, lexical items, and ambiguity types via our extensible data framework. Many
optimizations have could be made for ambiguity, e.g. decoding strategies that emphasize diversity
(temperature sampling, sequentially decoding outputs, etc.) might result in better results for the ZM
metric, since models lack output diversity. In our experiments we attempted to mimic how semantic
parsing is commonly done in practice, without optimizing for ambiguity specifically.
Conclusion By introducing a new benchmark for parsing under ambiguity, we are able to examine
how modern semantic parsers handle cases where utterances can have multiple meanings. To this end,
we introduced three new metrics for measuring the extent to which models capture the distribution of
meanings. While we find that models struggle to compose symbols without explicit guidance, we
also find that they are sensitive the ambiguity when given mixed prompts, suggesting that having
ambiguity in the training data may be a sufficient condition for capturing it in the output. This
motivates our call for capturing ambiguity during annotation.
   7
     For example, Rudinger & Van Durme (2014) found that one of the key features separating dependency-based
syntax and event-based semantics was the ability to handle PP attachment ambiguities.
   8
     For training data, we may be able to obtain diverse judgements instead, with examples of a given ambiguity
type paired with different outputs, as was done in Section 4


                                                      9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


7   E THICS S TATEMENT
By creating sentences templatically, we ensure that A M P does not contain any harmful texts. This
protects our human annotators from exposure to such inputs; we also compensate the annotators at a
level substantially above US federal minimum wage, and in-line with living wage estimates. Like
most NLP research, our work has the potential to contribute to dual-use. However, we believe that
overall, making models robust to ambiguity will contribute to safer and more reliable technology, and
has limited potential for negative applications.

8   R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT
In order to further reproducibility, we release our dataset and our code. This includes the code
for A M P, which can be extended to generate new ambiguities, as well as the code for running all
experiments. We do make use of a closed-source model (ChatGPT), which can hinder reproducibility;
to hedge against this, most of our results are based on open-source models that are widely available.
We also include our prompts in the appendix.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This work has been supported in part by the U.S. National Science Foundation under grant No.
2204926. Elias Stengel-Eskin was supported by an National Science Foundation Graduate Research
Fellowship.

R EFERENCES
Scott AnderBois, Adrian Brasoveanu, and Robert Henderson. The pragmatics of quantifier scope: A
  corpus study. In Proceedings of Sinn und Bedeutung, volume 16, pp. 15–28, 2012.
Yoav Artzi and Luke Zettlemoyer. Weakly supervised learning of semantic parsers for mapping
  instructions to actions. Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 1:49–62,
  2013.
Yoav Artzi, Kenton Lee, and Luke Zettlemoyer. Broad-coverage ccg semantic parsing with amr. In
  Proceedings of the 2015 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp.
  1699–1710, 2015.
Jonathan Berant, Andrew Chou, Roy Frostig, and Percy Liang. Semantic parsing on Freebase from
  question-answer pairs. In Proceedings of the 2013 conference on empirical methods in natural
  language processing, pp. 1533–1544, 2013.
Yevgeni Berzak, Andrei Barbu, Daniel Harari, Boris Katz, and Shimon Ullman. Do you see what
  I mean? Visual resolution of linguistic ambiguities. In Proceedings of the 2015 Conference on
  Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 1477–1487, 2015.
Nilavra Bhattacharya, Qing Li, and Danna Gurari. Why does a visual question have different answers?
  In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 4271–4280,
  2019.
Johan Bos. Computational semantics in discourse: Underspecification, resolution, and inference.
  Journal of Logic, Language and Information, 13:139–157, 2004.
Glenn W Brier et al. Verification of forecasts expressed in terms of probability. Monthly weather
  review, 78(1):1–3, 1950.
Alfonso Caramazza, Ellen Grober, Catherine Garvey, and Jack Yates. Comprehension of anaphoric
  pronouns. Journal of verbal learning and verbal behavior, 16(5):601–609, 1977.
Tongfei Chen, Zhengping Jiang, Adam Poliak, Keisuke Sakaguchi, and Benjamin Van Durme. Un-
  certain natural language inference. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  for Computational Linguistics, pp. 8772–8779, Online, July 2020. Association for Computa-
  tional Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2020.acl-main.774. URL https://aclanthology.org/2020.
  acl-main.774.

Wei-Lin Chiang, Zhuohan Li, Zi Lin, Ying Sheng, Zhanghao Wu, Hao Zhang, Lianmin Zheng,
 Siyuan Zhuang, Yonghao Zhuang, Joseph E. Gonzalez, Ion Stoica, and Eric P. Xing. Vicuna:
 An open-source chatbot impressing gpt-4 with 90%* chatgpt quality, March 2023. URL https:
 //lmsys.org/blog/2023-03-30-vicuna/.

Ann Copestake, Dan Flickinger, Carl Pollard, and Ivan A Sag. Minimal recursion semantics: An
  introduction. Research on language and computation, 3:281–332, 2005.
Marco Damonte, Rahul Goel, and Tagyoung Chung. Practical semantic parsing for spoken language
 understanding. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North American Chapter of the
 Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume 2 (Industry
 Papers), pp. 16–23, 2019.
Li Dong and Mirella Lapata. Language to logical form with neural attention. In Proceedings
  of the 54th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long
  Papers), pp. 33–43, Berlin, Germany, 2016. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi:
  10.18653/v1/P16-1004. URL https://aclanthology.org/P16-1004.
Veena D Dwivedi. Interpreting quantifier scope ambiguity: Evidence of heuristic first, algorithmic
  second processing. PloS one, 8(11):e81461, 2013.
Ruth Filik, Kevin B Paterson, and Simon P Liversedge. Processing doubly quantified sentences:
  Evidence from eye movements. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 11(5):953–959, 2004.
Jerry A Fodor and Zenon W Pylyshyn. Connectionism and cognitive architecture: A critical analysis.
  Cognition, 28(1-2):3–71, 1988.
Matthieu Futeral, Cordelia Schmid, Ivan Laptev, Benoı̂t Sagot, and Rachel Bawden. Tackling
 ambiguity with images: Improved multimodal machine translation and contrastive evaluation.
 arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.10140, 2022.
Rohit J Kate, Yuk Wah Wong, Raymond J Mooney, et al. Learning to transform natural to formal
  languages. In AAAI, volume 5, pp. 1062–1068, 2005.
Najoung Kim and Tal Linzen. COGS: A compositional generalization challenge based on semantic
  interpretation. In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
  Processing (EMNLP), pp. 9087–9105, Online, 2020. Association for Computational Linguistics.
  doi: 10.18653/v1/2020.emnlp-main.731. URL https://aclanthology.org/2020.emnlp-main.
  731.

Howard S Kurtzman and Maryellen C MacDonald. Resolution of quantifier scope ambiguities.
 Cognition, 48(3):243–279, 1993.
James R Lackner and Merrill F Garrett. Resolving ambiguity: Effects of biasing context in the
  unattended ear. Cognition, 1(4):359–372, 1972.
Brenden M. Lake and Marco Baroni. Generalization without systematicity: On the compositional
  skills of sequence-to-sequence recurrent networks. In Jennifer G. Dy and Andreas Krause (eds.),
  Proceedings of the 35th International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2018, Stock-
  holmsmässan, Stockholm, Sweden, July 10-15, 2018, volume 80 of Proceedings of Machine
  Learning Research, pp. 2879–2888. PMLR, 2018. URL http://proceedings.mlr.press/v80/
  lake18a.html.

Alisa Liu, Zhaofeng Wu, Julian Michael, Alane Suhr, Peter West, Alexander Koller, Swabha
  Swayamdipta, Noah A Smith, and Yejin Choi. We’re afraid language models aren’t modeling
  ambiguity. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.14399, 2023.
Ninareh Mehrabi, Palash Goyal, Apurv Verma, Jwala Dhamala, Varun Kumar, Qian Hu, Kai-Wei
  Chang, Richard Zemel, Aram Galstyan, and Rahul Gupta. Is the elephant flying? resolving
  ambiguities in text-to-image generative models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.12503, 2022.


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Grégoire Mialon, Roberto Dessı̀, Maria Lomeli, Christoforos Nalmpantis, Ram Pasunuru, Roberta
  Raileanu, Baptiste Rozière, Timo Schick, Jane Dwivedi-Yu, Asli Celikyilmaz, et al. Augmented
  language models: a survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.07842, 2023.

Sewon Min, Julian Michael, Hannaneh Hajishirzi, and Luke Zettlemoyer. AmbigQA: Answering
  ambiguous open-domain questions. In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods
  in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), pp. 5783–5797, 2020.

Richard Montague. English as a formal language. Linguaggi nella Societa e nella Tecnica, 1970.

Yixin Nie, Xiang Zhou, and Mohit Bansal. What can we learn from collective human opinions on
  natural language inference data? In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in
  Natural Language Processing (EMNLP). Association for Computational Linguistics, 2020.

Erik Nijkamp, Bo Pang, Hiroaki Hayashi, Lifu Tu, Huan Wang, Yingbo Zhou, Silvio Savarese,
  and Caiming Xiong. Codegen: An open large language model for code with multi-turn program
  synthesis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.13474, 2022.

Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong
  Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, et al. Training language models to follow
  instructions with human feedback. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:
  27730–27744, 2022.

Aaron Parisi, Yao Zhao, and Noah Fiedel. Talm: Tool augmented language models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2205.12255, 2022.

Terence Parsons. Events in the Semantics of English: A Study in Subatomic Semantics. MIT Press,
  1990.

Ellie Pavlick and Tom Kwiatkowski. Inherent disagreements in human textual inferences. Transac-
  tions of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 7:677–694, 2019.

Steven T Piantadosi, Harry Tily, and Edward Gibson. The communicative function of ambiguity in
  language. Cognition, 122(3):280–291, 2012.

Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, Ilya Sutskever, et al. Language
  models are unsupervised multitask learners, 2019.

Nathan Ellis Rasmussen and William Schuler. A corpus of encyclopedia articles with logical forms.
  In Proceedings of the 12th Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2020),
  2020.

Keith Rayner, Marcia Carlson, and Lyn Frazier. The interaction of syntax and semantics during
  sentence processing: Eye movements in the analysis of semantically biased sentences. Journal of
  verbal learning and verbal behavior, 22(3):358–374, 1983.

Subhro Roy, Sam Thomson, Tongfei Chen, Richard Shin, Adam Pauls, Jason Eisner, and Benjamin
  Van Durme. BenchCLAMP: A benchmark for evaluating language models on semantic parsing.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.10668, 2022.

Rachel Rudinger and Benjamin Van Durme. Is the stanford dependency representation semantic?
  In Proceedings of the Second Workshop on EVENTS: Definition, Detection, Coreference, and
  Representation, pp. 54–58, 2014.

Keisuke Sakaguchi and Benjamin Van Durme. Efficient online scalar annotation with bounded sup-
  port. In Proceedings of the 56th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics
  (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 208–218, Melbourne, Australia, July 2018. Association for Compu-
  tational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/P18-1020. URL https://aclanthology.org/P18-1020.

Timo Schick, Jane Dwivedi-Yu, Roberto Dessı̀, Roberta Raileanu, Maria Lomeli, Luke Zettlemoyer,
  Nicola Cancedda, and Thomas Scialom. Toolformer: Language models can teach themselves to
  use tools. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.04761, 2023.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Hinrich Schutze. Ambiguity in language learning: Computational and cognitive models. Stanford
  University, 1995.
Semantic Machines, Jacob Andreas, John Bufe, David Burkett, Charles Chen, Josh Clausman,
  Jean Crawford, Kate Crim, Jordan DeLoach, Leah Dorner, Jason Eisner, Hao Fang, Alan Guo,
  David Hall, Kristin Hayes, Kellie Hill, Diana Ho, Wendy Iwaszuk, Smriti Jha, Dan Klein, Jayant
  Krishnamurthy, Theo Lanman, Percy Liang, Christopher H. Lin, Ilya Lintsbakh, Andy McGovern,
  Aleksandr Nisnevich, Adam Pauls, Dmitrij Petters, Brent Read, Dan Roth, Subhro Roy, Jesse Rusak,
  Beth Short, Div Slomin, Ben Snyder, Stephon Striplin, Yu Su, Zachary Tellman, Sam Thomson,
  Andrei Vorobev, Izabela Witoszko, Jason Wolfe, Abby Wray, Yuchen Zhang, and Alexander Zotov.
  Task-oriented dialogue as dataflow synthesis. Transactions of the Association for Computational
  Linguistics, 8:556–571, September 2020. URL https://doi.org/10.1162/tacl_a_00333.
Richard Shin and Benjamin Van Durme. Few-shot semantic parsing with language models trained on
  code. In Proceedings of the 2022 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association
  for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, pp. 5417–5425, 2022.
Richard Shin, Christopher Lin, Sam Thomson, Charles Chen Jr, Subhro Roy, Emmanouil Antonios
  Platanios, Adam Pauls, Dan Klein, Jason Eisner, and Benjamin Van Durme. Constrained language
  models yield few-shot semantic parsers. In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference on Empirical
  Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 7699–7715, 2021.
Mark Steedman. Taking scope: The natural semantics of quantifiers. Mit Press, 2011.
Elias Stengel-Eskin and Benjamin Van Durme. Calibrated interpretation: Confidence estimation in
  semantic parsing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.07443, 2022.
Elias Stengel-Eskin and Benjamin Van Durme. Did you mean...? Confidence-based trade-offs in
  semantic parsing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.16857, 2023.
Elias Stengel-Eskin, Jimena Guallar-Blasco, Yi Zhou, and Benjamin Van Durme. Why did the
  chicken cross the road? Rephrasing and analyzing ambiguous questions in vqa. Proceedings of the
  61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 2023.
Stefanie Tellex, Thomas Kollar, Steven Dickerson, Matthew Walter, Ashis Banerjee, Seth Teller,
  and Nicholas Roy. Understanding natural language commands for robotic navigation and mobile
  manipulation. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 25, pp.
  1507–1514, 2011.
Stefanie Tellex, Nakul Gopalan, Hadas Kress-Gazit, and Cynthia Matuszek. Robots that use language.
  Annual Review of Control, Robotics, and Autonomous Systems, 3:25–55, 2020.
Hugo Touvron, Thibaut Lavril, Gautier Izacard, Xavier Martinet, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Timothée
  Lacroix, Baptiste Rozière, Naman Goyal, Eric Hambro, Faisal Azhar, et al. Llama: Open and
  efficient foundation language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.13971, 2023.
Siddharth Vashishtha, Benjamin Van Durme, and Aaron Steven White. Fine-grained temporal relation
  extraction. In Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
  Linguistics, pp. 2906–2919, Florence, Italy, 2019. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi:
  10.18653/v1/P19-1280. URL https://aclanthology.org/P19-1280.
Jason Wei, Maarten Bosma, Vincent Zhao, Kelvin Guu, Adams Wei Yu, Brian Lester, Nan Du,
  Andrew M Dai, and Quoc V Le. Finetuned language models are zero-shot learners. In International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.
Terry Winograd. Understanding natural language. Cognitive psychology, 3(1):1–191, 1972.
Ludwig Wittgenstein. Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus. Annalen der Naturphilosophie, 1921.
Zhengxuan Wu, Christopher D Manning, and Christopher Potts. ReCOGS: How incidental details of a
  logical form overshadow an evaluation of semantic interpretation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.13716,
  2023.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Tao Yu, Rui Zhang, Kai Yang, Michihiro Yasunaga, Dongxu Wang, Zifan Li, James Ma, Irene Li,
  Qingning Yao, Shanelle Roman, et al. Spider: A large-scale human-labeled dataset for complex
  and cross-domain semantic parsing and text-to-sql task. In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference on
  Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 3911–3921, 2018.
Yuewei Yuan, Chaitanya Malaviya, and Mark Yatskar. AmbiCoref: Evaluating human and model
  sensitivity to ambiguous coreference. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
  EACL 2023, pp. 993–1000, 2023.
John M Zelle and Raymond J Mooney. Learning to parse database queries using inductive logic
  programming. In Proceedings of the national conference on artificial intelligence, pp. 1050–1055,
  1996.
Sheng Zhang, Xutai Ma, Kevin Duh, and Benjamin Van Durme. Broad-coverage semantic parsing as
  transduction. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
  Processing and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-
  IJCNLP), pp. 3786–3798, Hong Kong, China, 2019. Association for Computational Linguistics.
  doi: 10.18653/v1/D19-1392. URL https://aclanthology.org/D19-1392.
George Kingsley Zipf. Human Behaviour and the Principle of Least Effort. Addison-Wesley Press,
 1949.


A     A PPENDIX
A.1     DATASET C ONSTRUCTION

We take a neo-Davidsonian event semantics approach (Parsons, 1990) to our logical forms (LFs),
expressing our logical forms in quantified first-order logic (FOL). Events are represented as variables,
with event-type predicates applied to them. For example, the statement a woman walks would be
represented as ∃x.∃e.woman(x) ∧ walk(e) ∧ agent(e, x), allowing for an arbitrary number of
semantic roles; the semantic roles covered in our dataset are agent, patient, and instrument. Generic
noun phrases like “a dog” are existentially quantified: ∃x.dog(x). Proper nouns are assumed to have
a single referrent, and are not quantified, e.g. Mary walks → ∃e.walks(e) ∧ agent(e, M ary).

A.1.1    L EXICAL I TEMS
For PP ambiguity, we pair visual verbs (e.g. see, observe, spot, etc.) with visual instruments (e.g.
telescope, binoculars, etc.) and tactile verbs (e.g. grab, pick up, etc.) with things that can be
worn/possessed and used for manipulation (e.g. gloves, ovenmitts, tongs, etc.). For scope and reverse
scope, we use common nouns and visual and tactile verbs. For pronoun coreference, the lexical items
used here are gendered names (e.g Mary, John, etc.) and gendered nouns (e.g. woman, man, boy,
girl). Conjunction examples use intransitive verbs.

A.1.2    E XISTENTIAL QUANTIFICATION
For uses of “the”, we differ from Kim & Linzen (2020), who use the ι notation for definite articles to
denote a uniqueness clause. This is implemented as a existential quantifier at the widest scope, which
can be ignored in all cases except scope ambiguity, where we only have indefinitely-quantified NPs.
Similarly, Artzi et al. (2015) introduce Skolem terms (Steedman, 2011) for definite NPs, which are
also globally scoped. Thus, we do not differentiate between definite and indefinite NPs in A M P. This
has no impact on ambiguity.

A.1.3    E XTENDING TO NEW TEMPLATES
The framework we release allows for the addition of new templates and lexical items. To add a new
template, the user specifies a surface-form template and an LF template, and provides the set of
lexical items that can be used to fill slots in the templates. The framework enumerates all possible
combinations of lexical items which respect the template constraints and produces paired inputs and
LFs.


                                                  14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.2   Z ERO - SHOT P ROMPTS

PP Attachment For PP attachment, we show an example the main verb being used transitively, the
instrumental use of “with”, and the accompaniment use of “with”.
Let’s translate what a human user says into what a computer might say.


Human: Galileo saw Mary
Computer: exists a . saw(a) AND agent(a, Galileo) AND patient(a, Mary)

Human: Mary with the camera
Computer: exists x . exists a . camera(x) AND have(a) AND agent(a, Mary) AND patient
    (a, x)

Human: Galileo saw with the camera
Computer: exists x . exists a . camera(x) AND saw(a) AND agent(a, Galileo) AND
    instrument(a, x)

Human: Galileo saw Mary with the camera
Computer:


Conjunctions For conjunction ambiguities, we include an example of double conjunction (e.g. and
... and) and double disjunction (e.g. or ... or). The bracketing can vary.
Let’s translate what a human user says into what a computer might say.


Human: the bird left and walked and ate
Computer: exists x . exists a . exists e . exists i . bird(x) AND ( left(a) AND
    agent(a, x) AND walked(e) AND agent(e, x) ) AND ate(i) AND agent(i, x)

Human: the bird left or walked or ate
Computer: exists x . exists a . exists e . exists i . bird(x) AND ( left(a) AND
    agent(a, x) ) OR ( ( walked(e) AND agent(e, x) ) OR ( ate(i) AND agent(i, x) ) )


Human: the bird left or walked and ate
Computer:


Bound pronouns For pronoun coreference, we show the transitive verb and each possible subject
with the embedded verb separately. We also include an example of a subject with two verbs so that
the model sees how to compose two verbs in the same sentence.
Let’s translate what a human user says into what a computer might say.


Human: the woman saw Marie
Computer: exists x . exists a . woman(x) AND saw(a) AND agent(a, x) AND patient(a,
    Marie)

Human: Marie smiled
Computer: exists a . smiled(a) AND agent(a, Marie)

Human: the woman frowned and smiled
Computer: exists x . exists a . exists e . woman(x) AND frowned(a) AND agent(a, x)
    AND smiled(e) AND agent(e, x)

Human: the woman smiled
Computer: exists x . exists a . woman(x) AND smiled(a) AND agent(a, x)

Human: the woman saw Marie and she smiled
Computer:



                                               15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Scope Scope ambiguity prompts include an example of the verb being used transitively, as well an
example of universal quantification.
Let’s translate what a human user says into what a computer might say.


Human: a bird held a sweater
Computer: exists x . exists y . exists a . bird(x) AND sweater(y) AND held(a) AND
    agent(a, x) AND patient(a, y)

Human: each bird
Computer: forall x . bird(x)

Human: each bird held a sweater
Computer:


Inverse scope Inverse scope prompts include the same information as scope ambiguities but with
reversed arguments.
Let’s translate what a human user says into what a computer might say.


Human: a dog spotted a hat
Computer: exists x . exists y . exists a . dog(x) AND hat(y) AND spotted(a) AND
    agent(a, x) AND patient(a, y)

Human: each hat
Computer: forall x . hat(x)

Human: a dog spotted each hat
Computer:


A.3      C ONSTRAINED DECODING

For locally-run models, we use grammar-constrained decoding (Shin et al., 2021; Shin & Van Durme,
2022; Roy et al., 2022) to ensure that the model produces syntactically-correct formulae. During
decoding, we use the BenchCLAMP framework (Roy et al., 2022) to restrict the model’s output
vocabulary according to a context-free grammar, such that the model can only produce strings
accepted by the grammar.9 This allows us to separate the model’s semantic performance from its
syntactic abilities. We decode with beam search, using a beam of 5.

A.4      Z ERO - SHOT PARSING : Q UALITATIVE A NALYSIS

Section 3.1 shows that models typically perform poorly on zero-shot parsing. Given that we use
constrained decoding on all open-source models, the errors they make cannot be syntactic in nature,
i.e. their outputs are guaranteed to be well-formed FOL expressions. This raises the question of what
kinds of errors models are making. Here, we qualitatively analyze model errors. For each ambiguity
type, we sample 10 incorrect examples from the Codegen-16B model and classify the errors the
model makes.

         • PP attachment: There are two classes of errors. 9/10 examples have a missing
           predicate, e.g. exists v0 . exists v1 . agent(v1, Adele) AND have(v1)
           AND instrument(v1, v0) AND spied(v1) AND telescope(v0)          is missing a
           patient(v1, Sherlock) predicate for the sentence “Adele spied Sherlock with a
           telescope”. The remaining example had incorrect variable usage.
         • Scope: 9/10 incorrect examples had a ∃ in place of the ∀ quantifier (i.e. the right number of
           quantifiers but no ∀ quantifier). 1/10 was missing a ∃ quantifier.
         • Inverse Scope: 10/10 examples had a ∃ in place of the ∀ quantifier.
   9
       We release our FOL and Lisp grammars.


                                                   16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


       • Bound:        8/10 examples used the same variable for 2 verbs.             For example,
         in exists v0 . agent(v0, Katherine) AND frowned(v0) AND observed(v0)
         AND patient(v0, Mary), the event variable v0 is used for frowned and observed when
         there should be an additional event variable v1. 1/10 examples had other incorrect variable
         use, and another had a different missing predicate.
       • Conjunctions: 8/10 examples had the wrong connectives, i.e. OR, OR, AND instead of
         OR, AND, AND. 2/10 had bad scoping, where the correct predicates and connectives were
         produced but were grouped incorrectly.


A.5    A NNOTATION TASK

To ensure the validity of our results, we conducted a pilot paraphrasing task, where we asked
Mechanical Turk annotators to verify that they were native English speakers and paraphrase a short
passage. In the task, annotators from a trusted list were first asked if they were native English speakers.
To verify the results, annotators were additionally asked to paraphrase a short fable (The North Wind
and the Sun) in 3 sentences. The annotation interface precluded copying, preventing annotators from
using external resources. Annotators were paid $0.50 for the pilot task, corresponding to an hourly
payment of ∼ $14.00 Each annotator’s summary was then manually checked to verify fluency and
adequacy; all annotators passed the quality check.
In the main HIT, annotators were again paid ∼ $14.00 per hour, and each annotator performed exactly
20 annotations in a sequence. Each sequence has 5 tuples of the 4 ambiguity types. Annotators were
shown a sliding scale with 3 ticks: not confident, somewhat confident, very confident, and annotators
can slide the indicator anywhere along the scale. The interface can be seen in Fig. 7.


                        Figure 7: Annotation interface for human evaluation.


To transform the annotators’ confidence scores into probabilities, we first min-max normalize raw
confidence scores, following past work using sliding bars (Vashishtha et al., 2019). This accounts for
the fact that different annotators may use the slider differently. We then take the lowest confidence
value to correspond to p(LFc ) = 0.5, where LFc is the LF corresponding to the chosen interpretation.
Intuitively, if p(LFc ) were less than 0.5, the annotator would have chosen the other LF. The highest
confidence value corresponds to p(LFc ) = 1.0.
Qualitatively, we find that visual verbs and nouns (e.g. saw-telescope, observed-glasses) are matched
more to LF1 , where the PP is an instrument, while tactile verbs and nouns (e.g. held-gloves, picked
up-mittens) yield a possessive interpretation.


                                                   17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Limitations of the Annotation Task To gather human preferences, we elicit choices between
verbalized interpretations of each logical form. This is a different task from what the models are
being tasked with, and is motivated by the fact that annotators are unlikely to know first-order logic.
Even if they did, it is difficult to constrain annotators to produce exactly the kind of first-order
logic statements that would match the reference. In this sense, most of the models we test have an
advantage, as we use constrained decoding according to a grammar. Thus, the model cannot produce
LFs that deviate from the syntax expected by AMP.
Our method for eliciting judgements differs from standard methods in psycholinguistics, which
are typically based on reading times, eye tracking, or other more elaborate experimental methods
(Lackner & Garrett, 1972; Rayner et al., 1983; Filik et al., 2004; Dwivedi, 2013). It is more akin
to the paraphrase verification method used by Rayner et al. (1983) to elicit interpretations. Note
that these methods test for different things. While the former set of methods typically test for
incremental and subconscious processes, our method and paraphrase verification test for conscious,
non-incremental judgements. In the context of a comparison to transformer-based models which do
not receive incremental input, the second paradigm is a more accurate fit. Nevertheless, the uncertainty
consciously expressed by our human annotators may differ, for example, from the uncertainty we
would obtain via more direct measurements like reading times.


                                                  18
