Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D ECODABLE AND S AMPLE I NVARIANT C ONTINUOUS
O BJECT E NCODER
 Dehao Yuan, Furong Huang, Cornelia Fermüller & Yiannis Aloimonos
 Department of Computer Science
 University of Maryland
 College Park, MD 20740, USA
 {dhyuan, furongh, fermulcm, jyaloimo}@umd.edu


                                             A BSTRACT

         We propose Hyper-Dimensional Function Encoding (HDFE). Given samples of a
         continuous object (e.g. a function), HDFE produces an explicit vector representa-
         tion of the given object, invariant to the sample distribution and density. Sample
         distribution and density invariance enables HDFE to consistently encode contin-
         uous objects regardless of their sampling, and therefore allows neural networks
         to receive continuous objects as inputs for machine learning tasks, such as clas-
         sification and regression. Besides, HDFE does not require any training and is
         proved to map the object into an organized embedding space, which facilitates the
         training of the downstream tasks. In addition, the encoding is decodable, which
         enables neural networks to regress continuous objects by regressing their encod-
         ings. Therefore, HDFE serves as an interface for processing continuous objects.
         We apply HDFE to function-to-function mapping, where vanilla HDFE achieves
         competitive performance with the state-of-the-art algorithm. We apply HDFE to
         point cloud surface normal estimation, where a simple replacement from PointNet
         to HDFE leads to 12% and 15% error reductions in two benchmarks. In addition,
         by integrating HDFE into the PointNet-based SOTA network, we improve the
         SOTA baseline by 2.5% and 1.7% on the same benchmarks.


1   I NTRODUCTION

Continuous objects are objects that can be sampled with arbitrary distribution and density. Examples
include point clouds (Guo et al., 2020), event-based vision data (Gallego et al., 2020), and sparse
meteorological data (Lu et al., 2021). A crucial characteristic of continuous objects, which poses a
challenge for learning, is that their sample distribution and size varies between training and test sets.
For example, point cloud data in the testing phase may be sparser or denser than that in the training
phase. A framework that handles this inconsistency is essential for continuous object learning.
When designing the framework, four properties are desirable: (1) Sample distribution invariance:
the framework is not affected by the distribution from which the samples are collected. (2) Sample
size invariance: the framework is not affected by the number of samples. (3) Explicit representation:
the framework generates outputs with fixed dimensions, such as fixed-length vectors. (4) Decodabil-
ity: the continuous object can be reconstructed at arbitrary resolution from the representation.
Sample invariance (properties 1 and 2) ensures that differently sampled instances of the same con-
tinuous objects are treated consistently, thereby eliminating the ambiguity caused by variations in
sampling. An explicit representation (property 3) enables a neural network to receive continuous
objects as inputs, by consuming the encodings of the objects. Decodability (property 4) enables a
neural network to predict a continuous object, by first predicting the representation and then decod-
ing it back to the continuous object. Fig. 1 illustrates the properties and their motivations.
However, existing methodologies, which we divide into three categories, are limited when incorpo-
rating the four properties. (1) Discrete framework. The methods discretize continuous objects and
process them with neural networks. For example, Liu et al. (2019) uses a 3D-CNN to process vox-
elized point clouds, Kim et al. (2017) uses an RNN to predict particle trajectories. These methods
are not sample invariant – the spatial and temporal resolution must be consistent across the training


                                                   1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                               classification
                                                                                   Neural
                                                                       HDFE                     regression
                                                                                  Network
                                                                                                     ...
                                        HDFE
               HDFE        distance
                                      Reconstruct


                                                                        Neural     HDFE
                                                          Any Inputs
                                                                       Network   Reconstruct


Figure 1: Left: HDFE encodes continuous objects into fixed-length vectors without any training.
The encoding is not affected by the distribution and size with which the object is sampled. The
encoding can be decoded to reconstruct the continuous object. Right: Applications of HDFE. HDFE
can be used to perform machine learning tasks (e.g. classification, regression) on continuous objects.
HDFE also enables neural networks to regress continuous objects by predicting their encodings.

and testing phases. (2) Mesh-grid-based framework. They operate on continuous objects defined on
mesh grids and achieve discretization invariance (the framework is not affected by the resolution of
the grids). Examples include the Fourier transform (Salih, 2012) and the neural operator (Li et al.,
2020a). But they do not apply to sparse data like point clouds. (3) Sparse framework. They oper-
ate on sparse samples drawn from the continuous object. Kernel methods (Hofmann et al., 2008)
work for non-linear regression, classification, etc. But they do not provide an explicit representation
of the function. PointNet (Qi et al., 2017a) receives sparse point cloud input and produces an ex-
plicit representation, but the representation is not decodable (see Appendix B). In addition, all the
frameworks require extra training of the encoder, which is undesired in some scarce data scenarios.
Currently, only the vector function architecture (VFA) (Frady et al., 2021) can encode an explicit
function into a vector through sparse samples, while preserving all four properties. However, VFA
is limited by its strong
                    P assumption of the functional form. VFA requires the input function to con-
form to f (x) =       k αk · K(x, xk ), where K : X × X → R is a kernel defined on X. If the
input function does not conform to the form, VFA cannot apply or induces large errors. In practice,
such requirement is rarely satisfied. For example, f (x) cannot even approximate a constant function
g(x) = 1: to approximate the constant function, the kernel K must be constant. But with the con-
stant kernel, f (x) cannot approximate other non-constant functions. Such limitation greatly hinders
the application of VFA. Kindly refer to Appendix C for failure cases and detailed discussions.
We propose hyper-dimensional function encoding (HDFE), which does not assume any explicit
form of input functions but only requires Lipschitz continuity (Appendix D illustrates some suitable
input types). Consequently, HDFE can encode a much larger class of functions, while holding all
four properties without any training. Thanks to the relaxation, HDFE can be applied to multiple
real-world applications that VFA fails, which will be elaborated on in the experiment section.
HDFE maps the samples to a high-dimensional space and computes weighted averages of the
samples in that space to capture collective information of all the samples. A challenge in HDFE
design is maintaining sample invariance, for which we propose a novel iterative refinement process
to decide the weight of each sample. The contributions of our paper can be summarized as follows:
 • We present HDFE, an encoder for continuous objects without any training that exhibits sample
   invariance, decodability, and distance-preservation. To the best of our knowledge, HDFE is the
   only algorithm that can encode Lipschitz functions while upholding all the four properties.
 • We provide extensive theoretical foundation for HDFE. We prove that HDFE is equipped with
   all the desirable properties. We also verify them with empirical experiments.
 • We evaluate HDFE on mesh-grid data and sparse data. In the mesh-grid data domain, HDFE
   achieves competitive performance as the specialized state-of-the-art (SOTA) in function-to-
   function mapping tasks. In the sparse data domain, replacing PointNet with HDFE leads to
   average error decreases of 12% and 15% in two benchmarks, and incorporating HDFE into the
   PointNet-based SOTA architecture leads to average error decreases of 2.5% and 1.7%.

2   P ROBLEM D EFINITION AND M ETHODOLOGY
Let F be the family of c-Lipschitz continuous functions defined on a compact  domain X with  a
compact range Y . In other words, ∀f ∈ F , f : X → Y and dY f (x1 ), f (x2 ) ≤ c · dX x1 , x2 ,


                                                    2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


where (X, dX ) and (Y, dY ) are metric spaces, and c is the Lipschitz constant. Our goal is to find
a representation algorithm that can encode a function f ∈ F into  a vector representation
                                                                                          F ∈ CN .
To construct it, we will feed samples of the function mapping xi , f (xi ) to the representation
algorithm, which will generate the vector representation based on these samples.
We require the function representation to satisfy the following: (1) Sample distribution invariance:
the function representation is “not affected” by the distribution from which the samples are col-
lected. (2) Sample size invariance: the function representation is “not affected” by the number of
samples. (3) Fixed-length representation: all functions are represented by fixed-length vectors. (4)
Decodability: as new inputs query the function representation, it can reconstruct the function values.
To better formalize the heuristic expression of “not affected” in Properties 1 and 2, we introduce the
definition of asymptotic sample invariance to formulate an exact mathematical expression:
Definition 1 (Asymptotic Sample Invariance). Let f : X → Y be the function to be encoded,
p : X → (0, 1) be a probability density function (pdf) on X, {xi }ni=1 ∼ p(X) be n independent
samples of X. Let Fn be the representation computed from the samples {xi , f (xi )}ni=1 , asymptotic
sample invariance implies Fn converges to a limit F∞ independent of the pdf p.
In this definition, sample size invariance is reflected because the distance between Fm and Fn can
be arbitrarily small as m, n become large. Sample distribution invariance is reflected because the
limit F∞ does not depend on the pdf p, as long as p is supported on the whole input space X.
With the problem definition above, we present our hyper-dimensional function encoding (HDFE)
approach. Sec. 2.1 introduces how HDFE encodes explicit functions. Sec. 2.2 generalizes HDFE
to implicit function encoding. Sec. 2.3 realizes HDFE for vector-valued function encoding. Finally,
Sec. 2.4 establishes the theorems that HDFE is asymptotic sample invariant and distance-preserving.
Throughout the section, we assume the functions are c-Lipschitz continuous. The assumption will
also be explained in Section 2.4. Kindly refer to Appendix A for the table of notations.

2.1   E XPLICIT F UNCTION E NCODING

Encoding HDFE is inspired by the methodology of hyper-dimensional computing (HDC) (Kleyko
et al., 2023), where one encodes an indefinite number of data points into a fixed-length vector. The
common practice is to first map the data points to a high-dimensional space and then average the data
point representations in that space. The resulting superposed vector can represent the distribution of
the data. Following the idea, we represent an explicit function as the superposition of its samples:
                                             X
                                       F=        wi · E(xi , yi )                                  (1)
                                                i
where E maps function samples to a high-dimensional space CN . The question remains (a) how to
design the mapping to make the vector decodable; (b) how to determine the weight of each sample
wi so that the representation is sample invariant. We will answer question (a) first and leave question
(b) to the iterative refinement section.
Regarding the selection of E(x, y), a counter-example is a linear mapping, where the average of
the function samples in the high-dimensional space will degenerate to the average of the function
samples, which does not represent the function. To avoid degeneration, the encodings of the samples
should not interfere with each other if they are far from each other. Specifically, if dX (x1 , x2 ) is
larger than a threshold ϵ0 , their function values f (x1 ), f (x2 ) may be significantly different. In this
case, we want E(x1 , y1 ) to be orthogonal to E(x2 , y2 ) to avoid interference. On the other hand, if
dX (x1 , x2 ) is smaller than the threshold ϵ0 , by the Lipschitz continuity, the distance between their
function values dY (f (x1 ), f (x2 )) is bounded by cϵ0 . In this case, we want E(x1 , y1 ) to be similar
to E(x2 , y2 ). We call the tunable threshold ϵ0 the receptive field of HDFE, which will be discussed
in Sec. 2.4. Denoting the similarity between vectors as ⟨·, ·⟩, the requirement can be formulated as:
                                                                     dX (x, x′ ) < ϵ0

                                                ≈1
                      ⟨E(x, y), E(x′ , y ′ )⟩                                                           (2)
                                                decays to 0 quickly dX (x, x′ ) > ϵ0
In addition to avoiding degeneration, we also require the encoding to be decodable. This can
be achieved by factorizing E(x, y) into two components: We first map xi and yi to the high-
dimensional space CN through two different mappings EX and EY . To ensure equation 2 is satis-
fied, we require ⟨EX (x), EX (x′ )⟩ ≈ 1 when dX (x, x′ ) < ϵ0 and that it decays to 0 otherwise. The


                                                    3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


property of EY will be mentioned later in the discussion of decoding. Finally, we compute the joint
embedding of xi and yi through a binding operation ⊗: E(xi , yi ) = EX (xi ) ⊗ EY (yi ).
We will show that the representation is decodable if the binding operation satisfies these properties:
  1. commutative: x ⊗ y = y ⊗ x
  2. distributive: x ⊗ (y + z) = x ⊗ y + x ⊗ z
  3. similarity preserving: ⟨x ⊗ y, x ⊗ z⟩ = ⟨y, z⟩.
  4. invertible: there exists an associative, distributive, similarity preserving operator that undoes
     the binding, called unbinding ⊘, satisfying (x ⊗ y) ⊘ z = (x ⊘ z) ⊗ y and (x ⊗ y) ⊘ x = y.
The binding and unbinding operations can be analogous to multiplication and division, where the
difference is that binding and unbinding operate on vectors and are similarity preserving.
Decoding With the properties of the two operations, the decoding of the function representation
can be performed by a similarity search. Given the function representation F ∈ CN , and a query
input x0 ∈ X, the estimated function value yˆ0 is computed by:
                              yˆ0 = argmaxy∈Y ⟨F ⊘ EX (x0 ), EY (y)⟩                              (3)
The distributive property allows the unbinding operation to be performed sample-by-sample. The
invertible property allows
                            the unbinding operation  to recover the  encoding of the function values:
EX (xi ) ⊗ EY f (xi ) ⊘ EX (x0 ) ≈ EY f (xi ) ≈ EY f (x0 ) when dX (x0 , xi ) is small. The
similarity preserving property ensures that [EX (xi ) ⊘ EX (x0 )] ⊗ EY (f (xi )) produces a vector
orthogonal to EY (f (x0 )) when the distance between two samples is large, resulting in a summation
of noise. The following formula illustrates the idea and Appendix E details the derivation.
                 X
F ⊘ EX (x0 ) =       wi · EX (xi ) ⊗ EY f (xi ) ⊘ EX (x0 )
                      i
                          X                                  X
              =                   wi · EY f (xi )    +                   wi · [EX (xi ) ⊘ EX (x0 )] ⊗ EY (f (xi ))
                  d(x0 ,xi )<ϵ0                          d(x0 ,xi )>ϵ0
                  |                {z           }        |                                {z                       }
                              ≈EY (f (x0 ))                              noise, since orthogonal to EY (f (x0 ))

After computing F ⊘ EX (x0 ), we search for y ∈ Y such that the cosine similarity between EY (y)
and F ⊘ EX (x0 ) is maximized. We desire that ∂y∂
                                                  ⟨EY (y), EY (y ′ )⟩ > 0 for all y and y ′ so that the
optimization can be solved by gradient descent. See Appendix F for detailed formulation.
Since the decoding only involves measuring cosine similarity, in the last step, we normalize the
function representation to achieve sample size invariance without inducing any loss:
                                        X
                       F = normalize          wi · EX xi ⊗ EY f (xi )                        (4)
                                                 i

Iterative refinement for sample distribution invari-
ance In equation 4, we are left to determine the weight Algorithm 1 Iterative Refinement
of each sample so that the representation is sample invari-    zi ←PEX (xi ) ⊗ EY (f (xi )) for all i.
ant. To address this, we propose an iterative refinement       F = i zi
process to make the encoding invariant to the sample dis-      while mini ⟨F, zi ⟩ still increases do
tribution. We initialize wi = 1 and compute the initial           j = argmini ⟨F, zi ⟩
function vector. Then we compute the similarity between           F ← F + zj
the function vector and the encoding of each sample. We        end while
then add the sample encoding with the lowest similarity
to the function vector and repeat this process until the lowest similarity no longer increases. By
doing so, the output will be the center of the smallest ball containing all the sample encodings.
Such output is asymptotic sample invariant because the ball converges to the smallest ball contain-
ing ∪x∈X [EX (x) ⊗ EY (f (x))] as the sample size goes large, where the limit ball only depends
on the function. We left the formal proof to the Appendix H.1. In Appendix I.3, we introduce a
practical implementation of the iterative refinement for saving computational cost.

2.2   I MPLICIT F UNCTION E NCODING

Generalizing HDFE to implicit functions is fairly straightforward. Without loss of generality, we
assume an implicit function is represented as f (x) = 0. Then it can be encoded using equation 5,


                                                         4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


where the weights wx are determined by the iterative refinement:
                                                 X
                          Ff =0 = normalize               wx · EX (x)                              (5)
                                                   x:f (x)=0

The formula can be understood as encoding an explicit function g, where g(x) = 1 if f (x) = 0 and
g(x) = 0 if f (x) ̸= 0. Then by choosing EY (1) = 1 and EY (0) = 0 in equation 4, we can obtain
equation 5. The formula can be interpreted in a simple way: a continuous object can be represented
as the summation of its samples in a high-dimensional space.

2.3   V ECTOR -VALUED F UNCTION E NCODING

In the previous sections, we established a theoretical framework for encoding c-Lipschitz continu-
ous functions. In this section, we put this framework into practice by carefully choosing appropriate
input and output mappings EX , EY , the binding operator ⊗, and the unbinding operator ⊘ in equa-
tion 4. We will first state our choice and then explain the motivation behind it.
Formulation Let (x, y) be one of the function samples, where x ∈ Rm and y ∈ R, the mapping
EX : X → CN , EY : R → CN and the operations ⊗ and ⊘ are chosen as:
                                        Φx
                    EX (x) := exp i · α          EY (y) := exp iβΨy                    (6)
                                         m
                                                       Φx
                        EX (x) ⊗ EY (y) := exp i · α      + iβΨy
                                                       m
                                                       Φx
                        EX (x) ⊘ EY (y) := exp i · α      − iβΨy
                                                       m

where i is the imaginary unit, Φ ∈ RN ×m and Ψ ∈ RN are random fixed matrices where all
elements are drawn from the standard normal distribution. α and β are hyper-parameters controlling
the properties of the mappings.
Motivation The above way of mapping real vectors to high-dimensional spaces is modified from
Komer & Eliasmith (2020), known as fractional power encoding (FPE). We introduce the motivation
for adopting this technique heuristically. In Appendix G, we elaborate on the relation between FPE
and radial basis function (RBF) kernels, which gives a rigorous reason for adopting this technique.
First, the mappings are continuous, which can avoid losses when mapping samples to the embedding
space. Second, the receptive field of the input mapping EX (the ϵ0 in equation 2) can be adjusted
easily through manipulating α. Fig. 2a demonstrates how manipulating α can alter the behavior of
EX . Typically, α has a magnitude of 10 for capturing the high-frequency component of the function.
Thirdly, the decodability of the output mapping EY can easily be achieved by selecting appropriate β
values. We select β such that ⟨EY (0), EY (1)⟩ is equal to 0 to utilize the space CN maximally while
keeping the gradient of ⟨EY (y1 ), EY (y2 )⟩ non-zero for all y1 and y2 . Per the illustration in Fig.
2a, the optimal choice for β is 2.5. Finally, the binding and unbinding operators are defined as the
element-wise multiplication and division of complex vectors, which satisfy the required properties.

2.4   P ROPERTIES OF HDFE

HDFE produces an explicit decodable representation of functions. In this section, we state a theorem
on the asymptotic sample invariance, completing the claim that HDFE satisfies all four desirable
properties. We study the effect of the receptive field on the behavior of HDFE. We also state that
HDFE is distance-preserving and discuss the potential of scaling HDFE to high-dimensional data.
We leave the proofs to Appendix H and verify the claims with empirical experiments in Appendix I.
We include several empirical experiments of HDFE in Appendix I, including the cost of the iterative
refinement and its practical implementation, the effectiveness of sample invariance in a synthetic
regression problem, and the analysis of information loss when encoding continuous objects.
Theorem 1 (Sample Invariance). HDFE is asymptotic sample invariant (defined at Definition 1).
HDFE being sample invariant ensures functions realized with different sampling schemes are treated
invariantly. Kindly refer to Appendix H.1 and I.1 for the proof and empirical experiments.


                                                  5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Theorem 2 (Distance Preserving). Let f, g : X → Y be both c-Lipschitz continuous, then their
L2-distance is preserved in the encoding. In other words, HDFE is an isometry:
                                     Z
                                                         2
                      ||f − g||L2 =         f (x) − g(x) dx ≈ b − a⟨F, G⟩
                                        x∈X

HDFE being isometric indicates that HDFE encodes functions into a organized embedding space,
which can reduce the complexity of the machine learning architecture when training downstream
tasks on the functions. Kindly refer to Appendix H.2 and I.2 for the proof and empirical experiment.
Effect of receptive field Fig. 2 shows the reconstruction results of a 1d function f : R → R,
which demonstrates that HDFE can reconstruct the original functions given a suitable receptive
field and a sufficiently large embedding space. When using a large receptive field (Fig. 2b), the
high-frequency components will be missed by HDFE. When using a small receptive field (Fig. 2c),
the high-frequency components can be captured, but it may cause incorrect reconstruction if the
dimension of the embedding space is not large enough. Fortunately, reconstruction failures can be
eliminated by increasing the dimension of the embedding space (Fig. 2d).


(a) Similarity between    (b) Large recept. field.       (c) Small recept. field.   (d) Small recept. field.
EX (x) and EX (0).        Dimension = 1000.              Dimension = 1000.          Dimension = 2000.
Figure 2: (a): How α and β in equation 6 affects the receptive field of HDFE. (b)-(d): Functions can
be reconstructed accurately given a suitable receptive field and encoding dimension. To capture the
high-frequency component of the function, a small receptive field and a high dimension are required.

Scale to high-dimensional input HDFE produces the function encoding based on the sparsely
collected samples. Unlike mesh-grid based methods, which require a mesh-grid domain and suffer
from an exponential increase in memory and computational cost as the data dimension increases,
HDFE uses superposition to encode all the samples defined in the support of the function. This
means the required dimensionality only depends on the size of the support, not on the data dimen-
sionality. Even if the data dimensionality is high, HDFE can mitigate this issue as long as the data
reside in a low-rank subspace. Appendix I.6 gives an empirical experiment of high-dimensional
input to show the potential of HDFE to work in low-rank high-dimensional scenarios.

3     E XPERIMENT
In this section, we present two applications of HDFE. Sec. 3.1 showcases how HDFE can be lever-
aged for solving partial differential equations (PDE). This exemplifies how HDFE can enhance neu-
ral networks to receive function inputs and produce function outputs. In Sec. 3.2, we apply HDFE
to predict the surface normal of point clouds. This demonstrates how HDFE can enhance neural
networks to process implicit functions and extract relevant attributes.

3.1   PDE S OLVER

Several neural networks have been developed to solve partial differential equations (PDE), such as
the Fourier neural operator (Li et al., 2020a). In this section, we compare our approach using HDFE
against the current approaches and show that we achieve on-par performance. VFA does not apply
to the problem since the input and output functions do not conform to the form that VFA requires.
Architecture To solve PDEs using neural networks, we first encode the PDE and its solution into
their vector embeddings using HDFE. Then, we train a multi-layer perceptron to map the embedding
of the PDE to the embedding of its solution. The optimization target is the cosine similarity between


                                                     6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


the predicted embedding and the true embedding. Since the embeddings are complex vectors, we
adopt a Deep Complex Network (Trabelsi et al., 2017) as the architecture of the multi-layer percep-
tron. The details are presented in Appendix J.1. Once the model is trained, we use it to predict the
embedding of the solution, which is then decoded to obtain the actual solution.
Dataset We use 1d Burgers’ Equation (Su & Gardner, 1969) and 2d Darcy Flow (Tek, 1957)
for evaluating our method. The error is measured by the absolute distance between the predicted
solution and the ground-truth solution. The benchmark (Li et al., 2020c) has been used to evaluate
neural operators widely. For the 1d Burgers’ Equation, it provides 2048 PDEs and their solutions,
sampled at a 1d mesh grid at a resolution of 8192. For the 2d Darcy Flow, it provides 2048 PDEs
and their solutions, sampled at a 2d mesh grid at a resolution of 241 × 241.
Baselines We evaluate our HDFE against other neural network PDE-solving methods. These in-
clude: PCANN (Bhattacharya et al., 2021); MGKN: Multipole Graph Neural Operator (Li et al.,
2020c); FNO: Fourier Neural Operator (Li et al., 2020a).


Figure 3: HDFE solves a PDE by predicting the encoding of its solution and then reconstructing
at points, so the error consists of a function encoding prediction error and a reconstruction error.
Left: Prediction error of different methods under different testing resolutions, evaluated on the 1d
Burgers’ equation. Mid: The reconstruction error (in HDFE) dominates the function encoding
prediction error, while the reconstruction error can be reduced by increasing the dimensionality of
the embedding. Right: Prediction error of different methods evaluated on 2d Darcy Flow.

When decoding is required, our approach achieves ∼ 55% lower prediction error than MGKN
and PCANN and competitive performance to FNO. The error of HDFE consists of two compo-
nents. The first is the error arising from predicting the solution embedding, and the second is the
reconstruction error arising when decoding the solution from the predicted embedding. In contrast,
FNO directly predicts the solution, and hence, does not suffer from reconstruction error. If we con-
sider both errors, HDFE achieves comparable performance to FNO. Fig. 3 shows the comparison.
On the other hand, when decoding is not required, our approach achieves lower error than FNO.
Such scenarios happen frequently when we use functions only as input, for example, the local ge-
ometry prediction problem in Experiment 3.2. Despite the presence of reconstruction error, the
reconstruction error can be reduced by increasing the embedding dimension, as shown in Fig-
ure 3 (Mid). Increasing the embedding dimension may slightly increase the function prediction
error, possibly because the network is not adequately trained due to limited training data and some
overfitting. We conjecture that this prediction error can be reduced with more training data.
In addition to comparable performance, HDFE overcomes two limitations of FNO. First, HDFE
provides an explicit function representation, resolving the restriction of FNO, which only models
the mappings between functions without extracting attributes from them. Second, HDFE not only
works for grid-sampled functions but also for sparsely sampled functions.

3.2   U NORIENTED S URFACE N ORMAL E STIMATION

Next, we apply HDFE to extract attributes of functions, a setting where neither neural operators nor
VFA applies, because neural operators do not consume sparse samples and VFA does not encode
implicit functions. We predict the unoriented surface normal from 3d point cloud input.


                                                 7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Baselines We compare our HDFE with two baselines. In the first baseline, we compare the vanilla
HDFE with the PCPNet (Guerrero et al., 2018), which is a vanilla PointNet (Qi et al., 2017a) archi-
tecture. We replace the PointNet with our HDFE appended with a deep complex network (Trabelsi
et al., 2017). In the second baseline, we incorporate HDFE into HSurf-Net (Li et al., 2022), which
is the state-of-the-art PointNet-based normal estimator. In both settings, we compare the effect of
data augmentation in the HDFE module, where we add noise to the weight of each sample when
generating the patch encoding by HDFE. Kindly refer to Appendix J.2 J.3 for details.
Dataset and metrics We use the root mean squared angle error (RMSE) as the metrics, evaluated
on the PCPNet (Guerrero et al., 2018) and FamousShape (Li et al., 2023) datasets. We compare the
robustness for two types of data corruption: (1) point density: sampling subsets of points with two
regimes, where gradient simulates the effects of distance from the sensor, and strips simulates local
occlusions. (2) point perturbations: adding Gaussian noise to the point coordinates. Table 1 reports
normal angle RMSE comparison with the baselines on PCPNet and FamousShape. Appendix K
reports the ablation studies examining the effect of the receptive field size and the dimensionality.

Table 1: Unoriented normal RMSE results on datasets PCPNet and FamousShape. Replacing from
PointNet to HDFE improves performance. Integrating HDFE with the SOTA estimator improves its
performance. Applying data augmentation to HDFE improves its performance.
                                             PCPNet Dataset (↓ means improvement)                      FamousShape Dataset (↓ means improvement)
                                                Noise                  Density                               Noise                  Density
                                                                                    Average                                                      Average
                                  None      Low      Med    High  Stripe Gradient             None       Low     Med   High    Stripe Gradient
PCPNet Guerrero et al. (2018)      9.64    11.51 18.27 22.84 11.73          13.46   14.58     18.47     21.07 32.60 39.93 18.14          19.50    24.95
PCPNet - PointNet + HDFE           9.48    11.05 17.16 22.53 11.61          10.19   13.67     15.66     17.92 31.24 38.89 17.26          14.55    22.59
Difference                        0.16 ↓   0.46 ↓ 1.11 ↓ 0.31 ↓ 0.12 ↓     3.27 ↓   0.91 ↓    2.81 ↓    3.15 ↓ 1.36 ↓ 1.04 ↓ 0.88 ↓     4.95 ↓    2.36 ↓
PCPNet - PointNet + HDFE + Aug.    7.97    10.72 17.69 22.76       9.47      8.67   12.88     13.04     17.99 31.23 38.57 14.01          12.13    21.16
Difference                        1.67 ↓   0.79 ↓ 0.58 ↓ 0.08 ↓ 2.26 ↓     4.79 ↓   1.70 ↓    5.43 ↓    3.08 ↓ 1.37 ↓ 1.36 ↓ 4.13 ↓     7.37 ↓    3.79 ↓
HSurf-Net Li et al. (2022)         4.30     8.78    16.15 21.64    5.18      5.03   10.18      7.54     15.56 29.47 38.61       7.82      7.44    17.74
HSurf-Net + HDFE                   4.13     8.64    16.14 21.64    5.02      4.87   10.07      7.46     15.50 29.42 38.56       7.77      7.35    17.68
Difference                        0.17 ↓   0.14 ↓ 0.01 ↓    0.00  0.16 ↓   0.16 ↓   0.11 ↓    0.08 ↓    0.06 ↓ 0.04 ↓ 0.05 ↓ 0.05 ↓     0.09 ↓    0.06 ↓
HSurf-Net + HDFE + Aug.            3.89     8.78    16.14 21.65    4.60      4.51    9.93      7.11     15.57 29.44 38.57       6.97      6.98    17.44
Difference                        0.41 ↓    0.00    0.01 ↓ 0.01 ↑ 0.58 ↓   0.52 ↓   0.25 ↓    0.43 ↓    0.01 ↑ 0.03 ↓ 0.04 ↓ 0.85 ↓     0.46 ↓    0.30 ↓


HDFE significantly outperforms the PointNet baseline. When processing the local patches, we
replace PointNet with HDFE followed by a neural network. This replacement leads to an average
reduction in error of 1.70 and 3.79 on each dataset. This is possibly because HDFE encodes the
distribution of the local patch, which is guaranteed by the decodability property of HDFE. PointNet,
on the other hand, does not have such guarantee. Specifically, PointNet aggregates point cloud
features through a max-pooling operation, which may omit points within the point cloud and fail to
adequately capture the patch’s distribution. Consequently, in tasks where modeling the point cloud
distribution is crucial, such as normal estimation, PointNet exhibits higher error compared to HDFE.
HDFE, as a plug-in module, improves the SOTA baseline significantly. HSurf-Net (Li et al.,
2022), the SOTA method in surface normal estimation, introduces many features, such as local
aggregation layers, and global shift layers specifically for the task. Notably, HDFE does not compel
such features. We incorporate HDFE into HSurf-Net (See Appendix J.3 for details), where it leads to
average error reductions of 0.25/0.30 on each dataset. Notably, such incorporation can be performed
on any PointNet-based architecture across various tasks. Incorporating HDFE to other PointNet-
based architectures for performance and robustness gain can be a future research direction.
HDFE promotes stronger robustness to point density variance. In both comparisons and both
benchmarks, HDFE exhibits stronger robustness to point density variation than its PointNet counter-
part, especially in the Density-Gradient setting (error reduction of 4.79/7.37/0.52/0.46). This shows
the effectiveness of the HDFE’s sample invariance property and the embedding augmentation. Sam-
ple invariance ensures a stable encoding of local patches when the point density changes. The
embedding augmentation is a second assurance to make the system more robust to density variation.

4     R ELATED W ORK
4.1     M ESH - GRID - BASED FRAMEWORK

These methods operate on continuous objects (functions) defined on mesh grids with arbitrary reso-
lution. They enjoy discretization invariance, but they do not receive sparse samples as input.
Fourier transform (FT) can map functions from their time domains to their frequency domains.
By keeping a finite number of frequencies, FT can provide a vector representation of functions. 1D-


                                                                          8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


FT has been a standard technique for signal processing (Salih, 2012) and 2D-FT has been used for
image processing (Jain, 1989). FT is also incorporated into deep learning architectures (Fan et al.,
2019; Sitzmann et al., 2020). However, FT is not scalable since the n-dimensional Fourier transform
returns an n-dimensional matrix, which is hard to process when n gets large.
Neural operator is a set of toolkits to model the mapping between function spaces. The technique
was pioneered in DeepONet (Lu et al., 2019) and a series of tools were developed (Li et al., 2021;
2020b;c; Guibas et al., 2021; Kovachki et al., 2021) for studying the problem. The most well-known
work is the Fourier Neural Operator (FNO) (Li et al., 2020a). The approach showed promising
accuracy and computational efficiency. Though proposed in 2020, FNO is still the first choice when
mapping between function spaces (Wen et al., 2023; Renn et al., 2023; Gopakumar et al., 2023).
Despite their success, neural operators lack explicit function representations and their application is
limited to mappings between function spaces.

4.2   S PARSE FRAMEWORK

These methods, including HDFE, work with sparse samples from continuous objects.
PointNet (Qi et al., 2017a) is a neural network architecture for processing point cloud data. It
uses multi-layer perceptrons to capture local features of every point and then aggregates them into
a global feature vector that’s invariant to the order of the input points. PointNet and its variation
(Zaheer et al., 2017; Qi et al., 2017b; Joseph-Rivlin et al., 2019; Yang et al., 2019; Zhao et al.,
2019; Duan et al., 2019; Yan et al., 2020) have been widely applied to sparse data processing, for
example, for object classification (Yan et al., 2020; Lin et al., 2019), semantic segmentation (Ma
et al., 2020; Li et al., 2019), and object detection (Qi et al., 2020; Yang et al., 2020) with point cloud
input. However, PointNet does not produce a decodable representation. Specifically, after encoding
a point cloud with PointNet, it is difficult to decide whether a point is drawn from the point cloud
distribution. Besides, PointNet is also sensitive to perturbations in the input point cloud.
Kernel methods (Hofmann et al., 2008) are a type of machine learning algorithm that transforms
data into a higher-dimensional feature space via a kernel function, such as the radial basis function
(RBF) (Cortes & Vapnik, 1995), which can capture nonlinear relationships. Though kernel methods
can predict function values at any query input (i.e. decodable) and the prediction is invariant to the
size and distribution of the training data, kernel methods do not produce an explicit representation
of functions, so they are only used for fitting functions but not processing or predicting functions.
Vector
P        function architecture VFA (Frady et al., 2021) encodes a function of the form f (x) =
   k αk · K(x, xk ) into a vector, where K : X × X → R is a kernel defined on the input space. VFA
and HDFE share a similar high-level idea. They both map the samples to high-dimensional space and
compute the weighted average in that space. However VFA determines the weight by relying on the
assumption of the functional form. HDFE, on the other hand, uses iterative refinement to solve the
weights. The iterative refinement coupled with the binding operation relaxes the assumption required
by VFA and enables encoding functions across a larger class of inputs. In addition, VFA is limited
to empirical experiments such as non-linear regression and density estimation, without practical
applications. In comparison, HDFE is demonstrated to be applicable to real-world problems.

5     C ONCLUSION
We introduced Hyper-Dimensional Function Encoding (HDFE), which constructs vector represen-
tations for continuous objects. The representation, without any training, is sample invariant, decod-
abile, and isometric. These properties position HDFE as an interface for the processing of contin-
uous objects by neural networks. Our study demonstrates that the HDFE-based architecture attains
significantly reduced errors compared to PointNet-based counterparts, especially in the presence of
density perturbations. This reveals that HDFE presents a promising complement to PointNet and
its variations for processing point cloud data. Adapting HDFE (e.g. imposing rotational invariance
to HDFE) to tasks like point cloud classification and segmentation offers promising avenues for ex-
ploration. Still, HDFE does possess limitations in encoding capacity. For functions defined over
large domains or highly non-linear functions, HDFE can experience underfitting. The exploration
of techniques to enhance HDFE’s capacity remains promising research. Regardless, HDFE already
shows strong applicability in low-dimensional (1D, 2D, 3D) inputs.


                                                    9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


6   ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
The support of NSF under awards OISE 2020624 and BCS 2318255, and ARL under the Army
Cooperative Agreement W911NF2120076 is greatly acknowledged. The in-depth discussions with
Denis Kleyko, Paxon Frady, Bruno Olshausen, Christopher Kymn, Friedrich Sommer, Pentti Kan-
erva significantly improved the manuscript and we are grateful.

R EFERENCES
Mahmoud Abbasi, Amin Shahraki, and Amir Taherkordi. Deep learning for network traffic moni-
 toring and analysis (ntma): A survey. Computer Communications, 170:19–41, 2021.
Kaushik Bhattacharya, Bamdad Hosseini, Nikola B Kovachki, and Andrew M Stuart. Model reduc-
  tion and neural networks for parametric pdes. The SMAI journal of computational mathematics,
  7:121–157, 2021.
Yiang Chen, Dehao Yuan, Wanying Chen, Mingyun Hu, Jimmy CH Fung, Haochen Sun, and
  Xingcheng Lu. Estimation and variation analysis of secondary inorganic aerosols across the
  greater bay area in 2005 and 2015. Chemosphere, 292:133393, 2022.
Zhuangbin Chen, Jinyang Liu, Wenwei Gu, Yuxin Su, and Michael R Lyu. Experience report: Deep
  learning-based system log analysis for anomaly detection. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.05908,
  2021.
Corinna Cortes and Vladimir Vapnik. Support-vector networks. Machine learning, 20:273–297,
  1995.
Yueqi Duan, Yu Zheng, Jiwen Lu, Jie Zhou, and Qi Tian. Structural relational reasoning of point
  clouds. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recogni-
  tion, pp. 949–958, 2019.
Yuwei Fan, Cindy Orozco Bohorquez, and Lexing Ying. Bcr-net: A neural network based on the
  nonstandard wavelet form. Journal of Computational Physics, 384:1–15, 2019.
E Paxon Frady, Denis Kleyko, Christopher J Kymn, Bruno A Olshausen, and Friedrich T
  Sommer. Computing on functions using randomized vector representations. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2109.03429, 2021.
Guillermo Gallego, Tobi Delbrück, Garrick Orchard, Chiara Bartolozzi, Brian Taba, Andrea Censi,
  Stefan Leutenegger, Andrew J Davison, Jörg Conradt, Kostas Daniilidis, et al. Event-based vision:
  A survey. IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence, 44(1):154–180, 2020.
Vignesh Gopakumar, Stanislas Pamela, Lorenzo Zanisi, Zongyi Li, Anima Anandkumar, and MAST
  Team. Fourier neural operator for plasma modelling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.06542, 2023.
Paul Guerrero, Yanir Kleiman, Maks Ovsjanikov, and Niloy J Mitra. Pcpnet learning local shape
  properties from raw point clouds. In Computer graphics forum, volume 37, pp. 75–85. Wiley
  Online Library, 2018.
John Guibas, Morteza Mardani, Zongyi Li, Andrew Tao, Anima Anandkumar, and Bryan Catan-
  zaro. Adaptive fourier neural operators: Efficient token mixers for transformers. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2111.13587, 2021.
Yulan Guo, Hanyun Wang, Qingyong Hu, Hao Liu, Li Liu, and Mohammed Bennamoun. Deep
  learning for 3d point clouds: A survey. IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine
  intelligence, 43(12):4338–4364, 2020.
Xian-Feng Han, Zhi-Ao Feng, Shi-Jie Sun, and Guo-Qiang Xiao. 3d point cloud descriptors: state-
  of-the-art. Artificial Intelligence Review, pp. 1–51, 2023.
Thomas Hofmann, Bernhard Schölkopf, and Alexander J Smola. Kernel methods in machine learn-
  ing. 2008.


                                                10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Xiaoshui Huang, Guofeng Mei, Jian Zhang, and Rana Abbas. A comprehensive survey on point
  cloud registration. arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.02690, 2021.
Anil K Jain. Fundamentals of digital image processing. Prentice-Hall, Inc., 1989.
Mor Joseph-Rivlin, Alon Zvirin, and Ron Kimmel. Momen (e) t: Flavor the moments in learning
 to classify shapes. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision
 workshops, pp. 0–0, 2019.
ByeoungDo Kim, Chang Mook Kang, Jaekyum Kim, Seung Hi Lee, Chung Choo Chung, and
  Jun Won Choi. Probabilistic vehicle trajectory prediction over occupancy grid map via recur-
  rent neural network. In 2017 IEEE 20th International Conference on Intelligent Transportation
  Systems (ITSC), pp. 399–404. IEEE, 2017.
Denis Kleyko, Dmitri Rachkovskij, Evgeny Osipov, and Abbas Rahimi. A survey on hyperdimen-
  sional computing aka vector symbolic architectures, part ii: Applications, cognitive models, and
  challenges. ACM Computing Surveys, 55(9):1–52, 2023.
Brent Komer and Chris Eliasmith. Efficient navigation using a scalable, biologically inspired spatial
  representation. In CogSci, 2020.
Nikola Kovachki, Zongyi Li, Burigede Liu, Kamyar Azizzadenesheli, Kaushik Bhattacharya, An-
  drew Stuart, and Anima Anandkumar. Neural operator: Learning maps between function spaces.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.08481, 2021.
Qing Li, Yu-Shen Liu, Jin-San Cheng, Cheng Wang, Yi Fang, and Zhizhong Han. Hsurf-net: Nor-
  mal estimation for 3d point clouds by learning hyper surfaces. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 35:4218–4230, 2022.
Qing Li, Huifang Feng, Kanle Shi, Yue Gao, Yi Fang, Yu-Shen Liu, and Zhizhong Han. Shs-net:
  Learning signed hyper surfaces for oriented normal estimation of point clouds. In Proceedings of
  the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 13591–13600, 2023.
Zihao Li, Shu Zhang, Junge Zhang, Kaiqi Huang, Yizhou Wang, and Yizhou Yu. Mvp-net: multi-
  view fpn with position-aware attention for deep universal lesion detection. In Medical Image
  Computing and Computer Assisted Intervention–MICCAI 2019: 22nd International Conference,
  Shenzhen, China, October 13–17, 2019, Proceedings, Part VI 22, pp. 13–21. Springer, 2019.
Zongyi Li, Nikola Kovachki, Kamyar Azizzadenesheli, Burigede Liu, Kaushik Bhattacharya, An-
  drew Stuart, and Anima Anandkumar. Fourier neural operator for parametric partial differential
  equations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.08895, 2020a.
Zongyi Li, Nikola Kovachki, Kamyar Azizzadenesheli, Burigede Liu, Kaushik Bhattacharya, An-
  drew Stuart, and Anima Anandkumar. Neural operator: Graph kernel network for partial differ-
  ential equations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.03485, 2020b.
Zongyi Li, Nikola Kovachki, Kamyar Azizzadenesheli, Burigede Liu, Andrew Stuart, Kaushik Bhat-
  tacharya, and Anima Anandkumar. Multipole graph neural operator for parametric partial differ-
  ential equations. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:6755–6766, 2020c.
Zongyi Li, Hongkai Zheng, Nikola Kovachki, David Jin, Haoxuan Chen, Burigede Liu, Kamyar
  Azizzadenesheli, and Anima Anandkumar. Physics-informed neural operator for learning partial
  differential equations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.03794, 2021.
Hongxin Lin, Zelin Xiao, Yang Tan, Hongyang Chao, and Shengyong Ding. Justlookup: One
  millisecond deep feature extraction for point clouds by lookup tables. In 2019 IEEE International
  Conference on Multimedia and Expo (ICME), pp. 326–331. IEEE, 2019.
Zhijian Liu, Haotian Tang, Yujun Lin, and Song Han. Point-voxel cnn for efficient 3d deep learning.
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019.
Lu Lu, Pengzhan Jin, and George Em Karniadakis. Deeponet: Learning nonlinear operators for iden-
  tifying differential equations based on the universal approximation theorem of operators. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1910.03193, 2019.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Xingcheng Lu, Dehao Yuan, Yiang Chen, Jimmy CH Fung, Wenkai Li, and Alexis KH Lau. Estima-
  tions of long-term nss-so42–and no3–wet depositions over east asia by use of ensemble machine-
  learning method. Environmental Science & Technology, 54(18):11118–11126, 2020.
Xingcheng Lu, Dehao Yuan, Yiang Chen, and Jimmy CH Fung. Impacts of urbanization and long-
  term meteorological variations on global pm2. 5 and its associated health burden. Environmental
  Pollution, 270:116003, 2021.
Yanni Ma, Yulan Guo, Hao Liu, Yinjie Lei, and Gongjian Wen. Global context reasoning for se-
  mantic segmentation of 3d point clouds. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Winter Conference on
  Applications of Computer Vision, pp. 2931–2940, 2020.
Charles R Qi, Hao Su, Kaichun Mo, and Leonidas J Guibas. Pointnet: Deep learning on point sets
  for 3d classification and segmentation. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision
  and pattern recognition, pp. 652–660, 2017a.
Charles R Qi, Xinlei Chen, Or Litany, and Leonidas J Guibas. Imvotenet: Boosting 3d object
  detection in point clouds with image votes. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on
  computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 4404–4413, 2020.
Charles Ruizhongtai Qi, Li Yi, Hao Su, and Leonidas J Guibas. Pointnet++: Deep hierarchical fea-
  ture learning on point sets in a metric space. Advances in neural information processing systems,
  30, 2017b.
Peter I Renn, Cong Wang, Sahin Lale, Zongyi Li, Anima Anandkumar, and Morteza Gharib. Fore-
  casting subcritical cylinder wakes with fourier neural operators. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.08290,
  2023.
Salih Salih. Fourier Transform: Signal Processing. BoD–Books on Demand, 2012.
Vincent Sitzmann, Julien Martel, Alexander Bergman, David Lindell, and Gordon Wetzstein. Im-
  plicit neural representations with periodic activation functions. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 33:7462–7473, 2020.
Chau Hsing Su and Clifford S Gardner. Korteweg-de vries equation and generalizations. iii. deriva-
  tion of the korteweg-de vries equation and burgers equation. Journal of Mathematical Physics,
  10(3):536–539, 1969.
MR Tek. Development of a generalized darcy equation. Journal of Petroleum Technology, 9(06):
 45–47, 1957.
Chiheb Trabelsi, Olexa Bilaniuk, Ying Zhang, Dmitriy Serdyuk, Sandeep Subramanian, Joao Fe-
  lipe Santos, Soroush Mehri, Negar Rostamzadeh, Yoshua Bengio, and Christopher J Pal. Deep
  complex networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1705.09792, 2017.
Gege Wen, Zongyi Li, Qirui Long, Kamyar Azizzadenesheli, Anima Anandkumar, and Sally M
  Benson. Real-time high-resolution co 2 geological storage prediction using nested fourier neural
  operators. Energy & Environmental Science, 16(4):1732–1741, 2023.
Xu Yan, Chaoda Zheng, Zhen Li, Sheng Wang, and Shuguang Cui. Pointasnl: Robust point
  clouds processing using nonlocal neural networks with adaptive sampling. In Proceedings of
  the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 5589–5598, 2020.
Jiancheng Yang, Qiang Zhang, Bingbing Ni, Linguo Li, Jinxian Liu, Mengdie Zhou, and Qi Tian.
   Modeling point clouds with self-attention and gumbel subset sampling. In Proceedings of the
   IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 3323–3332, 2019.
Zetong Yang, Yanan Sun, Shu Liu, and Jiaya Jia. 3dssd: Point-based 3d single stage object detector.
  In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp.
  11040–11048, 2020.
Manzil Zaheer, Satwik Kottur, Siamak Ravanbakhsh, Barnabas Poczos, Russ R Salakhutdinov, and
 Alexander J Smola. Deep sets. Advances in neural information processing systems, 30, 2017.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Hengshuang Zhao, Li Jiang, Chi-Wing Fu, and Jiaya Jia. Pointweb: Enhancing local neighborhood
  features for point cloud processing. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer
  vision and pattern recognition, pp. 5565–5573, 2019.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                     A PPENDIX
A    N OTATION TABLE
                                     Table 2: Table of Notation


                                 Notations of Continuous Functions

                 F    ≜   family of c-Lipschitz continuous functions
                  c   ≜   Lipschitz constant of the continuous function
                 X    ≜   input space, a bounded domain of the function
                 Y    ≜   output space, a bounded range of the function
               dX     ≜   distance metrics in the input space X
               dY     ≜   distance metrics in the output space Y
    {(xi , f (xi )}   ≜   collection of function samples.
                 m    ≜   dimensionality of the input space X.

                                         Notations of HDFE

                ϵ0    ≜   receptive field of HDFE.
                F     ≜   N -dimensional complex vector. Encoding of the explicit function f .
            Ff =0     ≜   N -dimensional complex vector. Encoding of the implicit function
                          f (x) = 0.
              N       ≜   dimensionality of the function encoding.
        EX , EY       ≜   the input and output mapping from X, Y to the encoding space CN .
              ⊗       ≜   binding operation.
              ⊘       ≜   unbinding operation.
           ⟨·, ·⟩     ≜   cosine similarity between two complex vectors.


B    P OINT N ET AS F UNCTION E NCODER
In this section, we present empirical evidence highlighting PointNet’s limitations in generating de-
codable function encodings. Our designed pipeline, following the popular style of training recon-
struction networks, demonstrates PointNet’s inability to produce even reasonable reconstructions.
Consequently, we infer that without substantial modifications, PointNet is unlikely to acquire the
necessary capability for effective function encoding.
Specifically, we generate random functions by
                                                   4
                                            1 1X
                                  f (x) =    +   ak sin(2πkx)
                                            2 8
                                                 k=1
where ak ∼ U nif orm(0, 1) are the parameters controlling the generation and f (x) ∈ (0, 1). We
randomly sample {xi , yi }5000
                           i=1 where yi = f (xi ) + ϵi , xi ∼ U nif orm(0, 1) and ϵi is white noise
with variance 1e-4. Then we stack xi and yi into a (5000, 2) matrix and feed it to a standard PointNet
to generate a 1024-dimensional vector. After encoding the function samples, we introduce a decoder
that retrieves the function values from the encoding when receiving function inputs. We optimize
the PointNet encoder and the decoder by minimizing the reconstruction loss. The procedure can be
summarized as:
                                                                               X n
          F = PointNet {(xi , yi )}ni=1 , yˆi = Decoder(F, xi ), L =                |yi − ŷi |2

                                                                               i=1
The decoder is designed as followed: xi is lifted to a 1024-dimensional vector x̃i through sequential
layers of Linear(1,64), Linear(64,128), Linear(128,1024) with BatchNorm and


                                                 14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


ReLU inserted between the linear layers. The retrieved function value ŷi is computed by the dot
product between F and x̃i . Figure 4 (Left) plots the training curve and Figure 4 (Right) visualizes
the reconstruction, which shows PointNet fails to learn a decodable representation.


Figure 4: PointNet fails to learn an effective function encoder. Left: Training curve of the PointNet
function encoder. The error is still significantly higher than HDFE though training for 700 epochs.
Right: The PointNet function encoder does not produce a reasonable reconstruction.

C    V ECTOR F UNCTION A RCHITECTURE
In this section, we will give a brief introduction of VFA and its relation and comparison with HDFE.
Vector Function Architecture (VFA) A function of the form
                                        X
                                f (x) =     αk · K(x, xk )                                        (7)
                                              k
                          P
is represented by F =        k αk · E(xk ), where the kernel K(·, ·) and the encoder E(·) satisfy
K(x, y) = ⟨E(x), E(y)⟩. Given the function encoding F, the function value at a query point
x0 can be retrieved by fˆ(x0 ) = ⟨F, E(x0 )⟩.
VFA satisfies the four desired properties: VFA can encode an explicit function into a fixed-length
vector, where the encoding is sample invariant and decodable.
                                                            R    Besides, the function encoding will
preserve the overall similarity of the functions: ⟨F, G⟩ = x f (x)g(x)dx. Note that when encoding
multiple functions, the kernel K(·, ·) and the encoder E(·) must be the same. Otherwise, the function
encoding generated by VFA will be meaningless.
However, it is a strong assumption that a function can
be approximated by equation 7. In other words, under
a fixed selection of K(·, ·) and E(·), equation 7 can only
approximate a small set of functions. There are a large
set of functions that cannot be approximated by equa-
tion 7. In Fig. 5, we show a failure case of VFA. We
                                      P10
generate a function f (x) = 0.1 + k=1 αk · K(x, xk ),
where xk ∼ N (0, 1), αk ∼ U nif orm(0, 1). K(x, y) =
exp[−20(x − y)2 ] is an RBF kernel. We generate 1000
function samples and add white noise to the output values
to form the training set. The experiment shows that VFA
fails to reconstruct the function but HDFE succeeds.
In this paper, HDFE is applicable for all c-Lipchitz func- Figure 5: VFA fails to reconstruct the
tion, without compromising the four desired properties. function but HDFE succeeds.
Thanks to the improvement, we can apply function en-
coding to real-world applications. The first application,
PDE solving, cannot be solved by VFA because the input and output functions cannot be approxi-
mated by equation 7. The second application, local geometry prediction, has to deal with implicit
function encoding, which cannot be solved by VFA either because VFA only encodes explicit func-
tions.


                                                  15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D    S UITABLE I NPUT T YPES FOR HDFE
We mentioned HDFE can encode Lipschitz functions. In this section, we will discuss several data
types that exhibits Lipschitz continuity, making them well-suited as inputs for HDFE. This enu-
meration is not exhaustive of all potential suitable inputs for HDFE. Our objective is to furnish a
conceptual understanding of the characteristics that define a suitable input, thereby guiding future
considerations in this domain.
Point Cloud Local Geometry In many 3D vision problems, point cloud local features are important,
such as point cloud registration (Huang et al., 2021), scene matching (Han et al., 2023). The local
geometry around a point in a point cloud is usually a continuous surface, which inherently exhibits
Lipschitz continuity. This characteristic makes HDFE suitable for encoding this type of data.
Meteorological Measurements In the field of meteorology, machine learning plays a pivotal role
in various applications, including pollutant estimation (Lu et al., 2020) and weather forecasting
(Chen et al., 2022). A standard practice in these applications involves inputting meteorological
measurements from neighboring areas (for instance, windows of 100 km2 ) into machine learning
models. HDFE is a suitable tool for encoding these neighboring meteorological measurements,
primarily due to the inherent physical constraints that ensure these measurements do not rapidly
change over time and space.
Time Series Data: Some time series data, especially in fields like event logging (Chen et al., 2021)
or network traffic (Abbasi et al., 2021), are sparse in nature. Such sparse events can be treated as
implicit functions and therefore HDFE is well-suited for it.

E    D ERIVATION OF D ECODING
In this section, we complete the details why F ⊘ EX (x0 ) can be decomposed into the summation
of EY (f (x0 )) and noises. This is an immediate outcome from the similarity preserving property.
When dX (x0 , xi ) is large, ⟨EX (x0 ) ⊗ EY (f (x0 )), EX (xi ) ⊗ EY (f (xi ))⟩ ≈ 0. Since the unbinding
operation is similarity preserving, we have ⟨EY (f (x0 )), EX (xi ) ⊗ EY (f (xi )) ⊘ EX (x0 )⟩ ≈ 0.
Therefore, F ⊘ EX (x0 ) can be decomposed into EY (f (x0 )) and the sum of vectors that are orthog-
onal to it. Consequently, when we search for the y to maximize the ⟨F ⊘ EX (x0 ), EY (y)⟩, those
orthogonal vectors will not bias the optimization.

F    G RADIENT D ESCENT FOR D ECODING F UNCTION E NCODING
In equation 3, HDFE decodes the function encoding by a similarity maximization. Given the func-
tion encoding F ∈ CN , and a query point x0 ∈ X, the function value ŷ0 is reconstructed by:
                               yˆ0 = argmaxy∈Y ⟨F ⊘ EX (x0 ), EY (y)⟩
When EX and EY are chosen as the fractional power encoding (equation 6), the optimization can be
solved by gradient descent. In this section, we detail the gradient descent formulation. We assume
the output space Y = R.
By setting EY as the fractional power encoding, the optimization can be rewritten as:
                           ŷ0 = argmaxy∈(0,1) ⟨F ⊘ EX (x0 ), exp(iΨy)⟩1

where Ψ ∈ RN is a random fixed vector where all elements are drawn from the normal distribution.
Since F ⊘ EX (x0 ) is a constant vector, the optimization can be further simplified as:
                                  ŷ0 = argmaxy∈(0,1) ⟨z, exp(iΨy)⟩                                 (8)

where z = F ⊘ EX (x0 ) ∈ CN . We write z into its polar form:
                              z = a1 eiθ1 , a2 eiθ2 , · · · , aN eiθN


   1
     In equation 6, EY (y) = exp(iβΨy). Since β and n are two constant numbers, we rewrite βΨ as Ψ for
notation purpose.


                                                   16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


where ak ∈ [0, +∞) and θk ∈ [0, 2π). We first simplify equation 8 and then compute its gradient
with respect to y.
                                  1
                  ⟨z, exp(iΨy)⟩ =   ||z̄ · exp(iΨy)||2
                                 N2
                                         N
                                  1 X                           2
                                = 2          ak eiθk e−iΨk y
                                 N
                                          k=1
                                        N X
                                          N
                                     1  X
                                                        i (θp −θq )−(Ψp −Ψq )y
                                =               ap aq e
                                    N 2 p=1 q=1
                                        N N
                                     1 XX
                                =     2
                                              ap aq cos (θp − θq ) − (Ψp − Ψq )y
                                    N p=1 q=1

The gradient can be computed easily by taking the derivative:
                                N N
            d                 1 XX
              ⟨z, exp(iΨy)⟩ = 2        ap aq (Ψp − Ψq ) sin (θp − θq ) − (Ψp − Ψq )y                (9)
           dy                N p=1 q=1

In practice, N can be a large number like 8000. Computing the gradient by equation 9 can be
expensive. Fortunately, since Ψ is a random fixed vector, where all elements are independent of
each other, we can unbiasedly estimate the gradient by sampling a small number of entries in the
vector. The decoding can be summarized by the pseudo-code below.

Algorithm 2 Gradient Descent for Decoding Function Encoding
    Input: F, x0 , EX , Ψ                          ▷ F is the function encoding. x0 is the query point.
                                                ▷ EX is the input mapping. Ψ is the parameter in EY .
    z =  F ⊘ EX (x0 )
    z = a1 eiθ1 , a2 eiθ2 , · · · , aN eiθN                      ▷ Convert z into its polar form.
    while ⟨z, exp(iΨy)⟩ still increases do
                     P a subset of [0, N ) ∩ Z.  Denote as S.
       Randomly select                                                   ▷ We choose |S| = 500.
       g = |S|−2 · p,q∈S ap aq (Ψp − Ψq ) sin (θp − θq ) − (Ψp − Ψq )y
       y ←y−α·g                                                           ▷ α is the learning rate.
    end while


G     R ELATION BETWEEN FPE AND RBF K ERNEL
In the main paper, we mention that we adopt fractional power encoding (FPE) as the mapping for
the input and output space. In this section, we explain the rational behind our choice by revealing
its close relationship between the radial basis function (RBF) kernel. For explanation purpose, we
discuss the single-variable case. It is straight-forward to generalize to multi-variable scenarios.

RBF kernel is a similarity measure defined as K(x, y) = exp − γ(x − y)2 . The feature space of
the kernel has an infinite number of dimensions:
                                             ∞
                                         X       (−1)k 2k
                   exp − γ(x − y)2 =                    γ (x − y)2k = ⟨ϕ(x), ϕ(y)⟩
                                                  (2k)!
                                            k=0
                                  q          q
                     2     pγ          2         3
where ϕ(x) = e−γx 1, 1!        x, γ2! x2 , γ3! x3 , · · · .

We will then show a theorem that tells that FPE maps real numbers into finite complex vectors, where
the similarity between the vectors can approximate a heavy-tailed RBF kernel. However, the feature
space of the heavy-tailed RBF kernel still has an infinite number of dimensions and therefore inherits
all the blessings of the RBF kernel. Notably, FPE provides a finite encoding, while approximating
an infinite dimensional feature space.


                                                   17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Theorem 3. Let x, y ∈ R, E(x) = eiγΘx , where Θ ∈ RN and ∀θ ∈ Θ, θ ∼ N (0, 21 ), then as
N → ∞,
                                             ∞
                                            X   (−1)k 2k
          ⟨E(x), E(y)⟩ = ⟨eiγΘx , eiγΘy ⟩ →             γ (x − y)2k = ⟨ϕ(x), ϕ(y)⟩
                                                 (2k)!!
                                            k=0
                              q        q
              −γx2              γ2 2      γ3 3
                       pγ
where ϕ(x) = e       1, 1!! x, 2!! x , 3!! x , · · · .


Proof.
                                     1
                    ⟨eiγΘx , eiγΘy ⟩ = || exp(iγΘx) · exp(−iγΘy)||2
                                    N2
                                           N
                                     1 X iγθk (x−y) 2
                                   = 2        e
                                    N
                                                 k=1
                                             N
                                          1 hX              X                          i
                                   =                   1+          eiγ(θp −θq )(x−y)
                                         N2      p=1        p̸=q
                                     1   1 X
                                   =   + 2      cos γ(θp − θq )(x − y)
                                     N  N
                                           p̸=q
                                                 ∞                            2k
                                     1   1 XX             γ(θp − θq )(x − y)
                                   =   + 2         (−1)k
                                     N  N                         (2k)!
                                                       p̸=q k=0
                                                 ∞
                                         1       X               X (θp − θq )2k   γ 2k (x − y)2k
                                   =       +           (−1)k
                                         N                             N2               (2k)!
                                                 k=0             p̸=q
                                          ∞
                                          X                             γ 2k (x − y)2k
                                   →           (−1)k (2k − 1)!!
                                                                              (2k)!
                                          k=0
                                         ∞
                                         X (−1)k
                                   =                     γ 2k (x − y)2k
                                                (2k)!!
                                         k=0

Since θp , θq ∼     N (0, 12 ), θp − θq   ∼ N (0, 1), and therefore, E[(θp − θq )2n ] = (2n − 1)!!. So
P     (θp −θq )2n
    p̸=q     N2      converges to (2n − 1)!!.

H      P ROOF OF THE HDFE’ S P ROPERTIES
H.1        A SYMPTOTIC S AMPLE I NVARIANCE

In the main paper, we claim that the iterative refinement (Algorithm 1) will converge to the center of
the smallest ball containing all the sample encodings and therefore, HDFE leads to an asymptotic
sample invariant representation. In this section, we detail the proof of the argument. To facilitate
the understanding, Figure 6 sketches the proof from a high-level viewpoint. Recall the definition of
asymptotic sample invariance (definition 1):
Definition (Asymptotic Sample Invariance). Let f : X → Y be the function to be encoded, p :
X → (0, 1) be a probability density function (pdf) on X, {xi }ni=1 ∼ p(X) be n independent
samples of X. Let Fn be the representation computed from the samples {xi , f (xi )}ni=1 , asymptotic
sample invariance implies Fn converges to a limit F∞ independent of the pdf p.

Proof. We begin by showing the iterative refinement converges to
                                                                 n
                                Fn = argmax||z||=1 min⟨z, E(xi , f (xi ))⟩                         (10)
                                                               i=1

where E(x, f (x)) is defined at equation 6 in the original paper. It maps a function sample to a
high-dimensional space CN .


                                                            18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                            :

                                                            :

                                                            :

                                                            :


Figure 6: Proof of asymptotic sample invariance (overview). Ball(S) and Ball(Sn ) are the smallest
ball containing S and Sn . As n → ∞, the Hausdorff distance between the two balls goes to
zero with probability one. From elementary geometry, ||center(Ball(Sn )) − center(Ball(S))|| ≤
dH (Ball(Sn ), Ball(S)). So the distance between the centers of the two balls goes to 0.


To show the convergence of the iterative refinement, it follows from the gradient descent: since
∇[− mini ⟨z, E(xi , f (xi )⟩] = −argmini ⟨z, E(xi , f (xi )⟩, the gradient descent is formulated as z ←
z + α · argmini ⟨z, E(xi , f (xi ))⟩, which aligns with the iterative refinement in the paper.
Then we will prove equation 10 produces a sample invariant encoding by proving Fn converges to
                                F∞ = argmax||z||=1 min⟨z, E(x, f (x))⟩                                     (11)
                                                           x∈X


Throughout the proof, we use the following definitions:

          S ⊂ CN
                             S
                        ≜           E(x, f (x))
                             Sx∈X
                               n
         Sn ⊂ CN        ≜      i=1 E(xi , f (xi ))
             || · ||    ≜    L2-norm of a complex vector.
               dH       ≜    maxq∈Q minp∈P ||p − q||. Hausdorff distance between two compact
                             sets P ⊂ Q ⊂ CN .
         Ball(P )       ≜    the smallest solid ball that contains the compact set P .
  center(Ball(·))       ≜    center of the ball.


Recall from equation 6, E(x, y) = F −1 (ei(Φx+Ψy) ), so ||E(x, y)|| = 1 for all x and y. Since
||z1 − z2 ||2 = ||z1 ||2 + ||z2 ||2 − 2⟨z1 , z2 ⟩, we have ⟨z, E(x, y)⟩ = 1 − 12 ||z − E(x, y)||2 if ||z||2 = 1.
Therefore, equation 10 is equivalent to
                                                       n
                              Fn = argmin||z||=1 max ||z − E(xi , f (xi ))||                               (12)
                                                      i=1


Note that equation 12 implies Fn is the center of the smallest ball containing Sn :
                                         Fn = center(Ball(Sn ))                                            (13)


because if we were to construct balls containing Sn with a center F′ ̸= Fn , the radius of the ball
must be larger than the radius of Ball(Sn ).
When n → ∞, the Hausdorff distance between Ball(Sn ) and Ball(S) goes to 0 with probabil-
ity one. First, it is easy to see that dH (Ball(Sn ), Ball(S)) is a decreasing sequence and is positive,
so the limit exists. Assume the limit is strictly positive, then there exists a point p′ ∈ S such that
minq∈Sn ||p′ − q|| > c for some constant c > 0 as n → ∞. This means no sample is drawn from
the ball Bc (p′ ). This is contradictory to the definition of p : X → (0, 1): p is positive over the input
space X.
Finally, we conclude by ||Fn −F∞ || ≤ dH (Ball(Sn ), Ball(S)). Since Ball(Sn ) ⊂ Ball(S), from
elementary geometry, if A ⊂ B are two balls, then ||center(B) − center(A)|| ≤ radius(B) −
radius(A) ≤ dH (B, A). Therefore, we have ||center(Ball(Sn )) − center(Ball(S))|| ≤
dH (Ball(Sn ), Ball(S)). Therefore, ||Fn − F∞ || ≤ dH (Ball(Sn ), Ball(S)), which decays to
0 as n → ∞.


                                                      19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


H.2      I SOMETRY

In this section, we complete the proof that HDFE is an isometry.
Theorem. Let f, g : X → Y be both c-Lipschitz continuous, then their L2-distance is preserved in
the encoding. In other words, HDFE is an isometry:
                                    Z
                                                      2
                      ||f − g||L2 =       f (x) − g(x) dx ≈ b − a⟨F, G⟩
                                                  x∈X

Lemma 4. ⟨x ⊗ y, x ⊗ z⟩ = ⟨y, z⟩.

Proof. Let x = eix , y = eiy , z = eiz ,
                                        ⟨x ⊗ y, x ⊗ z⟩ = ⟨ei(x+y)) , ei(x+z) ⟩
                                                         = ei(x+y) · e−i(x+z)
                                                         = ⟨eiy , eiz ⟩
                                                         = ⟨y, z⟩



Proof.
                     Z Z
          ⟨F, G⟩ =              ⟨EX (x) ⊗ EY (f (x)), EX (x′ ) ⊗ EY (g(x′ ))⟩dx′ dx
                           x′
                     Zx
                =                 ⟨EX (x) ⊗ EY (f (x)), EX (x′ ) ⊗ EY (g(x′ ))⟩dx′ dx
                      |x−x′ |<ϵ
                                  Z
                                +          ⟨EX (x) ⊗ EY (f (x)), EX (x′ ) ⊗ EY (g(x′ ))⟩dx′ dx
                                      |x−x′ |>ϵ
                     Z
                =         ⟨EX (x) ⊗ EY (f (x)), EX (x) ⊗ EY (g(x))⟩dx + noise
                      x
                     Z
                ≈         ⟨EY (f (x)), EY (g(x))⟩dx             by Lemma 4.
                      x
                       ∞
                                 (−1)k 2k
                     Z X
                =                       β (f (x) − g(x))2k dx             by Theorem 3
                      x k=0      (2k)!!
                             Z
                ≈b−a                |f (x) − g(x)|2 dx      by taking the first and second order terms
                                x

The second line holds because when dX (x, x′ ) is larger than the receptive field ϵ0 , EX (x) and
EX (x′ ) will be orthogonal, so the similarity between EX (x) ⊗ EY (f (y)) and EX (x′ ) ⊗ EY (g(y))
will be close to zero and they will be summed as noise.

I     E MPIRICAL E XPERIMENT OF HDFE

In this section, we verify the properties claimed in Sec. 2.4 with empirical experiments.

I.1   S AMPLE I NVARIANCE

In Fig. 7, we demonstrate that the function encoding produced by HDFE remains invariant of both
the sample distribution and sample density. Specifically, we sample function values from three
distinct input space distributions, namely left-skewed, right-skewed, and uniform distribution, each
with sample sizes of either 5000 or 1000. We then calculate the similarity between the function
vectors generated from these six sets of function samples. Before tuning the function vectors, the
representation is influenced by the sample distributions (Fig. 7 Mid). However, after the tuning
process, the function vector becomes immune to the sample distribution (Fig. 7 Right).


                                                           20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 7: HDFE is invariant of sample distribution and sample size. Left: Three distributions where
the function samples are drawn from. For each distribution, the sample size is either 5000 or 1000.
Mid, Right: Similarity among the function vectors generated by the six sets of function samples,
before and after the function vector tuning process, respectively.

I.2   I SOMETRY

In Fig. 8, we generate pairs of random functions and compute their function encodings through
HDFE. We plot the L2-distance between the functions and the similarity between their encodings.
We discover a strong correlation between them. This coincides the isometric property claimed in
Theorem 2.


Figure 8: HDFE is a distance preserving transformation. The L2-distance between functions is
proportional to the negative similarity between their encodings.


I.3   P RACTICAL C ONSIDERATION OF I TERATIVE R EFINEMENT

In Algorithm 1, we propose one implementation of iterative refinement, which iteratively adds the
sample encoding that has the minimum similarity with the function encoding. This implementation
is a conservative implementation that guarantees asymptotic sample invariance. However, in practi-
cal applications, strict sample invariance may not be necessary. For example, achieving a similarity
threshold of 0.99 when constructing with different samples might not be required. This relaxation
is viable because the downstream neural network possesses an inherent ability to handle some level
of inconsistency. Therefore, we consider a practical adaptation of Algorithm 1 by introducing slight
modifications to accommodate these real-world considerations.
One-Shot Refinement In Algorithm 1, the motivation of the iterative refinement is to balance the
weights between dense and sparse samples. By iterative refinement, we adjust the function encoding
so that the sparse samples also contribute to the encoding. Such motivation can be achieved by
another cheaper one-shot refinement. After obtaining the initial function encoding by averaging
the sample encoding, we compute the similarity between this initial encoding and all the sample
encodings. The similarity can serve as a rough estimation of the sample density at a particular point.


                                                 21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Therefore, if we were to balance the weights between dense and sparse samples, we can simply
recompute the weights by the inverse estimated density. Algorithm 3 illustrates the procedure.

Algorithm 3 One-Shot Refinement
  zi ←P  EX (xi ) ⊗ EY (f (xi )) for all i.
  F = i zi
  for i do
      wi = ⟨F, zi ⟩                                ▷ wi is an estimation of the density at (xi , f (xi )).
      wi = max(ϵ,Pwi )                                                   ▷ Ensure numerical stability.
                     n
      wi = wi−1 / j=1 wj−1                                                ▷ Compute inverse density.
  end for
        P
  F = i wi · zi


Although one-shot refinement is not strictly sample distribution invariant, it is a quite good
approximation of the sample invariant function encoding and is very cheap to compute. We
perform a comparison among no refinement, one-shot refinement and iterative refinement with syn-
thetic data, where we encode the same function sampled with two different distributions and com-
pute the similarity between the two encodings. Specifically, we generate a random function by
                                                   4
                                              1 1X
                                    f (x) =    +   ak sin(2πkx)                                      (14)
                                              2 8
                                                  k=1

where ak ∼ U nif orm(0, 1) are the parameters controlling the generation and f (x) ∈ (0, 1). We
construct the encoding of the function by samples from two different sample distributions. The
first distribution is computed by xi ∼ U nif orm(0, 1) and xi ← x2i . The second distribution
is computed by xi ∼ U nif orm(0, 1) and xi ← 1 − x2i . Consequently, the first distribution is
left-tailed, and the second distribution is right-tailed. Then we compare the similarity of function
encodings generated by no iterative refinement, one-shot refinement, and iterative refinement. Figure
9 shows the comparison, which demonstrates that one-shot refinement is a quite good approximation
of the sample invariant function encoding (the similarity increases from ∼ 0.5 to 0.98 after one-shot
refinement). In Appendix I.4, Table 3, we also compare the effectiveness of the three refinement
schemes in a synthetic regression problem.


Figure 9: When encoding the same function under two different sample distributions, one-shot
refinement can approximate the sample invariant function encoding well. It takes 75/90/1500 ms to
encode 5000 samples on a CPU, and 7.5/8.0/250 ms on an NVIDIA Titan-X GPU when performing
no refinement/one-shot refinement/200-step iterative refinement.


I.4   E FFECTIVENESS OF S AMPLE I NVARIANCE

In this section, we examine the effectiveness of HDFE’s sample invariance property through an
synthetic function regression problem. We first generate random functions by equation 14, where
ak ∼ U nif orm(0, 1) are the parameters controlling the generation. The task is to regress the


                                                  22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 3: Performance of function parameters regression. PointNet fails when sample distribution
varies between training and testing phases, while HDFE is robust to the sample distribution variation.
                                                                  HDFE
                              PointNet
                                         No Refinement    One-Shot Refinement    200-Step Iter. Ref.
                        MSE   0.0037       < 0.0005            < 0.0005              < 0.0005
       No Distr. Var.
                        R2    0.978        > 0.9975            > 0.9975              > 0.9975
                        MSE   0.0717         0.003             < 0.0005                0.001
        Distr. Var.
                        R2    0.513          0.982             > 0.9975                0.992

coefficients [a1 , a2 , a3 , a4 ] from the function samples {xi , f (xi )}. Regarding the sample size, the
number of function samples is 5000 in the training phase and 2500 in the testing phase. Regarding
sample distribution, we consider two different settings:
Setting 1 (No Sample Distribution Variation): The sample distribution is consistent between train-
ing phase and testing phase. We let xi ∼ U nif orm(0, 1) in both training phase and testing phase.
Setting 2 (Sample Distribution Variation): The sample distribution is different between the train-
ing phase and testing phase. Specifically, in the training phase, we let xi ∼ U nif orm(0, 1) and
xi ← x2i . In the testing phase, we let xi ∼ U nif orm(0, 1) and xi ← 1 − x2i . Consequently, the
sample distribution in the training phase is left-tailed, while in the testing phase is right-tailed.
We compare our HDFE with PointNet in terms of mean squared error (MSE) and the R-squared
(R2 ) metrics. For HDFE, we compare the performance among no refinement, one-shot refinement
(introduced in Appendix I.3), and 200-step iterative refinement. Table 3 shows the comparison.
In Setting 1, when there is no distribution variation, HDFE achieves significantly lower error than
PointNet. This is because HDFE is capable of capturing the entire distribution of functions, while
PointNet seems to struggle on that.
In Setting 2, when there is distribution variation, PointNet fails miserably, while HDFE, even without
iterative refinement, already achieves fairly good estimation, and even better than the PointNet in
Setting 1. In addition, the experiment also shows that both the one-shot refinement and the iterative
refinement are effective techniques to improve the robustness to distribution variation.

I.5   I NFORMATION L OSS OF HDFE

In this section, we analyze the information loss when encoding continuous objects with HDFE. It
is intuitive that a larger encoding dimensionality induces smaller information loss, and encoding a
function changing more rapidly induces larger information loss. We attempt to quantify the relation
through empirical experiments. We generate random functions and we measure the “function com-
                                                                       R1
plexity” by the integral of the absolute gradient: complexity(f ) = 0 |f ′ (x)|dx. Consequently,
functions changing more rapidly yield a higher complexity(f ).
We study the relation between the reconstruction mean absolute error (MAE) / R-squared (R2 ) and
the function complexity under different encoding dimensions. Figure 10 reveals the MAE exhibits a
linear relation with the input function complexity, while the R-squared seems not to be affected by
the function complexity when the dimension is large enough.


      Figure 10: Empirical information loss when encoding functions of different complexities.

                                                   23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


I.6   L OW-R ANK H IGH -D IMENSIONAL S CENARIOS

We generate random functions by first randomizing xk ∈ Rd and αk ∈ R, the random function is
constructed by:
                                           n
                                           X
                                  f (x) =     αk · K(x, xk )
                                             k=1

where n can measure the complexity of the function, and d is the dimension of the function input.
The testing samples are generated by xk + noise for all k ∈ [n].
In Fig. 11, the reconstruction error increases as n increases, which indicates the encoding quality
is negatively correlated to the complexity of the function. However, the reconstruction error does
not change as d increases, which indicates that the encoding quality does not depend on the explicit
dimension of the function input.
This empirical experiment shows that HDFE has the potential to operate on high-dimensional data,
because the encoding quality of HDFE does not depend on the dimension of the function input, but
only depends on the complexity of the function.


Figure 11: The reconstruction error of HDFE is negatively correlated to the complexity of the func-
tion, but does not depend on the dimension of the function input.


J     E XPERIMENT D ETAILS

J.1   PDE S OLVER

The PDE and the solution are encoded into two embedding vectors with length N . A
deep complex network is trained to learn the mapping between two vectors.                  The ar-
chitecture is a sequence of layers: [ComplexLinear(N,256), ComplexReLU(),
ComplexLinear(256,256), ComplexReLU(), ComplexLinear(256,256),
ComplexReLU(), ComplexLinear(256,N)]. The network is trained with Adam optimizer
with a learning rate of 0.001 for 20,000 iterations. The α value in equation 6 is 15, 25, 42, 45 for
N = 4000, 8000, 16000, 24000 and the β value is 2.5.

J.2   S URFACE N ORMAL E STIMATION

The     architecture   is    a    sequence of    layers:     [ComplexLinear(N,256),
ComplexBatchNorm() ComplexReLU(), ComplexLinear(256,256),
ComplexBatchNorm(), ComplexReLU(), ComplexLinear(256,128),
ComplexBatchNorm(), ComplexReLU()]. After the sequence of layers, it will pro-
duce a 128-dimensional complex vector z. Since we desire a 3-dimensional real vector output
(normal vector in R3 ), we use two RealLinear(128,3) layers L real and L imag. The
final output normal vector is L real(z.real) + L imag(z.imag). The network is trained
with Adam optimizer with learning rate 0.001 for 270 epochs. The α is chosen as 20 and the
dimensionality is chosen as 4096.


                                                   24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


J.3    A DDING HDFE M ODULE TO HS URF -N ET

Denote the input local patch as P with shape (B, N, 3), where B is the batch size, N is the
number of points in a local patch. HSurf-Net uses their novel space transformation module to
extract n keypoints and their K nearest neighbors. The resulting data is denoted as P sub with
shape (B, n, K, 3). HSurf-Net uses a PointNet to process P sub, by first lifting the dimension to
(B, n, K, C) and then doing a maxpooling to shape the data into (B, n, C). We add our HDFE
module here: we use HDFE to shape the data from (B, n, K, 3) to (B, n, C), by first lifting the
dimension from (B, n, K, 3) to (B, n, K, 512) using equation 6 and then average the embedding
across the neighbors to shape it into (B, n, 512). Then we use a fully-connected layer to map the
data into (B, n, C), which becomes the HDFE feature. Then we sum the features generated by
HSurf-Net and HDFE into a (B, n, C) matrix and pass to the output layer as HSurf-Net does.

K     A BLATION S TUDIES OF S URFACE N ORMAL E STIMATION

                                  Table 4: Ablation Studies on the PCPNet dataset.
 Dimension                                2048                                                        4096
 Noise Level   None    Low     Med     High Stripe    Gradient   Average   None    Low     Med     High Stripe    Gradient   Average
  α = 10       8.98    10.80   17.40   22.18 10.62     9.92       13.32    9.00    10.60   17.40   22.48 10.50     9.87       13.31
  α = 15       8.98    11.02   17.73   22.72 10.85     9.46       13.46    8.29    10.77   17.46   22.63 10.17     9.10       13.07
  α = 20       8.14    10.53   17.86   23.07   9.93    8.81       13.06    7.97    10.72   17.69   22.76   9.47    8.67       12.88
  α = 25       8.86    11.43   17.94   22.85 10.42     9.33       13.47    8.40    11.23   17.66   22.74   9.89    8.95       13.15



                               Table 5: Ablation Studies on the FamousShape dataset.
 Dimension                                2048                                                        4096
 Noise Level   None    Low     Med     High Stripe    Gradient   Average   None    Low     Med     High Stripe    Gradient   Average
  α = 10       15.12   18.43   30.86   38.66 15.52     13.82      22.07    15.06   18.15   30.61   38.50 16.81     13.71      22.14
  α = 15       14.42   17.97   30.45   38.92 15.47     13.81      21.84    13.68   17.77   31.17   38.79 14.83     13.06      21.55
  α = 20       13.37   18.43   31.40   39.03 13.92     12.54      21.45    13.04   17.99   31.23   38.57 14.01     12.13      21.16
  α = 25       14.70   19.71   31.52   38.95 15.04     13.56      22.25    14.03   19.16   31.39   38.65 14.38     13.22      21.81


In general, when the dimensionality is higher, the error is lower. When the receptive field is large (α
is small), HDFE performs better when the noise level is high. When the receptive field is small (α
is large), HDFE performs better when the noise level is low. This coincides with the analysis in Fig.
2. A large receptive field tends to filter out the perturbations and therefore is more robust to noise.
A small receptive field can capture the high-frequency details and therefore is more accurate.

L     N OISE ROBUSTNESS
In this section, we further analyze why HDFE is robust to point perturbations. For visualization
purposes, we perform the analysis on 2d data, while the analysis generalizes well to higher dimen-
sions. We randomly sample 1000 points from the unit circle x2 + y 2 = 1 and add Gaussian noises
to the samples. Then we encode the points into vectors using HDFE with different receptive fields
(α = 10, 15, 20, 25) and reconstruct the implicit function. The pseudo-color plot in Fig. 12 visual-
izes the likelihood that a point lies on the unit circle.
When α is small, the visualization shows that the reconstructions under different noise levels are
similar, which tells that the encodings under different noise levels are similar. So it demonstrates
a robustness to point perturbations. On the other hand, when α is large, the reconstruction is more
refined and captures the high-frequency details, but as a price, it is more sensitive to the point
perturbations.


                                                                 25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 12: Reconstruction of implicit functions sampled with noisy inputs under different choices
of receptive field.


                                               26
