Preprint


L OCALIZING AND E DITING K NOWLEDGE IN
T EXT- TO -I MAGE G ENERATIVE M ODELS
 Samyadeep Basu1 , Nanxuan Zhao2 , Vlad Morariu2 , Soheil Feizi*1 , Varun Manjunatha*2
 1
   : University of Maryland, 2 : Adobe Research;
 Correspondence to:sbasu12@umd.edu



                                              A BSTRACT

           Text-to-Image Diffusion Models such as Stable-Diffusion and Imagen have
           achieved unprecedented quality of photorealism with state-of-the-art FID scores
           on MS-COCO and other generation benchmarks. Given a caption, image gen-
           eration requires fine-grained knowledge about attributes such as object structure,
           style, and viewpoint amongst others. Where does this information reside in text-
           to-image generative models? In our paper, we tackle this question and understand
           how knowledge corresponding to distinct visual attributes is stored in large-scale
           text-to-image diffusion models. We adapt Causal Mediation Analysis for text-
           to-image models and trace knowledge about distinct visual attributes to various
           (causal) components in the (i) UNet and (ii) text-encoder of the diffusion model.
           In particular, we show that unlike large-language models, knowledge about differ-
           ent attributes is not localized in isolated components, but is instead distributed
           amongst a set of components in the conditional UNet. These sets of compo-
           nents are often distinct for different visual attributes (e.g., style / objects). Re-
           markably, we find that the text-encoder in public text-to-image models such as
           Stable-Diffusion contains only one causal state across different visual attributes,
           and this is the first self-attention layer corresponding to the last subject token of
           the attribute in the caption. This is in stark contrast to the causal states in other
           language models which are often the mid-MLP layers. Based on this observa-
           tion of only one causal state in the text-encoder, we introduce a fast, data-free
           model editing method D IFF -Q UICK F IX which can effectively edit concepts (re-
           move or update knowledge) in text-to-image models. D IFF -Q UICK F IX can edit
           (ablate) concepts in under a second with a closed-form update, providing a signif-
           icant 1000x speedup and comparable editing performance to existing fine-tuning
           based editing methods. Code at https://github.com/samyadeepbasu/DiffQuickFix.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Text-to-Image generative models such as Stable-Diffusion (Rombach et al., 2021), Imagen (Saharia
et al., 2022) and DALLE (Ramesh et al., 2021) have revolutionized conditional image generation
in the last few years. These models have attracted a lot of attention due to their impressive im-
age generation and editing capabilities, obtaining state-of-the-art FID scores on common generation
benchmarks such as MS-COCO (Lin et al., 2014). Text-to-Image generation models are gener-
ally trained on billion-scale image-text pairs such as LAION-5B (Schuhmann et al., 2022) which
typically consist of a plethora of visual concepts encompassing color, artistic styles, objects, and
famous personalities, amongst others. Prior works (Carlini et al., 2023; Somepalli et al., 2023a;b)
have shown that text-to-image models such as Stable-Diffusion memorize various aspects of the
pre-training dataset. For example, given a caption from the LAION dataset, a model can generate
an exact image from the training dataset corresponding to the caption in certain cases (Carlini et al.,
2023). These observations reinforce that some form of knowledge corresponding to visual attributes
is stored in the parameter space of text-to-image model.
When an image is generated, it possesses visual attributes such as (but not limited to) the presence
of distinct objects with their own characteristics (such as color or texture), artistic style or scene
    * Equal Advising


                                                    1
Preprint


                                                                                                                          Restoration on Corrupted Model
                                Clean Model                                                                                        (Causal State)


                   …..                              …..                                                               …..                                  …..

                                                                                                                                                                               Generated Image
       Text-Encoder                                                                                         Text-Encoder                                                       is faithful to
                        c = ‘Apple in Van Gogh Style’                                                                        c = ‘Apple in Van Gogh Style’                     caption
                                     (a)                                                                                                  (c)
                                                                                                                           Restoration on Corrupted Model
                              Corrupted Model                                                                                     (Non-Causal State)


                      …..                               …..                                                            …..                                 …..

                                                                                                                                                                              Generated Image
         Text-Encoder                                                                                      Text-Encoder                                                       is not faithful to
                        c = ‘Apple in Van Gogh Style’                                                                      c = ‘Apple in Van Gogh Style’                      caption
                                                         Add Gaussian Noise to the token embeddings
                                     (b)                 corresponding to the attribute of interest                                       (d)
                                                         (e.g., Van Gogh in case of style)
                                                                                                                                                    Cross-Attn    Self-Attn     ResNet
   Option 1: Causal Tracing for UNet - Copy clean states to the corrupted model across layers in UNet
   Option 2: Causal Tracing for Text-Encoder - Copy clean states to the corrupted model across layers in the text-encoder                                        Corrupted States



Figure 1: Causal Tracing in Text-to-Image Models for (i) UNet and (ii) Text-Encoder shows
that knowledge location matters, i.e., restoring causal layers in a corrupted model causes the
model to obey the prompt again, while restoring non-causal layers does not. (a) Clean Model:
We prompt a Stable-Diffusion model in the conventional way and generate an image as output. (b)
Corrupted Model: Token embeddings corresponding to attribute of interest are corrupted, leading to
a generated image that does not obey the prompt. (c) Restored (Causal) Model: Causal layer acti-
vations are now copied from the clean model to the corrupted model. We observe that the corrupted
model can now generate images with high fidelity to the original caption. (d) Restored (Non-Causal)
Model: Non-causal layer activations are copied from the clean model to the corrupted model, but we
now observe that the generated image does not obey the prompt. A single layer is copied at a time,
and it can be from either the UNet (solid violet arrow) or the text-encoder (broken black arrow).

viewpoint. This attribute-specific information is usually specified in the conditioning textual prompt
to the UNet in text-to-image models which is used to pull relevant knowledge from the UNet to
construct and subsequently generate an image. This leads to an important question: How and where
is knowledge corresponding to various visual attributes stored in text-to-image models? In our
paper, we choose to concentrate on specific visual attributes within a scene, including objects, style,
action, and color. Additionally, in the Appendix, we delve into aspects like count and viewpoint.
In this work, we empirically study this question towards understanding how knowledge correspond-
ing to different visual attributes is stored in text-to-image models, using Stable Diffusion(Rombach
et al., 2021) as a representative model. In particular, we adapt Causal Mediation Analysis (Vig et al.,
2020; Pearl, 2001) for large-scale text-to-image diffusion models to identify specific causal compo-
nents in the (i) UNet and (ii) the text-encoder where visual attribute knowledge resides. Previously,
Causal Meditation Analysis has been used for understanding where factual knowledge is stored in
LLMs. In particular, (Meng et al., 2022) find that factual knowledge is localized and stored in the
mid-MLP layers of a LLM such as GPT-J (Wang & Komatsuzaki, 2021). Our work, however, paints
a different picture - for multimodal text-to-image models, we specifically find that knowledge is not
localized to one particular component. Instead, there exist various components in the UNet where
knowledge is stored. However, each of these components store attribute information with a different
efficacy and often different attributes have a distinct set of causal components where knowledge is
stored. For e.g., for style – we find that the first self-attention layer in the UNet stores style related
knowledge, however it is not causally important for other attributes such as objects, viewpoint or
action. To our surprise, we specifically find that the cross-attention layers are not causally important
states and a significant amount of knowledge is in fact stored in components such as the ResNet
blocks and the self-attention blocks.
Remarkably, in the text-encoder, we find that knowledge corresponding to distinct attributes is
strongly localized, contrary to the UNet. However unlike generative language models (Meng et al.,
2022) where the mid MLP layers are causal states, we find that the first self-attention layer is causal
in the CLIP based text-encoder of public text-to-image generative models (e.g., Stable-Diffusion).
Identification of local causal states in a given model has a crucial benefit: it allows for incorporating
controlled edits to the model by updating only a tiny fraction of the model parameters without any


                                                                                                      2
Preprint


fine-tuning. Using our observation that the text-encoder hosts only one localized causal state, we
introduce a new data-free and fast model editing method - D IFF -Q UICK F IX which can edit concepts
in text-to-image models effectively using a closed-form update. In particular, we show that D IFF -
Q UICK F IX can (i) remove copyrighted styles, (ii) trademarked objects as well as (iii) update stale
knowledge 1000x faster than existing fine-tuning based editing methods such as (Kumari et al.,
2023; Gandikota et al., 2023) with comparable or even better performance in some cases.
In summary, our contributions are as follows:

          • We adapt Causal Mediation Analysis (Pearl, 2001; Vig et al., 2020) to large-scale text-to-
            image models (with Stable-Diffusion as a representative model), and use it to trace knowl-
            edge corresponding to various visual attributes in the UNet and text-encoder.
          • We perform large-scale analysis of the identified causal components and shed light on the
            knowledge flow corresponding to various visual attributes in the UNet and the text-encoder.
          • Leveraging the interpretability observations of localized causal states in the text-encoder,
            we develop a light-weight method D IFF -Q UICK F IX which can edit various concepts in
            text-to-image models in under a second, 1000x faster than existing concept ablating meth-
            ods Kumari et al. (2023); Gandikota et al. (2023).


2       R ELATED W ORKS

Text-to-Image Diffusion Models. In the last year, a large number of text-to-image models such
as Stable-Diffusion (Rombach et al., 2021), DALLE (Ramesh et al., 2021) , Imagen (Saharia et al.,
2022) and others (Balaji et al., 2022; Chang et al., 2023; Ding et al., 2022; Kang et al., 2023) have
been released. In addition, the open-source community has released DeepFloyd1 and Midjourney2
which can generate photorealistic images given a text prompt. While most of these models operate
in the latent space of the images, they differ in the text-encoder used. For e.g., Stable-Diffusion
uses CLIP for the text-encoder, whereas Imagen uses T5. These text-to-image diffusion models
have been used as a basis for various applications such as image-editing, semantic-segmentation,
object-detection, image restoration and zero-shot classification.
Intepretability of Text-to-Image Models. To our knowledge, few works delve into the mech-
anisms of large text-to-image models like Stable-Diffusion. DAAM (Tang et al., 2023) interprets
diffusion models by analyzing cross-attention maps between text tokens and images, emphasizing
their semantic accuracy for interpretation. In contrast, our approach focuses on comprehending
the inner workings of diffusion models by investigating the storage of visual knowledge related to
different attributes. We explore various model layers beyond just the cross-attention layer.
Editing Text-to-Image Models. Understanding knowledge storage in diffusion models has signif-
icant implications for model editing. This ability to modify a diffusion model’s behavior without
retraining from scratch were first explored in Concept-Ablation (Kumari et al., 2023) and Concept-
Erasure (Gandikota et al., 2023). TIME (Orgad et al., 2023) is another model editing method which
translates between concepts by modifying the key and value matrices in cross-attention layers. How-
ever, the experiments in (Orgad et al., 2023) do not specifically target removing or updating concepts
such as those used in (Kumari et al., 2023; Gandikota et al., 2023). We also acknowledge concurrent
works (Gandikota et al., 2024) and (Anonymous, 2023) use a closed-form update on the cross-
attention layers and text-encoder respectively to ablate concepts. However, we note that our work
focuses primarily on first understanding how knowledge is stored in text-to-image models and sub-
sequently using this information to design a closed-form editing method for editing concepts.

3       C AUSAL T RACING FOR T EXT- TO -I MAGE G ENERATIVE M ODELS

In this section, we first provide a brief overview of diffusion models in Sec.(3.1). We then describe
how causal tracing is adapted to multimodal diffusion models such as Stable-Diffusion.

    1
        https://www.deepfloyd.ai
    2
        https://www.midjourney.com/


                                                    3
Preprint


3.1   BACKGROUND

Diffusion models are inspired by non-equilibrium thermodynamics and specifically aim to learn to
denoise data through a number of steps. Usually, noise is added to the data following a Markov
chain across multiple time-steps t ∈ [0, T ]. Starting from
                                                        p an initial random real image x0 , the noisy
                                            √
image at time-step t is defined as xt = αt x0 + (1 − αt )ϵ. In particular, αt determines the
strength of the random Gaussian noise and it gradually decreases as the time-step increases such
that xT ∼ N (0, I). The denoising network denoted by ϵθ (xt , c, t) is pre-trained to denoise the
noisy image xt to obtain xt−1 . Usually, the conditional input c to the denoising network ϵθ (.) is a
text-embedding of a caption c through a text-encoder c = vγ (c) which is paired with the original
real image x0 . The pre-training objective for diffusion models can be defined as follows for a given
image-text pair denoted by (x, c):
                                  L(x, c) = Eϵ,t ||ϵ − ϵθ (xt , c, t)||22 ,                          (1)
where θ is the set of learnable parameters. For better training efficiency, the noising as well as the
denoising operation occurs in a latent space defined by z = E(x) Rombach et al. (2021). In this
case, the pre-training objective learns to denoise in the latent space as denoted by:
                                  L(x, c) = Eϵ,t ||ϵ − ϵθ (zt , c, t)||22 ,                          (2)
where zt = E(xt ) and E is an encoder such as VQ-VAE (van den Oord et al., 2017). During
inference, where the objective is to synthesize an image given a text-condition c, a random Gaussian
noise xT ∼ N (0, I) is iteratively denoised for a fixed range of time-steps in order to produce the
final image. We provide more details on the pre-training and inference steps in Appendix L.

3.2   A DAPTING C AUSAL T RACING F OR T EXT- TO -I MAGE D IFFUSION M ODELS

Causal Mediation Analysis (Pearl, 2001; Vig et al., 2020) is a method from causal inference that
studies the change in a response variable following an intervention on intermediate variables of
interest (mediators). One can think of the internal model components (e.g., specific neurons or layer
activations) as mediators along a directed acyclic graph between the input and output. For text-
to-image diffusion models, we use Causal Mediation Analysis to trace the causal effects of these
internal model components within the UNet and the text-encoder which contributes towards the
generation of images with specific visual attributes (e.g., objects, style). For example, we find the
subset of model components in the text-to-image model which are causal for generating images with
specific objects, styles, viewpoints, action or color.
Where is Causal Tracing Performed? We identify the causal model components in both the UNet
ϵθ and the text-encoder vγ . For ϵθ , we perform the causal tracing at the granularity of layers, whereas
for the text-encoder, causal tracing is performed at the granularity of hidden states of the token
embeddings in c across distinct layers. The UNet ϵθ consists of 70 unique layers distributed amongst
three types of blocks: (i) down-block; (ii) mid-block and (iii) up-block. Each of these
blocks contain varying number of cross-attention layers, self-attention layers and residual layers.
Fig 1 visualizes the internal states of the UNet and how causal tracing for knowledge attribution
is performed. For the text-encoder vγ , there are 12 blocks in total with each block consisting of a
self-attention layer and a MLP layer (see Fig 1). We highlight that the text-encoder in text-to-image
models such as Stable-Diffusion has a GPT-style architecture with a causal self-attention, though it’s
pre-trained without a language modeling objective. More details on the layers used in Appendix J.
Given a caption c, an image x is generated starting from some random Gaussian noise. This image
x encapsulates the visual properties embedded in the caption c. For e.g., the caption c can contain
information corresponding from objects to action etc. We specifically identify distinct components
in the UNet and the text-encoder which are causally responsible for these properties.
Creating the Probe Captions. We primarily focus on four different visual attributes for causal
tracing: (i) objects; (ii) style; (iii) color; and (iv) action. In particular, identifying the location
of knowledge storage for objects and style can be useful to perform post-hoc editing of diffusion
models to edit concepts (e.g., delete or update certain concepts). We provide the complete details
about the probe dataset used for causal tracing in Appendix A. The probe dataset also contains
additional captions for viewpoint and count attribute. However, we do not focus on them as often the
generations from the unedited model are erroneous for these attributes (see Appendix E for details).


                                                     4
Preprint


                                                                                                                                        Style                                         Original           Corrupted             Causal State Non-Causal State


                                                                        down-1-resnet-0
                     self-attention-0
                                                                                                                                                                                Prompt: ‘Airplane in the style of Van Gogh’    self-attention-0
                                                                                                                                Objects



                                                                                down-1-resnet-1
 Higher CLIP-Score


                                                                                                                                                                                Prompt: ‘A photo of a vase in the kitchen’     down-1-resnet-1
                                                                                                                                 Action
                                                                                                         mid-block-cross-attn

                                                                                                                                mid-block-resnet-1
                                          down-0-resnet-0


                                                                                                                                                                                Prompt: ‘A photo of a dog running’            mid-block-cross-attn
                                                                                                                                   Color
                                                            down-1-ff


                                                                                                                                                                                Prompt: ‘A black bag’                             down-1-ff
                                                                                                                           Layers in UNet
                                        down-block                                                mid-block                                          up-block


Figure 2: Causal Tracing Results for the UNet: Knowledge is Distributed. The intensity of
the bars indicate the CLIP-Score between the generated image (after causal intervention) and the
original caption. For each attribute, we find that the causal states are distributed across the UNet and
the distribution varies amongst distinct attributes. For e.g., self-attn in the first layer is causal for
style, but not for objects, action or color. Similarly, mid-block cross-attn is causal for action, but not
for the other attributes. On the right-side, we visualize the images generated by (i) Original model;
(ii) Corrupted Model; (iii) Restored causal states and (iv) Restored non-causal states in the UNet for
style, action, object, color attributes.
3.3                          T RACING K NOWLEDGE IN UN ET

During inference, classifier-free guidance (Ho & Salimans, 2021) is used to regulate image-
generation by incorporating scores from the conditional and unconditional diffusion model at each
of the time-steps. In particular, at each time-step, classifier-free guidance is used in the following
way to combine the conditional (ϵθ (zt , c, t)) and unconditional score estimates (ϵθ (zt , t)) at each
time-step t to obtain the combined score denoted as ϵ̂(zt , c, t):
                                                                              ϵ̂θ (zt , c, t) = ϵθ (zt , c, t) + α(ϵθ (zt , c, t) − ϵθ (zt , t)),                                                                 ∀t ∈ [T, 1].                          (3)
This combined score is used to update the latent zt using DDIM sampling (Song et al., 2020) at each
time-step iteratively to obtain the final latent code z0 .
To perform causal tracing on the UNet ϵθ (see Fig 1 for visualization), we perform a sequence of
operations that is somewhat analogous to earlier work from (Meng et al., 2022) which investigated
knowledge-tracing in large language models. We consider three types of model configurations: (i) a
clean model ϵθ , where classifier-free guidance is used as default; (ii) a corrupted model ϵcorr   θ   , where
the word embedding of the subject (e.g., Van Gogh) of a given attribute (e.g., style) corresponding to
a caption c is corrupted with Gaussian Noise; and, (iii) a restored model ϵrestored
                                                                                 θ       , which is similar to
ϵcorr
 θ    except  that one of its layers is restored from  the   clean model   at each time-step  of the classifier-
free guidance. Given a list of layers A, let ai ∈ A denote the ith layer whose importance needs to
be evaluated. Let ϵθ [ai ], ϵcorr
                              θ   [ai ] and ϵrestored
                                             θ        [ai ] denote the activations of layer ai . To find the
importance of layer ai for a particular attribute embedded in a caption c, we perform the following
replacement operation on the corrupted model ϵcorr   θ      to obtain the restored model ϵrestored
                                                                                            θ        :
                                                                                                                                                     ϵrestored
                                                                                                                                                      θ        [ai ] : ϵcorr
                                                                                                                                                                        θ    [ai ] = ϵθ [ai ].                                                          (4)
Next, we obtain the restored model by replacing the activations of layer ai of the corrupted model
with those of the clean model to get a restored layer ϵrestored
                                                       θ        [ai ]. We run classifier-free guidance to
obtain the combined score estimate:
 ϵ̂restored
   θ        (zt , c, t) = ϵrestored
                           θ        (zt , c, t) + α(ϵrestored
                                                     θ        (zt , c, t) − ϵrestored
                                                                             θ        (zt , t)),                                                                                                                                           ∀t ∈ [T, 1]. (5)


                                                                                                                                                                        5
Preprint


                                                                          Original              Corrupted          Causal State Non-Causal State


 Higher CLIP-Score


                                                                     Prompt: ‘A photo of a sandwich in the room’     Self-attn-0


                                                                     Prompt: ‘A deer running’                        Self-attn-0



Figure 3: Causal Tracing in the Text-Encoder: Knowledge is Localized. In the CLIP text-
encoder used for Stable-Diffusion, we find the existence of only one causal state, which is the first
self-attention layer corresponding to the last subject token. The CLIP-Score(Left) is computed
across all the four visual attributes. Visualizations (Right) further illustrate that restoring the sole
causal state (self-attn-0) leads to image generation with high fidelity to the original captions.

The final latent z0 is obtained with the score from Equation (5) at each time-step using DDIM (Song
et al., 2020) and passed through the VQ-VAE decoder to obtain the final image xrestored
                                                                                    0     .

3.4                  T RACING K NOWLEDGE IN THE T EXT-E NCODER

The text-encoder in public text-to-image models such as Stable-Diffusion is a CLIP-ViT-L/336px
text-encoder Rombach et al. (2021). Similar to Sec.(3.3), we define three states of the CLIP text-
encoder: (i) Clean model denoted by vγ ; (ii) Corrupted model vγcorr where the word embedding of
the subject in a given caption c is corrupted; (iii) Restored model vγrestored which is similar to vγcorr
except that one of its layers is copied from vγ . Similar to Sec.(3.3), to find the effect of the layer
ai ∈ A, where A consists of all the layers to probe in the CLIP text-encoder:

                                           vγrestored [ai ] : vγcorr [ai ] = vγ [ai ],                                                     (6)

We then use the restored text-encoder vγrestored with classifier-free guidance to obtain the final score
estimate:
              ϵ̂θ (zt , c′ , t) = ϵθ (zt , c′ , t) + α(ϵθ (zt , c′ , t) − ϵθ (zt , t)), ∀t ∈ [T, 1]  (7)
where c′ = vγrestored [ai ](c) for a given caption c. This score estimate ϵ̂θ (zt , c′ , t) at each time-step
t is used to obtain the final latent code z0 which is then used with the VQ-VAE decoder to obtain
the final image xrestored
                  0        .
3.5                  E XTRACTING C AUSAL S TATES U SING CLIP-S CORE

In this section, we discuss details on how to retrieve causal states using automated metrics such as
CLIP-Score (Hessel et al., 2021). Let xrestored
                                              0       (ai ) be the final image generated by the diffusion
model after intervening on layer ai , x0 be the image generated by the clean diffusion model and
xcorr be the final image generated by the corrupted model. In particular, we are interested in the
average indirect effect (Vig et al., 2020; Pearl, 2001) which measures the difference between the
corrupted model and the restored model. Intuitively, a higher value of average indirect effect (AIE)
signifies that the restored model deviates from the corrupted model. To compute the average indirect
effect with respect to causal mediation analysis for text-to-image models such as Stable-Diffusion,
we use CLIP-Score which computes the similarity between an image embedding and a caption
embedding. In particular, AIE = (CLIPScore(xrestored    0        , c) − CLIPScore(xcorr    0   , c)). Given
xcorr
  0    is common    across all the layers, we can use CLIPScore(x       restored
                                                                        0        , c) as the AIE.
Selecting Threshold for CLIP-Score. We observe that the difference between the CLIP-Score of
generated images (after restoration) with high fidelity to the original caption and generated images
(after restoration) with low fidelity to the original caption, to be small. Therefore to effectively find
a reasonable cut-off point to automatically select causal states (where the generated images have
high-fidelity to the original caption), we use a threshold selection mechanism. In order to determine
the optimal threshold value for CLIP-Score, we select a small validation set of 10 prompts per
attribute. To this end, we establish a concise user study interface (refer to Appendix D for details).


                                                               6
Preprint


Through human participation, we collect binary ratings if an image generated by restoring a partic-
ular layer is faithful to the original captions. We then extract the common causal states across all the
prompts for a given attribute and find the average (across all the prompts) CLIP-Score for each
causal state. We then use the lowest average CLIP-Score corresponding to a causal state as the
threshold, which we apply on the probe dataset in Appendix A to filter the causal states at scale for
each attribute separately.
4 H OW IS K NOWLEDGE S TORED IN T EXT- TO -I MAGE M ODELS ?
In this section, we discuss the results of tracing knowledge across various components of the text-
to-image model in details.
Tracing Results for UNet. In Fig 2, we illustrate the distribution of causal states across different
visual attributes within the UNet architecture using the CLIP-Score metric. This metric evaluates
the faithfulness of the image produced by the restored state xrestored
                                                                0        compared to the original cap-
tion c. From the insights derived in Fig 2, it becomes evident that causal states are spread across
diverse components of the UNet. In particular, we find that the density of the causal states are more
in the up-block of the UNet when compared to the down-block or the mid-block. Nonethe-
less, a notable distinction emerges in this distribution across distinct attributes. For instance, when
examining the style attribute, the initial self-attention layer demonstrates causality, whereas this
causal relationship is absent for other attributes. Similarly, in the context of the action attribute,
the cross-attention layer within the mid-block exhibits causality, which contrasts with its non-causal
behavior concerning other visual attributes. Fig 2 showcases the images generated by restoring
both causal and non-causal layers within the UNet. A comprehensive qualitative enumeration of
both causal and non-causal layers for each visual attribute is provided in Appendix B. Our findings
underscore the presence of information pertaining to various visual attributes in regions beyond the
cross-attention layers. Importantly, we observe that the distribution of information within the UNet
diverges from the patterns identified in extensive generative language models, as noted in prior re-
search (Meng et al., 2022), where attribute-related knowledge is confined to a few proximate layers.
In Appendix M, we provide additional causal tracing results, where we add Gaussian noise to the
entire text-embedding. Even in such a case, certain causal states can restore the model close to its
original configuration, highlighting that the conditional information can be completely bypassed if
certain causal states are active.
Tracing Results for Text-Encoder. In Fig 3, we illustrate the causal states in the text-encoder for
Stable-Diffusion corresponding to various visual attributes. At the text-encoder level, we find that
the causal states are localized to the first self-attention layer corresponding to the last subject token
across all the attributes. In fact, there exists only one causal state in the text-encoder. Qualitative
visualizations in Fig 3 and Appendix C illustrate that the restoration of layers other than the first
self-attention layer corresponding to the subject token does not lead to images with high fidelity
to the original caption. Remarkably, this observation is distinct from generative language models
where factual knowledge is primarily localized in the proximate mid MLP layers Meng et al. (2022).

      General Takeaway. Causal components corresponding to various visual attributes are dis-
      persed (with a different distribution between distinct attributes) in the UNet, whereas there
      exists only one causal component in the text-encoder.

The text-encoder’s strong localization of causal states for visual attributes enables controlled knowl-
edge manipulation in text-to-image models, facilitating updates or removal of concepts. However,
since attribute knowledge is dispersed in the UNet, targeted editing is challenging without layer in-
terference. While fine-tuning methods for UNet model editing exist (Gandikota et al., 2023; Kumari
et al., 2023), they lack scalability and don’t support simultaneous editing of multiple concepts. In the
next section, we introduce a closed-form editing method, D IFF -Q UICK F IX, leveraging our causal
tracing insights to efficiently edit various concepts in text-to-image models.

5     D IFF -Q UICK F IX : FAST M ODEL E DITING FOR T EXT- TO -I MAGE M ODELS
5.1     E DITING M ETHOD

Recent works such as (Kumari et al., 2023; Gandikota et al., 2023) edit concepts from text-to-image
diffusion models by fine-tuning the UNet. They generate training data for fine-tuning using the pre-
trained diffusion model itself. While both methods are effective at editing concepts, fine-tuning the


                                                   7
Preprint


        Editing Causal Layers vs. Non-Causal Layers             Comparison with Other Methods                     Effectiveness of Multi-Concept Ablated Model


                                                                 1s ~6min ~6.5min           1s ~6min ~6.5min


 Causal Layer              (a)                                    Editing time      (b)                                                         (c)
                                                                  per concept
Figure 4: Quantitative Analysis of D IFF -Q UICK F IX. (a) Editing Causal vs. Non-Causal Layers
(Averaged across Objects, Style and Facts): Lower CLIP-Score for causal layer indicates suc-
cessful edits; (b) Efficacy of D IFF -Q UICK F IX when compared to other methods – Our method leads
to comparable CLIP-Scores to fine-tuning based approaches, but can edit concepts 1000x faster;
(c) D IFF -Q UICK F IX can be used to effectively edit multiple concepts at once, shown by comparable
CLIP-Scores to the single-concept edited ones.
UNet can be expensive due to backpropogation of gradients through the UNet. To circumvent this
issue, we design a fast, data-free model editing method leveraging our interpretability observations
in Section 4, where we find that there exists only one causal state (the very first self-attention layer)
in the text-encoder for Stable-Diffusion.
Our editing method D IFF -Q UICK F IX can update text-to-image diffusion models in a targeted way in
under 1s through a closed-form update making it 1000x faster than existing fine-tuning based con-
cept ablating methods such as (Kumari et al., 2023; Gandikota et al., 2023). The first self-attention
layer in the text-encoder for Stable-Diffusion contains four updatable weight matrices: Wk , Wq , Wv
and Wout , where Wk , Wq , Wv are the projection matrices for the key, query and value embeddings
respectively. Wout is the projection matrix before the output from the self-attn-0 layer after
the attention operations. D IFF -Q UICK F IX specifically updates this Wout matrix by collecting cap-
tion pairs (ck , cv ) where ck (key) is the original caption and cv (value) is the caption to which ck is
mapped. For e.g., to remove the style of ‘Van Gogh’, we set ck = ‘Van Gogh’ and cv = ‘Painting’.
In particular, to update Wout , we solve the following optimization problem:
                                                       N
                                                       X
                                                                                           ′
                                                min          ∥Wout ki − vi ∥22 + λ∥Wout − Wout ∥22 ,                                                             (8)
                                                Wout
                                                       i=1
                                                                                             ′
where λ is a regularizer to not deviate significantly from the original pre-trained weights Wout ,N
denotes the total number of caption pairs containing the last subject token embeddings of the key
and value. ki corresponds to the embedding of cki after the attention operation using Wq , Wk and
Wv for the ith caption pair. vi corresponds to the embedding of cvi after the original pre-trained
           ′
weights Wout acts on it.
One can observe that Eq. (8) has a closed-form solution due to the absence of any non-linearities.
In particular, the optimal Wout can be expressed as the following:
                                                                          N
                                                                          X                            N
                                                                                                       X
                                                        ′
                                              Wout = (λWout +                       vi kiT )(λI +              ki kiT )−1 ,                                      (9)
                                                                           i=1                          i=1
In Section 5.3, we show qualitative as well as quantitative results using D IFF -Q UICK F IX for editing
various concepts in text-to-image models.
5.2       E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP

We validate D IFF -Q UICK F IX by applying edits to a Stable-Diffusion (Rombach et al., 2021) model
and quantifying the efficacy of the edit. For removing concepts such as artistic styles or objects us-
ing D IFF -Q UICK F IX, we use the prompt dataset from (Kumari et al., 2023). For updating knowledge
(e.g., President of a country) in text-to-image models, we add newer prompts to the prompt dataset
from (Kumari et al., 2023) and provide further details in Appendix N. We compare our method
with (i) Original Stable-Diffusion; (ii) Editing methods from (Kumari et al., 2023) and (Gandikota
et al., 2023). To validate the effectiveness of editing methods including our D IFF -Q UICK F IX, we
perform evaluation using automated metrics such as CLIP-Score. In particular, we compute the
CLIP-Score between the images from the edited model and the concept corresponding to the
visual attribute which is edited. A low CLIP-Score therefore indicates correct edits.

                                                                                     8
Preprint


           Removing Snoopy        Removing Van Gogh Style        Updating the President of US   Updating the British Monarch


           Removing R2D2           Removing Monet Style               Removing Nemo              Removing Grumpy Cat


    Before Edit     After Edit   Before Edit    After Edit       Before Edit      After Edit     Before Edit      After Edit
Figure 5: Qualitative Examples with using D IFF -Q UICK F IX to ablate style, objects and update
facts in text-to-image models. More qualitative examples in the Appendix F.
5.3 E DITING R ESULTS
Editing Non-causal Layers Does Not Lead to Correct Edits. We use D IFF -Q UICK F IX with
the non-causal self-attention layers in the text-encoder to ablate styles, objects and update facts.
In Fig 4-(a), we compute the CLIP-Score between the generated images and the attribute from
the original captions (e.g., van gogh in the case of style). In particular, we find that editing the non-
causal layers does not lead to any intended model changes – highlighted by the high CLIP-Scores
consistently across non-causal layers (layers numbered 1 to 11). However, editing the sole causal
layer (layer-0) leads to correct model changes, highlighted by the lower CLIP-Score between the
generated images from the edited model and the attribute from the original captions. This shows that
identifying the causal states in the model is particularly important to perform targeted model editing
for ablating concepts. In Appendix G, we show additional qualitative visualizations.
Efficacy in Removing Styles and Objects. Fig 4-(b) shows the average CLIP-Score of the
generated images from the edited model computed with the relevant attributes from the original cap-
tions. We find that the CLIP-Score from the edited model with D IFF -Q UICK F IX decreases when
compared to the generations from the unedited model. We also find that our editing method has com-
parable CLIP-Scores to other fine-tuning based approaches such as Concept-Erase (Gandikota
et al., 2023) and Concept-Ablation (Kumari et al., 2023), which are more computationally expen-
sive. Fig 5 shows qualitative visualizations corresponding to images generated by the text-to-image
model before and after the edit operations. Together, these quantitative and qualitative results show
that D IFF -Q UICK F IX is able to effectively remove various styles and objects from an underlying
text-to-image model. In Appendix F we provide additional qualitative visualizations and in Fig 52
we show additional results showing that our editing method does not harm surrounding concepts
(For e.g., removing the style of Van Gogh does not harm the style of Monet).
Efficacy in Updating Stale Knowledge. The CLIP-Score between the generated images and
a caption designating the incorrect fact (e.g., Donald Trump as the President of the US) decreases
from 0.28 to 0.23 after editing with D IFF -Q UICK F IX, while the CLIP-Score with the correct fact
(e.g., Joe Biden as the President of the US) increases from 0.22 to 0.29 after the relevant edit. This
shows that the incorrect fact is updated with the correct fact in the text-to-image model. Additional
qualitative visualizations are provided in Fig 5 and Appendix F.
Multiple Edits using D IFF -Q UICK F IX. An important feature of D IFF -Q UICK F IX is its capa-
bility to ablate multiple concepts simultaneously. In Fig 4-(c), our framework demonstrates the
removal of up to 10 distinct styles and objects at once. This multi-concept ablation results in lower
CLIP-Scores compared to the original model, similar CLIP-Scores to single concept editing.
6 C ONCLUSION
Through the lens of Causal Mediation Analysis, we present methods for understanding the storage
of knowledge corresponding to visual attributes in text-to-image models. Notably, we find a distinct
distribution of causal states across attributes in the UNet, while the text-encoder maintains a single
causal state. This differs significantly from observations in language models like GPT, where factual
information is concentrated in mid-MLP layers. In contrast, our analysis shows that public text-
to-image models like Stable-Diffusion concentrate multiple visual attributes within the first self-
attention layer of the text-encoder. Harnessing these insights, we design a fast model editing method
D IFF -Q UICK F IX. The potency of D IFF -Q UICK F IX is manifested through its adeptness in removing
artistic styles, objects, and updating outdated knowledge all accomplished data-free and in less than
a second, making D IFF -Q UICK F IX a practical asset for real-world model editing scenarios.


                                                             9
Preprint


R EFERENCES
Anonymous. ReFACT: Updating text-to-image models by editing the text encoder. In Submitted
  to The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023. URL https://
  openreview.net/forum?id=u2as4lHoyl. under review.
Yogesh Balaji, Seungjun Nah, Xun Huang, Arash Vahdat, Jiaming Song, Karsten Kreis, Miika
  Aittala, Timo Aila, Samuli Laine, Bryan Catanzaro, Tero Karras, and Ming-Yu Liu. ediff-i:
  Text-to-image diffusion models with an ensemble of expert denoisers. CoRR, abs/2211.01324,
  2022. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2211.01324. URL https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.
  2211.01324.
Nicolas Carlini, Jamie Hayes, Milad Nasr, Matthew Jagielski, Vikash Sehwag, Florian Tramèr, Borja
  Balle, Daphne Ippolito, and Eric Wallace. Extracting training data from diffusion models. In
  32nd USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 23), pp. 5253–5270, Anaheim, CA, August
  2023. USENIX Association. ISBN 978-1-939133-37-3. URL https://www.usenix.org/
  conference/usenixsecurity23/presentation/carlini.
Huiwen Chang, Han Zhang, Jarred Barber, Aaron Maschinot, José Lezama, Lu Jiang, Ming-Hsuan
  Yang, Kevin Patrick Murphy, William T. Freeman, Michael Rubinstein, Yuanzhen Li, and Dilip
  Krishnan. Muse: Text-to-image generation via masked generative transformers. In Andreas
  Krause, Emma Brunskill, Kyunghyun Cho, Barbara Engelhardt, Sivan Sabato, and Jonathan Scar-
  lett (eds.), International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2023, 23-29 July 2023, Hon-
  olulu, Hawaii, USA, volume 202 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 4055–4075.
  PMLR, 2023. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v202/chang23b.html.
Ming Ding, Wendi Zheng, Wenyi Hong, and Jie Tang. Cogview2: Faster and better text-to-image
 generation via hierarchical transformers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.14217, 2022.
Rohit Gandikota, Joanna Materzyńska, Jaden Fiotto-Kaufman, and David Bau. Erasing concepts
  from diffusion models. In Proceedings of the 2023 IEEE International Conference on Computer
  Vision, 2023.
Rohit Gandikota, Hadas Orgad, Yonatan Belinkov, Joanna Materzyńska, and David Bau. Unified
  concept editing in diffusion models. IEEE/CVF Winter Conference on Applications of Computer
  Vision, 2024.
Hongcheng Gao, Hao Zhang, Yinpeng Dong, and Zhijie Deng. Evaluating the robustness of text-to-
  image diffusion models against real-world attacks. CoRR, abs/2306.13103, 2023. doi: 10.48550/
  ARXIV.2306.13103. URL https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2306.13103.
Jack Hessel, Ari Holtzman, Maxwell Forbes, Ronan Le Bras, and Yejin Choi. Clipscore: A
  reference-free evaluation metric for image captioning. CoRR, abs/2104.08718, 2021. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2104.08718.
Jonathan Ho and Tim Salimans. Classifier-free diffusion guidance. In NeurIPS 2021 Workshop on
  Deep Generative Models and Downstream Applications, 2021. URL https://openreview.
  net/forum?id=qw8AKxfYbI.
Minguk Kang, Jun-Yan Zhu, Richard Zhang, Jaesik Park, Eli Shechtman, Sylvain Paris, and Taesung
 Park. Scaling up gans for text-to-image synthesis. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on
 Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2023.
Nupur Kumari, Bingliang Zhang, Sheng-Yu Wang, Eli Shechtman, Richard Zhang, and Jun-Yan
  Zhu. Ablating concepts in text-to-image diffusion models. In ’International Conference on Com-
  puter Vision (ICCV)’, 2023.
Tsung-Yi Lin, Michael Maire, Serge J. Belongie, Lubomir D. Bourdev, Ross B. Girshick, James
  Hays, Pietro Perona, Deva Ramanan, Piotr Dollár, and C. Lawrence Zitnick. Microsoft COCO:
  common objects in context. CoRR, abs/1405.0312, 2014. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/
  1405.0312.
Kevin Meng, David Bau, Alex Andonian, and Yonatan Belinkov. Locating and editing factual
  associations in GPT. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2022.


                                               10
Preprint


Hadas Orgad, Bahjat Kawar, and Yonatan Belinkov. Editing implicit assumptions in text-to-image
  diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision,
  2023.

Judea Pearl. Direct and indirect effects. In Proceedings of the Seventeenth Conference on Uncer-
  tainty in Artificial Intelligence, UAI’01, pp. 411–420, San Francisco, CA, USA, 2001. Morgan
  Kaufmann Publishers Inc. ISBN 1558608001.

Dustin Podell, Zion English, Kyle Lacey, Andreas Blattmann, Tim Dockhorn, Jonas Müller, Joe
  Penna, and Robin Rombach. Sdxl: Improving latent diffusion models for high-resolution image
  synthesis, 2023.

Aditya Ramesh, Mikhail Pavlov, Gabriel Goh, Scott Gray, Chelsea Voss, Alec Radford, Mark
  Chen, and Ilya Sutskever. Zero-shot text-to-image generation. In Marina Meila and Tong Zhang
  (eds.), Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 139 of
  Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 8821–8831. PMLR, 18–24 Jul 2021. URL
  https://proceedings.mlr.press/v139/ramesh21a.html.

Anton Razzhigaev, Arseniy Shakhmatov, Anastasia Maltseva, Vladimir Arkhipkin, Igor Pavlov, Ilya
  Ryabov, Angelina Kuts, Alexander Panchenko, Andrey Kuznetsov, and Denis Dimitrov. Kandin-
  sky: an improved text-to-image synthesis with image prior and latent diffusion. 2023.

Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer. High-
  resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. CoRR, abs/2112.10752, 2021. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2112.10752.

Chitwan Saharia, William Chan, Saurabh Saxena, Lala Li, Jay Whang, Emily L Den-
  ton, Kamyar Ghasemipour, Raphael Gontijo Lopes, Burcu Karagol Ayan, Tim Sali-
  mans, Jonathan Ho, David J Fleet, and Mohammad Norouzi.      Photorealistic text-to-
  image diffusion models with deep language understanding.  In S. Koyejo, S. Mo-
  hamed, A. Agarwal, D. Belgrave, K. Cho, and A. Oh (eds.), Advances in Neural In-
  formation Processing Systems, volume 35, pp. 36479–36494. Curran Associates, Inc.,
  2022. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2022/
  file/ec795aeadae0b7d230fa35cbaf04c041-Paper-Conference.pdf.

Christoph Schuhmann, Romain Beaumont, Richard Vencu, Cade W Gordon, Ross Wightman,
  Mehdi Cherti, Theo Coombes, Aarush Katta, Clayton Mullis, Mitchell Wortsman, Patrick
  Schramowski, Srivatsa R Kundurthy, Katherine Crowson, Ludwig Schmidt, Robert Kaczmarczyk,
  and Jenia Jitsev. LAION-5b: An open large-scale dataset for training next generation image-text
  models. In Thirty-sixth Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems Datasets and
  Benchmarks Track, 2022. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=M3Y74vmsMcY.

Gowthami Somepalli, Vasu Singla, Micah Goldblum, Jonas Geiping, and Tom Goldstein. Diffusion
  art or digital forgery? investigating data replication in diffusion models. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 6048–6058,
  June 2023a.

Gowthami Somepalli, Vasu Singla, Micah Goldblum, Jonas Geiping, and Tom Goldstein. Under-
  standing and mitigating copying in diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.20086, 2023b.

Jiaming Song, Chenlin Meng, and Stefano Ermon. Denoising diffusion implicit models. CoRR,
   abs/2010.02502, 2020. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2010.02502.

Raphael Tang, Linqing Liu, Akshat Pandey, Zhiying Jiang, Gefei Yang, Karun Kumar, Pontus
  Stenetorp, Jimmy Lin, and Ferhan Ture. What the DAAM: Interpreting stable diffusion using
  cross attention. In Anna Rogers, Jordan Boyd-Graber, and Naoaki Okazaki (eds.), Proceedings
  of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long
  Papers), pp. 5644–5659, Toronto, Canada, July 2023. Association for Computational Linguis-
  tics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2023.acl-long.310. URL https://aclanthology.org/2023.
  acl-long.310.


                                                11
Preprint


Aaron van den Oord, Oriol Vinyals, and koray kavukcuoglu. Neural discrete representation learn-
  ing. In I. Guyon, U. Von Luxburg, S. Bengio, H. Wallach, R. Fergus, S. Vishwanathan,
  and R. Garnett (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 30. Cur-
  ran Associates, Inc., 2017. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/
  paper/2017/file/7a98af17e63a0ac09ce2e96d03992fbc-Paper.pdf.
Jesse Vig, Sebastian Gehrmann, Yonatan Belinkov, Sharon Qian, Daniel Nevo, Yaron Singer, and
  Stuart M. Shieber. Causal mediation analysis for interpreting neural NLP: the case of gender bias.
  CoRR, abs/2004.12265, 2020. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2004.12265.
Ben Wang and Aran Komatsuzaki. GPT-J-6B: A 6 Billion Parameter Autoregressive Language
  Model. https://github.com/kingoflolz/mesh-transformer-jax, May 2021.


                                                12
