Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D IFFUSION L ANGUAGE M ODELS C AN P ERFORM M ANY
TASKS WITH S CALING AND I NSTRUCTION -F INETUNING
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                              A BSTRACT

           The recent surge of generative AI has been fueled by the generative power of diffu-
           sion probabilistic models and the scalable capabilities of large language models.
           Despite their potential, it remains elusive whether diffusion language models can
           solve general language tasks comparable to their autoregressive counterparts. This
           paper demonstrates that scaling diffusion models w.r.t. data, sizes, and tasks can
           effectively make them strong language learners. We build competent diffusion lan-
           guage models at scale by first acquiring knowledge from massive data via masked
           language modeling pretraining thanks to their intrinsic connections. We then re-
           program pretrained masked language models into diffusion language models via
           diffusive adaptation, wherein task-specific finetuning and instruction finetuning are
           explored to unlock their versatility in solving general language tasks. Experiments
           show that scaling diffusion language models consistently improves performance
           across downstream language tasks. We further discover that instruction finetuning
           can elicit zero-shot and few-shot in-context learning abilities that help tackle many
           unseen tasks by following natural language instructions, and show promise in
           advanced and challenging abilities such as reasoning.


1      I NTRODUCTION
Recent advances in generative modeling have led to remarkable progress in the field of generative
AI. In domains of continuous signals, diffusion probabilistic models have shown great success in
rendering photorealistic images (Rombach et al., 2021; Ramesh et al., 2022) and synthesizing high-
quality audio (Kong et al., 2020) through iterative denoising, outperforming GANs and autoregressive
models, and even contributing to the surge of AI art. The story is different in the domains of
discrete signals comprising symbolic sequences such as natural languages, where autoregressive large
language models (large LMs or LLMs, Brown et al., 2020) have dominated the scene, delivering
impressive generalist language abilities in language understanding and generating human-like texts,
and can even follow natural language instructions to perform unseen tasks.
The revolutionized generative abilities of diffusion models, manifested in image generation and
speech synthesis, give the promise of a strong alternative to autoregressive language models for
several favorable reasons, including (1) global receptive field vs. one-sided context, and (2) non-
autoregressive drafting-then-revising manner vs. restrictive unidirectional generation/autoregression.
Hence, an intriguing question arises: can diffusion models speak languages well? This question is in
turn asking about the scalability of diffusion language models, which can be further boiled down
into the following specific research questions regarding the three key ingredients of the success of
large-scale language models, i.e., data, model sizes, and tasks:
    RQ 1. On scaling data. Acquiring general knowledge via self-supervised pretraining from massive
          unlabeled data plays a crucial role in the success of the modern NLP paradigms (Radford
          et al., 2018; Devlin et al., 2018), hence it is also of importance to enable diffusion language
          models to learn from massive data. Can diffusion language models leverage knowledge
          from large-scale data?
    RQ 2. On scaling model sizes. It has been widely observed that the larger the model size, the
          more competent the language models become. Can enlarging diffusion language models
          effectively improve downstream tasks?
    RQ 3. On scaling tasks. What makes LLMs most attractive is they can tackle new tasks that they
          were never exposed to during training by following natural language instructions with little


                                                    1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



    A                                   Paradigms of Language Models
                                                                                                              B            GENERATIVE SURGERY: From MLMs to Diffusion LMs

        INPUT                                                          OUTPUT                                 ⓵ Knowledge Acquisition                                               - Translation
        (instruction/prompt)                                           (sequential generation)
                                               Autoregressive                 扩散
                                                                                                                                                                    Specialist      - Summarization
        Translate “Diffusion language
                                                                                                                                                                   Diffusion LM     - Protein Inverse
        models can be so cool.”
                                                    LMs                       扩散语⾔                                  MLM pretraining
        Answer in Chinese.                                                                                                                    Task-specific                           Folding
                                                                              扩散语⾔模型
                                                                                                                   on large-scale data                              for task A      - etc..
                                                                              扩散语⾔模型太                                                          Finetuning                           -
                                                                              扩散语⾔模型太酷啦

                                                                                                                  Large Pretrained MLM:
                                                                                                                                                                                    - Instruction
        INPUT                                                          OUTPUT
                                                                                                                                               Instruction           Generalist       Following
        (instruction/prompt)                                           (iterative refinement/denoising)           BERT, RoBERTa                Finetuning                           - In-context
                                                                              [M][M][M][M]模型[M][M][M]
                                                                                                                  XLM-RoBERTa, etc                                  Diffusion LM      Learning
        Translate “Diffusion language
        models can be so cool.”                 Diffusion LMs                 [M]M]语⾔模型[M][M][M]                                                                   for many tasks   - CoT reasoning
        Answer in Chinese.                                                    扩散语⾔模型[M][M][M]                                                                                       - etc..
                                                                              扩散语⾔模型[M][M]了
                                                                              扩散语⾔模型太酷啦                                                   ⓶ Diffusive Adaptation


Figure 1: Overview. (A) Comparative illustration of language model (LM) paradigms, i.e., autore-
gressive LMs vs. diffusion LMs. (B) Overall illustration of the proposed approach wherein massively
pretrained masked LMs are reprogrammed to diffusion LMs via generative surgery.

                to no demonstrations. Can scaled diffusion language models exhibit general zero-shot and
                few-shot in-context learning capabilities to generalize to unseen tasks?
Nevertheless, building diffusion language models at scale is non-trivial. Previous efforts mostly still
fall short of satisfactory generation quality, and the scalability remains largely unexplored. Several
studies attempted to adapt continuous diffusion models to discrete domains by embedding discrete
                                                                                                                                                                                                        61
symbols into continuous surrogates (Li et al., 2022; Gong et al., 2022; Gao et al., 2022; Ye et al., 2023).
However, a significant performance gap persists due to the pitfall of discreteness (Ye et al., 2023),
which renders Gaussian perturbation ineffective in providing training signals to learn on discrete
tokens. Discrete diffusion models, which directly operate in the discrete space, appear well-suited for
sequence learning (Hoogeboom et al., 2021; Austin et al., 2021). However, they have long-standing
struggles applying to more complex and practical scenarios (typically with large vocabulary) like
natural languages. Very recently, reparameterized discrete diffusion models (RDM, Zheng et al.,
2023a) has made substantial progress on representative benchmarks like machine translation. In
addition, He et al. (2023) demonstrated DiffusionBERT, a discrete diffusion model finetuned from
pretrained masked language models (MLMs, Devlin et al., 2018). Likewise, Zheng et al. (2023b)
also showed that the generative ability can be unleashed from pretrained protein MLMs (Rives et al.,
2019) for designing protein amino acid sequences in a diffusion-like iterative refinement fashion.
Despite such promising progress, the scalability of diffusion language models remains elusive.
In this paper, we aim to advance diffusion language models by exploring their scalability w.r.t. data,
model sizes, and tasks. We first demonstrate the intrinsic connection between masked language
models and discrete diffusion models, which permits us to treat pretrained masked language models of
various scales as pretrained diffusion language models, without the need for expensive learning from
scratch. We then reprogram pretrained masked language models into diffusion language models via
diffusive adaptation, where task-specific finetuning and instruction finetuning (Wei et al., 2021) are
explored for solving certain targeted downstream tasks or general language problems, respectively.
Based on extensive experiments, we reveal that large-scale diffusion language models can serve as
strong sequence generative models, exhibiting competitive performance as compared with autoregres-
sive language models. Scaling up diffusion language models helps achieve improved performance
across a wide range of tasks, from translating across languages to summarizing documents. By
leveraging instruction finetuning, we can further elicit zero-shot and few-shot abilities for diffusion
language models to tackle unseen tasks by following natural language instructions. Notably, diffu-
sion language models demonstrate promising structured reasoning behaviors thanks to their flexible
non-autoregressive generation order. Nevertheless, their capacity to tackle complex reasoning tasks
remains an ongoing challenge awaiting resolution.
To sum up, we hope that our explorations provide valuable insights into the scalability of diffusion
language models and their potential as a viable alternative in tackling generative language tasks
across the board.

2    P RELIMINARIES : D IFFUSION M ODELS FOR S EQUENCE G ENERATION
Language processing tasks can be unified as sequence-to-sequence problems (Raffel et al., 2020),
modeling the conditional distribution pθ (x|c), where x = (x[1] , x[2] , . . . , x[N ] ) is a target sequence
composing N tokens and c is the given context. For example, we may want to generate responses
x conditioned on the prompt c, or it can be unconditional generation if no context is provided (i.e.,
c = ϕ). As a result, one thing we care about is the capability of generative models for sequence data


                                                                                                          2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


x, e.g., the prevailing autoregressive models or diffusion models. In this section, we provide the
necessary background on diffusion-based sequence generative models, where we abuse the notation
and use pθ (x) for both conditional pθ (x|c) and unconditional pθ (x|c = ϕ) for brevity. We provide
more detailed discussions on relevant literature in §B.
Diffusion Models (Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015) are a class of generative models characterized by
a pair of Markov processes, i.e., a forward diffusion process and a backward denoising process.
                                       QT
The forward process q(x1:T |x0 ) = t=1 q(xt |xt−1 ) gradually perturb the data x0 ∼ q(x0 ) into a
stationary distribution q(xT ) with T increasingly noisy steps x1:T = x1 , x2 , . . . , xT . The learned
                                         QT
backward process pθ (x0:T ) = p(xT ) t=1 pθ (xt−1 |xt ), reversely, gradually denoises the samples
towards the data distribution. To fit the model pθ (x0 ) to the data distribution q(x0 ), the denoiser
model is typically optimized by the variational bound of the negative log-likelihood (Ho et al., 2020):
                                                                             T
                                                       pθ (x0:T )           X
           Eq(x0 ) [− log pθ (x0 )] ≤ Eq(x0:T ) − log                = L1 +     Lt + const.,          (1)
                                                      q(x1:T |x0 )          t=2
where L1 = Eq [− log pθ (x0 |x1 )] and Lt = Eq [KL[q(xt−1 |xt , x0 )∥pθ (xt−1 |xt )]] for t ∈ [2, T ].
In general, diffusion models can be categorized into continuous and discrete diffusion models
according to distribution type for data perturbation. Continuous diffusion models with Gaussian
perturbation have demonstrated impressive performance in generating continuous signals (Rombach
et al., 2021; Ho et al., 2022; Kong et al., 2020) but still struggle with satisfactory generation quality
in natural languages (Li et al., 2022; Gong et al., 2022; Gao et al., 2022; Yuan et al., 2022; Ye et al.,
2023). A critical challenge herein is the pitfall of discreteness (Ye et al., 2023) that makes Gaussian
perturbation on embeddings hardly provide effective training signals. In contrast, discrete diffusion
models directly operate over the discrete state space of tokens, providing an attractive alternative
for generative sequence learning. Therefore in this paper, we explore developing diffusion language
models upon discrete diffusion.
Discrete Diffusion Models (Hoogeboom et al., 2021; Austin et al., 2021) cover a subset of diffusion
models for which transition probabilities between timesteps are discrete distributions. Since the for-
ward diffusion process is applied independently to each token of a sequence x, for the sake of brevity,
we abuse the notation xt for arbitrary tokens at diffusion timestep t. Formally, xt ∈ {0, 1}|V| is a
token represented as a one-hot vector, where V is the vocabulary of all possible tokens. Let Cat(x; p)
be a categorical distribution on x with probabilities given by vector p on |V| − 1 dimensional proba-
bility simplex, and the forward transition be q(xt |xt−1 ) = Cat (xt ; p = βt xt−1 + (1 − βt )qnoise ) ,
where 0 ≪ βt < 1 is the noise schedule controlling the degree of perturbation at timestep t, and qnoise
is the probability vector of stationary distribution q(xT ), i.e., q(xT ) = Cat(xT ; p = qnoise ). In this
case, the distribution of corrupted sample xt given its original data x0 has a closed-form expression:
                         q(xt |x0 ) = Cat (xt ; p = αt x0 + (1 − αt )qnoise ) ,                        (2)
              Qt
where αt = i=1 βi . This shows that the diffusion process is intuitively a convex combination
between data and noise where the αt controls the degree of corruption at different timesteps. In
particular, αt decreases as the timestep increases. With sufficiently large timesteps, we have αT ≈ 0,
which preserves no information from the data at the end of the diffusion process.
Different stationary distributions qnoise lead to different formulations of discrete diffusion models. One
typical design is the absorbing diffusion with q(xT ) = {1 if xT = [MASK]; 0 if xT ̸= [MASK]},
where [MASK] is an absorbing state. According to Eq. (2), this formulation results in xt either being
masked or the same as x0 , with a masking ratio (1 − αt ). This makes absorbing diffusion resemble
masked language models (MLM, Devlin et al., 2018) as He et al. (2023) points out.
Reparameterized Discrete Diffusion Models (RDM, Zheng et al., 2023a) reparameterize the
backward transition of diffusion language models that reformulates the training objective of discrete
diffusion models into             h                                             i
                                        (2)
                          Lt = E −λt−1 (1 − 1(xt = x0 )) log pθ (x0 |xt ) ,                             (3)
where 1(·) is indicator function. Under the formulation of absorbing diffusion, Eqn. 5 resembles a
weighted MLM objective (Devlin et al., 2018). Zheng et al. (2023a) demonstrate that Eqn. 5 is a
more effective training protocol compared to Eqn. 1 for generative discrete diffusion models, showing
performance on par with autoregressive LMs (Vaswani et al., 2017) on representative machine
translation benchmarks for the first time. In this paper, we use RDM as our primary training objective
for building our diffusion language models (see §C for more details).


                                                    3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Generative Process of Discrete Diffusion Models. Diffusion models yield new samples by their
reverse generative process of iterative denoising. Under the formulation of absorbing diffusion, the
denoising process can be characterized in an iterative mask-predict manner (Ghazvininejad et al.,
2019). Specifically, the starting sequence is initialized by all [MASK] tokens, and in each iteration,
some masked tokens are replaced by the model predictions from pθ (xt−1 |xt ) while some unmasked
tokens are remasked, according to specific strategies/schedules (Ghazvininejad et al., 2019; Savinov
et al., 2021; Chang et al., 2022; Zheng et al., 2023a). In this paper, we follow Zheng et al. (2023a) to
unmask positions with top-k log-probability predicted by pθ (x0 |xt ), and mask all the rest position in
each denoising step1 .

3       S CALING D IFFUSION L ANGUAGE M ODELS w.r.t. DATA , S IZES AND TASKS
Developing diffusion language models that leverage the advantages of both the generative power
of both diffusion models and the scalability of large pretrained language models is a promising yet
challenging endeavor. The key to the success of the current standard paradigm of large generative
language models is acquiring knowledge via massive pretraining and generating in a prompt-response
manner for preferable output for many tasks. For diffusion language models, (1) how to benefit
from pretraining at scale, and (2) how to best fit the prompt-response paradigm, are the crucial open
questions. In this section, we will elaborate on how to empower diffusion language models with
knowledge from pretraining of large-scale data as well as model sizes, and extend their generative
capabilities for extensive downstream tasks.
3.1       K NOWLEDGE ACQUISITION VIA MLM P RETRAINING AT S CALE

The theoretical framework of discrete diffusion models has an intrinsic connection to masked language
modeling (MLM), which was discussed in Austin et al. (2021); Gong et al. (2022) and He et al.
(2023). Among various types of discrete diffusion models, the absorbing diffusion (Austin et al.,
2021) resembles a generalized masked language modeling, which has been shown to be an effective
training objective in pretraining foundation models (Devlin et al., 2018; Liu et al., 2019). Specifically,
absorbing diffusion defines a stationary distribution: q(xT ) = {1 if xT = [MASK]; 0 if xT ̸=
[MASK]}, where [MASK] is an absorbing token. According to Eq. (2), this formulation results in
xt either being masked or the same as x0 , with a masking ratio (1 − αt ). Consequently, xt = x0
if and only if xt ̸= [MASK], which aligns the reparameterized training objective in Eq. (5) exactly
with the masked language modeling objective.
This connection allows us to establish diffusion language models by pretraining with MLM objec-
tives from massive raw textual data. We can even treat abundant community-available pretrained
MLMs (Devlin et al., 2018; Liu et al., 2019; Conneau et al., 2019) as pretrained diffusion language
models, and can depart from them for downstream tasks at a very low cost, bypassing the expensive
pretraining stage.
3.2       D IFFUSIVE A DAPTATION : R EPROGRAMMING P RETRAINED MLM S TO D IFFUSION
          L ANGUAGE M ODELS FOR S EQUENCE G ENERATION
Existing masked language models are primarily designed to serve as sequence encoders, and are not
able to generate sequences by default. Despite their connections to absorbing discrete diffusion, it is
non-trivial to naively sample from masked language models through the iterative denoising process
of absorbing diffusion. One major reason is that absorbing diffusion generates sampling by iterative
applying pθ (xt−1 |xt ) from complete noise to the final prediction (i.e., ranging gradually from 100%
to 0%[MASK] tokens) through different timesteps, whereas vanilla masked language models are
only pretrained with a limited and constant masking ratio (e.g., 15%).
In order to elicit the pretrained masked language models’ ability for sequence generation, we propose
diffusion adaptation to eliminate the gap between pretrained masked and diffusion language models,
where we further finetune pretrained MLMs with diffusion training objective such that sampling with
the denoising process becomes possible. In particular, we follow the reparameterized training and
sampling method in RDM (Zheng et al., 2023a) as described in §2. As for model architecture, we



    1
        See §D for concrete noise schedules, and Zheng et al. (2023a) for the justification of this sampling strategy.


                                                           4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


adopt a decoder-only architecture2 and do not add extra timesteps indicators to the models, similar
to He et al. (2023). In this way, our diffusion language model starts as a fully pretrained model
without any randomly initialized parameters incorporated. In addition, we incorporate a task-specific
length predictor, a common practice in NAR text generation (Gu et al., 2018), to determine the lengths
of predicted sequences. We pick its tok-k length predictions for parallel length beam search, where k
is referred to as the length beam size. We include more implementation details in §D.
For different purposes, we perform diffusive adaptation for diffusion language models in two ways:
• Optimizing specialist capabilities on certain downstream tasks via task-specific finetuning. To
  verify the feasibility of diffusive adaptation, we finetune pretrained masked language models on the
  specific dataset for each downstream task. Moreover, we further perform finetuning on pretrained
  models of different scales so as to study the scalability of diffusion language models.
• Eliciting generalist capabilities on extensive tasks via instruction finetuning. Finetuning on a
  collection of tasks phrased as instructions (i.e., instruction finetuning) enables language models
  to better respond to instruction prompts and generalize to unseen tasks (Wei et al., 2021; Chung
  et al., 2022). Inspired by this, we apply diffusive adaptation to pretrained masked language models
  by instruction finetuning to study whether diffusion language models can acquire few-shot and
  zero-shot abilities like autoregressive LLMs.
Both scenarios handle conditional sequence generation tasks from input to output, which require
the model to generate target sequences according to the given prompts. To handle these with a
decoder-only model, we organize the data in a prompt-response format3 . During tuning, we only
apply the diffusion process to the target response tokens and compute loss on them. During inference,
we append the initial fully masked sequences to the prompts and denoise from them.

4     E XPERIMENTS
We first introduce our general experimental setups in §4.1. Then we conduct three parts of experiments
progressively regarding scaling on data (§4.2), model sizes (§4.3), and the number of tasks (§4.4).
4.1    E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP

Model architecture. Throughout the experiments, we use XLM-RoBERTa (XLM-R; Conneau et al.,
2019; Goyal et al., 2021) as our foundation models, which is pretrained on CC100 (Wenzek et al.,
2020), a multilingual corpus containing 167B tokens of 100 languages, with four model sizes
(numbers of non-embedding parameters) at different scales, i.e., 86M, 304M, 2.8B, and 9.7B.
Data. We investigate our approach for its specialist ability in respective downstream tasks and
generalist ability to solve massive unseen tasks using natural language instructions. The datasets we
use to finetune our model are as follows:
(1) Downstream task datasets. We evaluate whether our approach can help diffusion language models
serve as strong specialized models on multiple representative downstream tasks: (1) IWSLT144
for D E→E N translation; (2) WMT145 for E N→D E translation; and (3) Gigaword-10K6 for text
summarization.
(2) Instruction finetuning datasets. We follow Chung et al. (2022) and finetuned the XLM-R models
of different scales with the Flan 2022 Collection (Chung et al., 2022; Longpre et al., 2023) with
diffusion training objective in Eq. (5). The Flan 2022 Collection is the publicly available version of
the instruction tuning data for Flan-T5 and Flan-PaLM, covering over 1.8K tasks. It combines several
multitask learning datasets with instructions (Wei et al., 2021; Sanh et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2022),
combined with a few extra chain-of-thought and dialog data.


   2
     In this paper, the decoder-only architecture, as a counterpart of encoder-decoder architecture, refers to the
language model architecture that does not comprise a separate encoder stack to encode contexts/conditions.
Under this definition, masked language models (e.g., BERT and XLM-R) are treated as decoder-only models.
   3
     A prompt-response formatted example for German-to-English translation (“Vielen dank” - “Thank you”):
“Translate the German sentence into English. German: Vielen dank. English: Thank you.”
   4
     https://wit3.fbk.eu/
   5
     http://www.statmt.org/wmt14/translation-task
   6
     https://github.com/harvardnlp/sent-summary


                                                        5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 1: SacreBLEU (Post, 2018) on IWSLT14 D E→E N and WMT14 E N→D E, and Rouge-L
on Gigaword-10k. We use 10 length beams for all the results with length prediction. Results out
of (inside) parentheses are obtained with length prediction (oracle target length). “#Params.”:
Number of non-embedding parameters. “Type”: whether the training objective and sampling
method are autoregressive (AR, Vaswani et al., 2017) or follow reparameterized diffusion mod-
els (RDM, Zheng et al., 2023a). “Pretrained”: whether initialized from pretrained models. “†”:
Transformer-BASE-IWSLT has the same architecture as the Transformer-BASE in Vaswani
et al. (2017) but the dimension of the feed-forward layers is 1024 and the number of attention heads
is 4, which is standard practice on this dataset.
                   Architecture                   #Params. Type Pretrained      IWSLT14        WMT14 Gigaword-10K
                                              †    39M         AR   ✗               33.30            -              -
                   Transformer-BASE-IWSLT
                                                   39M        RDM   ✗               32.14            -              -
 Encoder-Decoder
                                                   43M         AR   ✗                   -        26.85          10.42
                   Transformer-BASE
                                                   43M        RDM   ✗                   -        26.54              -
                   XLM-R-BASE                      86M         AR   ✗                26.07             -             -
                   XLM-R-BASE                      86M        RDM   ✗        28.79 (29.12) 26.09 (26.86) 10.01 (10.66)
 Decoder-only
                   XLM-R-BASE                      86M        RDM   ✓        34.10 (35.78) 26.65 (26.64) 27.52 (28.83)
                   XLM-R-XXL                       9.7B       RDM   ✓        38.57 (40.65) 30.34 (32.81) 31.54 (32.57)


Figure 2: An exemplary generation process on machine translation. Notice that the target translation
contains three segments, which are generated simultaneously by the diffusion language model.

4.2   D IFFUSION L ANGUAGE M ODELS B ENEFIT FROM L ARGE - SCALE DATA

We apply diffusive adaptation on XLM-R-BASE (Conneau et al., 2019) model architecture on
sequence generation benchmarks to verify the feasibility of our generative surgery and investigate
whether diffusion LMs can benefit from large-scale self-supervised learning. We sample the target
sequences with 50 steps during inference. For comparison, we include the commonly used encoder-
decoder Transformer (Vaswani et al., 2017), and decoder-only autoregressive LMs with the same
architecture from scratch as the baselines7 to help intuitively understand the model performance.
Diffusive adaptation unlocks the generative ability of pretrained masked language models.
Tab. 1 shows our results on IWSLT14 D E→E N and WMT14 E N→D E translation, as well as
Gigaword-10k summarization tasks. The performance of finetuned XLM-R models is competitive
or superior to the common encoder-decoder Transformer baseline. As qualitatively shown in Fig. 2,
diffusion language models generate fluent and semantically accurate translation8 , further confirming
the feasibility of our generative surgery to the pretrained masked language models.
MLM pretraining at scale benefit diffusion language models. On both IWSLT14 and Gigaword-
10K, diffusion language models (RDM) initialized from a pretrained MLM model considerably
outperform the randomly initialized one. This suggests the benefit of self-supervised learning
with large-scale data for diffusion language models. Moreover, experimental results show minor
improvement on WMT14 (4.5M pairs), a relatively more obvious gain on IWSLT14 (160K pairs),
    7
      As shown in Tab. 1, diffusion (RDM) slightly underperforms AR with encoder-decoder architectures but
largely outperforms in the decoder-only setting, on IWSLT14 translation. A notable difference between the
models in these two settings lies in the receptive field. Diffusion always has a global receptive field on the
conditioning input, whereas AR can only perceive the condition with unidirectional attention if not equipped
with an encoder. This supports our motivation to build diffusion language models for their favorable global
receptive field.
    8
      The intermediate steps demonstrate that the models generate three clauses simultaneously, implying a global
perception that plans the generation of the whole sequence. We consider this benefits the model on more complex
generation tasks, which we discuss in §A.2.


                                                          6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 3: Scaling curves of task-specific finetuning on IWSLT14, WMT14 and Gigaword-10K. We
obtain results of mT5 (Xue et al., 2020) on IWSLT14 by ourselves. The results of T5 on WMT14
are from Raffel et al. (2020). “OL”: results obtained with oracle target lengths. “LB=10”: length
prediction results with 10 length beams. “#Params.”: Number of effective parameters (i.e., non-
embedding parameters).

and a significant performance boost on Gigaword-10K (10K pairs). This demonstrates that the benefit
of pretraining is more obvious if the training set of the downstream task is smaller, indicating the
effect of pretraining in scaling data.
4.3     S CALING UP THE S IZES OF D IFFUSION LM S B OOST D OWNSTREAM TASKS
We now move on to investigate the scalability with respect to model sizes. We finetune XLM-R
models of different scales (Conneau et al., 2019; Goyal et al., 2021), whose numbers of effective
parameters (i.e., number of non-embedding parameters) range from <100M to 10B. Notably, when
the model scales up to 10B, it shows impressive performance that surpasses base-sized models by a
remarkable margin (Tab. 1).
Fig. 3 shows the scaling curve of model performance with respect to model sizes. It demonstrates that
the performance of the finetuned diffusion models substantially increases as the model size increases.
This shows the scaling law of diffusion language models in terms of model size. In addition, we
also include the performance of (m)T5 (Raffel et al., 2020; Xue et al., 2020) at similar scales as
references to intuitively understand how scalable our diffusion language models are. Note that the
performance of different models is intricately affected by not only the model size but also numerous
factors including model designs, pretraining budget, pretraining objectives, as well as pretraining
data (Shazeer, 2020; Raffel et al., 2020; Tay et al., 2022; Scao et al., 2022; Hoffmann et al., 2022).
In Fig. 3, although we see a performance gap between the finetuned (m)T5 and XLM-R models at
similar scales, the discrepancy is minor and does not seem amplified as models scale up. Therefore,
while there is still ample room for improving large-scale pretrained diffusion language models, we
believe that the path of scaling up these models holds great promise.
4.4     I NSTRUCTION -F INETUNING H ELPS G ENERALIZE TO U NSEEN TASKS

A fascinating property that motivates scaling language models up is that large language models
can follow instructions and show impressive few-shot or even zero-shot performance (Brown et al.,
2020; Wei et al., 2021). We now investigate whether diffusion models can also exhibit zero-shot and
few-shot performance when being scaled up.

4.4.1    I NSTRUCTION FINETUNING ELICITS SCALABLE ZERO - SHOT PERFORMANCE
Strict zero-shot evaluation on IWSLT14 D E→E N.           Table 2:       Zero-shot SacreBLEU of
We first conduct a strict zero-shot evaluation to study   instruction-finetuned diffusion language
if diffusion language models can acquire zero-shot        models on IWSLT14 D E→E N translation.
capabilities through instruction finetuning. Specifi-     For Flan 2021, we explicitly remove all
cally, we evaluate on IWSLT14 D E→E N translation         German data for strict evaluation. Results are
task, for which we instruction-finetune diffusion lan-    obtained with oracle length.
guage models on Flan 2021 Collection (Wei et al.,         Architecture            Strict Flan’21 Flan’22
2021) with all German data removed to ensure that
the D E→E N translation becomes a strictly unseen         instruction-tuned diffusion:
task. As shown in Tab. 2, the instruction-tuned diffu-    XLM-R-BASE (85M)              7.15      21.26
                                                          XLM-R-LARGE (304M)           22.52      25.24
sion language models demonstrate scalable zero-shot       XLM-R-XL (2.8B)              27.27      28.13
performance even without finetuning with German           XLM-R-XXL (9.7B)             28.74      29.59
data, signifying that large diffusion LMs are able to
follow natural language instructions.                     ref: supervised AR on 160k D E→E N data: 33.30


                                                   7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Extensive zero-shot evaluation with large-scale instruction tuning. We then follow the recom-
mended settings and conduct larger-scale instructions tuning on the full Flan 2022 Collection (Long-
pre et al., 2023) and run extensive evaluations9 . Following Chung et al. (2022), we named our
instruction-tuned models on Flan 2022 Collection as Flan-XLM-R. The results in Fig. 4 suggest
that the Flan-XLM-R models are indeed general-purpose zero-shot learners, and their zero-shot
performance substantially improves as the model scales.


Figure 4: Zero-shot performance of Flan-XLM-R models. OL means the results are obtained with
oracle length, while LB means the number of length beams to sample the target with length prediction.
The model sizes refer to the number of non-embedding parameters.

In particular, we highlight the results on IWSLT14. The largest model, Flan-XLM-R-XXL even
achieves a 30.90 zero-shot ScareBLEU score, only 2.4 below the performance of widely adopted
supervised transformer baselines (33.30 as shown in Tab. 2). This indicates the Flan-XLM-R models
produce a very good language generation quality.

4.4.2    D IFFUSION LANGUAGE MODELS CAN DO IN - CONTEXT LEARNING
We also evaluate the in-context ability of the large diffusion language models. Limited by the maxi-
mum length of 512 XLM-R supports, our few-shot evaluation only involves at most 2 demonstrations
except for TyDiQA, on which we follow Chung et al. (2022) and evaluate 1-shot performance.


Figure 5: Few-shot performance of Flan-XLM-R and Flan-T5 models. “OL” means the results
are obtained with oracle length, while “LB” means the number of length beams to sample the target
with length prediction. The model sizes refer to the number of non-embedding parameters.

As shown in Fig. 5, we demonstrate that diffusion language models also obtain the ability to do
in-context learning for few-shot settings. We find that the gap between instruction-tuned models’
zero-shot performance and in-context few-shot performance is small, which is consistent with similar
findings in autoregressive language models (Chung et al., 2022; Longpre et al., 2023; Fu et al., 2023).
4.5 E XPLORING R EASONING A BILITIES OF D IFFUSION L ANGUAGE M ODELS
We are also interested in exploring the reasoning abilities of our diffusion language models as it is
a crucial emergent ability that distinguishes large language models from the small ones (Wei et al.,
2022a; Fu et al., 2023). We highlight our key findings here, and include detailed discussion in §A.

     9
       We continue to evaluate on the IWSLT14 dataset. Besides, we also evaluate several datasets used in Chung
et al. (2022). In detail, MMLU (Hendrycks et al., 2020) includes multiple-choice exam questions from 57 tasks
covering elementary mathematics, US history, computer science, law, and more. BBH-NLP (Suzgun et al.,
2022) covers 12 challenging multiple-choice tasks in BigBench (Srivastava et al., 2022) where language models
still underperform the average human-rater. TyDiQA (Clark et al., 2020) is an open-book question-answering
benchmark across 8 typologically diverse languages


                                                      8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


As shown in Fig. 6, we find that even Flan-XLM-R-XXL fails
to emerge non-trivial reasoning performance on GSM8K (Cobbe
et al., 2021), a benchmark dataset for mathematical reasoning, and
its German translated version in MGSM (Shi et al., 2022). As
such, we further conduct in-depth qualitative analysis to gain a
fine-grained understanding of the reasoning ability of our models.
Diffusion LMs could generate content in causal orders. Non-
autoregressive language models typically face the challenge of
modeling complex dependencies between target tokens. For rea-
                                                                        Figure 6: Evaluation on multi-
soning, in particular, models require previously generated tokens
                                                                        step reasoning on GSM datasets.
(i.e., premises) to improve the generation accuracy of later tokens
(i.e., conclusions). Formally, this requires the model to generate tokens conforming to a topological
sort on a causal graph (Pearl, 1998). Encouragingly, we find that the generation order of our diffusion
language models (1) satisfies this requirement even without specific tuning; and (2) shows a topo-
logical sort different from autoregressive models, indicating ability or potential in backtracing and
planning. Please refer to §A.2.1 for a concrete example.
Mitigating the limitation of foundation models probably unlocks the reasoning ability of
diffusion language models. For one thing, we find the accuracy of our models on GSM8K
rockets from 5.6% to 12.8% after tuning on chain-of-thought data of GSM8K distilled from
code-davinci-002, provided by Fu et al. (2023), who show this strategy effective in specializing
small models to reason in particular task. Therefore, we suggest that our diffusion language models
are able to reason while their generic reasoning ability is limited by the model sizes. Additionally, the
pretraining recipe of XLM-R differs from current best practices, for which it is poor in some essential
abilities like doing calculations. Through comparison (§A.2.2), we find a more up-to-date recipe
could benefit the arithmetic abilities of the models.
In summary, we expect more research on the pretraining of diffusion language models to mitigate the
limitation of foundation models, unlocking their potential in complex reasoning abilities. We leave
this for future exploration.
5 D ISCUSSIONS , L IMITATIONS , AND F UTURE W ORK
In this work, we pioneer studying the scalability of diffusion language models to catch up with recent
advances in large language models and facilitate the exploration of their potential. Our investigation
comprehensively covers scaling on the data, model sizes, and tasks. Experimental results verify that
(1) diffusion language models benefit from large-scale pretraining; (2) their performance improves
as the sizes scale up; and (3) they exhibit zero-shot and few-shot capabilities in extensive tasks.
While these findings show the promise of large diffusion language models, admittedly, the models
are still weak in some advanced abilities like reasoning. Nevertheless, we qualitatively showcase
that diffusion language models can generate content in causal orders, showing positive prospects of
advanced abilities for future research.
Limitedly, we only build diffusion language models by tuning existing large masked language models
instead of pretraining from scratch. However, there exist large discrepancies in architecture and
data engineering between our foundation models, XLM-R (Conneau et al., 2019), which were built
years ago, and the state-of-the-art large language models like LLaMA (Touvron et al., 2023a;b). This
impedes us from approaching the ultimate capability of current diffusion language models. Evident
limitations include the fairly short maximum length (i.e., 512) and unsatisfying arithmetic ability.
Additionally, the difference in masking ratios also questions whether diffusive adaptation is enough
to fill the gap between BERT-like pretraining and diffusion models. Therefore, there remains a great
need to investigate pretraining for diffusion language models in future research.
Overall, our study confirms the scalability of diffusion language models and leads to future research
on the continual exploitation of large diffusion language models. Compared with autoregressive
models, diffusion language models are probabilistically more expressive (Gong et al., 2022) and cover
a more extensive set of languages (Lin et al., 2021). Practically, they enjoy a global receptive field and
generate via non-autoregressive iterative refinement, potentially bringing advanced capabilities, such
as supporting drafting-then-revising and backtracking manners in nature. We hope that our findings
will facilitate the success of diffusion models in broader domains and also encourage a compelling
alternative to autoregressive large language models, which might push forward the boundary of
techniques to pursue more advanced machine intelligence.


                                                    9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Kushal Arora, Layla El Asri, Hareesh Bahuleyan, and Jackie Chi Kit Cheung. Why exposure bias
  matters: An imitation learning perspective of error accumulation in language generation. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2204.01171, 2022.

Jacob Austin, Daniel D Johnson, Jonathan Ho, Daniel Tarlow, and Rianne van den Berg. Structured
  denoising diffusion models in discrete state-spaces. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 34:17981–17993, 2021.

Nikita Balagansky and Daniil Gavrilov. Democratized diffusion language model. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2305.10818, 2023.

Yoshua Bengio, Réjean Ducharme, and Pascal Vincent. A neural probabilistic language model.
  Advances in neural information processing systems, 13, 2000.

Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are
  few-shot learners. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:1877–1901, 2020.

Huiwen Chang, Han Zhang, Lu Jiang, Ce Liu, and William T Freeman. Maskgit: Masked generative
  image transformer. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition, pp. 11315–11325, 2022.

Jiaao Chen, Aston Zhang, Mu Li, Alex Smola, and Diyi Yang. A cheaper and better diffusion
   language model with soft-masked noise. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.04746, 2023.

Wei-Lin Chiang, Zhuohan Li, Zi Lin, Ying Sheng, Zhanghao Wu, Hao Zhang, Lianmin Zheng,
 Siyuan Zhuang, Yonghao Zhuang, Joseph E. Gonzalez, Ion Stoica, and Eric P. Xing. Vicuna: An
 open-source chatbot impressing gpt-4 with 90%* chatgpt quality, March 2023. URL https:
 //lmsys.org/blog/2023-03-30-vicuna/.

Aakanksha Chowdhery, Sharan Narang, Jacob Devlin, Maarten Bosma, Gaurav Mishra, Adam
  Roberts, Paul Barham, Hyung Won Chung, Charles Sutton, Sebastian Gehrmann, Parker Schuh,
  Kensen Shi, Sasha Tsvyashchenko, Joshua Maynez, Abhishek Rao, Parker Barnes, Yi Tay, Noam
  Shazeer, Vinodkumar Prabhakaran, Emily Reif, Nan Du, Ben Hutchinson, Reiner Pope, James
  Bradbury, Jacob Austin, Michael Isard, Guy Gur-Ari, Pengcheng Yin, Toju Duke, Anselm Lev-
  skaya, Sanjay Ghemawat, Sunipa Dev, Henryk Michalewski, Xavier Garcia, Vedant Misra, Kevin
  Robinson, Liam Fedus, Denny Zhou, Daphne Ippolito, David Luan, Hyeontaek Lim, Barret Zoph,
  Alexander Spiridonov, Ryan Sepassi, David Dohan, Shivani Agrawal, Mark Omernick, Andrew M.
  Dai, Thanumalayan Sankaranarayana Pillai, Marie Pellat, Aitor Lewkowycz, Erica Moreira, Rewon
  Child, Oleksandr Polozov, Katherine Lee, Zongwei Zhou, Xuezhi Wang, Brennan Saeta, Mark
  Diaz, Orhan Firat, Michele Catasta, Jason Wei, Kathy Meier-Hellstern, Douglas Eck, Jeff Dean,
  Slav Petrov, and Noah Fiedel. Palm: Scaling language modeling with pathways, 2022.

Hyung Won Chung, Le Hou, Shayne Longpre, Barret Zoph, Yi Tay, William Fedus, Eric Li, Xuezhi
 Wang, Mostafa Dehghani, Siddhartha Brahma, et al. Scaling instruction-finetuned language models.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.11416, 2022.

Jonathan H Clark, Eunsol Choi, Michael Collins, Dan Garrette, Tom Kwiatkowski, Vitaly Nikolaev,
  and Jennimaria Palomaki. Tydi qa: A benchmark for information-seeking question answering in
  typologically diverse languages. Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 8:
  454–470, 2020.

Karl Cobbe, Vineet Kosaraju, Mohammad Bavarian, Mark Chen, Heewoo Jun, Lukasz Kaiser,
  Matthias Plappert, Jerry Tworek, Jacob Hilton, Reiichiro Nakano, et al. Training verifiers to solve
  math word problems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.14168, 2021.

Alexis Conneau, Kartikay Khandelwal, Naman Goyal, Vishrav Chaudhary, Guillaume Wenzek, Fran-
  cisco Guzmán, Edouard Grave, Myle Ott, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Veselin Stoyanov. Unsupervised
  cross-lingual representation learning at scale. arXiv preprint arXiv:1911.02116, 2019.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. Bert: Pre-training of deep
  bidirectional transformers for language understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04805, 2018.
Prafulla Dhariwal and Alexander Nichol. Diffusion models beat gans on image synthesis. Advances
  in neural information processing systems, 34:8780–8794, 2021.
Sander Dieleman, Laurent Sartran, Arman Roshannai, Nikolay Savinov, Yaroslav Ganin, Pierre H
  Richemond, Arnaud Doucet, Robin Strudel, Chris Dyer, Conor Durkan, et al. Continuous diffusion
  for categorical data. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.15089, 2022.
Yao Fu, Hao Peng, Litu Ou, Ashish Sabharwal, and Tushar Khot. Specializing smaller language
  models towards multi-step reasoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.12726, 2023.
Zhujin Gao, Junliang Guo, Xu Tan, Yongxin Zhu, Fang Zhang, Jiang Bian, and Linli Xu. Dif-
  former: Empowering diffusion model on embedding space for text generation. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2212.09412, 2022.
Marjan Ghazvininejad, Omer Levy, Yinhan Liu, and Luke Zettlemoyer. Mask-predict: Parallel
 decoding of conditional masked language models. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on
 Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and the 9th International Joint Conference on
 Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP), pp. 6112–6121, 2019.
Shansan Gong, Mukai Li, Jiangtao Feng, Zhiyong Wu, and LingPeng Kong. Diffuseq: Sequence to
  sequence text generation with diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.08933, 2022.
Naman Goyal, Jingfei Du, Myle Ott, Giri Anantharaman, and Alexis Conneau. Larger-scale trans-
  formers for multilingual masked language modeling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2105.00572, 2021.
Jiatao Gu and Xu Tan. Non-autoregressive sequence generation. In Proceedings of the 60th Annual
   Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Tutorial Abstracts, pp. 21–27, 2022.
Jiatao Gu, James Bradbury, Caiming Xiong, Victor OK Li, and Richard Socher. Non-autoregressive
   neural machine translation. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2018.
Ishaan Gulrajani and Tatsunori B Hashimoto. Likelihood-based diffusion language models. arXiv
   preprint arXiv:2305.18619, 2023.
Xiaochuang Han, Sachin Kumar, and Yulia Tsvetkov. Ssd-lm: Semi-autoregressive simplex-based
  diffusion language model for text generation and modular control. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.17432,
  2022.
Xiaochuang Han, Sachin Kumar, Yulia Tsvetkov, and Marjan Ghazvininejad. Ssd-2: Scaling and
  inference-time fusion of diffusion language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.14771, 2023.
Zhengfu He, Tianxiang Sun, Kuanning Wang, Xuanjing Huang, and Xipeng Qiu. Diffusionbert:
  Improving generative masked language models with diffusion models. 2023.
Dan Hendrycks, Collin Burns, Steven Basart, Andy Zou, Mantas Mazeika, Dawn Song, and
  Jacob Steinhardt. Measuring massive multitask language understanding. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2009.03300, 2020.
Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel.    Denoising diffusion probabilistic models.
  In H. Larochelle, M. Ranzato, R. Hadsell, M.F. Balcan, and H. Lin (eds.), Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 33, pp. 6840–6851. Curran Asso-
  ciates, Inc., 2020. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2020/file/
  4c5bcfec8584af0d967f1ab10179ca4b-Paper.pdf.
Jonathan Ho, William Chan, Chitwan Saharia, Jay Whang, Ruiqi Gao, Alexey Gritsenko, Diederik P
  Kingma, Ben Poole, Mohammad Norouzi, David J Fleet, et al. Imagen video: High definition
  video generation with diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.02303, 2022.
Jordan Hoffmann, Sebastian Borgeaud, Arthur Mensch, Elena Buchatskaya, Trevor Cai, Eliza
  Rutherford, Diego de Las Casas, Lisa Anne Hendricks, Johannes Welbl, Aidan Clark, et al.
  Training compute-optimal large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.15556, 2022.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Emiel Hoogeboom, Didrik Nielsen, Priyank Jaini, Patrick Forré, and Max Welling. Argmax flows
 and multinomial diffusion: Learning categorical distributions. Advances in Neural Information
 Processing Systems, 34:12454–12465, 2021.

Emiel Hoogeboom, Vıctor Garcia Satorras, Clément Vignac, and Max Welling. Equivariant diffusion
  for molecule generation in 3d. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 8867–8887.
  PMLR, 2022.

Fei Huang, Hao Zhou, Yang Liu, Hang Li, and Minlie Huang. Directed acyclic transformer for
  non-autoregressive machine translation. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
  9410–9428. PMLR, 2022.

Fei Huang, Pei Ke, and Minlie Huang. Directed acyclic transformer pre-training for high-quality
  non-autoregressive text generation. Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics,
  2023.

Dan Jurafsky and James H. Martin. Speech and language processing : an introduction to
  natural language processing, computational linguistics, and speech recognition. Pearson
  Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River, N.J., 2009. ISBN 9780131873216 0131873210. URL
  http://www.amazon.com/Speech-Language-Processing-2nd-Edition/dp/
  0131873210/ref=pd_bxgy_b_img_y.

Jared Kaplan, Sam McCandlish, Tom Henighan, Tom B Brown, Benjamin Chess, Rewon Child, Scott
   Gray, Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, and Dario Amodei. Scaling laws for neural language models.
   arXiv preprint arXiv:2001.08361, 2020.

Seyed Mehran Kazemi, Najoung Kim, Deepti Bhatia, Xin Xu, and Deepak Ramachandran. Lambada:
  Backward chaining for automated reasoning in natural language. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.13894,
  2022.

Emre Kıcıman, Robert Ness, Amit Sharma, and Chenhao Tan. Causal reasoning and large language
  models: Opening a new frontier for causality. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.00050, 2023.

Jaehyeon Kim, Jungil Kong, and Juhee Son. Conditional variational autoencoder with adversarial
  learning for end-to-end text-to-speech. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
  5530–5540. PMLR, 2021.

Diederik P. Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. In Yoshua
  Bengio and Yann LeCun (eds.), 3rd International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR
  2015, San Diego, CA, USA, May 7-9, 2015, Conference Track Proceedings, 2015. URL http:
  //arxiv.org/abs/1412.6980.

Takeshi Kojima, Shixiang Shane Gu, Machel Reid, Yutaka Matsuo, and Yusuke Iwasawa. Large
  language models are zero-shot reasoners. Advances in neural information processing systems, 35:
  22199–22213, 2022.

Zhifeng Kong, Wei Ping, Jiaji Huang, Kexin Zhao, and Bryan Catanzaro. Diffwave: A versatile
  diffusion model for audio synthesis. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2020.

Aitor Lewkowycz, Anders Andreassen, David Dohan, Ethan Dyer, Henryk Michalewski, Vinay Ra-
  masesh, Ambrose Slone, Cem Anil, Imanol Schlag, Theo Gutman-Solo, et al. Solving quantitative
  reasoning problems with language models. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  35:3843–3857, 2022.

Xiang Lisa Li, John Thickstun, Ishaan Gulrajani, Percy Liang, and Tatsunori Hashimoto. Diffusion-lm
  improves controllable text generation. ArXiv, abs/2205.14217, 2022.

Hunter Lightman, Vineet Kosaraju, Yura Burda, Harri Edwards, Bowen Baker, Teddy Lee, Jan
  Leike, John Schulman, Ilya Sutskever, and Karl Cobbe. Let’s verify step by step. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2305.20050, 2023.


                                                12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Chu-Cheng Lin, Aaron Jaech, Xin Li, Matthew R Gormley, and Jason Eisner. Limitations of
  autoregressive models and their alternatives. In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference of the
  North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language
  Technologies (NAACL-HLT), 2021.
Zhenghao Lin, Yeyun Gong, Yelong Shen, Tong Wu, Zhihao Fan, Chen Lin, Weizhu Chen, and Nan
  Duan. Genie: Large scale pre-training for text generation with diffusion model. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2212.11685, 2022.
Yinhan Liu, Myle Ott, Naman Goyal, Jingfei Du, Mandar Joshi, Danqi Chen, Omer Levy, Mike
  Lewis, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Veselin Stoyanov. Roberta: A robustly optimized bert pretraining
  approach. arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.11692, 2019.
Shayne Longpre, Le Hou, Tu Vu, Albert Webson, Hyung Won Chung, Yi Tay, Denny Zhou, Quoc V
  Le, Barret Zoph, Jason Wei, et al. The flan collection: Designing data and methods for effective
  instruction tuning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.13688, 2023.
Lucie Charlotte Magister, Jonathan Mallinson, Jakub Adamek, Eric Malmi, and Aliaksei Severyn.
  Teaching small language models to reason. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.08410, 2022.
Tomás Mikolov, Kai Chen, Greg Corrado, and Jeffrey Dean. Efficient estimation of word representa-
  tions in vector space. In Yoshua Bengio and Yann LeCun (eds.), 1st International Conference on
  Learning Representations, ICLR 2013, Scottsdale, Arizona, USA, May 2-4, 2013, Workshop Track
  Proceedings, 2013. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1301.3781.
Niklas Muennighoff, Alexander M Rush, Boaz Barak, Teven Le Scao, Aleksandra Piktus, Nouamane
  Tazi, Sampo Pyysalo, Thomas Wolf, and Colin Raffel. Scaling data-constrained language models.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.16264, 2023.
Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong
  Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, et al. Training language models to follow
  instructions with human feedback. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:
  27730–27744, 2022.
Judea Pearl. Graphical models for probabilistic and causal reasoning. Quantified representation of
  uncertainty and imprecision, pp. 367–389, 1998.
Matthew E. Peters, Mark Neumann, Mohit Iyyer, Matt Gardner, Christopher Clark, Kenton Lee,
 and Luke Zettlemoyer. Deep contextualized word representations. In Proceedings of the 2018
 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
 Human Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long Papers), pp. 2227–2237, New Orleans, Louisiana,
 June 2018. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/N18-1202. URL https:
 //aclanthology.org/N18-1202.
Matt Post. A call for clarity in reporting bleu scores. In Proceedings of the Third Conference on
 Machine Translation: Research Papers, pp. 186–191, 2018.
Lihua Qian, Yi Zhou, Zaixiang Zheng, Yaoming Zhu, Zehui Lin, Jiangtao Feng, Shanbo Cheng, Lei
  Li, Mingxuan Wang, and Hao Zhou. The volctrans glat system: Non-autoregressive translation
  meets wmt21. WMT 2021, pp. 187, 2021.
Lihua Qian, Mingxuan Wang, Yang Liu, and Hao Zhou. Diff-glat: Diffusion glancing transformer for
  parallel sequence to sequence learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.10240, 2022.
Alec Radford, Karthik Narasimhan, Tim Salimans, Ilya Sutskever, et al. Improving language
  understanding by generative pre-training. 2018.
Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, Ilya Sutskever, et al. Language
  models are unsupervised multitask learners. OpenAI blog, 1(8):9, 2019.
Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Katherine Lee, Sharan Narang, Michael Matena, Yanqi
  Zhou, Wei Li, Peter J Liu, et al. Exploring the limits of transfer learning with a unified text-to-text
  transformer. J. Mach. Learn. Res., 21(140):1–67, 2020.


                                                   13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Aditya Ramesh, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alex Nichol, Casey Chu, and Mark Chen. Hierarchical text-
  conditional image generation with clip latents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.06125, 2022.

Alexander Rives, Joshua Meier, Tom Sercu, Siddharth Goyal, Zeming Lin, Jason Liu, Demi Guo,
  Myle Ott, C. Lawrence Zitnick, Jerry Ma, and Rob Fergus. Biological structure and function
  emerge from scaling unsupervised learning to 250 million protein sequences. PNAS, 2019. doi:
  10.1101/622803. URL https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/622803v4.

Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer. High-
  resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models, 2021.

Victor Sanh, Albert Webson, Colin Raffel, Stephen H. Bach, Lintang Sutawika, Zaid Alyafeai,
  Antoine Chaffin, Arnaud Stiegler, Teven Le Scao, Arun Raja, Manan Dey, M Saiful Bari, Canwen
  Xu, Urmish Thakker, Shanya Sharma Sharma, Eliza Szczechla, Taewoon Kim, Gunjan Chhablani,
  Nihal Nayak, Debajyoti Datta, Jonathan Chang, Mike Tian-Jian Jiang, Han Wang, Matteo Manica,
  Sheng Shen, Zheng Xin Yong, Harshit Pandey, Rachel Bawden, Thomas Wang, Trishala Neeraj,
  Jos Rozen, Abheesht Sharma, Andrea Santilli, Thibault Fevry, Jason Alan Fries, Ryan Teehan,
  Stella Biderman, Leo Gao, Tali Bers, Thomas Wolf, and Alexander M. Rush. Multitask prompted
  training enables zero-shot task generalization, 2021.

Victor Sanh, Albert Webson, Colin Raffel, Stephen H Bach, Lintang Sutawika, Zaid Alyafeai,
  Antoine Chaffin, Arnaud Stiegler, Teven Le Scao, Arun Raja, et al. Multitask prompted training
  enables zero-shot task generalization. In ICLR 2022-Tenth International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2022.

Nikolay Savinov, Junyoung Chung, Mikolaj Binkowski, Erich Elsen, and Aaron van den Oord.
  Step-unrolled denoising autoencoders for text generation. In International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2021.

Teven Le Scao, Thomas Wang, Daniel Hesslow, Lucile Saulnier, Stas Bekman, M Saiful Bari, Stella
  Bideman, Hady Elsahar, Niklas Muennighoff, Jason Phang, et al. What language model to train if
  you have one million gpu hours? arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.15424, 2022.

Claude E Shannon. Prediction and entropy of printed english. Bell system technical journal, 30(1):
  50–64, 1951.

Noam Shazeer. Glu variants improve transformer. arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.05202, 2020.

Freda Shi, Mirac Suzgun, Markus Freitag, Xuezhi Wang, Suraj Srivats, Soroush Vosoughi,
  Hyung Won Chung, Yi Tay, Sebastian Ruder, Denny Zhou, et al. Language models are mul-
  tilingual chain-of-thought reasoners. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.03057, 2022.

Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Eric Weiss, Niru Maheswaranathan, and Surya Ganguli. Deep unsupervised
  learning using nonequilibrium thermodynamics. In Francis Bach and David Blei (eds.), Proceedings
  of the 32nd International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 37 of Proceedings of Machine
  Learning Research, pp. 2256–2265, Lille, France, 07–09 Jul 2015. PMLR. URL https://
  proceedings.mlr.press/v37/sohl-dickstein15.html.

Yang Song, Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Diederik P Kingma, Abhishek Kumar, Stefano Ermon, and Ben
  Poole. Score-based generative modeling through stochastic differential equations. In International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2020.

Aarohi Srivastava, Abhinav Rastogi, Abhishek Rao, Abu Awal Md Shoeb, Abubakar Abid, Adam
  Fisch, Adam R Brown, Adam Santoro, Aditya Gupta, Adrià Garriga-Alonso, et al. Beyond the
  imitation game: Quantifying and extrapolating the capabilities of language models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2206.04615, 2022.

Tianxinag Sun and Xipeng Qiu. Moss. https://github.com/OpenLMLab/MOSS, 2023.

Ilya Sutskever, Oriol Vinyals, and Quoc V Le. Sequence to sequence learning with neural networks.
   Advances in neural information processing systems, 27, 2014.


                                                14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Mirac Suzgun, Nathan Scales, Nathanael Schärli, Sebastian Gehrmann, Yi Tay, Hyung Won Chung,
 Aakanksha Chowdhery, Quoc V Le, Ed H Chi, Denny Zhou, et al. Challenging big-bench tasks
 and whether chain-of-thought can solve them. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.09261, 2022.
Rohan Taori, Ishaan Gulrajani, Tianyi Zhang, Yann Dubois, Xuechen Li, Carlos Guestrin, Percy
  Liang, and Tatsunori B. Hashimoto. Stanford alpaca: An instruction-following llama model.
  https://github.com/tatsu-lab/stanford_alpaca, 2023.
Yi Tay, Mostafa Dehghani, Vinh Q Tran, Xavier Garcia, Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Hyung Won
  Chung, Dara Bahri, Tal Schuster, Steven Zheng, et al. Ul2: Unifying language learning paradigms.
  In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.
Ross Taylor, Marcin Kardas, Guillem Cucurull, Thomas Scialom, Anthony Hartshorn, Elvis Saravia,
  Andrew Poulton, Viktor Kerkez, and Robert Stojnic. Galactica: A large language model for science.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.09085, 2022.
Hugo Touvron, Thibaut Lavril, Gautier Izacard, Xavier Martinet, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Timothée
  Lacroix, Baptiste Rozière, Naman Goyal, Eric Hambro, Faisal Azhar, Aurelien Rodriguez, Armand
 Joulin, Edouard Grave, and Guillaume Lample. Llama: Open and efficient foundation language
  models, 2023a.
Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Albert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei, Nikolay
  Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti Bhosale, et al. Llama 2: Open foundation
  and fine-tuned chat models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.09288, 2023b.
Jonathan Uesato, Nate Kushman, Ramana Kumar, Francis Song, Noah Siegel, Lisa Wang, Antonia
  Creswell, Geoffrey Irving, and Irina Higgins. Solving math word problems with process-and
  outcome-based feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.14275, 2022.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Łukasz
  Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. Advances in neural information processing
  systems, 30, 2017.
Yizhong Wang, Swaroop Mishra, Pegah Alipoormolabashi, Yeganeh Kordi, Amirreza Mirzaei,
  Anjana Arunkumar, Arjun Ashok, Arut Selvan Dhanasekaran, Atharva Naik, David Stap, et al.
  Super-naturalinstructions:generalization via declarative instructions on 1600+ tasks. In EMNLP,
  2022.
Jason Wei, Maarten Bosma, Vincent Zhao, Kelvin Guu, Adams Wei Yu, Brian Lester, Nan Du,
  Andrew M Dai, and Quoc V Le. Finetuned language models are zero-shot learners. In International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.
Jason Wei, Yi Tay, Rishi Bommasani, Colin Raffel, Barret Zoph, Sebastian Borgeaud, Dani Yogatama,
  Maarten Bosma, Denny Zhou, Donald Metzler, et al. Emergent abilities of large language models.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.07682, 2022a.
Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Fei Xia, Ed Chi, Quoc V Le, Denny
  Zhou, et al. Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:24824–24837, 2022b.
Guillaume Wenzek, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Alexis Conneau, Vishrav Chaudhary, Francisco Guzmán,
 Armand Joulin, and Édouard Grave. Ccnet: Extracting high quality monolingual datasets from
 web crawl data. In Proceedings of The 12th Language Resources and Evaluation Conference, pp.
 4003–4012, 2020.
Tong Wu, Zhihao Fan, Xiao Liu, Yeyun Gong, Yelong Shen, Jian Jiao, Hai-Tao Zheng, Juntao Li,
  Zhongyu Wei, Jian Guo, et al. Ar-diffusion: Auto-regressive diffusion model for text generation.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.09515, 2023.
Linting Xue, Noah Constant, Adam Roberts, Mihir Kale, Rami Al-Rfou, Aditya Siddhant, Aditya
  Barua, and Colin Raffel. mt5: A massively multilingual pre-trained text-to-text transformer. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2010.11934, 2020.


                                                15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Shunyu Yao, Dian Yu, Jeffrey Zhao, Izhak Shafran, Thomas L Griffiths, Yuan Cao, and Karthik
  Narasimhan. Tree of thoughts: Deliberate problem solving with large language models. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2305.10601, 2023.
Jiasheng Ye, Zaixiang Zheng, Yu Bao, Lihua Qian, and Mingxuan Wang. Dinoiser: Diffused
   conditional sequence learning by manipulating noises. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.10025, 2023.
Hongyi Yuan, Zheng Yuan, Chuanqi Tan, Fei Huang, and Songfang Huang. Seqdiffuseq: Text
  diffusion with encoder-decoder transformers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.10325, 2022.
Aohan Zeng, Xiao Liu, Zhengxiao Du, Zihan Wang, Hanyu Lai, Ming Ding, Zhuoyi Yang, Yifan Xu,
 Wendi Zheng, Xiao Xia, et al. Glm-130b: An open bilingual pre-trained model. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2210.02414, 2022.
Cheng Zhang, Stefan Bauer, Paul Bennett, Jiangfeng Gao, Wenbo Gong, Agrin Hilmkil, Joel Jennings,
  Chao Ma, Tom Minka, Nick Pawlowski, et al. Understanding causality with large language models:
  Feasibility and opportunities. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.05524, 2023.
Lin Zheng, Jianbo Yuan, Lei Yu, and Lingpeng Kong. A reparameterized discrete diffusion model for
  text generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.05737, 2023a.
Zaixiang Zheng, Yifan Deng, Dongyu Xue, Yi Zhou, Fei YE, and Quanquan Gu. Structure-informed
  language models are protein designers. In International Conference of Machine Learning (ICML),
  2023b.
Chunting Zhou, Graham Neubig, and Jiatao Gu. Understanding knowledge distillation in non-
  autoregressive machine translation. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2020.


                                               16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A     E XPLORING R EASONING A BILITIES OF D IFFUSION L ANGUAGE M ODELS
We are interested in whether diffusion language models can solve tasks by multi-step reasoning as
this is a crucial emergent ability that marks the success of large language models and distinguishes
them from the small ones (Wei et al., 2022a; Fu et al., 2023). Chung et al. (2022) shows that with a
certain amount of chain-of-thought instruction tuning data (included in the Flan 2022 Collection),
it is possible for 10B models to emerge reasoning ability to a certain extent. This motivates us to
investigate the reasoning ability of our diffusion language models as our largest XLM-R does scale
up to this size.
A.1     Q UANTITATIVE E VALUATION

We first evaluate our instruction-tuned models on common reasoning benchmarks to gain a coarse
understanding of the reasoning abilities of diffusion language models.
Evaluation setup. We studied reasoning abilities on
GSM8K (Cobbe et al., 2021) which contains diverse grade school
math word problems, and its translated version MGSM (Shi
et al., 2022). Previous studies (Wei et al., 2022b) have shown
solving them requires multi-step reasoning which is a typical
emergent ability that only exists in models large enough (Wei
et al., 2022a). Even the largest Flan-T5 (i.e., Flan-T5-11B)
can only show plausible performance on some of the MGSM
subsets of high-resource languages such as German, Spanish, and
French (Chung et al., 2022). Therefore, for MGSM, we skip the
                                                                      Figure 7:       Evaluation on
low-resource languages and only evaluate the German subset. For
                                                                      math word problems in
implementation details, we use the chain-of-thought prompting
                                                                     (M)GSM (Cobbe et al., 2021;
from Shi et al. (2022). We set 60 as the target length in zero-shot
                                                                      Shi et al., 2022) with step-by-
evaluation, and use the length of the longest demonstrations for
                                                                      step answer promptings.
few-shot evaluation.
Diffusion language models still fall short of complex reasoning tasks. As shown in Fig. 7, our
instruction-tuned XLM-R fails to emerge with positive reasoning performance on all the evaluated
settings. Considering that solving math word problems requires multi-step reasoning, their correctness
may only emerge as the quality of all intermediate steps improves to a certain extent. To this end, we
next focus on the qualitative analysis of the reasoning steps to gain a fine-grained understanding of
reasoning ability of our models.

A.2     Q UALITATIVE A NALYSIS
A typical challenge in non-autoregressive language modeling arises from the complex dependencies
between target tokens (Zhou et al., 2020; Gu & Tan, 2022). This, we suggest, also explains why
our diffusion language models excel at traditional generation tasks but struggle with reasoning.
Specifically, tasks like machine translation and text summarization have strong conditioning, wherein
most of the target tokens can be predicted based on the given conditions. The intermediate steps mainly
function to resolve conflicts between different possible results (a.k.a., multimodality problem (Gu
et al., 2018)). However, in reasoning tasks, a model need to generate intermediate reasoning steps to
approach the final answers (a.k.a., “let’s think step by step”). In this case, the model more heavily
relies on the intermediate results generated by itself to make predictions. This leads to constraints on
the generation order when performing reasoning tasks.
We now further elaborate on this from the perspective of causal graphs for reasoning tasks.
A.2.1    U NDERSTANDING TARGET DEPENDENCIES WITH CAUSAL GRAPHS .

We consider illustrating the semantic dependencies in reasoning tasks with causal graphs (Pearl,
1998), directed acyclic graphs whose edges point from causes to their effects. Fig. 8(a) depicts
the causal graph for the exemplary problem and its solution shown in Fig. 8(b). We argue that,
in order to solve the task with reasoning, language models must generate tokens in an order that
conforms to a topological sort of the causal graph. Specifically, it means the following requirements
for the generation order: (1) the final results should come after the last intermediate result; (2) the
intermediate results should come after listing the corresponding equation; (3) to correctly list an


                                                  17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 8: Qualitative investigation into the reasoning abilities of diffusion language models. (a) A
causal graph (Pearl, 1998) that represents the dependencies between the reasoning steps. (b) An
example question, its reference answer, and answers from autoregressive models. (c) The answer
from Flan-XLM-R-XXL and its generation process. (d) Answers from a diffusive instruction-tuned
LLaMA-13B, sampling with diffusive unmasking or left-to-right unmasking strategy, where the
former fails to generate in an order conforming to one of the topological sorts in (a).


equation, models need to have the idea for this equation, copying calculation results from previous
steps or numbers provided by the question; and (4) before these, models need to propose the idea for
each step first.
Diffusion language models can figure out feasible topological sorts on the causal graph. A follow-
up question is whether the generation process of autoregressive models and our diffusion language
models conform to possible topological sorts. In fact, one feasible topological sort is exactly the
left-to-right traversal on the chain-of-thought text and is implicitly provided to autoregressive models
during training. Diffusion language models, on the other hand, learn without a fixed generation order
due to random masking. To see if they can figure out a feasible generation order, we demonstrate its
generation process of solving the exemplary question in Fig. 8(c). Encouragingly, despite incorrect
final answers, the generative process does conform to a topological sort of the causal graph in Fig. 8(a).
The model generates the ideas first, then writes the formulas, and finally calculates the answers10 .
This implies that diffusion language models learn to figure out feasible topological sorts, namely a
structure reasoning ability.


   10
      We also observe similar behaviors in other examples. For clarity, we focus on one of them in this paper and
include others in our open-sourced repository.


                                                      18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Diffusion language models reason with a flexible mind. Notably, diffusion language models
are able to explore different topological sorts different from autoregressive models thanks to less
constrained generative orders. We highlight some of the interesting patterns resulting from this.
• Easy first. Fig. 8(c) shows that the model fills up the fixed pattern (i.e., “the final answer is”) at
  first, showing a quite smart easy-to-hard generation behavior.
• Planning ahead. In Fig. 8(c), the model constructs the framework for the solution before diving
  into arithmetic. Actually, we have seen similar behavior in Fig. 2 where the model generates three
  clauses simultaneously. Both cases demonstrate the models’ global perception which helps plan
  the generation of the whole sequence.
• Forward and backward reasoning. During the reasoning process in Fig. 2, on STEP 31, the
  model begins the solution with the idea for the last reasoning step. This shows backward reasoning
  behavior, a very common human behavior that is especially helpful for challenging reasoning
  activities such as finding mathematical proofs (Kazemi et al., 2022).
• Backtracing. The backward transition of diffusion models (Eqn. 4) formally supports backtracing
  by remasking tokens. In Fig. 8(c), STEP 47 erases a “the” token. This ability helps avoid
  accumulating errors in predicted tokens (Arora et al., 2022).
These observations signify the potential to elicit diffusion language models’ reasoning abilities
beyond chain-of-thought whose limitations have been demonstrated in Yao et al. (2023). We believe
this can encourage further research on the reasoning ability of diffusion language models.
A.2.2    U NDERSTANDING THE IMPACT OF FOUNDATION MODELS .
Although showing a flexible generation manner, admittedly, our diffusion language models rarely
predict the correct answers. One superficial hypothesis is that XLM-R models have limited capability.
We elaborate on this as follows.
• Limitations on model sizes. The largest XLM-R model only scales up to around 10B, a borderline
  to demonstrate plausible reasoning performance for previous instruction-tuned autoregressive
  models (Chung et al., 2022). It is likely that our diffusion language models follow a different
  scaling law (Kaplan et al., 2020; Hoffmann et al., 2022) from that of autoregressive models, and
  we need to further enlarge the model to elicit its reasoning ability. Alternatively, Fu et al. (2023);
  Magister et al. (2022) succeed in specializing smaller language models to solve certain reasoning
  tasks (e.g., math reasoning) (Fu et al., 2023; Magister et al., 2022) by distilling from large and
  capable models. We consider it promising to explore similar attempts for diffusion language
  models. For one thing, we can leverage more capable models (e.g., GPT4) to obtain specialized
  reasoning data for distillation11 . On the other hand, prestigious models can serve by discovering
  the causal graph in the reasoning data (Zhang et al., 2023; Kıcıman et al., 2023), with which we can
  involve process supervision (Uesato et al., 2022; Lightman et al., 2023) to facilitate the learning of
  generation order.
• Limitations on training recipe. XLM-R are pretrained on a recipe largely different from the best
  practices of the current state-of-the-art large language models. For instance, the data include little
  to no code or scientific literature, which are hypothesized to be crucial for reasoning ability (Taylor
  et al., 2022; Lewkowycz et al., 2022). As an attempt, we tried converting a more recent and capable
  autoregressive model LLaMA (Touvron et al., 2023a) into diffusion language models to handle
  these limitations. Specifically, we initialized the model with a 13B LLaMA and instruction-tuned
  it with the diffused training objective (Eq. 5). With LLaMA, we find the instruction-tuned model
  does showcase better arithmetic ability (Fig. 8(d), bottom). However, we find it fails to generate
  in an order that conforms to a topological sort of the corresponding causal graph in Fig. 8(a).
  For instance, in STEP 45 of Fig. 8(d)’s upper part, the model generates calculation results before
  completing the formula and also the final result before the intermediate results. This implies two
  critical influences of the foundation models. First, a more up-to-date pretraining recipe is helpful
  for arithmetic abilities. Second, the limitation in the training recipe cannot be simply bypassed
  by applying diffusive adaptation to competent autoregressive models due to the discrepancy in
  training objectives, and diffusion language models’ potential to perform structure reasoning is
  probably a product of masked language modeling pretraining. These two implications naturally
   11
      As a verification, we tried finetuning Flan-XLM-R-XXL on GSM8K chain-of-thought training data
distilled by Fu et al. (2023) from code-davinci-002. After this specialization, our model’s zero-shot and
3-shot performance on GSM8K rocket from 4.4% and 5.6% to 10.0% and 12.8%, respectively.


                                                   19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    lead to the idea of improving diffusion language models’ reasoning ability by pretraining with a
    more up-to-date recipe (e.g., the RedPajama12 ).
We leave these improvements on foundation models as future work and encourage further research
on them.

B        R ELATED W ORK
Language Modeling aims to learn a probabilistic model to describe sequence data p(x[1:N ] ) of
interest (Shannon, 1951; Jurafsky & Martin, 2009). The dominant paradigm, autoregressive language
models, decomposes the joint distribution over the tokens of a sequence into conditionals with the
                         QN
chain rule p(x[1:N ] ) = i=1 p(x[i] |x[1:i−1] ) and generates tokens by ancestral sampling from left to
right (Bengio et al., 2000; Sutskever et al., 2014; Vaswani et al., 2017). Recent advances propose non-
autoregressive language models as an alternative (Gu et al., 2018). They circumvent the constraint
of a predefined generation order (Qian et al., 2022; Huang et al., 2023) and show competitive or
superior performance compared to their autoregressive counterpart in various domains including
languages (Qian et al., 2021; Huang et al., 2022; Qian et al., 2022; Huang et al., 2023; Zheng et al.,
2023a), speeches (Kim et al., 2021), proteins (Zheng et al., 2023b), and molecules (Hoogeboom et al.,
2022). Among various non-autoregressive language models, diffusion language models (Li et al.,
2022; Gong et al., 2022; Zheng et al., 2023a) have recently arisen as a promising and theoretically
grounded paradigm.
Large Language Models. Pretraining language models on massive unlabeled data dramatically
boost their performance on downstream tasks (Mikolov et al., 2013; Peters et al., 2018; Radford
et al., 2018; Devlin et al., 2018). As data volume and model sizes scale up, the training loss language
models reach predictably decreases (Kaplan et al., 2020; Hoffmann et al., 2022; Muennighoff et al.,
2023), and performance improves across tasks even without specific finetuning (Radford et al., 2019).
A milestone to this end is GPT3 (Brown et al., 2020), which scales the models up to 175B parameters
and proposes in-context learning to elicit language models’ ability to solve specific tasks with only
a few demonstrations. Wei et al. (2021); Sanh et al. (2022); Ouyang et al. (2022) further introduce
instruction tuning, finetuning pretrained language models on collections of tasks described via
instructions, to improve their zero-shot performance in unseen tasks. More impressively, sufficiently
large language models emerge with advanced abilities such as multi-step reasoning (Kojima et al.,
2022; Wei et al., 2022a;b), differentiating them from small models (Fu et al., 2023). Empowered by
large language models, helpful applications such as conversational AI systems13 and autonomous
agents14 have drawn great attention. Although the most capable models for the time being remain
close-sourced, open-sourced efforts (Zeng et al., 2022; Touvron et al., 2023a;b; Taori et al., 2023;
Chiang et al., 2023; Sun & Qiu, 2023) have largely enhanced the public accessibility of powerful
large language models. While most existing works are based on autoregressive language models, our
study investigates scaling diffusion language models, a kind of non-autoregressive language models.
Diffusion Language Models are language models based on diffusion models (Sohl-Dickstein et al.,
2015), a type of generative model that samples data via iterative denoising from noise, which can
be categorized into continuous (Ho et al., 2020; Song et al., 2020) and discrete (Hoogeboom et al.,
2021; Austin et al., 2021) ones according to the distribution they model. Despite huge success in
vision (Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021; Rombach et al., 2021; Ho et al., 2022), continuous diffusion models
for languages that operate on continuous surrogates of discrete tokens (Li et al., 2022; Gong et al.,
2022; Han et al., 2022; Dieleman et al., 2022; Yuan et al., 2022; Gao et al., 2022; Ye et al., 2023;
Chen et al., 2023; Wu et al., 2023) struggle to overcome the pitfall of discreteness (Ye et al., 2023)
and still lag behind autoregressive language models. On the other hand, discrete diffusion models
have limited progress in large-scale applications but they naturally fit the data type of languages
(i.e., sequences of discrete tokens). Recent advancement by Zheng et al. (2023a) successfully
improves them and achieves comparable performance with autoregressive models on typical language
generation benchmarks like machine translation. Moreover, He et al. (2023); Zheng et al. (2023b)
show the close relationship between discrete diffusion models and masked language models, a widely
adopted pretraining paradigm in NLP (Devlin et al., 2018; Liu et al., 2019), implying the possibility
to build large discrete diffusion language models. Motivated by these findings, in this work, we
    12
       https://github.com/togethercomputer/RedPajama-Data
    13
       https://chat.openai.com/
    14
       https://github.com/Significant-Gravitas/Auto-GPT


                                                  20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


investigate the scalability of diffusion language models to explore their potential further. There are
also recent attempts to pretrain continuous diffusion language models (). In comparison, our work
builds on discrete diffusion models and leverages their connection to publicly accessible masked
language models, for which we can explore larger models and their general-purpose ability such
as instruction following (Lin et al., 2022; Balagansky & Gavrilov, 2023; Gulrajani & Hashimoto,
2023). The most relevant work to ours is Han et al. (2023) which builds a 13B chat model with
continuous simplex-based diffusion language models. In contrast, our work focuses on discrete
diffusion language models and their general abilities on diverse tasks.

C     R EPARAMETERIZAED D ISCRETE D IFFUSION M ODELS (RDM)
Zheng et al. (2023a) shows that the backward transition of discrete diffusion models q(xt−1 |xt , x0 )
can be rewritten as
                          
                          Cat xt−1 ; p = λ(1)
                                                             (1)
                                             t−1 xt + (1 − λt−1 )qnoise ,            if xt = x0
      q(xt−1 |xt , x0 ) =                                                                        , (4)
                          Cat xt−1 ; p = λ(2)
                          
                                             t−1 x t + (1 −  λ
                                                              (2)
                                                              t−1 )q noise (x t )  , if x t ̸
                                                                                            = x0

                                                         (1)        (2)
where qnoise (xt ) = βt xt + (1 − βt )qnoise , and both λt−1 and λt−1 are constants relating to βt and
βt−1 . This reformulation interprets the backward transition as a mixture distribution. Sampling from
it is equivalent to first sampling from a Bernoulli distribution and then the corresponding component
distribution, i.e.,

                       (1)                 (1)             (1)
                     vt−1 ∼ Bernoulli λt−1 ,             ut ∼ Cat (u; p = qnoise ) ,

                       (2)                 (2)       (2)
                     vt−1 ∼ Bernoulli λt−1 , ut ∼ Cat (u; p = qnoise (xt )) ,
                                   
                                      (1)              (1)     (1)
                                   vt−1
                                         xt + 1 − vt−1 ut , if xt = x0
                           xt−1 =                                               .
                                      (2)              (2)     (2)
                                   vt−1
                                         xt + 1 − vt−1 ut , if xt ̸= x0
This reparameterizes the transitions in Eq. (1) into q(xt , vt−1 |xt , x0 ) and pθ (xt−1 , vt−1 |xt ). With
this reparameterization, the training objective of diffusion models (i.e., the variational bound of
negative log-likelihood) becomes
                                                                            T
                                         pθ (x0 , x1:T , v1:T )            X
              −Eq (x1:T , v1:T |x0 ) log                          = L1 +       Lt + const.,
                                          q(x1:T , v1:T |x0 )              t=2

where L1 = −Eq(x1 |x0 ) [log pθ (x0 |x1 )] and Zheng et al. (2023a) shows that Lt can be simplified
into                            h                                        i
                                     (2)
                      Lt = E −λt−1 (1 − 1(xt = x0 )) log pθ (x0 |xt ) ,                          (5)
where 1(·) is indicator function. This is exactly a weighted cross-entropy loss on the perturbed data,
a.k.a. the masked language modeling objective (Devlin et al., 2018). Notably, training with different
noise schedules only differs in the weighting of the objective. During sampling, RDM leverages this
observation and proposes to employ a discriminative approach. Specifically, it denoises a token only
when it receives a top-k score (log-probability) from the network where k in each step is determined
by a denoising schedule.

D     I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS
D.1    M ODEL

Throughout this work, we mainly follow Zheng et al. (2023a) to train and sample from our diffusion
                                       (2)
language models. Specifically, we set λt−1 = 1 − t−1
                                                   T in the training objective (Eqn. 5) where t is the
current timestep and T is the number of total timesteps which is 50 in our experiments. Additionally,
we apply label smoothing with a factor of 0.1 when we train a model without pretraining. During
sampling, we also follow Ghazvininejad et al. (2019); Savinov et al. (2021); Zheng et al. (2023b)
and denoise tokens with high scores in each step instead of naively sampling from the Bernoulli


                                                    21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


distributions. We use the same cosine schedule as in Zheng et al. (2023a) to decide the number of
                                            πt
denoised tokens in each step k = ⌊N · cos 2T   ⌋, where N is the sequence length. For full details, we
refer readers to the pseudocode in the original paper (Zheng et al., 2023a, Algorithm 2). Besides,
we follow the time agnostic design in He et al. (2023) that does not introduce any extra parameters
to differentiate different timesteps. For length prediction, we feed model outputs into a one-layer
transformer, apply mean pooling to the features and feed the pooled feature into an MLP classifier
head. For task-specific finetuning, we remove both input and output embeddings of the tokens that do
not appear in the training set.
D.2      DATA
For IWSLT14 and WMT14 machine translation tasks, we download and preprocess data following
the example scripts provided by Fairseq15 , and we use SacreBleu (Post, 2018) for evaluation16 .
And we download Gigaword-10K data from the repository of LGEB17 . For (M)GSM, we follow the
instruction18 in the official repository of Shi et al. (2022) to process the data and prompts. Besides,
we obtain the preprocessed Flan 202119 , Flan 202220 , MMLU21 , BBH22 and TydiQA23 from shared
datasets on HuggingFace24 . During training with Flan 2022, we follow the recommended ratios in
Chung et al. (2022) to sample training data from different subsets. We follow Chung et al. (2022)
to report the MMLU performance on the validation set and adopt the GoldP setting for TyDiQA
as in Chowdhery et al. (2022); Chung et al. (2022). On the few-shot settings, we randomly select
demonstrations. We will also release our code and data for better reproducibility.

D.3      T RAINING DETAILS
We use Adam optimizer (Kingma & Ba, 2015) throughout our study. The dropout rate is consistent
with the original configuration of the models which is 0.1. For task-specific tuning, we use 8 Nvidia
A100 GPUs. For instruction tuning, we use 8 Nvidia V100 GPUs for BASE and LARGE-sized
models, 32 for XL, and 64 for XXL. The overall batch size and other detailed hyperparameters for
the two settings are in Tab. 3 and Tab. 4, respectively.

                   Table 3: The training hyperparameters for task-specific finetuning.
         Dataset         Pretrained model    Batch size (#. tokens)   Learning rate   #. training steps
                         XLM-R-BASE                  32K                  5e-5                150,000
                         XLM-R-LARGE                 32K                  5e-5                150,000
  IWSLT14 D E→E N
                         XLM-R-XL                    32K                  5e-5                100,000
                         XLM-R-XXL                   32K                  5e-5                 30,000
                         XLM-R-BASE                  128K                 5e-5                300,000
                         XLM-R-LARGE                 128K                 5e-5                300,000
  WMT14 E N→D E
                         XLM-R-XL                    128K                 5e-5                150,000
                         XLM-R-XXL                   128K                 5e-5                100,000
                         XLM-R-BASE                  16K                  5e-5                  30,000
                         XLM-R-LARGE                 16K                  5e-5                  10,000
       Gigaword-10K
                         XLM-R-XL                    16K                  5e-5                   5,000
                         XLM-R-XXL                   16K                  5e-5                   1,000


  15
     https://github.com/facebookresearch/fairseq/tree/main/examples/
translation
  16
     The signature of sacrebleu for IWSLT14 D E→E N is nrefs:1|case:mixed|eff:no|tok:13a|
smooth:exp|version:2.3.1, and for WMT14 E N→D E nrefs:1|case:mixed|eff:no|tok:intl|
smooth:exp|version:2.3.1, respectively.
  17
     https://github.com/CLUEbenchmark/LGEB
  18
     https://github.com/google-research/url-nlp/tree/main/mgsm
  19
     https://huggingface.co/datasets/Muennighoff/flan
  20
     https://huggingface.co/datasets/SirNeural/flan_v2
  21
     https://huggingface.co/datasets/cais/mmlu
  22
     https://huggingface.co/datasets/lukaemon/bbh
  23
     https://huggingface.co/datasets/khalidalt/tydiqa-goldp
  24
     https://huggingface.co/datasets


                                                   22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                     Table 4: The training hyperparameters for instruction finetuning.
    Training data      Pretrained model   Batch size (#. sequence)      Learning rate      #. training steps
                       XLM-R-BASE                    512                    5e-5                      5,000
                       XLM-R-LARGE                   512                    5e-5                      5,000
      Flan 2021
                       XLM-R-XL                      512                    5e-5                      3,000
                       XLM-R-XXL                     256                    5e-5                      1,000
                       XLM-R-BASE                    512                    1e-5                     70,000
                       XLM-R-LARGE                   512                    1e-5                     30,000
      Flan 2022
                       XLM-R-XL                      1024                   1e-5                     17,000
                       XLM-R-XXL                     2048                   1e-5                      4,000


E     F ULL E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS
The experimental results for task-specific tuning and instruction tuning on Flan 2022 are in Tab. 5
and Tab. 6, respectively.

Table 5: Full experimental results of task-specific finetuning. OL: the results are obtained with oracle
length. LB: the size of length beam for length prediction.
       Dataset (Metric)      Setting   XLM-R-BASE         XLM-R-LARGE       XLM-R-XL         XLM-R-XXL
      IWSLT14 D E→E N        OL           35.78              38.84             40.11             40.65
        (SacreBLEU)          LB=10        34.10              37.33             38.54             38.57
      WMT14 E N→D E          OL           26.65              30.22             30.91             32.81
       (SacreBLEU)           LB=10        26.72              29.04             30.23             30.34
        Gigaword-10K         OL           28.83              31.33             31.72             32.57
          (Rouge-L)          LB=10        27.52              30.11             31.42             31.54


Table 6: Full experimental results of instruction tuning on Flan 2022. OL: the results are obtained
with oracle length. LB: the size of length beam for length prediction.
    Dataset (Metric)      Setting         XLM-R-BASE        XLM-R-LARGE        XLM-R-XL         XLM-R-XXL
                          0-shot (OL)        21.26              25.24              28.13            29.59
 IWSLT14 D E→E N          2-shot (OL)        20.97              25.70              29.19            30.31
   (SacreBLEU)            0-shot (LB=3)      17.76              25.12              26.42            30.90
                          2-shot (LB=3)      15.91              23.49              27.29            31.04
       MMLU               0-shot             31.28              32.79              40.17            42.13
     (Accuracy%)          2-shot             28.74              32.72              38.08            42.06
       BBH-nlp            0-shot             41.86              37.64              42.35            40.70
     (Accuracy%)          2-shot             37.35              39.66              45.95            42.82
                          0-shot (OL)        44.68              44.64              48.50            52.06
       TyDiQA             1-shot (OL)        44.69              48.46              49.43            51.71
     (Exact Match)        0-shot (LB=3)      11.15              12.50              10.52            19.34
                          1-shot (LB=3)      10.24              12.54              10.16            15.43
     MGSM (D E)           0-shot              0.9                2.8                1.6              3.6
     (Accuracy%)          3-shot              1.6                2.8                5.2              4.4
       GSM8K              0-shot              3.6                3.2                5.2              4.4
     (Accuracy%)          3-shot              3.2                2.0                3.6              5.6


                                                     23
