Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


H IGH -P ROBABILITY C ONVERGENCE FOR C OMPOSITE
AND D ISTRIBUTED S TOCHASTIC M INIMIZATION AND
VARIATIONAL I NEQUALITIES WITH H EAVY-TAILED
N OISE
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                             A BSTRACT
         High-probability analysis of stochastic first-order optimization methods under
         mild assumptions on the noise has been gaining a lot of attention in recent years.
         Typically, gradient clipping is one of the key algorithmic ingredients to derive
         good high-probability guarantees when the noise is heavy-tailed. However, if
         implemented naДұМҲvely, clipping can spoil the convergence of the popular methods
         for composite and distributed optimization (Prox-SGD/Parallel SGD) even in the
         absence of any noise. Due to this reason, many works on high-probability analysis
         consider only unconstrained non-distributed problems, and the existing results for
         composite/distributed problems do not include some important special cases (like
         strongly convex problems) and are not optimal. To address this issue, we propose
         new stochastic methods for composite and distributed optimization based on the
         clipping of stochastic gradient differences and prove tight high-probability conver-
         gence results (including nearly optimal ones) for the new methods. Using similar
         ideas, we also develop new methods for composite and distributed variational
         inequalities and analyze the high-probability convergence of these methods.


1    I NTRODUCTION
Many recent works on stochastic optimization have the ultimate goal of bridging the theory and
practice in machine learning. This is mostly reflected in the attempts at the theoretical analysis of
optimization methods under weaker assumptions than the standard ones. Moreover, some phenomena
cannot be explained using classical in-expectation convergence analysis (see the motivating example
from (Gorbunov et al., 2020a)) that results in the growing interest in more accurate ways to the
analysis of stochastic methods, for example, high-probability convergence analysis.
However, despite the significant attention to this topic (Nazin et al., 2019; Davis et al., 2021; Gorbunov
et al., 2020a; 2022a; Cutkosky & Mehta, 2021; Sadiev et al., 2023; Nguyen et al., 2023b; Liu &
Zhou, 2023; Liu et al., 2023), several important directions remain unexplored. In particular, all
mentioned works either consider unconstrained problems or consider general composite/constrained
minimization/variational inequality problems but have some noticeable limitations, such as bounded
domain assumption, extra logarithmic factors in the complexity bounds, not optimal (not accelerated)
convergence rates, or no analysis of (quasi-) strongly convex (monotone) case. The importance of
composite/constrained formulations for the machine learning community can be justified in many
ways. For example, composite optimization and distributed optimization have a lot of similarities,
i.e., one can view a distributed optimization problem as a special composite optimization problem
(Parikh & Boyd, 2014). Due to the large sizes of modern machine learning models and datasets, many
important problems can be solved in a reasonable time only via distributed methods. Next, composite
formulations are very useful for handling different regularizations popular in machine learning and
statistics (Zou & Hastie, 2005; Shalev-Shwartz & Ben-David, 2014; Beck, 2017). Finally, variational
inequalities are usually considered with constraints as well.
The discrepancy between the importance of composite/constrained formulations and the lack of
high-probability convergence results in this setup can be partially explained as follows. SOTA high-
probability convergence results are derived for the algorithms that use gradient clipping (Pascanu


                                                    1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


et al., 2013), i.e., the clipping operator defined as clip(x, О») = min{1, О»/вҲҘxвҲҘ}x for x Мё= 0 and
clip(0, О») = 0 with some clipping level О» > 0 is applied to the stochastic gradients. If О» is too
small, then naДұМҲve Proximal Gradient Descent with gradient clipping is not a fixed point method, i.e.,
the method escapes the solution even if it is initialized there (see a technical explanation in Section 2).
This fact implies that one has either to increase the clipping level or to decrease the stepsize to
converge to the exact solution asymptotically; the latter approach leads to a slower convergence
rate. On the other hand, even in the unconstrained case, the existing results with acceleration/linear
convergence are derived for the methods using decreasing clipping level (Gorbunov et al., 2020a;
Sadiev et al., 2023). Therefore, new algorithms and analyses are required to handle this issue.
In this work, we close this gap by proposing new stochastic methods for composite and distributed
problems via the clipping of gradient differences that converge to zero with high probability. This
allows us to achieve the desirable acceleration and linear convergence. Before we move on to the
presentation of the main contributions, we need to introduce the problem settings formally.

1.1   S ETUP
                                                                                   p
Notation. The standard Euclidean norm of vector x вҲҲ Rd is denoted as вҲҘxвҲҘ = вҹЁx, xвҹ©. BR (x) =
{y вҲҲ Rd | вҲҘy вҲ’ xвҲҘ вүӨ R} is the ball centered at x with radius R. Bregman divergence w.r.t. function
                          def
f is denoted as Df (x, y) = f (x) вҲ’ f (y) вҲ’ вҹЁвҲҮf (y), x вҲ’ yвҹ©. In O(В·), we omit the numerical factors,
and in O(В·),
        e    we omit numerical and logarithmic factors. For natural n вүҘ 1 the set {1, 2, . . . , n} is
denoted as [n]. Finally, we use EОҫ [В·] to denote the expectation w.r.t. the randomness coming from Оҫ.

Considered problems. The first class of problems we consider in this work is stochastic composite
minimization problems:
                               min {ОҰ(x) = f (x) + ОЁ(x)} ,                                    (1)
                                    xвҲҲRd

where f (x) = EОҫвҲјD [fОҫ (x)] is a differentiable function satisfying some properties to be defined
later and ОЁ(x) is a proper, closed, convex function (composite/regularization term). The examples
of problem (1) arise in various applications, e.g., machine learning (Shalev-Shwartz & Ben-David,
2014), signal processing (Combettes & Pesquet, 2011), image processing (Luke, 2020). We also
consider variational inequality problems, see Appendix C.
The distributed version of (1) has the following structure of f :
                                           n
                                        1X
                              f (x) =         {fi (x) = EОҫi вҲјDi [fОҫi (x)]} .                           (2)
                                        n i=1

In this case, there are n workers connected in a centralized way with some parameter server; worker i
can query some noisy information (stochastic gradients/estimates) about fi .

In-expectation and high-probability convergence. In-expectation convergence guarantees provide
the upper bounds on the number of iterations/oracle calls KМӮ = KМӮ(Оө) for a method needed to find point
xKМӮ such that E[C(xKМӮ )] вүӨ Оө for given convergence criterion C(x) (e.g., C(x) can be f (x) вҲ’ f (xвҲ— ),
вҲҘx вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲҘ2 , вҲҘвҲҮf (x)вҲҘ2 ) and given accuracy Оө > 0. High-probability convergence guarantees give
the upper bounds on the number of iterations/oracle calls K = K(Оө, ОІ) for a method needed to
find point x such that P{C(xK ) вүӨ Оө} вүҘ 1 вҲ’ ОІ, where ОІ вҲҲ (0, 1) is a confidence level. It is worth
                                                                   K
noting that MarkovвҖҷs inequality implies P{C(xK ) > Оө} < E[C(x )]/Оө, meaning that it is sufficient
                                                        KМӮ
to take K = KМӮ(ОІОө) = KМӮ: P{C(xKМӮ ) > Оө} < E[C(x )]/Оө вүӨ ОІ. However, this typically leads to
the polynomial dependence on 1/ОІ that significantly spoils the complexity of the method when ОІ is
small. Therefore, we focus on the high-probability convergence guarantees that depend on 1/ОІ poly-
logarithmically. Moreover, such high-probability results are more sensitive to the noise distribution
(and, thus, more accurate) than in-expectation ones (Gorbunov et al., 2020a; Sadiev et al., 2023).

Proximal operator. We assume that function ОЁ(x) has a relatively simple structure such that one
can efficiently compute proximal operator: proxОіОЁ (x) = arg minyвҲҲRd {ОіОЁ(y) + 12 вҲҘy вҲ’ xвҲҘ2 }. For
the properties of the proximal operator and examples of functions ОЁ(x) such that proxОіОЁ (x) can be
easily computed, we refer the reader to (Beck, 2017).


                                                    2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Bounded central Оұ-th moment. We consider the situation when fi and Fi are accessible through
the stochastic oracle calls. The stochastic estimates satisfy the following assumption.1
Assumption 1. There exist some set Q вҠҶ Rd and values Пғ вүҘ 0, Оұ вҲҲ (1, 2] such that for all x вҲҲ Q
we have EОҫi вҲјDi [вҲҮfОҫi (x)] = вҲҮfi (x) and
                                                                       Оұ
                                   EОҫi вҲјDi [вҲҘвҲҮfОҫi (x) вҲ’ вҲҮfi (x)вҲҘ ] вүӨ Пғ Оұ .                                        (3)

For Оұ = 2, Assumption 1 reduces to the bounded variance assumption, and for Оұ вҲҲ (1, 2) variance of
the stochastic estimator can be unbounded, e.g., the noise can have LeМҒvy Оұ-stable distribution (Zhang
et al., 2020b), which is heavy-tailed.

Assumptions on fi . We assume that functions {fi }iвҲҲ[n] are L-smooth.
Assumption 2. We assume that there exist some set Q вҠҶ Rd and constant L > 0 such that for all
x, y вҲҲ Q, i вҲҲ [n] and for all xвҲ— вҲҲ arg minxвҲҲRd ОҰ(x)
                  вҲҘвҲҮfi (x) вҲ’ вҲҮfi (y)вҲҘ        вүӨ    LвҲҘx вҲ’ yвҲҘ,                                                       (4)
                                     вҲ—   2                             вҲ—              вҲ—          вҲ—
               вҲҘвҲҮfi (x) вҲ’ вҲҮfi (x )вҲҘ          вүӨ    2L (fi (x) вҲ’ fi (x ) вҲ’ вҹЁвҲҮfi (x ), x вҲ’ x вҹ©) .                    (5)

As noted in Appendix B from (Sadiev et al., 2023), (5) is satisfied on the set Q Мё= Rd if (4) holds on
a slightly larger set in the case of ОЁ вүЎ 0, n = 1 (unconstrained single-node case). For simplicity, we
assume that both (4) and (5) hold on Q. This is always the case for L-smooth functions on Q = Rd
when ОЁ вүЎ 0, n = 1. In a more general situation, condition (5) can be viewed as an assumption on the
structured non-convexity of {fi }iвҲҲ[n] . Finally, if {fi }iвҲҲ[n] are convex and L-smooth on the whole
domain of the problem (1), then Assumption 2 holds.
Next, for each particular result about the convergence of methods for (1), we make one of the
following assumptions.
Assumption 3. There exist some set Q вҠҶ Rd and constant Вө вүҘ 0 such that f is Вө-strongly convex:
                                                  Вө
                f (y) вүҘ f (x) + вҹЁвҲҮf (x), y вҲ’ xвҹ© + вҲҘy вҲ’ xвҲҘ2 вҲҖ x, y вҲҲ Q.                      (6)
                                                  2
When Вө = 0, function f is called convex on Q.

This is a standard assumption for optimization literature (Nesterov et al., 2018). We also consider a
relaxation of strong convexity.
Assumption 4. There exist some set Q вҠҶ Rd and constant Вө вүҘ 0 such that f1 , . . . , fn are (Вө, xвҲ— )-
quasi-strongly convex for all xвҲ— вҲҲ arg minxвҲҲRd ОҰ(x):
                                                     Вө
              fi (xвҲ— ) вүҘ fi (x) + вҹЁвҲҮfi (x), xвҲ— вҲ’ xвҹ© + вҲҘx вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲҘ2 вҲҖ x вҲҲ Q, i вҲҲ [n].              (7)
                                                     2

Condition (7) is weaker than (6) and holds even for some non-convex functions (Necoara et al., 2019).

1.2    O UR C ONTRIBUTIONS

вҖў Methods with clipping of gradient differences for distributed composite minimization. We
develop two stochastic methods for composite minimization problems вҖ“ Proximal Clipped SGD with
shifts (Prox-clipped-SGD-shift) and Proximal Clipped Similar Triangles Method with shifts (Prox-
clipped-SSTM-shift). Instead of clipping stochastic gradients, these methods clip the difference
between the stochastic gradients and the shifts that are updated on the fly. This trick allows us
to use decreasing clipping levels, and, as a result, we derive the first accelerated high-probability
convergence rates and tight high-probability convergence rates for the non-accelerated method in the
    1
      Following (Sadiev et al., 2023), we consider all assumptions only on some bounded set Q вҠҶ Rd ; the
diameter of Q depends on the starting point. We emphasize that we do not assume boundedness of the domain
of the original problem. Instead, we prove via induction that the iterates of the considered methods stay in some
ball around the solution with high probability (see the details in Section 3). Thus, it is sufficient for us to assume
everything just on this ball, though our analysis remains unchanged if we introduce all assumptions on the whole
domain.


                                                          3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 1: Summary of known and new high-probability complexity results for solving (non-) composite (non-) distributed smooth optimization
problem (1). Column вҖңSetupвҖқ indicates the assumptions made in addition to Assumptions 1 and 2. All assumptions are made only on some
ball around the solution with radius вҲј R вүҘ вҲҘx0 вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲҘ. Complexity is the number of stochastic oracle calls (per worker) needed for a
method to guarantee that P{Metric вүӨ Оө} вүҘ 1 вҲ’ ОІ for some Оө > 0, ОІ вҲҲ (0, 1] and вҖңMetricвҖқ is taken from the corresponding column.
Numerical and logarithmic factors are omitted for simplicity. Column вҖңC?вҖқ shows whether the problem (1) is composite, вҖңD?вҖқ indicates whether
the problem
       q P   (1) is distributed. Notation: L = Lipschitz constant; Пғ = parameter from Assumption 1; R = any upper bound on вҲҘx0 вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲҘ;
          1    n                     b2 = R 3R + LвҲ’1 (2О·Пғ + вҲҘвҲҮf (x0 )вҲҘ) for some О· > 0 (for the result from (Nguyen et al., 2023a);

О¶вҲ— =        n    i=1 вҲҘвҲҮfi (xвҲ— )вҲҘ2 ; R
one can show that R b2 = Оҳ(R2 + RО¶вҲ—/L) when n = 1, see the discussion after Theorem 2.3); Вө = (quasi-)strong convexity parameter. The
results of this paper are highlighted in blue.

        Setup               Method                           Metric                           Complexity                      C?      D?
                         clipped-SGD                                                                         Оұ o
                                                                                              LR2
                                                                                          n
                                                          K             вҲ—                           ПғR

                                                      f (x ) вҲ’ f (x )             max          Оө ,   Оө
                                                                                                            ОұвҲ’1               вң—       вң—
                      (Sadiev et al., 2023)                                           q
                        clipped-SSTM                      K             вҲ—                  LR2
                                                                                                            Оұ
                                                                                                     ПғR ОұвҲ’1
                                                      f (y ) вҲ’ f (x )            max         Оө   ,     Оө                      вң—       вң—
                      (Sadiev et al., 2023)
                        Clipped-SMD (1),(2)                                                 b2             Оұ o
                                                                                      n
                                                     ОҰ(xK ) вҲ’ ОҰ(xвҲ— )              max LR    Оө ,
                                                                                                    ПғR ОұвҲ’1
                                                                                                     Оө                        вң“       вң—
        As. 3        (Nguyen et al., 2023a)
                       Clipped-ASMD (1)
                                                                                      q
                                                                                           LR2
                                                                                                            Оұ
       (Вө = 0)                                       ОҰ(y K ) вҲ’ ОҰ(xвҲ— )            max                 ПғR ОұвҲ’1
                                                                                                                              вң“вң—(3)   вң—
                     (Nguyen et al., 2023a)                                                  Оө ,       Оө
                   DProx-clipped-SGD-shift
                                                                                   n    2 RО¶вҲ— 1                Оұ o
                                                     ОҰ(xK ) вҲ’ ОҰ(xвҲ— )          max LR  Оө ,
                                                                                             вҲҡ
                                                                                              nОө n
                                                                                                  ,       ПғR ОұвҲ’1
                                                                                                           Оө                   вң“      вң“
                          Theorem 2.3                                             q
                   DProx-clipped-SSTM-shift               K             вҲ—            LR2
                                                                                             q
                                                                                                RО¶                Оұ
                                                      ОҰ(y ) вҲ’ ОҰ(x )          max                вҲҡ вҲ—,1        ПғR ОұвҲ’1
                                                                                                                               вң“      вң“
                          Theorem 2.4                                                 Оө ,         nОө n        Оө
                                                                                               2   Оұ
                         clipped-SGD                        K     вҲ— 2                                   2(ОұвҲ’1)
                                                       вҲҘx       вҲ’x вҲҘ             max L  Вө  ,    Пғ
                                                                                                 2                            вң—       вң—
         As. 4        (Sadiev et al., 2023)                                                    Вө Оө
       (Вө > 0)
                                                                                                 2   Оұ
                   DProx-clipped-SGD-shift                  K         вҲ— 2                                 2(ОұвҲ’1)
                                                        вҲҘx      вҲ’x вҲҘ             max L   ,
                                                                                       Вө n
                                                                                            1     Пғ
                                                                                                 Вө2 Оө
                                                                                                                              вң“       вң“
                          Theorem 2.2
 (1)
     All assumptions are made on the whole domain.
 (2)
     The authors additionally assume that for a chosen point x
                                                             b from the domain and for О· > 0 one can compute an estimate g
                                                                                                                         b such that
 P{вҲҘb g вҲ’ вҲҮf (xМӮ)вҲҘ > О·Пғ} вүӨ Пө. Such an estimate can be found using geometric median computed over O(ln ПөвҲ’1 ) samples (Minsker,
 2015).
 (3)
     The authors assume that вҲҮf (xвҲ— ) = 0, which is not true for general composite optimization.



quasi-strongly convex case. We also generalize the proposed methods to the distributed case (DProx-
clipped-SGD-shift and DProx-clipped-SSTM-shift) and prove that they benefit from parallelization.
To the best of our knowledge, our results are the first showing linear speed-up under Assumption 1.
вҖў Methods with clipping of gradient differences for distributed composite VIPs. We also apply
the proposed trick to the methods for variational inequalities. In particular, we propose DProx-
clipped-SGDA-shifts and DProx-clipped-SEG-shifts and rigorously analyze their high-probability
convergence. As in the minimization case, the proposed methods have provable benefits from
parallelization.
вҖў Tight convergence rates. As a separate contribution, we highlight the tightness of our analysis:
in the known special cases (ОЁ вүЎ 0 and/or n = 1), the derived complexity bounds either recover or
outperform previously known ones (see Table 1 and also Table 2 in the appendix). Moreover, in
certain regimes, the results have optimal (up to logarithms) dependencies on Оө. This is achieved under
quite general assumptions.

1.3        C LOSELY R ELATED W ORK

We discuss closely related work here and defer additional discussion to Appendix A.

High-probability bounds for unconstrained convex problems. Standard high-probability conver-
gence results are obtained under the so-called light-tails assumption (sub-Gaussian noise) (Nemirovski
et al., 2009; Juditsky et al., 2011; Ghadimi & Lan, 2012). The first work addressing this limitation is
(Nazin et al., 2019), where the authors derive the first high-probability complexity bounds for the case
of minimization on a bounded set under bounded variance assumption. In the unconstrained case,
these results are extended and accelerated by Gorbunov et al. (2020a) for smooth convex and strongly
convex minimization problems. Gorbunov et al. (2021) tightens them and generalizes to the case of
problems with HoМҲlder-continuous gradients and Gorbunov et al. (2022a) derives high-probability
convergence rates in the case of VIPs. Sadiev et al. (2023) relaxes the assumption of bounded variance
to Assumption 1 for all problem classes mentioned above, and the results under the same assumption
are also derived for clipped-SGD (without acceleration) by Nguyen et al. (2023b) in the convex and
non-convex cases.


                                                                       4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


High-probability bounds for composite convex problems. Nazin et al. (2019) propose a trun-
cated version of Mirror Descent for convex and strongly convex composite problems and prove
non-accelerated rates of convergence under bounded variance and bounded domain assumptions.
Accelerated results under bounded variance assumption for strongly convex composite problems are
proven by Davis et al. (2021), who propose an approach based on robust distance estimation. Since
this approach requires solving some auxiliary problem at each iteration of the method, the complexity
bound from Davis et al. (2021) contains extra logarithmic factors independent of the confidence
level. Finally, in their very recent work, Nguyen et al. (2023a) prove high-probability convergence
for Clipped Stochastic Mirror Descent (Clipped-SMD) for convex composite problems. Moreover,
the authors also propose Accelerated Clipped-SMD (Clipped-ASMD) and show that the algorithm
is indeed accelerated but only under the additional assumption that вҲҮf (xвҲ— ) = 0.


2    M AIN R ESULTS FOR C OMPOSITE D ISTRIBUTED M INIMIZATION P ROBLEMS

In this section, we consider problem (1) and methods for it.

Failure of the naДұМҲve approach. For simplicity, consider a non-stochastic case with strongly
convex f (x), n = 1. The standard deterministic first-order method for solving problems like (1)
is Proximal Gradient Descent (Prox-GD) (Combettes & Pesquet, 2011; Nesterov, 2013): xk+1 =
proxОіОЁ (xk вҲ’ ОівҲҮf (xk )). Due to the good interplay between the structure of the problem, properties
of the proximal operator, and the structure of the method, Prox-GD has the same (linear) convergence
rate as GD for minimization of f (x). One of the key reasons for that is that any solution xвҲ— of problem
(1) satisfies xвҲ— = proxОіОЁ (xвҲ— вҲ’ ОівҲҮf (xвҲ— )), i.e., the solutions of (1) are fixed points of Prox-GD (and
vice versa), which is equivalent to вҲ’вҲҮf (xвҲ— ) вҲҲ вҲӮОЁ(xвҲ— ), where вҲӮОЁ(xвҲ— ) is a subdifferential of ОЁ at
xвҲ— . However, if we apply gradient clipping to Prox-GD naДұМҲvely

                            xk+1 = proxОіОЁ xk вҲ’ Оіclip(вҲҮf (xk ), О») ,

                                                                                                      (8)

then the method loses a fixed point property if вҲҘвҲҮf (xвҲ— )вҲҘ > О», because in this case,
вҲ’clip(вҲҮf (xвҲ— ), О») does not necessarily belongs to вҲӮОЁ(xвҲ— ) and xвҲ— Мё= proxОіОЁ (xвҲ— вҲ’
Оіclip(вҲҮf (xвҲ— ), О»)) in general. Therefore, for such О», one has to decrease the stepsize Оі to achieve
any accuracy of the solution. This approach slows down the convergence making it sublinear even
without any stochasticity in the gradients. To avoid this issue, it is necessary to set О» large enough.
This strategy works in the deterministic case but becomes problematic for a stochastic version of the
method from (8):
                          xk+1 = proxОіОЁ xk вҲ’ Оіclip(вҲҮfОҫk (xk ), О»k ) ,

                                                                                                    (9)

where Оҫ k is sampled independently from previous iterations. The problem comes from the fact the
existing analysis in the unconstrained case (which is a special case of the composite case) requires
taking decreasing О»k (Gorbunov et al., 2021; Sadiev et al., 2023) that contradicts the requirement that
clipping level has to be large enough. Therefore, more fundamental algorithmic changes are needed.

Non-implementable solution. Let us reformulate the issue: (i) to handle the heavy-tailed noise, we
want to use decreasing clipping level О»k , (ii) but the method should also converge linearly without
the noise, i.e., when вҲҮfОҫk (xk ) = EОҫk [вҲҮfОҫk (xk )] = вҲҮf (xk ). In other words, the expectation of the
vector that is clipped in the method should converge to zero with the same rate as О»k . The method
should converge, i.e., with high probability, we should have вҲҮf (xk ) вҶ’ вҲҮf (xвҲ— ). These observations
lead us to the following purely theoretical algorithm that we call Prox-clipped-SGD-star2 :

  xk+1 = proxОіОЁ xk вҲ’ Оіe      g k , where gek = вҲҮf (xвҲ— ) + clip вҲҮfОҫk (xk ) вҲ’ вҲҮf (xвҲ— ), О»k . (10)


The method is non-implementable since вҲҮf (xвҲ— ) is unknown in advance. Nevertheless, as we explain
in the next subsection, the method is useful in designing and analyzing implementable versions. The
following theorem gives the complexity of Prox-clipped-SGD-star.
  2
    The idea behind and the name of this method is inspired by SGD-star proposed by Gorbunov et al. (2020b);
Hanzely & RichtaМҒrik (2019).


                                                     5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Theorem 2.1. Let n = 1 and Assumptions 1, 2, and 4 with Вө > 0 hold for Q = B2R (xвҲ— ),
R вүҘ вҲҘx0 вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲҘ, for some3 xвҲ— вҲҲ arg minxвҲҲRd ОҰ(x). Assume that K вүҘ 1, ОІ вҲҲ (0, 1), A = ln 4(K+1)
                                                                                          ОІ   ,

                                                                   (K + 1)2(ОұвҲ’1)/Оұ Вө2 R2

                             1   ln(BK )
    0 < Оі = O min              ,             , BK = Оҳ max 2, 2 2(ОұвҲ’1)/Оұ 2                                  ,
                            LA Вө(K + 1)                            Пғ A        ln (BK )

                                            exp(вҲ’ОіВө(1 + k/2))R
                                   О»k = Оҳ                        .
                                                   ОіA
Then to guarantee вҲҘxK вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲҘ2 вүӨ Оө with probability вүҘ 1 вҲ’ ОІ Prox-clipped-SGD-star requires
                           (               Оұ   )!
                                    2
                                        2(ОұвҲ’1)
                             L    Пғ
                   O
                   e max       ,                     iterations/oracle calls.           (11)
                             Вө Вө2 Оө

Sketch of the proof. Following Gorbunov et al. (2020a); Sadiev et al. (2023), we prove by induction4
that вҲҘxk вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲҘ2 вүӨ 2 exp(вҲ’ОіВөk)R2 with high probability. This and L-smoothness imply that
вҲҘвҲҮf (xk ) вҲ’ вҲҮf (xвҲ— )вҲҘ вҲј exp(вҲ’ОіВөk/2) and вҲҘвҲҮf (xk ) вҲ’ вҲҮf (xвҲ— )вҲҘ вүӨ О»k/2 with high probability. These
facts allow us to properly clip the heavy-tailed noise without sacrificing the convergence rate. See the
complete formulation of Theorem 2.1 and the full proof in Appendix D.

The above complexity bound for Prox-clipped-SGD-star coincides with the known one for clipped-
SGD for the unconstrained problems under the same assumptions (Sadiev et al., 2023) вҖ“ similarly as
the complexity of Prox-GD coincides with the complexity of GD for unconstrained smooth problems.

Prox-clipped-SGD-shift. As mentioned before, the key limitation of Prox-clipped-SGD-star
is that it explicitly uses shift вҲҮf (xвҲ— ), which is not known in advance. Therefore, guided by the
literature on variance reduction and communication compression (Gorbunov et al., 2020b; Gower
et al., 2020; Mishchenko et al., 2019), it is natural to approximate вҲҮf (xвҲ— ) via shifts hk . This
                                                                                                leads
us to a new method called Prox-clipped-SGD-shift: as before xk+1 = proxОіОЁ xk вҲ’ Оіe          g k but now
              gek = hk + вҲҶЛҶ k , hk+1 = hk + ОҪ вҲҶ ЛҶ k, вҲҶ ЛҶ k = clip вҲҮfОҫk (xk ) вҲ’ hk , О»k ,

                                                                                                   (12)
where ОҪ > 0 is a stepsize for learning shifts. Similar shifts are proposed by Mishchenko et al. (2019)
in the context of distributed optimization with communication compression. Since Prox-clipped-
SGD-shift is a special case of its distributed variant, we continue our discussion with the distributed
version of the method.

Distributed Prox-clipped-SGD-shift. We propose a generalization of Prox-clipped-SGD-shift to
the distributed case (2) called Distributed Prox-clipped-SGD-shift (DProx-clipped-SGD-shift):
                                                                n
                                                            1X k                    ЛҶ ki ,
              xk+1 = proxОіОЁ xk вҲ’ Оіe       g k , where gek =       ge , geik = hki + вҲҶ

                                                                                           (13)
                                                            n i=1 i

                     hk+1  = hki + ОҪ вҲҶЛҶ ki , вҲҶ ЛҶ ki = clip вҲҮfОҫk (xk ) вҲ’ hki , О»k ,         (14)
                       i                                      i

where Оҫ1k , . . . , Оҫnk are sampled independently from each other and previous steps. In this method,
worker i updates the shift hki and sends clipped vector вҲҶЛҶ k to the server. Since gek = hk + 1 Pn вҲҶ   ЛҶk
                                                            i                                n   i=1 i
      k+1         k     ОҪ
                          P  n  ЛҶ , where h =
                                  k        k    1
                                                  P n     k                                k
and h      = h + n i=1 вҲҶ          i             n   i=1 hi , workers do not need to send hi to the server
for k > 0. We notice that even when ОЁ вүЎ 0, i.e., the problem is unconstrained, individual gradients
{вҲҮfi (xвҲ— )}iвҲҲ[n] of the clientsвҖҷ function at the solution of problem (1) are not necessary zero, though
their sum equals to zero. However, if applied without any shifts to the local (stochastic) gradients,
then, similarly to the case ofPnon-distributed Prox-GD (8), the clipping operation also breaks the
                                    n
fixed point property, since n1 i=1 clip(вҲҮfi (xвҲ— ), О») Мё= 0 for small values of О». This highlights the
importance of the shifts for distributed unconstrained case.
For the proposed method, we derive the following result.
   3
      If all of our results, one can use any solution xвҲ— , e.g., one can take xвҲ— being a projection of xвҲ— on the
solution set.
    4
      We use the induction to apply BernsteinвҖҷs inequality for the estimation of the sums appearing due to the
stochasticity of the gradients. We refer to Section 3 for the details.


                                                       6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Theorem 2.2 (Convergence of DProx-clipped-SGD-shift: quasi-strongly convex case). Let K вүҘ 1,
ОІ вҲҲ (0, 1), A = ln 48n(K+1)
                       ОІ    . Let Assumptions 1, 2, and 4 with Вө > 0 hold for Q = B3nвҲҡ2R (xвҲ— ),
                                            q P
                                                   n
where R вүҘ вҲҘx0 вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲҘ2 . Assume that О¶вҲ— = n1 i=1 вҲҘвҲҮfi (xвҲ— )вҲҘ2 ,
                                                             вҲҡ
                         1                              1      nR ln(BK )
                ОҪ=Оҳ           , 0 < Оі = O min              ,     ,            ,
                         A                             LA AО¶вҲ— Вө(K + 1)
                     (K + 1)2(ОұвҲ’1)/Оұ Вө2 n2(ОұвҲ’1)/Оұ R2

                                                                     n exp(вҲ’ОіВө(1 + k/2))R
 BK = Оҳ max 2,                                            , О»k = Оҳ                          .
                         Пғ 2 A2(ОұвҲ’1)/Оұ ln2 (BK )                              ОіA
Then to guarantee вҲҘxK вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲҘ2 вүӨ Оө with probability вүҘ 1 вҲ’ ОІ DProx-clipped-SGD-shift requires
                  (                      Оұ )!
                               1 Пғ 2 2(ОұвҲ’1)

                    L    О¶вҲ—
         O max
         e            ,вҲҡ     ,                        iterations/oracle calls per worker. (15)
                    Вө    nВөR n Вө2 Оө


Sketch of the proof. The proof follows similar steps to the proof of Theorem 2.1 up the change of the
Lyapunov function: by induction, we prove that Vk вүӨ 2 exp(вҲ’ОіВөk)V with high probability, where
                       2 2 2 Pn
Vk = вҲҘxk вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲҘ2 + C Оіn A               k           вҲ— 2
                                 i=1 вҲҘhi вҲ’ вҲҮfi (x )вҲҘ . The choice of the Lyapunov function reflects
the importance of the вҖңqualityвҖқ of shifts {hi }iвҲҲ[n] , i.e., their proximity to {вҲҮfi (xвҲ— )}iвҲҲ[n] . Moreover,
                                            k

we increase the clipping level n times to balance the bias and variance of gek ; see Appendix B. This
allows us to reduce the last term in the complexity bound n times. See the complete formulation of
Theorem 2.2 and the full proof in Appendix E.

The next theorem gives the convergence result in the convex case.
Theorem 2.3 (Convergence of DProx-clipped-SGD-shift: convex case). Let K вүҘ 1, ОІ вҲҲ (0, 1),
A = ln 48n(K+1)
             ОІ   . Let Assumptions 1, 2, and 3 with Вө = 0 hold for Q = BвҲҡ2R (xвҲ— ), where
                                           q P
                                                  n
R вүҘ вҲҘx0 вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲҘ. Assume that ОҪ = 0, О¶вҲ— = n1 i=1 вҲҘвҲҮfi (xвҲ— )вҲҘ2 ,
                                    вҲҡ
                                             n(ОұвҲ’1)/Оұ R

                               1      nR                                           nR
          0 < Оі = O min           ,      ,                     , О»k = О» = Оҳ             .
                              LA AО¶вҲ— ПғK 1/Оұ A(ОұвҲ’1)/Оұ                               ОіA
                                                        PK
Then to guarantee ОҰ(xМ„K ) вҲ’ ОҰ(xвҲ— ) вүӨ Оө for xМ„K = K+11           k
                                                           k=0 x with probability вүҘ 1 вҲ’ ОІ DProx-
clipped-SGD-shift requires
                  (                         Оұ )!
                    LR2 RО¶вҲ— 1 ПғR ОұвҲ’1

          O max
          e               ,вҲҡ ,                         iterations/oracle calls per worker.  (16)
                      Оө      nОө n      Оө

Discussion of the results for DProx-clipped-SGD-shift. Up to the difference between V and
вҲҘx0 вҲ’xвҲ— вҲҘ2 , in the single-node case, the derived results coincide with ones known for clipped-SGD in
the unconstrained case (Sadiev et al., 2023). In the composite non-distributed case (n = 1), the result
of Theorem 2.2 is the first known of its type, and Theorem 2.3 recovers (up to logarithmic factors) the
result from (Nguyen et al., 2023a) for a version of Stochastic Mirror Descent with gradient    clipping
(Clipped-SMD), see Table 1. Indeed, parameter R     b2 = R 3R + LвҲ’1 (2О·Пғ + вҲҘвҲҮf (x0 )вҲҘ) for some
О· > 0 from the result by Nguyen et al. (2023a) equals Оҳ(Оҳ(R2 + RО¶вҲ—/L)), when О· is sufficiently small
(otherwise Rb can be worse than Оҳ(R2 + RО¶вҲ—/L)), which can be seen from the following inequalities
following smoothness: вҲҘвҲҮf (x0 )вҲҘ вүӨ вҲҘвҲҮf (xвҲ— )вҲҘ + вҲҘвҲҮf (x0 ) вҲ’ вҲҮf (xвҲ— )вҲҘ вүӨ вҲҘвҲҮf (xвҲ— )вҲҘ + LвҲҘx0 вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲҘ
and вҲҘвҲҮf (xвҲ— )вҲҘ вүӨ вҲҘвҲҮf (x0 )вҲҘ + вҲҘвҲҮf (x0 ) вҲ’ вҲҮf (xвҲ— )вҲҘ вүӨ вҲҘвҲҮf (x0 )вҲҘ + LвҲҘx0 вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲҘ. Since in this
work we do not focus on the logarithmic factors, we do not show them in the main text and provide
the complete expressions in the appendix. Nguyen et al. (2023a) has better dependencies on the
parameters under logarithms than our results. We conjecture that adjusting the proof technique from
(Nguyen et al., 2023a) one can improve the logarithmic factors in our results as well.
It is worth mentioning that shifts are not needed in the convex case because the method does not
have fast enough convergence, which makes it work with a constant clipping level, i.e., the method in
the convex case requires less tight gradient estimates and is more robust to the bias than in strongly


                                                     7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


convex. In the quasi-strongly convex case, the shiftsвҖҷ stepsize is chosen as ОҪ вҲј Оҳ(1/A) and it does
not explicitly affect the rate since ОіВө = Оҳ(1/A), see the details in Section 3 and Appendix E.
Next, as expected for a distributed method, the terms in the complexity bounds related to the
noise improve with the growth of n. More precisely, the terms depending on the noise level Пғ are
proportional to 1/n, i.e., our results show so-called linear speed-up in the complexity вҖ“ a desirable
feature for a stochastic distributed method. This aspect highlights the benefits of parallelization.
To the best of our knowledge, the results for the distributed methods proposed in our work are the
only existing ones under Assumption 1 (even if we take into account the in-expectation convergence
results). In the special case of Оұ = 2, our results match (up to logarithmic factors) the SOTA
ones from (Gorbunov et al., 2021) since parallelization with linear speed-up follows for free under
the bounded variance assumption, if the clipping is applied after averaging as it should be in the
parallelized version of methods from (Gorbunov et al., 2021) to keep the analysis from (Gorbunov
et al., 2021) unchanged. Indeed, when {вҲҮfОҫi (x)}iвҲҲ[n] are independent stochastic gradients satisfying
Assumption 1 with parameters Пғ > 0 and Оұ = 2, then n1 iвҲҲ[n] вҲҮfОҫi (x) also satisfies Assumption 1
                                                          P
                    вҲҡ
with parameters Пғ/ n and Оұ = 2. However, when Оұ < 2 achieving linear speed-up is not that
straightforward. If {вҲҮfОҫi (x)}iвҲҲ[n] are independent stochastic gradients satisfying Assumption 1
with parameters Пғ > 0 and Оұ < 2, then the existing results (Wang et al., 2021, Lemma 7) give a
                                                                                2вҲ’Оұ Оұ1 вҲ’1
weaker guarantee: n1 iвҲҲ[n] вҲҮfОҫi (x) satisfies Assumption 1 with parameters 2 dОұвҲ’1       2Пғ
                      P
                                                                                           , which is
                                                                                    n   Оұ
dimension dependent, and the same Оұ. Therefore, if one applies this result to the known ones from
(Sadiev et al., 2023; Nguyen et al., 2023a), then the resulting complexity will have an extra factor
      1       Оұ
of d ОұвҲ’1 вҲ’ 2(ОұвҲ’1) in the term that depends on Пғ. For large-scale or even medium-scale heavy-tailed
                                                                                                7
problems, this factor can be huge, e.g., when d = 1000 and Оұ = 76 , this factor is 10006вҲ’ 3 >
10003 = 109 .
To avoid these issues, we apply gradient clipping on the workers and then average clipped vectors,
not vice versa. This is also partially motivated by the popularity of gradient clipping for ensuring
differential privacy guarantees (Abadi et al., 2016; Chen et al., 2020) in Federated Learning (KonecМҢnyМҖ
et al., 2016; Kairouz et al., 2021). Therefore, the proposed distributed methods can be useful for
differential privacy as well, though we do not study this aspect in our work.

Acceleration. Next, we propose a distributed version of clipped Stochastic Similar Triangles
Method (Gorbunov et al., 2020a; Gasnikov & Nesterov, 2016) for composite problems (DProx-
clipped-SSTM-shift): x0 = y 0 = z 0 , A0 = Оұ0 = 0, Оұk+1 = k+2
                                                          2aL , Ak+1 = Ak + Оұk+1 and

                      Ak y k + Оұk+1 z k
               xk+1 =                      , z k+1 = proxОұk+1 ОЁ z k вҲ’ Оұk+1 ge(xk+1 ) ,

                                                                                                   (17)
                             Ak+1
                                           n
                                     1X                                       ЛҶ ki ,
                        ge(xk+1 ) =          gei (xk+1 ), gei (xk+1 ) = hki + вҲҶ                    (18)
                                     n i=1

                   hk+1  =  hk
                             i +  ОҪk
                                     ЛҶ ki , вҲҶ
                                     вҲҶ        ЛҶ ki = clip вҲҮfОҫk (xk+1 ) вҲ’ hki , О»k ,                (19)
                    i                                             i

                                               Ak y k + Оұk+1 z k+1
                                     y k+1 =                                                       (20)
                                                      Ak+1
where Оҫ1k , . . . , Оҫnk are sampled independently from each other and previous steps. For the proposed
method, we derive the following result.
Theorem 2.4 (Convergence of DProx-clipped-SSTM-shift). Let Assumptions
                                                                q P1, 2, and 3 with
                      вҲҡ      вҲ—               0   вҲ— 2               1   n          вҲ— 2
Вө = 0 hold for Q = B5 2nR (x ), where R вүҘ вҲҘx вҲ’ x вҲҘ . Let О¶вҲ— =      n   i=1 вҲҘвҲҮfi (x )вҲҘ ,
           вҲҡ
C = Оҳ(A/ n), K0 = Оҳ(A2 ), where K вүҘ 1, ОІ вҲҲ (0, 1), A = ln 10nK
                                                            ОІ . Assume that
       ( 2k+5
        (k+3)2 ,         if k > K0 ,                    A4 A3 О¶вҲ— ПғK (Оұ+1)/Оұ A(ОұвҲ’1)/Оұ

  ОҪk =      (k+2)2                   , a = Оҳ max 2,       , вҲҡ ,                         ,
        C 2 (K0 +2)2 n , if k вүӨ K0 ,
                                                         n L nR      LRnОұвҲ’1/Оұ

                                                nR
                                      О»k = Оҳ            .
                                               Оұk+1 A


                                                   8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Then to guarantee ОҰ(y K ) вҲ’ ОҰ(xвҲ— ) вүӨ Оө with probability вүҘ 1 вҲ’ ОІ DProx-clipped-SSTM-shift
requires
                                           Оұ )!
             (r         s
                     2
                                          ОұвҲ’1
                  LR       RО¶вҲ—  1    ПғR
     Oe max            , вҲҡ ,                       iterations/oracle calls per worker. (21)
                   Оө        nОө n      Оө


Sketch of the proof. The proof of this result resembles the proof for clipped-SSTM from (Sadiev
et al., 2023) but has some noticeable differences. In addition to handling the extra technical challenges
appearing due to the composite structure (e.g., one cannot apply some useful formulas like z k вҲ’
z k+1 = Оұk+1 ge(xk+1 ) that hold in the unconstrained Pcase),  we use a non-standard potential function
                                                        n
Mk defined as Mk = вҲҘz k вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲҘ2 + (C ОұK0 +1/n) i=1 вҲҘhki вҲ’ вҲҮfi (xвҲ— )вҲҘ2 for k вүӨ K0 and Mk =
                                           2 2


                 C 2 Оұ2k+1 Pn
вҲҘz k вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲҘ2 +       n
                                  k           вҲ— 2
                            i=1 вҲҘhi вҲ’ вҲҮfi (x )вҲҘ for k > K0 . We elaborate on this and provide the
complete proof in Appendix F.

When n = 1, the derived result has optimal dependence on Оө (up to logarithmic factors) (Nemirovskij
& Yudin, 1983; Zhang et al., 2020b). In contrast to the result from (Nguyen et al., 2023a), we do not
assume that вҲҮf (xвҲ— ) = 0. Moreover, as DProx-clipped-SGD-shift, DProx-clipped-SSTM-shift
benefits from parallelization since the second term in (21) is proportional 1/n. When n is sufficiently
large, the effect of acceleration can become significant even for large Пғ. In Appendix F.2, we also
provide the convergence results for the restarted version of DProx-clipped-SSTM-shift assuming
additionally that f is strongly convex and one can compute starting shifts h0i as вҲҮfi (x0 ).

3    O N THE P ROOFS S TRUCTURE
In this section, we elaborate on the proofs structure of our results and highlight additional challenges
appearing due to the presence of the composite term and distributed nature of the methods. The
proof of each result consist of two parts: optimization/descent lemma and the analysis of the sums
appearing due to the stochasticity and biasedness of the updates (due to the clipping). In the first part,
we usually follow some standard analysis of corresponding deterministic method without clipping
and separate the stochastic part from the deterministic one (though for DProx-clipped-SSTM-shift
we use quite non-standard Lyapunov function, which can be interesting on its own). For example, in
the analysis5 of DProx-clipped-SGD-shift under Assumption 4, we prove the following inequality:
                                           K    n
                                       2Оі X X
VK+1     вүӨ    (1 вҲ’ ОіВө)K+1 V0 +                  (1 вҲ’ ОіВө)KвҲ’k вҹЁxk вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲ’ Оі(вҲҮf (xk ) вҲ’ вҲҮf (xвҲ— )), Пүi,k вҹ©
                                       n    i=1
                                          k=0
                        K X
                      2 X n                                      K
                     Оі                                           X
                 +                  (1 вҲ’ ОіВө)KвҲ’k вҲҘПүi,k вҲҘ2 + Оі 2         (1 вҲ’ ОіВө)KвҲ’k вҲҘПүk вҲҘ2 ,
                     n2
                          k=0 i=1                                k=0
                              2 2 2 Pn
where Vk = вҲҘx вҲ’ x вҲҘ + C Оіn A
                k         вҲ— 2                 k          вҲ— 2
                                      i=1 вҲҘhi вҲ’ вҲҮfi (x )вҲҘ for some numerical constant C > 0 and
                      k     k
vectors Пүi,k = вҲҮfi (x ) вҲ’ gei represent the discrepancy between the full gradients and their estimates.
Moreover, to use this inequality for some K = T вүҘ 0 we need to show that {xk }Tk=0 belong to
the set where the assumptions hold (in this particular case, to B3nвҲҡ2R (xвҲ— )) with high probability.
We do it always by induction. More precisely, we prove that P{Ek } вүҘ 1 вҲ’ kОІ/(K+1) for the
                                                                                    PrвҲ’1 u
probability event Ek defined as follows: inequalities Vt вүӨ 4 exp(вҲ’ОіВөt)R2 and nОі i=1 Пүi,tвҲ’1          вүӨ
                      p 2
                                                                                                         u
exp(вҲ’ОіВө(tвҲ’1)/2) R /2 hold for t = 0, 1, . . . , k and r = 1, 2, . . . , n simultaneously, where Пүi,t        =
      git ] вҲ’ geit and EОҫit [В·] denotes an expectation w.r.t. Оҫit . To prove this, we use Bernstein inequality
EОҫit [e
for martingale difference (see Lemma B.1). However, to apply Bernstein inequality we need to
circumvent multiple technical difficulties related to the estimation of the norm of the clipped vector
(that involves derivations related to the shifts {hki }iвҲҲ[n] ), proper choice of the clipping level to
control the bias and variance and achieve desired linear speed-up (see Lemma B.3 and the following
discussion). Moreover, when n > 1 (distributed case), we also need to apply additional induction
over clients to estimate sums like в‘Ҙ from (265).
   5
     In the appendix, we analyze this case in the generality of variational inequalities. Here we provide a
simplified version for minimization.


                                                       9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Martin Abadi, Andy Chu, Ian Goodfellow, H Brendan McMahan, Ilya Mironov, Kunal Talwar, and
 Li Zhang. Deep learning with differential privacy. In Proceedings of the 2016 ACM SIGSAC
 conference on computer and communications security, pp. 308вҖ“318, 2016.
Ahmet Alacaoglu and Yura Malitsky. Stochastic variance reduction for variational inequality methods.
  In Conference on Learning Theory, pp. 778вҖ“816. PMLR, 2022.
Amir Beck. First-order methods in optimization. SIAM, 2017.
George Bennett. Probability inequalities for the sum of independent random variables. Journal of the
  American Statistical Association, 57(297):33вҖ“45, 1962.
Aleksandr Beznosikov, Eduard Gorbunov, Hugo Berard, and Nicolas Loizou. Stochastic gradient
  descent-ascent: Unified theory and new efficient methods. pp. 172вҖ“235, 2023.
Xiangyi Chen, Steven Z Wu, and Mingyi Hong. Understanding gradient clipping in private sgd: A
  geometric perspective. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:13773вҖ“13782,
  2020.
Patrick L Combettes and Jean-Christophe Pesquet. Proximal splitting methods in signal processing.
  Fixed-point algorithms for inverse problems in science and engineering, pp. 185вҖ“212, 2011.
Ashok Cutkosky and Harsh Mehta. High-probability bounds for non-convex stochastic optimization
  with heavy tails. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34, 2021.
Damek Davis, Dmitriy Drusvyatskiy, Lin Xiao, and Junyu Zhang. From low probability to high
  confidence in stochastic convex optimization. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 22(49):
 1вҖ“38, 2021.
Kacha Dzhaparidze and JH Van Zanten. On bernstein-type inequalities for martingales. Stochastic
  processes and their applications, 93(1):109вҖ“117, 2001.
David A Freedman et al. On tail probabilities for martingales. the Annals of Probability, 3(1):
 100вҖ“118, 1975.
Alexander Gasnikov and Yurii Nesterov. Universal fast gradient method for stochastic composit
  optimization problems. arXiv preprint arXiv:1604.05275, 2016.
Saeed Ghadimi and Guanghui Lan. Optimal stochastic approximation algorithms for strongly
  convex stochastic composite optimization i: A generic algorithmic framework. SIAM Journal on
  Optimization, 22(4):1469вҖ“1492, 2012.
Ian Goodfellow, Yoshua Bengio, and Aaron Courville. Deep learning. MIT press, 2016.
Eduard Gorbunov, Marina Danilova, and Alexander Gasnikov. Stochastic optimization with heavy-
  tailed noise via accelerated gradient clipping. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  33:15042вҖ“15053, 2020a.
Eduard Gorbunov, Filip Hanzely, and Peter RichtaМҒrik. A unified theory of sgd: Variance reduc-
  tion, sampling, quantization and coordinate descent. In International Conference on Artificial
  Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 680вҖ“690. PMLR, 2020b.
Eduard Gorbunov, Marina Danilova, Innokentiy Shibaev, Pavel Dvurechensky, and Alexander Gas-
  nikov. Near-optimal high probability complexity bounds for non-smooth stochastic optimization
  with heavy-tailed noise. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.05958, 2021.
Eduard Gorbunov, Marina Danilova, David Dobre, Pavel Dvurechenskii, Alexander Gasnikov, and
  Gauthier Gidel. Clipped stochastic methods for variational inequalities with heavy-tailed noise.
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:31319вҖ“31332, 2022a.
Eduard Gorbunov, Nicolas Loizou, and Gauthier Gidel. Extragradient method: O(1/K ) last-iterate
  convergence for monotone variational inequalities and connections with cocoercivity. In Interna-
  tional Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 366вҖ“402. PMLR, 2022b.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Robert M Gower, Mark Schmidt, Francis Bach, and Peter RichtaМҒrik. Variance-reduced methods for
  machine learning. Proceedings of the IEEE, 108(11):1968вҖ“1983, 2020.
Filip Hanzely and Peter RichtaМҒrik. One method to rule them all: Variance reduction for data,
   parameters and many new methods. arXiv preprint arXiv:1905.11266, 2019.
Anatoli Juditsky, Arkadi Nemirovski, and Claire Tauvel. Solving variational inequalities with
  stochastic mirror-prox algorithm. Stochastic Systems, 1(1):17вҖ“58, 2011.
Peter Kairouz, H Brendan McMahan, Brendan Avent, AureМҒlien Bellet, Mehdi Bennis, Arjun Nitin
  Bhagoji, Kallista Bonawitz, Zachary Charles, Graham Cormode, Rachel Cummings, et al. Ad-
  vances and open problems in federated learning. Foundations and TrendsВ® in Machine Learning,
  14(1вҖ“2):1вҖ“210, 2021.
Sai Praneeth Karimireddy, Lie He, and Martin Jaggi. Learning from history for byzantine robust
  optimization. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 5311вҖ“5319. PMLR, 2021.
Ahmed Khaled, Othmane Sebbouh, Nicolas Loizou, Robert M Gower, and Peter RichtaМҒrik. Unified
  analysis of stochastic gradient methods for composite convex and smooth optimization. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2006.11573, 2020.
Jakub KonecМҢnyМҖ, H Brendan McMahan, Felix X Yu, Peter RichtaМҒrik, Ananda Theertha Suresh, and
  Dave Bacon. Federated learning: Strategies for improving communication efficiency. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1610.05492, 2016.
Xiaoyu Li and Francesco Orabona. A high probability analysis of adaptive sgd with momentum.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2007.14294, 2020.
Zijian Liu and Zhengyuan Zhou. Stochastic nonsmooth convex optimization with heavy-tailed noises.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.12277, 2023.
Zijian Liu, Ta Duy Nguyen, Thien Hang Nguyen, Alina Ene, and Huy LeМӮ Nguyen. High probability
  convergence of stochastic gradient methods. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.14843, 2023.
Nicolas Loizou, Hugo Berard, Gauthier Gidel, Ioannis Mitliagkas, and Simon Lacoste-Julien. Stochas-
  tic gradient descent-ascent and consensus optimization for smooth games: Convergence analysis
  under expected co-coercivity. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34, 2021.
D Russell Luke. Proximal methods for image processing. Nanoscale Photonic Imaging, 134:165,
  2020.
Panayotis Mertikopoulos and Zhengyuan Zhou. Learning in games with continuous action sets and
  unknown payoff functions. Mathematical Programming, 173(1):465вҖ“507, 2019.
Stanislav Minsker. Geometric median and robust estimation in banach spaces. 2015.
Konstantin Mishchenko, Eduard Gorbunov, Martin TakaМҒcМҢ, and Peter RichtaМҒrik. Distributed learning
  with compressed gradient differences. arXiv preprint arXiv:1901.09269, 2019.
Aleksandr Viktorovich Nazin, AS Nemirovsky, Aleksandr Borisovich Tsybakov, and AB Juditsky.
  Algorithms of robust stochastic optimization based on mirror descent method. Automation and
  Remote Control, 80(9):1607вҖ“1627, 2019.
Ion Necoara, Yu Nesterov, and Francois Glineur. Linear convergence of first order methods for
  non-strongly convex optimization. Mathematical Programming, 175(1):69вҖ“107, 2019.
Arkadi Nemirovski, Anatoli Juditsky, Guanghui Lan, and Alexander Shapiro. Robust stochastic
  approximation approach to stochastic programming. SIAM Journal on optimization, 19(4):1574вҖ“
  1609, 2009.
Arkadij SemenovicМҢ Nemirovskij and David Borisovich Yudin. Problem complexity and method
  efficiency in optimization. 1983.
Yurii Nesterov et al. Lectures on convex optimization, volume 137. Springer, 2018.


                                               11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Yury Nesterov. Gradient methods for minimizing composite functions. Mathematical programming,
  140(1):125вҖ“161, 2013.
Ta Duy Nguyen, Alina Ene, and Huy L Nguyen. Improved convergence in high probability of clipped
  gradient methods with heavy tails. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.01119, 2023a.
Ta Duy Nguyen, Thien Hang Nguyen, Alina Ene, and Huy Le Nguyen. High probability convergence
  of clipped-sgd under heavy-tailed noise. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.05437, 2023b.
Neal Parikh and Stephen Boyd. Proximal algorithms. Foundations and trendsВ® in Optimization, 1
  (3):127вҖ“239, 2014.
Razvan Pascanu, Tomas Mikolov, and Yoshua Bengio. On the difficulty of training recurrent neural
  networks. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 1310вҖ“1318, 2013.
Abdurakhmon Sadiev, Marina Danilova, Eduard Gorbunov, Samuel HorvaМҒth, Gauthier Gidel, Pavel
  Dvurechensky, Alexander Gasnikov, and Peter RichtaМҒrik. High-probability bounds for stochas-
  tic optimization and variational inequalities: the case of unbounded variance. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2302.00999, 2023.
Shai Shalev-Shwartz and Shai Ben-David. Understanding machine learning: From theory to
  algorithms. Cambridge university press, 2014.
Chaobing Song, Zhengyuan Zhou, Yichao Zhou, Yong Jiang, and Yi Ma. Optimistic dual extrapolation
  for coherent non-monotone variational inequalities. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 33:14303вҖ“14314, 2020.
Hongjian Wang, Mert Gurbuzbalaban, Lingjiong Zhu, Umut Simsekli, and Murat A Erdogdu.
  Convergence rates of stochastic gradient descent under infinite noise variance. Advances in Neural
 Information Processing Systems, 34:18866вҖ“18877, 2021.
Jingzhao Zhang, Tianxing He, Suvrit Sra, and Ali Jadbabaie. Why gradient clipping accelerates
   training: A theoretical justification for adaptivity. In International Conference on Learning
   Representations, 2020a. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=BJgnXpVYwS.
Jingzhao Zhang, Sai Praneeth Karimireddy, Andreas Veit, Seungyeon Kim, Sashank J Reddi, Sanjiv
   Kumar, and Suvrit Sra. Why are adaptive methods good for attention models? Advances in Neural
   Information Processing Systems, 33, 2020b.
Hui Zou and Trevor Hastie. Regularization and variable selection via the elastic net. Journal of the
  royal statistical society: series B (statistical methodology), 67(2):301вҖ“320, 2005.


                                                12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C ONTENTS

1   Introduction                                                                                      1
    1.1   Setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     2
    1.2   Our Contributions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     3
    1.3   Closely Related Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      4

2   Main Results for Composite Distributed Minimization Problems                                     5

3   On the Proofs Structure                                                                          9

A Extra Related Work                                                                                14

B Auxiliary and Technical Results                                                                   15

C Composite Distributed Variational Inequalities                                                    17
    C.1 Setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      17
    C.2 Assumptions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      17
    C.3 DProx-clipped-SGDA-shift . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         18
    C.4 DProx-clipped-SEG-shift . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        19

D Missing Proofs for Prox-clipped-SGD-star                                                          20

E Missing Proofs for DProx-clipped-SGD-shift                                                        28

F Missing Proofs for DProx-clipped-SSTM-shift                                                       39
    F.1   Convex case . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    39
    F.2   Strongly Convex case . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     54

G Missing Proofs for DProx-clipped-SGDA-shift                                                       58
    G.1 Cocoercive case . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      58
    G.2 Quasi-Strongly Monotone case . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         70

H Missing Proofs for DProx-clipped-SEG-shift                                                        84
    H.1 Monotone Case . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        84
    H.2 Quasi-Strongly Monotone Case . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        100

I   Numerical Experiments                                                                           119


                                                  13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A    E XTRA R ELATED W ORK
Non-convex case. Li & Orabona (2020) analyze the high-probability convergence rate of SGD
for finding first-order stationary points for smooth non-convex unconstrained problems. The first
high-probability result under Assumption 1 for the same class of functions is derived by Cutkosky &
Mehta (2021). However, the result of Cutkosky & Mehta (2021) relies on the additional assumption
that the gradients are bounded. Sadiev et al. (2023) remove the bounded gradient assumption but
derive a slightly worse rate. Nguyen et al. (2023b) improve the result and achieve the same rate as in
(Cutkosky & Mehta, 2021) without assuming boundedness of the gradients. It is worth mentioning
that Cutkosky & Mehta (2021); Sadiev et al. (2023); Nguyen et al. (2023b) derive their main results
for the methods that use gradient clipping.

Gradient clipping is a very useful algorithmic tool in the training of deep neural networks (Pascanu
et al., 2013; Goodfellow et al., 2016). Gradient clipping also has some good theoretical properties, e.g.,
it can be useful for minimization of (L0 , L1 )-smooth functions (Zhang et al., 2020a), in differential
privacy (Abadi et al., 2016), Byzantine-robustness (Karimireddy et al., 2021). Moreover, as we
already mentioned, almost all existing high-probability results that do not rely on the light-tailed noise
assumption are derived for the methods with clipping. Recently, Sadiev et al. (2023) theoretically
showed that SGD has worse high-probability convergence than clipped-SGD even when the noise
in the gradient has bounded variance.


                                                   14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B    AUXILIARY AND T ECHNICAL R ESULTS
Bernstein inequality. In the final stages of our proofs, we need to estimate certain sums of random
variables. The main tool that we use to handle such sums is Bernstein inequality for martingale
differences (Bennett, 1962; Dzhaparidze & Van Zanten, 2001; Freedman et al., 1975).
Lemma B.1. Let the sequence of random variables {Xi }iвүҘ1 form a martingale difference se-
quence, i.e. E [Xi | XiвҲ’1 , . . . , X1 ] = 0 for all i вүҘ 1. Assume that conditional variances
    def
Пғi2 = E Xi2 | XiвҲ’1 , . . . , X1 exist and are bounded and also assume that there exists deterministic
constant c > 0 such that |Xi | вүӨ c almost surely for all i вүҘ 1. Then for all b > 0, G > 0 and n вүҘ 1
                   ( n                     n
                                                     )
                                                                          b2
                       X                  X
                                                2
                 P           Xi > b and       Пғi вүӨ G вүӨ 2 exp вҲ’                      .           (22)
                        i=1               i=1
                                                                     2G + 2cb/3

Impact of clipping on the bias and variance. The following lemma also helps to handle the
aforementioned sums of random variables.
Lemma B.2 (Lemma 5.1 from Sadiev et al. (2023)). Let X be a random vector in Rd and Xe =
clip(X, О»). Then, вҲҘX вҲ’ E[X]вҲҘ вүӨ 2О». Moreover, if for some Пғ вүҘ 0 and Оұ вҲҲ (1, 2] we have
                     e      e
E[X] = x вҲҲ Rd , E[вҲҘX вҲ’ xвҲҘОұ ] вүӨ Пғ Оұ , and вҲҘxвҲҘ вүӨ О»/2, then
                                        e вҲ’x           2Оұ Пғ Оұ
                                     E[X]        вүӨ            ,                      (23)
                                                       О»ОұвҲ’1
                                                       2
                                   E      e вҲ’ E[X]
                                          X     e           вүӨ 18О»2вҲ’Оұ Пғ Оұ .                        (24)

Intuition behind the choice of clipping level in the distributed case. To better illustrate why we
increase clipping level n times, we prove the following lemma.
Lemma B.3. Let X1 , X2 , . . . , Xn be independent random vectors in Rd and X
                                                                            ei = clip(Xi , О») for
                       e = 1 Pn X
all i вҲҲ [n]. Then, for X             ei we have вҲҘXe вҲ’ E[X]вҲҘ
                                                         e вүӨ 2О». Moreover, if for some Пғ вүҘ 0 and
                            n      i=1
       2] we have E[Xi ] = xi вҲҲ Rd , E[вҲҘXi вҲ’ xi вҲҘОұ ] вүӨ Пғ Оұ , and вҲҘxi вҲҘ вүӨ О»/2 for all i вҲҲ [n], then for
Оұ вҲҲ (1,P
         n
x = n1 i=1 xi the following inequalities hold
                                        e вҲ’x           2Оұ Пғ Оұ
                                     E[X]         вүӨ            ,                                  (25)
                                                       О»ОұвҲ’1
                                                             2вҲ’Оұ   Оұ

                                              2        18О»       Пғ
                             E X e вҲ’ E[X] e       вүӨ                  .                            (26)
                                                              n

Proof. From Lemma B.2 we have for all i вҲҲ [n] that вҲҘX
                                                    ei вҲ’ E[Xei ]вҲҘ вүӨ 2О» and
                                                        Оұ Оұ
                                     e i ] вҲ’ xi        2 Пғ
                                  E[X              вүӨ        ,                                     (27)
                                                       О»ОұвҲ’1
                                                       2
                                   E     ei вҲ’ E[X
                                         X      ei ]        вүӨ 18О»2вҲ’Оұ Пғ Оұ .                        (28)

JensenвҖҷs inequality implies
                                          n                   n
           e вҲ’ E[X]                    1 X  e       ei ] вүӨ 1
                                                             X
           X     e          =                Xi вҲ’ E[X            ei вҲ’ E[X
                                                                 X      ei ] вүӨ 2О»,
                                       n i=1               n i=1
                                          n                        n
                                       1 X  e              1X                   (27) 2Оұ Пғ Оұ
              e вҲ’x
            E[X]            =                E[Xi ] вҲ’ xi вүӨ         e i ] вҲ’ xi
                                                                 E[X             вүӨ            .
                                       n i=1               n i=1                     О»ОұвҲ’1
Finally, using the independence of X
                                   e ,...,Xen , we derive
                                  пЈ® 1                         пЈ№

                      2

                                     1
                                        n                   2        n
                                                                                        2

                                                              пЈ»= 1
                                       X                            X
    E X    e вҲ’ E[X]e       = EпЈ°             ei вҲ’ E[X
                                            X        ei ]               E   ei вҲ’ E[X
                                                                            X      ei ]
                                     n i=1                       n2 i=1
                            (28)       18О»2вҲ’Оұ Пғ Оұ
                              вүӨ
                                           n
that concludes the proof.


                                                       15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


From (25)-(26), we see that number of workers n appears differently in the bound on bias and
variance. However, if we replace О» with nО», then both bounds will transform to (23)-(24) respectively
            Оұ
with Пғ Оұ = Пғ /nОұвҲ’1 (in other words, bias and variance will have the same dependence on n). These
observations hint that the complexity bounds for distributed methods should be similar to the ones
proven for non-distributed methods (in the unconstrained case) by Sadiev et al. (2023) up to the
                          Оұ
replacement of Пғ Оұ with Пғ /nОұвҲ’1 . Nevertheless, our analysis of the distributed case does not rely on
Lemma B.3 and has some important differences with the single-node case (even when ОЁ вүЎ 0).

Useful inequality related to prox-operator. In the analysis of DProx-clipped-SGDA-shift, we
use the following standard result.
Lemma B.4 (Theorem 6.39 (iii) from (Beck, 2017)). Let ОЁ be a proper lower semicontinuous convex
function and x+ = proxОіОЁ (x). Then for all y вҲҲ Rd the following inequality holds:

                          вҹЁx+ вҲ’ x, y вҲ’ x+ вҹ© вүҘ Оі ОЁ(x+ ) вҲ’ ОЁ(y) .


                                                 16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 2: Summary of known and new high-probability complexity results for solving (non-) composite (non-) distributed variational
inequality problem (29). Column вҖңSetupвҖқ indicates the assumptions made in addition to Assumptions 1. All assumptions    вҲҡ are made only on
some ball around the solution with radius вҲј R вүҘ вҲҘx0 вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲҘ (for the results from (Sadiev et al., 2023)) or radius вҲј V (Theorems C.1
and C.2). Complexity is the number of stochastic oracle calls(per worker) needed for a method to guarantee that P{Metric вүӨ Оө} вүҘ 1 вҲ’ ОІ
for some Оө > 0, ОІ вҲҲ (0, 1] and вҖңMetricвҖқ is taken from the corresponding column. Numerical and logarithmic factors are omitted for
simplicity. Column вҖңC?вҖқ shows whether the problem (1) is composite, вҖңD?вҖқ indicates whether the problem (1) is distributed. Notation:
eK
                PK
                       ek (for SEG-type methods), xK
            1                                                        1
                                                                         PK       k
x avg = K+1        k=0 x                                  avg = K+1          k=0 x (for SGDA-type methods); L = Lipschitz constant; Пғ =
                                                                0     вҲ—
parameter from Assumption 1; R = any upper bound on вҲҘx вҲ’ x вҲҘ (for the results from (Sadiev et al., 2023)); V = any upper bound on
                                 48n(K+1)
                  409600Оі 2 ln2
вҲҘx0 вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲҘ2 +                         ОІ                       вҲ—
                                               Pn                 2
                              n2                  i=1 вҲҘFi (x )вҲҘ (for the results of this paper); Вө = quasi-strong monotonicity parameter; в„“ =
star-cocoercivity parameter. The results of this paper are highlighted in blue.

            Setup                      Method                        Metric                   Complexity                   C?     D?
                                   clipped-SEG
                                                                                            n     2          Оұ o
                                                                       xK
                                                                 GapR (eavg )          max LR   Оө ,
                                                                                                       ПғR ОұвҲ’1
                                                                                                        Оө                  вң—      вң—
                                (Sadiev et al., 2023)
          As. 6 & 7                                                                                    вҲҡ   Оұ
                              DProx-clipped-SEG-shift
                                                                       xK
                                                                GapвҲҡV (eavg )         max LV Оө , n
                                                                                                  1    Пғ V
                                                                                                         Оө
                                                                                                               ОұвҲ’1
                                                                                                                           вң“       вң“
                                   Theorem H.1
                                                                                                   2   Оұ )
                                   clipped-SEG
                                                                 вҲҘxk вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲҘ2           max L        Пғ
                                                                                             Вө , Вө2 Оө
                                                                                                          2(ОұвҲ’1
                                                                                                                           вң—      вң—
                                (Sadiev et al., 2023)
          As. 6 & 8                                                                                  2   Оұ )
                              DProx-clipped-SEG-shift                k     вҲ— 2                              2(ОұвҲ’1
                                                                 вҲҘx вҲ’ x вҲҘ             max L Вө, n
                                                                                                1     Пғ
                                                                                                     Вө2 Оө
                                                                                                                           вң“       вң“
                                   Theorem H.2
                                  clipped-SGDA
                                                                                             n    2            Оұ o
                                                                 GapR (xK              max в„“R          ПғR

                                                                                                              ОұвҲ’1          вң—      вң—
                                (Sadiev et al., 2023)                   avg )                   Оө ,    Оө
       As. 7 & 9 & 10                                                                                 вҲҡ   Оұ
                             DProx-clipped-SGDA-shift
                                                                GapвҲҡV (xK
                                                                        avg )         max   в„“V   1
                                                                                             Оө , n
                                                                                                      Пғ V
                                                                                                        Оө
                                                                                                            ОұвҲ’1
                                                                                                                           вң“       вң“
                                   Theorem G.1
                                                                                                          Оұ
                                  clipped-SGDA                                                      2         )

                                                                     K     вҲ— 2
                                                                вҲҘx       вҲ’x вҲҘ         max Вө  в„“
                                                                                               , ВөПғ2 Оө 2(ОұвҲ’1               вң—      вң—
                                (Sadiev et al., 2023)
          As. 8 & 9                                                                                 2   Оұ )
                             DProx-clipped-SGDA-shift
                                                                вҲҘxK вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲҘ2           max Вө   , n ВөПғ2 Оө 2(ОұвҲ’1
                                                                                            в„“ 1
                                                                                                                           вң“       вң“
                                   Theorem G.2



C      C OMPOSITE D ISTRIBUTED VARIATIONAL I NEQUALITIES

In this section, we provide an overview of the obtained results for variational inequalities.

C.1      S ETUP

In addition to the minimization problems, we also consider stochastic composite variational inequality
problems (VIPs):
                        find xвҲ— вҲҲ Rd such that вҹЁF (xвҲ— ), x вҲ’ xвҲ— вҹ© + ОЁ(x) вҲ’ ОЁ(xвҲ— ) вүҘ 0,                                                 (29)
where the assumptions on operator F (x) = EОҫвҲјD [FОҫ (x)] : Rd вҶ’ Rd will be specified later and, as
in the case of minimization, ОЁ(x) is a proper, closed, convex function. When f (x) is convex problem
(1) is a special case of (29) with F (x) = вҲҮf (x). For the examples of problems of type (29), we refer
to (Alacaoglu & Malitsky, 2022; Beznosikov et al., 2023).
The distributed version of (29) has the following structure of F :
                                                         n
                                                    1X
                                       F (x) =            {Fi (x) = EОҫi вҲјDi [FОҫi (x)]} .                                               (30)
                                                    n i=1

In this case, there are n workers connected in a centralized way with some parameter server; worker i
can query some noisy information (stochastic gradients/estimates) about Fi .

C.2      A SSUMPTIONS

Bounded central Оұ-th moment. We consider the situation when Fi are accessible through the
stochastic oracle calls. The stochastic estimates satisfy the following assumption.6
Assumption 5. There exist some set Q вҠҶ Rd and values Пғ вүҘ 0, Оұ вҲҲ (1, 2] such that for all x вҲҲ Q
we have EОҫi вҲјDi [FОҫi (x)] = Fi (x) and
                                                                                  Оұ
                                             EОҫi вҲјDi [вҲҘFОҫi (x) вҲ’ Fi (x)вҲҘ ] вүӨ Пғ Оұ .                                                     (31)
   6
     Following (Sadiev et al., 2023), we consider all assumptions only on some bounded set Q вҠҶ Rd ; the
diameter of Q depends on the starting point.


                                                                     17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Assumptions on Fi . We make standard assumptions on {Fi }iвҲҲ[n] . The first one is Lipschitzness.
Assumption 6. There exist some set Q вҠҶ Rd such that operators Fi are L-Lipschitz:
                        вҲҘFi (x) вҲ’ Fi (y)вҲҘ вүӨ LвҲҘx вҲ’ yвҲҘ                   вҲҖ x, y вҲҲ Q, i вҲҲ [n].                        (32)

Next, for each particular result, we make one or two of the following assumptions.
Assumption 7. There exist some set Q вҠҶ Rd such that F is monotone on Q:
                                       вҹЁF (x) вҲ’ F (y), x вҲ’ yвҹ© вүҘ 0               вҲҖ x, y вҲҲ Q.                        (33)
                                                           d                          вҲ—
Assumption 8. There exist some set Q вҠҶ R such that F is (Вө, x )-quasi strongly monotone on Q
for some Вө вүҘ 0 and any solution xвҲ— of (29):
                           вҹЁF (x) вҲ’ F (xвҲ— ), x вҲ’ xвҲ— вҹ© вүҘ ВөвҲҘx вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲҘ2 ,                     вҲҖ x вҲҲ Q.                 (34)
                                                            d                                    вҲ—
Assumption 9. There exist some set Q вҠҶ R such that {Fi }iвҲҲ[n] are (в„“, x )-star-cocoercive on Q
for some в„“ > 0 and any solution xвҲ— of (29):
                 вҲҘFi (x) вҲ’ Fi (xвҲ— )вҲҘ2 вүӨ в„“вҹЁFi (x) вҲ’ Fi (xвҲ— ), x вҲ’ xвҲ— вҹ©,                    вҲҖ x вҲҲ Q, i вҲҲ [n].        (35)
Assumption 10. There exist some set Q вҠҶ Rd such that F is в„“-cocoercive on Q for some в„“ > 0:
                        вҲҘF (x) вҲ’ F (y)вҲҘ2 вүӨ в„“вҹЁF (x) вҲ’ F (y), x вҲ’ yвҹ©,                       вҲҖ x, y вҲҲ Q.              (36)

Assumption 7 is a standard assumption for the literature on VIPs. Quasi-strong monotonicity
(Mertikopoulos & Zhou, 2019; Song et al., 2020; Loizou et al., 2021) is weaker than standard strong
monotonicity7 and star-cocoercivity is weaker than standard cocoercivity (Assumption 10), which
implies monotonicity and Lipschitzness but not vice versa. Both conditions (34) and (35) imply
neither monotonicity nor Lipschitzness (Loizou et al., 2021).

C.3      DP ROX - CLIPPED -SGDA- SHIFT

For composite variational inequalities, we start with Distributed Prox-clipped-SGDA-shift
(DProx-clipped-SGDA-shift)     that is defined in (13)-(14) with the following change: вҲҶ      ЛҶk =
                                                                                                i
              k       k             k          k
clip FОҫik (x ) вҲ’ hi , О»k , where Оҫ1 , . . . , Оҫn are sampled independently from each other and previ-
ous steps. For the proposed method, we derive the following result.
Theorem C.1 (Convergence of DProx-clipped-SGDA-shift). Let K вүҘ 1, ОІ вҲҲ (0, 1),
                                                2 2 Pn
A = ln 48n(K+1)
            ОІ     , V вүҘ вҲҘx0 вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲҘ2 + 25600Оі n2
                                                 A               вҲ— 2
                                                       i=1 вҲҘFi (x )вҲҘ .
Case 1. Let Assumptions 1, 8 with Вө > 0, and 9 hold for Q = B3вҲҡV (xвҲ— ). Assume
                        1 вҲҡ                                  1 вҲҡ
    0 < ОҪ = O( / nA), 0 < Оі = O (min{  / nAВө, /в„“A,
                                                                          ln(BK )/Вө(K+1)}), B
                                                                                              K =
that                                                                  1
                     2(ОұвҲ’1)/Оұ          2(ОұвҲ’1)/Оұ                                                               вҲҡ
Оҳ max{2, (K+1)                  Вө2 n              V /Пғ 2 A2(ОұвҲ’1)/Оұ ln2 (BK )}    , О»k = Оҳ(n exp(вҲ’ОіВө(1+k/2)) V /ОіA).
Case 2.       Let Assumptions 1, 7, and 9 hold for Q = B3вҲҡV (xвҲ— ).                                   Assume that ОҪ = 0,
                            (ОұвҲ’1)/Оұ вҲҡ                                        вҲҡ
0 < Оі = O(min{1/в„“A, n                      V /ПғK 1/Оұ A(ОұвҲ’1)/Оұ }), О» = О» = Оҳ(n V /ОіA).
                                                                   k
                                                вҲ— 2
Then to guarantee вҲҘxK вҲ’ x вҲҘ                 вүӨ    Оө in Case 1 and GapвҲҡV (xK           avg )     =
                                                                                  1
                                                                                      PK
maxyвҲҲBвҲҡV (xвҲ— ) вҹЁF (y), xavg вҲ’ yвҹ© + ОЁ(xavg ) вҲ’ ОЁ(y) вүӨ Оө in Case 2 with xK
                         K            K
                                                                          avg =  K+1      k=0 x k

with probability вүҘ 1 вҲ’ ОІ DProx-clipped-SGDA-shift requires
                       (              Оұ )!
                          в„“ 1 Пғ 2 2(ОұвҲ’1)

    Case 1: O max
               e           ,                        iterations/oracle calls per worker,     (37)
                         Вө n Вө2 Оө
                        пЈІ в„“V 1 Пғ вҲҡV ОұвҲ’1 пЈҪ
                 пЈ«      пЈұ              ! Оұ пЈјпЈ¶
    Case 2: O  e пЈӯmax        ,                  пЈё   iterations/oracle calls per worker.     (38)
                        пЈі Оө n       Оө         пЈҫ

As in the case of minimization, in the single-node case, the derived results coincide with ones known
for clipped-SGD in the unconstrained case (Sadiev et al., 2023) Up to the difference between V and
вҲҘx0 вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲҘ2 . In the distributed case, we also observe the benefits of parallelization.
   7
       Operator F is called Вө-strongly monotone on Q if вҹЁF (x) вҲ’ F (y), x вҲ’ yвҹ© вүҘ ВөвҲҘx вҲ’ yвҲҘ2 .


                                                                18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C.4    DP ROX - CLIPPED -SEG- SHIFT

Finally, we propose a distributed version of clipped-SEG for composite VIPs (DProx-clipped-SEG-
shift):
                                           n
                                        1X k                   Лң ki , e             Лң ki
          ek = proxОіОЁ xk вҲ’ Оіe
                            g k , gek =      ge , geik = e
                                                         hki + вҲҶ      hk+1  hki + ОҪ вҲҶ

          x                                                                =e                                   (39)
                                        n i=1 i                         i

                                         n
                                      1X k                   ЛҶ ki , b             ЛҶ ki
      xk+1 = proxОіОЁ xk вҲ’ Оіb
                          g k , gbk =      gb , gbik = b
                                                       hki + вҲҶ      hk+1  hki + ОҪ вҲҶ

                                                                         =b                                     (40)
                                      n i=1 i                         i


      Лңk
where вҲҶ         =     clip(FОҫ1,i k    ek
                             k (x ) вҲ’ h , О»k ),
                                                ЛҶk
                                                вҲҶ                              =          k (e
                                                                                   clip(FОҫ2,i xk ) вҲ’ b
                                                                                                     hki , О»k ) and
        i                              i          i
 k              k      k              k
Оҫ1,1 , . . . , Оҫ1,n , Оҫ2,1 , . . . , Оҫ2,n are sampled independently from each other and previous steps. For
the proposed method, we derive the following result.
Theorem C.2 (Convergence of DProx-clipped-SEG-shift). Let K вүҘ 1, ОІ вҲҲ (0, 1),
                                            2 2 Pn
A = ln 48n(K+1)
           ОІ    , V вүҘ вҲҘx0 вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲҘ2 + 409600Оі
                                        n2
                                             A             вҲ— 2
                                                 i=1 вҲҘFi (x )вҲҘ .
Case 1. Let Assumptions 1, 6, and 8 with Вө > 0 hold for Q = B3вҲҡV (xвҲ— ). As-
                                                            вҲҡ
    that ОҪ = ОіВө, 0 < Оі = O (min{ /ВөA ,  /L, /LA,
sume                                             1    2 1     n  ln(BK )/Вө(K+1)}), B   =
                                                                                     K
                    2(ОұвҲ’1)/Оұ          2(ОұвҲ’1)/Оұ                                                          вҲҡ
Оҳ max{2, (K+1)                 Вө2 n              V /Пғ 2 A2(ОұвҲ’1)/Оұ ln2 (BK )}   , О»k = Оҳ(n exp(вҲ’ОіВө(1+k/4)) V /ОіA).
Case 2.     Let Assumptions 1, 6, and 7 hold for Q = B4nвҲҡV (xвҲ— ).                             Assume that ОҪ = 0,
                           (ОұвҲ’1)/Оұ вҲҡ                                                  вҲҡ
0 < Оі = O(min{1/LA, n            V /ПғK 1/Оұ A(ОұвҲ’1)/Оұ }), О» = О» = Оҳ(n V /ОіA).
                                                         k
Then to guarantee вҲҘx        K
                                вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲҘ 2        вүӨ      Оө in Case 1 and GapвҲҡV (e            xK
                                                                                            avg )   =
                         K                 K                                     K       1
                                                                                             PK
maxyвҲҲBвҲҡV (xвҲ— ) вҹЁF (y), xeavg вҲ’ yвҹ© + ОЁ(e  xavg ) вҲ’ ОЁ(y) вүӨ Оө in Case 2 with x    eavg = K+1 k=0 x    ek
with probability вүҘ 1 вҲ’ ОІ DProx-clipped-SEG-shift requires
                       (                Оұ )!
                         L 1 Пғ 2 2(ОұвҲ’1)

    Case 1: O max
               e            ,                              iterations/oracle calls per worker,    (41)
                         Вө n Вө2 Оө
                       пЈІ LV 1 Пғ вҲҡV ОұвҲ’1 пЈҪ
                 пЈ«     пЈұ                    ! Оұ пЈјпЈ¶
    Case 2: O  e пЈӯmax         ,                      пЈё     iterations/oracle calls per worker.    (42)
                       пЈі Оө n           Оө          пЈҫ


The main properties of the above result are similar to the ones of the result for DProx-clipped-SGDA-
shift. The only difference is that the methods (DProx-clipped-SGDA/SEG-shift) are analyzed
for different classes of problems and, thus, complement each other. According to the known lower
bounds, our upper bound (41) has optimal dependence on Оө up to logarithmic factors.


                                                               19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D    M ISSING P ROOFS FOR Prox-clipped-SGD-star
This section provides the complete formulations of our results for Prox-clipped-SGD-star and
rigorous proofs. We start with the following result вҖ“ a generalization of Lemma E.7 from (Sadiev
et al., 2023) to the composite distributed problems.
Lemma D.1. Consider differentiable function f : Rd вҶ’ R having a finite-sum structure (2). If f
satisfies Assumption 4 on some set Q with parameter Вө and Df (x, xвҲ— ) вүҘ 0 for all8 x вҲҲ Q, then
operator F (x) = вҲҮf (x) satisfies Assumption 8 on Q with parameter Вө/2. If f1 , . . . , fn satisfy
Assumption 2 and 4 with Вө = 0 on some set Q, then operator F (x) = вҲҮf (x) satisfies Assumption 9
on Q with в„“ = 2L.

Proof. Let Assumption 4 hold on some set Q and Df (x, xвҲ— ) вүҘ 0 for all x вҲҲ Q. Then, averaging
inequalities (7), we get that for all x вҲҲ Q
                                                              Вө
                          f (xвҲ— ) вүҘ f (x) + вҹЁвҲҮf (x), xвҲ— вҲ’ xвҹ© + вҲҘx вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲҘ2 ,
                                                              2
implying for F (x) = вҲҮf (x) that
                                                           Вө             Вө
             вҹЁF (x) вҲ’ F (xвҲ— ), x вҲ’ xвҲ— вҹ© вүҘ Df (x, xвҲ— ) + вҲҘx вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲҘ2 вүҘ вҲҘx вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲҘ2 ,
                                                           2             2
meaning that Assumption 8 is satisfied with parameter Вө/2.
It remains to show the second part of the lemma. Let Assumptions 2 and 4 with Вө = 0 hold on some
set Q. We need to show that operators Fi (x) = вҲҮfi (x), i = 1, . . . , n satisfy Assumption 9 on Q
with в„“ = 2L. Guided by (Gorbunov et al., 2022b, Lemma C.6) and (Sadiev et al., 2023, Lemma E.7),
we derive
                                           2
                   1                                                2
        x вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲ’     (Fi (x) вҲ’ Fi (xвҲ— ))       =     вҲҘx вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲҘ2 вҲ’     вҹЁx вҲ’ xвҲ— , Fi (x) вҲ’ Fi (xвҲ— )вҹ©
                   L                                                L
                                                          1
                                                       +    вҲҘFi (x) вҲ’ Fi (xвҲ— )вҲҘ2                 (43)
                                                         L2
                                                                  2
                                               =     вҲҘx вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲҘ2 вҲ’ вҹЁx вҲ’ xвҲ— , вҲҮfi (x) вҲ’ вҲҮfi (xвҲ— )вҹ©
                                                                  L
                                                          1
                                                       + 2 вҲҘвҲҮfi (x) вҲ’ вҲҮfi (xвҲ— )вҲҘ2
                                                         L
                                               (5)                2
                                               вүӨ     вҲҘx вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲҘ2 вҲ’ вҹЁx вҲ’ xвҲ— , вҲҮfi (x)вҹ©
                                                                  L
                                                         2
                                                       + (fi (x) вҲ’ fi (xвҲ— ))
                                                         L
                                               (7)
                                               вүӨ     вҲҘx вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲҘ2 .                                    (44)
From (43) and (44) we get
                         2                                1
         вҲҘx вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲҘ2 вҲ’      вҹЁx вҲ’ xвҲ— , Fi (x) вҲ’ Fi (xвҲ— )вҹ© + 2 вҲҘFi (x) вҲ’ Fi (xвҲ— )вҲҘ2 вүӨ вҲҘx вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲҘ2
                        L                                L
that is equivalent to (35) with в„“ = 2L.

Therefore, for smooth quasi-strongly convex f such that Df (x, xвҲ— ) вүҘ 0 (n = 1) we can consider
operator F (x) = вҲҮf (x) and VI formulation instead. In this case, the method is equivalent to
Prox-clipped-SGDA-star:
           xk+1 = proxОіОЁ xk вҲ’ Оіe   g k , gek = F (xвҲ— ) + clip FОҫk (xk ) вҲ’ F (xвҲ— ), О»k


                              gbk = clip FОҫk (xk ) вҲ’ F (xвҲ— ), О»k .



The following lemma is the main вҖңoptimizationвҖқ part of the analysis of Prox-clipped-SGDA-star.
   8
     For example Df (x, xвҲ— ) вүҘ 0 when f is convex or when ОЁ(x) = 0. We notice that Assumption 2 implies
Df (x, xвҲ— ) вүҘ 0 since the right-hand side of (5) equals Df (x, xвҲ— ) after averaging.


                                                     20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                                  def
Lemma D.2. Let n = 1, Assumptions 8, 9 hold for Q = B2R (xвҲ— ), where R вүҘ R0 = вҲҘx0 вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲҘ,
and 0 < Оі вүӨ 1/в„“. If xk lies in B2R (xвҲ— ) for all k = 0, 1, . . . , K for some K вүҘ 0, then the iterates
produced by Prox-clipped-SGDA-star satisfy
                                                                         K
                                                                         X
       вҲҘxK+1 вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲҘ2           вүӨ       (1 вҲ’ ОіВө)K+1 вҲҘx0 вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲҘ2 + Оі 2         (1 вҲ’ ОіВө)KвҲ’k вҲҘПүk вҲҘ2
                                                                         k=0
                                                K
                                                X
                                          +2Оі       (1 вҲ’ ОіВө)KвҲ’k вҹЁxk вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲ’ Оі(F (xk ) вҲ’ F (xвҲ— )), Пүk вҹ©,      (45)
                                                k=0
                               def
                     Пүk        =       F (xk ) вҲ’ F (xвҲ— ) вҲ’ gbk .                                            (46)

Proof. Using the update rule of Prox-clipped-SGDA-star, we obtain

вҲҘxk+1 вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲҘ2             вҲҘ proxОіОЁ xk вҲ’ Оіe g k вҲ’ proxОіОЁ (xвҲ— вҲ’ ОіF (xвҲ— )) вҲҘ2

                   =
                     вүӨ               вҲҘxk вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲ’ Оі(e
                                                  g k вҲ’ F (xвҲ— ))вҲҘ2
                     =               вҲҘxk вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲҘ2 вҲ’ 2ОівҹЁxk вҲ’ xвҲ— , gbk вҹ© + Оі 2 вҲҘb
                                                                             g k вҲҘ2
                     (46)
                     =               вҲҘxk вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲҘ2 вҲ’ 2ОівҹЁxk вҲ’ xвҲ— , F (xk ) вҲ’ F (xвҲ— )вҹ© вҲ’ 2Оі 2 вҹЁF (xk ) вҲ’ F (xвҲ— ), Пүk вҹ©
                                       +2ОівҹЁxk вҲ’ xвҲ— , Пүk вҹ© + Оі 2 вҲҘF (xk ) вҲ’ F (xвҲ— )вҲҘ2 + Оі 2 вҲҘПүk вҲҘ2
                     (35)
                     вүӨ               вҲҘxk вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲҘ2 + 2ОівҹЁxk вҲ’ xвҲ— , Пүk вҹ© вҲ’ 2Оі 2 вҹЁF (xk ) вҲ’ F (xвҲ— ), Пүk вҹ©

                                                  Оів„“
                                       вҲ’2Оі 1 вҲ’         вҹЁxk вҲ’ xвҲ— , F (xk ) вҲ’ F (xвҲ— )вҹ© + Оі 2 вҲҘПүk вҲҘ2
                                                  2
                  (34),ОівүӨ 1в„“
                     вүӨ               вҲҘxk вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲҘ2 + 2ОівҹЁxk вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲ’ Оі(F (xk ) вҲ’ F (xвҲ— )), Пүk вҹ©

                                                   Оів„“
                                       вҲ’2ОіВө 1 вҲ’         вҲҘxk вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲҘ2 + Оі 2 вҲҘПүk вҲҘ2
                                                    2
                    ОівүӨ 1в„“
                     вүӨ               (1 вҲ’ ОіВө)вҲҘxk вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲҘ2 + 2ОівҹЁxk вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲ’ Оі(F (xk ) вҲ’ F (xвҲ— )), Пүk вҹ© + Оі 2 вҲҘПүk вҲҘ2 .
Unrolling the recurrence, we obtain (45).

Theorem D.1. Let n = 1, Assumptions 8, 9, hold for Q = B2R (xвҲ— ) = {x вҲҲ Rd | вҲҘx вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲҘ вүӨ 2R}
for any x вҲҲ B2R (xвҲ— ), where R вүҘ вҲҘx0 вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲҘ, and
                        (                                )
                                 1            ln(BK )
       0 < Оі вүӨ min                        ,                ,                                          (47)
                          400в„“ ln 4(K+1)
                                     ОІ
                                            Вө(K + 1)
                         пЈұ                                                              пЈј
                                                        2ОұвҲ’1
                                                              2   2
                         пЈІ                    (K + 1) Оұ Вө R                             пЈҪ
         BK = max 2,                                   2(ОұвҲ’1)
                                                                                                      (48)
                         пЈі 4 В· 10 Оұ1 120 2(ОұвҲ’1)
                                            Оұ    Пғ 2 ln Оұ       4(K+1)
                                                                            ln2 (BK ) пЈҫ
                                                                    ОІ
                       пЈ«     пЈұ                                                                  пЈјпЈј
                             пЈҙ
                             пЈҙ                                                                  пЈҙ
                                                                                                пЈҙ пЈҙ
                             пЈҙ                             2ОұвҲ’1
                                                                                                пЈҙпЈҙпЈҙ
                                                                  2   2
                       пЈ¬     пЈҙ                                                                  пЈҙ пЈҙ
                       пЈ¬     пЈІ                           K Оұ Вө R                                пЈҪ пЈҪ
              = O пЈ¬max 2,
                       пЈ¬                                          (                          )!     , (49)
                             пЈҙ         2(ОұвҲ’1)
                                                                              2ОұвҲ’1              пЈҙпЈҙпЈҙ
                                                         2                K        Вө2 R2
                             пЈҙ     2              K                             Оұ               пЈҙ
                             пЈі Пғ ln Оұ             ОІ ln       max 2,
                       пЈӯ     пЈҙ                                                                  пЈҙ пЈҙ
                                                                               2(ОұвҲ’1)
                             пЈҙ                                                                  пЈҙ
                                                                                                пЈҫпЈҙпЈҫ
                                                                        Пғ 2 ln Оұ      ( KОІ )
                      exp(вҲ’ОіВө(1 + k/2))R
          О»k    =                                     ,                                                     (50)
                            120Оі ln 4(K+1)
                                       ОІ

for some K вүҘ 0 and ОІ вҲҲ (0, 1] such that ln 4(K+1)
                                              ОІ    вүҘ 1. Then, after K iterations the iterates
produced by Prox-clipped-SGDA-star with probability at least 1 вҲ’ ОІ satisfy
                                      вҲҘxK+1 вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲҘ2 вүӨ 2 exp(вҲ’ОіВө(K + 1))R2 .                                 (51)


                                                            21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


In particular, when Оі equals the minimum from (47), then the iterates produced by Prox-clipped-
SGDA-star after K iterations with probability at least 1 вҲ’ ОІ satisfy
          пЈ«      пЈұ                                                   (                       )! пЈјпЈ¶
                                             2(ОұвҲ’1)
                                                                               2ОұвҲ’1
                                                                                      2 2
                 пЈҙ                       2            K     2              K     Оұ   Вө R        пЈҙ
          пЈ¬
                 пЈҙ
                 пЈҙ
                 пЈҙ                    ! Пғ ln Оұ         ОІ ln     max 2,          2(ОұвҲ’1)
                                                                                                пЈҙ
                                                                                                пЈҙ
                                                                                                пЈҙпЈ·
  2
          пЈ¬      пЈІ
                     2           ВөK                                      Пғ 2 ln    Оұ   ( K
                                                                                         ОІ )    пЈҪ пЈ·
RK = O пЈ¬    max    R   exp  вҲ’       K
                                       ,                        2ОұвҲ’1
                                                                                                  пЈ· , (52)
          пЈ¬
          пЈӯ      пЈҙ
                 пЈҙ
                 пЈҙ             в„“ ln ОІ                         K Оұ Вө2                            пЈҙ
                                                                                                пЈҙпЈё
                                                                                                пЈҙ
                                                                                                  пЈ·
                 пЈҙ
                 пЈі                                                                              пЈҙ
                                                                                                пЈҫ

                         2
meaning that to achieve RK  = вҲҘxK вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲҘ2 вүӨ Оө with probability at least 1 вҲ’ ОІ Prox-clipped-SGDA-
star requires
                     2                             Оұ                   Оұ !                 !
                                   R2
                                          2   2ОұвҲ’1
                                                            1 Пғ 2 2ОұвҲ’1

              в„“     R         в„“             Пғ                                      Оұ
   K=O          ln       ln     ln      ,              ln                      ln ОұвҲ’1 (BОө )  (53)
              Вө      Оө       ВөОІ    Оө       Вө2 Оө             ОІ Вө2 Оө

iterations/oracle calls, where
                                              пЈұ                                     пЈј
                                              пЈҙ                                     пЈҙ
                                                                R2
                                              пЈҙ
                                              пЈІ                                     пЈҙ
                                                                                    пЈҪ
                                  BОө = max         2,             Оұ   .
                                                                   2  2ОұвҲ’1
                                                        Оө ln ОІ1 ВөПғ2 Оө
                                              пЈҙ
                                              пЈҙ                            пЈҙ
                                                                           пЈҙ
                                              пЈі                            пЈҫ


Proof. Let Rk = вҲҘxk вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲҘ for all k вүҘ 0. Our proof is induction-based: by induction, we show that
the iterates of the method stay in some ball around the solution with high probability. To formulate
the statement rigorously, we introduce probability event Ek for each k = 0, 1, . . . , K + 1 as follows:
inequalities
                                       Rt2 вүӨ 2 exp(вҲ’ОіВөt)R2                                          (54)
hold for t = 0, 1, . . . , k simultaneously. We will prove by induction that P{Ek } вүҘ 1 вҲ’ kОІ/(K+1) for
all k = 0, 1, . . . , K + 1. The base of the induction follows immediately by the definition of R. Next,
assume that for k = T вҲ’ 1 вүӨ K the statement holds: P{ET вҲ’1 } вүҘ 1 вҲ’ (T вҲ’1)ОІ/(K+1). Given this, we
need to prove P{ET } вүҘ 1 вҲ’ T ОІ/(K+1). Since Rt2 вүӨ 2 exp(вҲ’ОіВөt)R2 вүӨ 2R2 , we have xt вҲҲ B2R (xвҲ— )
for t = 0, 1, . . . , T вҲ’ 1, where operator F is в„“-star-cocoercive. Thus, ET вҲ’1 implies
                                                               (54) вҲҡ                     (47),(50) О»
                                                                                                        t
              вҲҘF (xt ) вҲ’ F (xвҲ— )вҲҘ       вүӨ    в„“вҲҘxt вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲҘ вүӨ              2в„“ exp(вҲ’ОіВөt/2)R     вүӨ               (55)
                                                                                                   2
and
                                                                        (55) 5     (50) exp(вҲ’ОіВөt)R2
              вҲҘПүt вҲҘ2   вүӨ    2вҲҘF (xt ) вҲ’ F (xвҲ— )вҲҘ2 + 2вҲҘb
                                                      g t вҲҘ2 вүӨ                   О»2t вүӨ                      (56)
                                                                            2              4Оі 2
for all t = 0, 1, . . . , T вҲ’ 1, where we use that вҲҘa + bвҲҘ2 вүӨ 2вҲҘaвҲҘ2 + 2вҲҘbвҲҘ2 holding for all a, b вҲҲ Rd .
This means that we can apply Lemma D.2 and (1 вҲ’ ОіВө)T вүӨ exp(вҲ’ОіВөT ): ET вҲ’1 implies
                                            T
                                            X вҲ’1
      RT2   вүӨ exp(вҲ’ОіВөT )R2 + 2Оі                   (1 вҲ’ ОіВө)T вҲ’1вҲ’t вҹЁxt вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲ’ Оі(F (xt ) вҲ’ F (xвҲ— )), Пүt вҹ©
                                            t=0
                          T
                          X вҲ’1
                   +Оі 2          (1 вҲ’ ОіВө)T вҲ’1вҲ’t вҲҘПүt вҲҘ2 .
                          t=0

Before we proceed, we introduce a new notation:
              пЈұ
                  t    вҲ—          t       вҲ—
                                                          вҲҡ
              пЈІ|x вҲ’ x вҲ’ Оі(F{z(x ) вҲ’ F (x ))}, if вҲҘО·МӮt вҲҘ вүӨ 2(1 + Оів„“) exp(вҲ’ОіВөt/2)R,
              пЈҙ
         О·t =                 О·МӮt                                                                           (57)
              пЈҙ
              пЈі0,                               otherwise,

for t = 0, 1, . . . , T вҲ’ 1. Random vectors {О·t }Tt=0 are bounded almost surely:
                                          вҲҡ
                                   вҲҘО·t вҲҘ вүӨ 2(1 + Оів„“) exp(вҲ’ОіВөt/2)R                                           (58)


                                                          22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                                                                                                              вҲҡ
for all t = 0, 1, . . . , T вҲ’1. We also notice that ET вҲ’1 implies вҲҘF (xt )вҲ’F (xвҲ— )вҲҘ вүӨ                             2в„“ exp(вҲ’ОіВөt/2)R
(due to (55)) and
               вҲҘxt вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲ’ Оі(F (xt ) вҲ’ F (xвҲ— ))вҲҘ                  вүӨ          вҲҘxt вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲҘ + ОівҲҘF (xt ) вҲ’ F (xвҲ— )вҲҘ
                                                                 (55)       вҲҡ
                                                                 вүӨ            2(1 + Оів„“) exp(вҲ’ОіВөt/2)R
for t = 0, 1, . . . , T вҲ’ 1. Therefore, ET вҲ’1 implies О·t = xt вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲ’ Оі(F (xt ) вҲ’ F (xвҲ— )) for all
t = 0, 1, . . . , T вҲ’ 1 and from ET вҲ’1 it follows that
                                                                         T
                                                                         X вҲ’1
                       RT2      вүӨ exp(вҲ’ОіВөT )R2 + 2Оі                               (1 вҲ’ ОіВө)T вҲ’1вҲ’t вҹЁО·t , Пүt вҹ©
                                                                            t=0
                                                  T
                                                  X вҲ’1
                                           +Оі 2         (1 вҲ’ ОіВө)T вҲ’1вҲ’t вҲҘПүt вҲҘ2 .
                                                  t=0

For convenience, we define unbiased and biased parts of Пүt :
                       def                    def
                   Пүtu = EОҫt gbt вҲ’ gbt , Пүtb = F (xt ) вҲ’ F (xвҲ— ) вҲ’ EОҫt gbt ,

                                                                                                                             (59)
for all t = 0, . . . , T вҲ’ 1. By definition we have Пүt = Пүtu + Пүtb for all t = 0, . . . , T вҲ’ 1. Therefore,
ET вҲ’1 implies
                                                   T
                                                   X вҲ’1
        RT2    вүӨ exp(вҲ’ОіВөT )R2 + 2Оі                       (1 вҲ’ ОіВө)T вҲ’1вҲ’t вҹЁО·t , Пүtu вҹ©
                                                   t=0
                                             |                      {z                       }
                                                                     в‘ 
                              T
                              X вҲ’1                                                   T
                                                                                     X вҲ’1
                                    (1 вҲ’ ОіВө)T вҲ’1вҲ’t вҹЁО·t , Пүtb вҹ© + 2Оі 2                       (1 вҲ’ ОіВө)T вҲ’1вҲ’t EОҫt вҲҘПүtu вҲҘ2

                       + 2Оі
                              t=0                                                     t=0
                          |                   {z                        }     |                       {z                 }
                                              в‘Ў                                                       в‘ў
                                T
                                X вҲ’1
                       + 2Оі 2          (1 вҲ’ ОіВө)T вҲ’1вҲ’t вҲҘПүtu вҲҘ2 вҲ’ EОҫt вҲҘПүtu вҲҘ2

                                t=0
                          |                                 {z                                    }
                                                            в‘Ј
                                T
                                X вҲ’1
                       + 2Оі 2          (1 вҲ’ ОіВө)T вҲ’1вҲ’t вҲҘПүtb вҲҘ2 .                                                              (60)
                                t=0
                          |                  {z                         }
                                              в‘Ө

where we also use inequality вҲҘa + bвҲҘ2 вүӨ 2вҲҘaвҲҘ2 + 2вҲҘbвҲҘ2 holding for all a, b вҲҲ Rd to upper bound
вҲҘПүt вҲҘ2 . To derive high-probability bounds for в‘ , в‘Ў, в‘ў, в‘Ј, в‘Ө we need to establish several useful
                         u      b
inequalities related to Пүi,t , Пүi,t . First, by definition of clipping
                                                          вҲҘПүtu вҲҘ вүӨ 2О»t .                                                     (61)
                                       t            вҲ—
Next, ET вҲ’1    implies that вҲҘF (x ) вҲ’ F (x )вҲҘ вүӨ О»t/2 for all t = 0, 1, . . . , T вҲ’ 1 (see (55)). Therefore,
from Lemma B.2 we also have that ET вҲ’1 implies
                                                            2Оұ Пғ Оұ
                                                   Пүtb вүӨ ОұвҲ’1 ,                                                               (62)
                                                            О»t
                                                h        i
                                                    b 2
                                             EОҫt Пүt        вүӨ 18О»2вҲ’Оұ
                                                                  t ПғОұ ,                                                     (63)
                                                h        i
                                                       2
                                             EОҫt вҲҘПүtu вҲҘ вүӨ 18О»2вҲ’Оұ  t ПғОұ ,                                                     (64)
for all t = 0, 1, . . . , T вҲ’ 1.

Upper bound for в‘ . To estimate this sum, we will use BernsteinвҖҷs inequality. The summands have
conditional expectations equal to zero:
                               EОҫt 2Оі(1 вҲ’ ОіВө)T вҲ’1вҲ’t вҹЁО·t , Пүtu вҹ© = 0.



                                                                 23
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Next, the summands are bounded:
         |2Оі(1 вҲ’ ОіВө)T вҲ’1вҲ’t вҹЁО·t , Пүtu вҹ©|          2Оі exp(вҲ’ОіВө(T вҲ’ 1 вҲ’ t))вҲҘО·t вҲҘ В· вҲҘПүtu вҲҘ
                                                   вүӨ
                                       (58),(61)  вҲҡ
                                          вүӨ      4 2Оі(1 + Оів„“) exp(вҲ’ОіВө(T вҲ’ 1 вҲ’ t/2))RО»t
                                       (47),(50) exp(вҲ’ОіВөT )R2 def
                                          вүӨ                     = c.                       (65)
                                                   5 ln 4(K+1)
                                                           ОІ
                                   def
Finally, conditional variances Пғt2 = EОҫt 4Оі 2 (1 вҲ’ ОіВө)2T вҲ’2вҲ’2t вҹЁО·t , Пүtu вҹ©2 of the summands are

bounded:
                 Пғt2 вүӨ EОҫt 4Оі 2 exp(вҲ’ОіВө(2T вҲ’ 2 вҲ’ 2t))вҲҘО·t вҲҘ2 В· вҲҘПүtu вҲҘ2


                      (58)
                       вүӨ 8Оі 2 (1 + Оів„“)2 exp(вҲ’ОіВө(2T вҲ’ 2 вҲ’ t))R2 EОҫt вҲҘПүtu вҲҘ2


                      (47)
                       вүӨ 10Оі 2 exp(вҲ’ОіВө(2T вҲ’ t))R2 EОҫt вҲҘПүtu вҲҘ2 .

                                                                                           (66)
Applying BernsteinвҖҷs inequality (Lemma B.1) with Xt = 2Оі(1 вҲ’ ОіВө)T вҲ’1вҲ’t вҹЁО·t , Пүtu вҹ©, constant c
                                                     )R4
defined in (65), b = 51 exp(вҲ’ОіВөT )R2 , G = exp(вҲ’2ОіВөT
                                                 4(K+1) , we get
                                                           150 ln    ОІ

                                              вҲ’1
     (                                      T
                                                                                     )
                                     exp(вҲ’2ОіВөT )R4                                                      b2

         1                                  X
  P |в‘ | > exp(вҲ’ОіВөT )R2 and     Пғt2 вүӨ                                                     вүӨ   2 exp вҲ’
         5                 t=0        150 ln 4(K+1)                          ОІ
                                                                                                     2F + 2cb/3
                                                                                                ОІ
                                                                                         =            .
                                                                                             2(K + 1)
                                             ОІ
The above is equivalent to P{Eв‘  } вүҘ 1 вҲ’ 2(K+1)    for
                             вҲ’1
                (          T
                                                                                                          )
                           X          exp(вҲ’2ОіВөT )R4                                     1
         Eв‘  = either            Пғt2 >                                    or        |в‘ | вүӨ exp(вҲ’ОіВөT )R2         .   (67)
                            t=0        150 ln 4(K+1)
                                                 ОІ
                                                                                        5

Moreover, ET вҲ’1 implies
                T вҲ’1                                                         T
                                                                               вҲ’1
                X                 (66)                           EОҫt вҲҘПүtu вҲҘ2 X
                        Пғt2       вүӨ            2
                                            10Оі exp(вҲ’2ОіВөT )R             2

                  t=0                                        t=0
                                                                 exp(вҲ’ОіВөt)
                                                                                   K
                              (64),T вүӨK+1
                                                   2                         2 2
                                                                                   X      О»2вҲ’Оұ
                                                                                            t
                                  вүӨ         180Оі exp(вҲ’2ОіВөT )R Пғ
                                                                                    t=0
                                                                                        exp(вҲ’ОіВөt)
                                  (50)      180Оі Оұ exp(вҲ’2ОіВөT )R4вҲ’Оұ Пғ Оұ (K + 1) exp( ОіВөОұK
                                                                                      2 )
                                  вүӨ
                                                                1202вҲ’Оұ ln2вҲ’Оұ 4(K+1)
                                                                                ОІ
                                  (47)      exp(вҲ’2ОіВөT )R4
                                  вүӨ                                  .                                            (68)
                                             150 ln 4(K+1)
                                                       ОІ


Upper bound for в‘Ў. Probability event ET вҲ’1 implies
                                                   T вҲ’1
                                                   X       вҲҘО·t вҲҘ В· вҲҘПүtb вҲҘ
 в‘Ў          вүӨ             2Оі exp(вҲ’ОіВө(T вҲ’ 1))
                                                       t=0
                                                           exp(вҲ’ОіВөt)
                                                              T вҲ’1
         (58),(62)            вҲҡ                               X                                1
            вүӨ             21+Оұ 2Оі(1 + Оів„“) exp(вҲ’ОіВө(T вҲ’ 1))RПғ Оұ
                                                                                       О»ОұвҲ’1 exp(вҲ’ОіВөt/2)
                                                                                    t=0 t
                                     вҲҡ
     (50),T вүӨK+1          21+Оұ 120ОұвҲ’1 2Оі Оұ Пғ Оұ R2вҲ’Оұ (1 + Оів„“) exp(вҲ’ОіВө(T вҲ’ 1))(K + 1) exp ОіВөОұK
                                                                                          2
            вүӨ
                                                                    ln1вҲ’Оұ 4(K+1)
                                                                             ОІ
           (47)           1
            вүӨ               exp(вҲ’ОіВөT )R2 .                                                                        (69)
                          5

                                                              24
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Upper bound for в‘ў. Probability event ET вҲ’1 implies
                                                                     T вҲ’1
                                                                     X   EОҫt вҲҘПүtu вҲҘ2
               в‘ў                =            2Оі 2 exp(вҲ’ОіВө(T вҲ’ 1))
                                                                     t=0
                                                                         exp(вҲ’ОіВөt)
                                                                            T вҲ’1
                             (64)                                           X     О»2вҲ’Оұ
                                                                                    t
                                вүӨ            36Оі 2 exp(вҲ’ОіВө(T вҲ’ 1))Пғ Оұ
                                                                            t=0
                                                                                exp(вҲ’ОіВөt)
                     (50),T вүӨK+1             36Оі Оұ R2вҲ’Оұ exp(вҲ’ОіВө(T вҲ’ 1))Пғ Оұ (K + 1) exp( ОіВөОұK
                                                                                          2 )
                                вүӨ
                                                           1202вҲ’Оұ ln2вҲ’Оұ 4(K+1)
                                                                           ОІ
                             (47)            1
                                вүӨ              exp(вҲ’ОіВөT )R2 .                                                               (70)
                                             5

Upper bound for в‘Ј. To estimate this sum, we will use BernsteinвҖҷs inequality. The summands have
conditional expectations equal to zero:

                       2Оі 2 (1 вҲ’ ОіВө)T вҲ’1вҲ’t EОҫt вҲҘПүtu вҲҘ2 вҲ’ EОҫt вҲҘПүtu вҲҘ2 = 0.


Next, the summands are bounded:
                                                                            (61)    16Оі 2 exp(вҲ’ОіВөT )О»2t
               2Оі 2 (1 вҲ’ ОіВө)T вҲ’1вҲ’t вҲҘПүtu вҲҘ2 вҲ’ EОҫt вҲҘПүtu вҲҘ2

                                                                                вүӨ
                                                                                     exp(вҲ’ОіВө(t + 1))
                                                                            (50)    exp(вҲ’ОіВөT )R2
                                                                                вүӨ
                                                                                         5 ln 4(K+1)
                                                                                                 ОІ
                                                                             def
                                                                                =   c.                                      (71)

Finally, conditional variances
                                   h                                              2i
                              def
                          et2 = EОҫt 4Оі 4 (1 вҲ’ ОіВө)2T вҲ’2вҲ’2t вҲҘПүtu вҲҘ2 вҲ’ EОҫt вҲҘПүtu вҲҘ2

                          Пғ

of the summands are bounded:
                         (71)           2Оі 2 exp(вҲ’2ОіВөT )R2
               et2                                                              вҲҘПүtu вҲҘ2 вҲ’ EОҫt вҲҘПүtu вҲҘ2

               Пғ         вүӨ                                           EОҫt
                                    5 exp(вҲ’ОіВө(1 + t)) ln 4(K+1)
                                                             ОІ
                                          2                2
                                        4Оі exp(вҲ’2ОіВөT )R
                                                                     EОҫt вҲҘПүtu вҲҘ2 .

                         вүӨ                                                                                                  (72)
                                    5 exp(вҲ’ОіВө(1 + t)) ln 4(K+1)
                                                            ОІ


Applying BernsteinвҖҷs   inequality    (Lemma B.1) with Xt                                               =          2Оі 2 (1    вҲ’
ОіВө)T вҲ’1вҲ’t вҲҘПүtu вҲҘ2 вҲ’ EОҫt вҲҘПүtu вҲҘ2 , constant c defined in (71), b                                            1
                                                                                                                        2
                                                                                                 =         5 exp(вҲ’ОіВөT )R ,
                     4
G = exp(вҲ’2ОіВөT )R
          4(K+1) , we get:
      150 ln    ОІ


                                                 T вҲ’1
    (                                                                               )
                                   exp(вҲ’2ОіВөT )R4                                                       b2

         1                 X
  P |в‘Ј| > exp(вҲ’ОіВөT )R2 and   et2 вүӨ
                             Пғ                                                            вүӨ 2 exp вҲ’
         5                          150 ln 4(K+1) l=0                   ОІ
                                                                                                    2G + 2cb/3
                                                                                                  ОІ
                                                                                          =             .
                                                                                               2(K + 1)
                                           ОІ
The above is equivalent to P{Eв‘Ј } вүҘ 1 вҲ’ 2(K+1) for

                                        вҲ’1
                     (                T
                                                                                                              )
                                                                 4
                                      X         exp(вҲ’2ОіВөT )R                          1
          Eв‘Ј =       either               et2 >
                                          Пғ                            or        |в‘Ј| вүӨ exp(вҲ’ОіВөT )R2               .         (73)
                                      t=0        150 ln 4(K+1)
                                                           ОІ
                                                                                      5


                                                            25
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Moreover, ET вҲ’1 implies
          T вҲ’1                                                            T вҲ’1
          X                       (72)            4Оі 2 exp(вҲ’ОіВө(2T вҲ’ 1))R2 X EОҫt вҲҘПүlu вҲҘ2
                  et2
                  Пғ                вүӨ
          l=0                                             5 ln 4(K+1)  ОІ  t=0
                                                                               exp(вҲ’ОіВөt)
                                                                                                K
                          (64),T вүӨK+1             72Оі exp(вҲ’ОіВө(2T вҲ’ 1))R2 Пғ Оұ X
                                                     2
                                                                                                     О»2вҲ’Оұ
                                                                                                       t
                                   вүӨ
                                                            5 ln 4(K+1)
                                                                    ОІ                          t=0
                                                                                                   exp(вҲ’ОіВөt)
                                  (50)            72Оі Оұ exp(вҲ’ОіВө(2T вҲ’ 1))R4вҲ’Оұ Пғ Оұ (K + 1) exp( ОіВөОұK
                                                                                                2 )
                                   вүӨ
                                                                       5 В· 1202вҲ’Оұ ln3вҲ’Оұ 4(K+1)
                                                                                           ОІ
                                  (47)            exp(вҲ’2ОіВөT )R4
                                   вүӨ                                       .                                                    (74)
                                                   150 ln 4(K+1)
                                                             ОІ

Upper bound for в‘Ө. Probability event ET вҲ’1 implies
                                  T
                                  X вҲ’1
                              2
в‘Ө        =               2Оі              exp(вҲ’ОіВө(T вҲ’ 1 вҲ’ t))вҲҘПүtb вҲҘ2
                                  t=0
                                                                               T вҲ’1
         (62)                                                                  X          1
         вүӨ               2 В· 22Оұ Оі 2 Пғ 2Оұ exp(вҲ’ОіВө(T вҲ’ 1))                           2ОұвҲ’2
                                                                                  О»
                                                                               t=0 t
                                                                                         exp(вҲ’ОіВөt)
     (50),T вүӨK+1         2 В· 22Оұ 1202ОұвҲ’2 Оі 2Оұ Пғ 2Оұ exp(вҲ’ОіВө(T вҲ’ 3)) ln2ОұвҲ’2 4(K+1)
                                                                             ОІ
                                                                                 K
                                                                                 X
         вүӨ                                                                                                         exp (ОіВөОұt)
                                                              R2ОұвҲ’2                                          t=0

                         2 В· 22Оұ 1202ОұвҲ’2 Оі 2Оұ Пғ 2Оұ exp(вҲ’ОіВө(T вҲ’ 3)) ln2ОұвҲ’2 4(K+1)
                                                                             ОІ   (K + 1) exp(ОіВөОұK)
         вүӨ
                                                                                     R2ОұвҲ’2
         (47)            1
         вүӨ                 exp(вҲ’ОіВөT )R2 .                                                                                       (75)
                         5
That is, we derive the upper bounds for в‘ , в‘Ў, в‘ў, в‘Ј, в‘Ө. More precisely, ET вҲ’1 implies
                                          (60)
                                    RT2 вүӨ exp(вҲ’ОіВөT )R2 + в‘  + в‘Ў + в‘ў + в‘Ј + в‘Ө,
                (69) 1                                   (70) 1                                  (75) 1
         в‘Ў вүӨ             exp(вҲ’ОіВөT )R2 ,              в‘ў вүӨ          exp(вҲ’ОіВөT )R2 ,               в‘Ө вүӨ        exp(вҲ’ОіВөT )R2 ,
                     5                                       5                                       5
                         T вҲ’1                                               T вҲ’1
                         X              (68) exp(вҲ’2ОіВөT )R4                  X            (74) exp(вҲ’2ОіВөT )R4
                                  Пғt2 вүӨ                            ,                  et2 вүӨ
                                                                                      Пғ                        .
                         t=0                 150 ln 4(K+1)
                                                       ОІ                       t=0            150 ln 4(K+1)
                                                                                                        ОІ

In addition, we also establish (see (67), (73) and our induction assumption)
                                                                                (T вҲ’ 1)ОІ
                                                   P{ET вҲ’1 } вүҘ 1 вҲ’                       ,
                                                                                 K +1
                                                        ОІ                                          ОІ
                              P{Eв‘  } вүҘ 1 вҲ’                    ,             P{Eв‘Ј } вүҘ 1 вҲ’                 .
                                                     2(K + 1)                                   2(K + 1)
where
                                            вҲ’1
                         (                T
                                                                                                                        )
                                                                                     4
                                          X         exp(вҲ’2ОіВөT )R                                   1
        Eв‘        =        either              Пғt2 >                                      or   |в‘ | вүӨ exp(вҲ’ОіВөT )R2            ,
                                          t=0        150 ln 4(K+1)
                                                               ОІ
                                                                                                   5
                                            вҲ’1
                         (                T
                                                                                                                        )
                                                                                     4
                                          X         exp(вҲ’2ОіВөT )R                                   1
        Eв‘Ј       =        either              et2 >
                                              Пғ                                          or   |в‘Ј| вүӨ exp(вҲ’ОіВөT )R2            .
                                          t=0        150 ln 4(K+1)
                                                               ОІ
                                                                                                   5
Therefore, probability event ET вҲ’1 вҲ© Eв‘  вҲ© Eв‘Ј implies
                                           (60)
                                  RT2      вүӨ       exp(вҲ’ОіВөT )R2 + в‘  + в‘Ў + в‘ў + в‘Ј + в‘Ө
                                           вүӨ       2 exp(вҲ’ОіВөT )R2 ,


                                                                       26
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


which is equivalent to (54) for t = T . Moreover,
                                                                                   TОІ
              P{ET } вүҘ P{ET вҲ’1 вҲ© Eв‘  вҲ© Eв‘Ј } = 1 вҲ’ P{E T вҲ’1 вҲӘ E в‘  вҲӘ E в‘Ј } вүҘ 1 вҲ’          .
                                                                                  K +1
In other words, we showed that P{Ek } вүҘ 1 вҲ’ kОІ/(K+1) for all k = 0, 1, . . . , K + 1. For k = K + 1
we have that with probability at least 1 вҲ’ ОІ
                              вҲҘxK+1 вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲҘ2 вүӨ 2 exp(вҲ’ОіВө(K + 1))R2 .

Finally, if
                          (                             )
                                   1         ln(BK )
              Оі   = min                  ,                ,
                         400в„“ ln 4(K+1)
                                    ОІ
                                           Вө(K + 1)
                        пЈұ                                                          пЈј
                                                       2ОұвҲ’1
                        пЈІ                    (K + 1) Оұ Вө2 R2                       пЈҪ
         BK       = max 2,                            2(ОұвҲ’1)

                        пЈі 4 В· 10 Оұ1 120 2(ОұвҲ’1)
                                           Оұ    Пғ 2 ln Оұ       4(K+1)
                                                                        ln2 (BK ) пЈҫ
                                                                  ОІ
                      пЈ«     пЈұ                                                            пЈјпЈј
                            пЈҙ
                            пЈҙ                                                            пЈҙ
                                                                                         пЈҙпЈҙ
                                                                                          пЈҙ
                            пЈҙ                             2ОұвҲ’1
                                                                                         пЈҙпЈҙ
                                                                 2 2
                      пЈ¬     пЈҙ                                                            пЈҙпЈҙ
                      пЈ¬     пЈІ                           K   Оұ  Вө  R                      пЈҪпЈҪ
                  = OпЈ¬  max   2,                                 (                    )!
                                                                         2ОұвҲ’1
                      пЈ¬     пЈҙ         2(ОұвҲ’1)
                                                                                         пЈҙпЈҙ
                                                        2                      Вө2 R 2
                                                 K
                                                            max 2, K 2(ОұвҲ’1)
                                                                           Оұ
                            пЈі Пғ 2 ln Оұ
                            пЈҙ                                                            пЈҙпЈҙ
                                                 ОІ ln
                      пЈӯ     пЈҙ                                                            пЈҙпЈҙ
                            пЈҙ                                                            пЈҙ
                                                                                         пЈҫпЈҙ
                                                                                          пЈҫ
                                                                      2
                                                                     Пғ ln    Оұ    (ОІ)
                                                                                   K



then with probability at least 1 вҲ’ ОІ
вҲҘxK+1 вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲҘ2       вүӨ 2 exp(вҲ’ОіВө(K + 1))R2
                              (                      !       )
                         2              Вө(K + 1)           1
                    = 2R max exp вҲ’                      ,
                                      400в„“ ln 4(K+1)
                                                 ОІ
                                                          BK
                         пЈ«    пЈұ                                         (                      )! пЈјпЈ¶
                                                                                 2ОұвҲ’1
                                                                                        2 2
                              пЈҙ                      2    K   2                K   Оұ  Вө  R        пЈҙ
                         пЈ¬
                              пЈҙ
                              пЈҙ
                              пЈҙ                  ! Пғ ОІ ln max 2,                  2(ОұвҲ’1)
                                                                                                  пЈҙ
                                                                                                  пЈҙ
                                                                                                  пЈҙ
                              пЈІ             ВөK                                2
                                                                             Пғ ln Оұ      ( K
                                                                                             )    пЈҪпЈ·
                                 2                                                         ОІ
                         пЈ¬                                                                         пЈ·
                    = O пЈ¬max R exp вҲ’
                         пЈ¬
                                               K
                                                   ,               2(1вҲ’Оұ)   2ОұвҲ’1
                                                                                                   пЈ·.
                         пЈӯ    пЈҙ
                              пЈҙ
                              пЈҙ           в„“ ln ОІ                ln    Оұ   K   Оұ  Вө 2              пЈҙ
                                                                                                  пЈҙ
                                                                                                  пЈҙ
                                                                                                   пЈ·
                                                                                                   пЈё
                              пЈҙ
                              пЈі                                                                   пЈҙ
                                                                                                  пЈҫ

To get вҲҘxK+1 вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲҘ2 вүӨ Оө with probability at least 1 вҲ’ ОІ, K should be
                    2                                 Оұ                 Оұ !             !
                                    R2
                                           2   2ОұвҲ’1
                                                              1 Пғ 2 2ОұвҲ’1

             в„“      R         в„“                Пғ                                Оұ
    K=O        ln        ln      ln       ,               ln                ln ОұвҲ’1 (BОө ) ,
             Вө       Оө       ВөОІ     Оө         Вө2 Оө            ОІ Вө2 Оө

where                                     пЈұ                         пЈј
                                          пЈҙ                         пЈҙ
                                                           R2
                                          пЈҙ
                                          пЈІ                         пЈҙ
                                                                    пЈҪ
                               BОө = max       2,             Оұ   .
                                                              2  2ОұвҲ’1
                                                   Оө ln ОІ1 ВөПғ2 Оө
                                          пЈҙ
                                          пЈҙ                           пЈҙ
                                                                      пЈҙ
                                          пЈі                           пЈҫ


                                                     27
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E    M ISSING P ROOFS FOR DProx-clipped-SGD-shift
In this section, we give the complete formulations of our results for DProx-clipped-SGD-shift and
rigorous proofs. For the readersвҖҷ convenience, the methodвҖҷs update rule is repeated below:
                                                                n
                                                            1X k                     ЛҶ k,
               xk+1 = proxОіОЁ xk вҲ’ Оіe     g k , where gek =         ge , geik = hki + вҲҶ

                                                            n i=1 i                    i


                     hk+1  =  hk
                                 + ОҪ ЛҶ k, вҲҶ
                                     вҲҶ        ЛҶ k = clip вҲҮfОҫk (xk ) вҲ’ hk , О»k .
                       i       i       i        i             i            i

Lemma E.1. Let Assumptions 2 and 3 with Вө = 0 hold on Q = B3nвҲҡV (xвҲ— ), where V вүҘ вҲҘx0 вҲ’
        36864Оі 2 ln2          n
                     48n(K+1) P
xвҲ— вҲҘ2 +           n2
                         ОІ
                                вҲҘвҲҮfi (xвҲ— )вҲҘ2 , and let stepsize Оі satisfy Оі вүӨ L1 . If xk вҲҲ Q for all
                             i=1
k = 0, 1, . . . , K + 1, K вүҘ 0, then after K iterations of DProx-clipped-SGD-shift we have
                                          вҲҘx0 вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲҘ2 вҲ’ вҲҘxK+1 вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲҘ2
        2Оі ОҰ(xK+1 ) вҲ’ ОҰ(xвҲ— ) вүӨ

                                                      K +1
                                                       K                           K
                                                 2Оі X                         2Оі 2 X
                                            вҲ’             вҹЁПүk , xМӮk вҲ’ xвҲ— вҹ© +         вҲҘПүk вҲҘ2 ,            (76)
                                               K +1                          K +1
                                                            k=0                            k=0
                                                      K
                                      def      1 X k+1
                           xK+1       =           x    ,                                                 (77)
                                             K +1
                                                      k=0
                                      def
                              xМӮk            proxОіОЁ xk вҲ’ ОівҲҮf (xk ) ,

                                      =                                                                  (78)
                                      def
                              Пүk      =      вҲҮf (xk ) вҲ’ gek .                                            (79)

Proof. Using Lemma C.2 from (Khaled et al., 2020) with p = xk+1 , y = xk вҲ’ Оіe g k , x = xk , we
derive for all k = 0, 1, . . . , K that
  2Оі ОҰ(xk+1 ) вҲ’ ОҰ(xвҲ— ) вүӨ вҲҘxk вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲҘ2 вҲ’ вҲҘxk+1 вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲҘ2 вҲ’ 2ОівҹЁe     g k вҲ’ вҲҮf (xk ), xk+1 вҲ’ xвҲ— вҹ©.


Next, we obtain the following inequality
    g k вҲ’ вҲҮf (xk ), xk+1 вҲ’ xвҲ— вҹ©
вҲ’2ОівҹЁe                                 =          g k вҲ’ вҲҮf (xk ), xМӮk вҲ’ xвҲ— вҹ© + 2ОівҹЁe
                                             вҲ’2ОівҹЁe                               g k вҲ’ вҲҮf (xk ), xМӮk вҲ’ xk+1 вҹ©
                                      (79)
                                      вүӨ      вҲ’2ОівҹЁПүk , xМӮk вҲ’ xвҲ— вҹ© + 2ОівҲҘe
                                                                      g k вҲ’ вҲҮf (xk )вҲҘ В· вҲҘxМӮk вҲ’ xk+1 вҲҘ
                                      (78)
                                      =      вҲ’2ОівҹЁПүk , xМӮk вҲ’ xвҲ— вҹ© + 2ОівҲҘe
                                                                      g k вҲ’ вҲҮf (xk )вҲҘ
                                             В·вҲҘ proxОіОЁ xk вҲ’ ОівҲҮf (xk ) вҲ’ proxОіОЁ xk вҲ’ Оіegk вҲҘ


                                      (79)
                                      вүӨ      вҲ’2ОівҹЁПүk , xМӮk вҲ’ xвҲ— вҹ© + 2Оі 2 вҲҘПүk вҲҘ2 .
Putting all together we get
  2Оі ОҰ(xk+1 ) вҲ’ ОҰ(xвҲ— ) вүӨ вҲҘxk вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲҘ2 вҲ’ вҲҘxk+1 вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲҘ2 вҲ’ 2ОівҹЁПүk , xМӮk вҲ’ xвҲ— вҹ© + 2Оі 2 вҲҘПүk вҲҘ2 .


Summing up the above inequalities for k = 0, 1, . . . , K, we get
         K                                             K
 2Оі X                                          1 X
      ОҰ(xk+1 ) вҲ’ ОҰ(xвҲ— )                            вҲҘxk вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲҘ2 вҲ’ вҲҘxk+1 вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲҘ2

                                      вүӨ
K +1                                         K +1
        k=0                                           k=0
                                                             K                              K
                                                     2Оі X                     2Оі 2 X
                                                вҲ’         вҹЁПүk , xМӮk вҲ’ xвҲ— вҹ© +         вҲҘПүk вҲҘ2
                                                    K +1                     K +1
                                                             k=0                            k=0
                                                0      вҲ— 2          K+1       вҲ— 2            K
                                             вҲҘx вҲ’ x вҲҘ вҲ’ вҲҘx                вҲ’x вҲҘ         2Оі X
                                      =                                             вҲ’       вҹЁПүk , xМӮk вҲ’ xвҲ— вҹ©
                                                      K +1                            K +1
                                                                                            k=0
                                                       2     K
                                                     2Оі      X
                                                +                  вҲҘПүk вҲҘ2 .
                                                    K +1
                                                             k=0
                                    K
Finally, we use the definition of x     and JensenвҖҷs inequality and get the result.


                                                       28
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Theorem E.1. Let Assumptions 2 and 3 with Вө = 0 hold on Q = B3nвҲҡV (xвҲ— ), where V вүҘ
              36864Оі 2 ln2          n
                           48n(K+1) P
вҲҘx0 вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲҘ2 +           n2
                               ОІ
                                      вҲҘвҲҮfi (xвҲ— )вҲҘ2 , and ОҪ = 0, h01 = . . . = h0n = 0,
                                      i=1
                       пЈұ                                                                        пЈј
                       пЈҙ
                       пЈҙ                             вҲҡ                     вҲҡ   ОұвҲ’1
                                                                                                пЈҙ
                                                                                                пЈҙ
                       пЈІ         1          R n                    Vn           Оұ
                                                                                                пЈҪ
           Оі вүӨ min                       ,
                                 48n(K+1) 192AО¶
                                                  ,                             ОұвҲ’1   ,              (80)
                       пЈі 360L ln

                                                вҲ—                                Оұ пЈҙ
                                                    27 Оұ В· 48ПғK Оұ ln 48n(K+1)
                       пЈҙ                               1         1
                       пЈҙ             ОІ                                              пЈҙ
                                                                                    пЈҫ
                                                                         ОІ
                                                      вҲҡ
                                                     n V
                                     О»k = О» =                  ,                                     (81)
                                              48Оі ln 48n(K+1)
                                                           ОІ
             q P
                  n
for some О¶вҲ— = n1 i=1 вҲҘвҲҮfi (xвҲ— )вҲҘ2 , K + 1 > 0 and ОІ вҲҲ (0, 1]. Then, after K + 1 iterations of
DProx-clipped-SGD-shift the iterates with probability at least 1 вҲ’ ОІ satisfy
                                               V
                 ОҰ(xK+1 ) вҲ’ ОҰ(xвҲ— ) вүӨ                          and   {xk }K+1      вҲҡ    вҲ—
                                                                         k=0 вҠҶ B3n V (x ).           (82)
                                            Оі(K + 1)
In particular, we have V вүӨ 2R2 , and when Оі equals the minimum from (80), then the iterates
produced by DProx-clipped-SGD-shift after K + 1 iterations with probability at least 1 вҲ’ ОІ satisfy
                                пЈ«     пЈұ                                           пЈјпЈ¶
                                      пЈІ LR2 ln nK RО¶вҲ— ln nK ПғR ln ОұвҲ’1     Оұ   nK пЈҪ
                                                 ОІ            ОІ                ОІ
          ОҰ(xK+1 ) вҲ’ ОҰ(xвҲ— ) = O пЈӯmax                , вҲҡ          , ОұвҲ’1 ОұвҲ’1           пЈё,      (83)
                                      пЈі     K             nK       n Оұ K Оұ пЈҫ

meaning that to achieve ОҰ(xK+1 ) вҲ’ ОҰ(xвҲ— ) вүӨ Оө with probability at least 1 вҲ’ ОІ DProx-clipped-SGD-
shift requires
                                          вҲҡ             вҲҡ ! ОұвҲ’1  Оұ             вҲҡ ! ОұвҲ’1 Оұ пЈ¶
           пЈ«      пЈұ                                                     пЈ«                  пЈјпЈ¶
                  пЈІ LR2 nLR2 RО¶             nRО¶вҲ—      Пғ V                 1 Пғ V            пЈҪ
                                     вҲ—
   K = O пЈӯmax            ln      , вҲҡ ln           ,     ОұвҲ’1          ln пЈӯ                пЈё пЈё
                  пЈі Оө        Оө      nОө       Оө        Оөn Оұ                ОІ     Оө          пЈҫ
                                                                                             (84)
iterations/oracle calls.

Proof. The key idea behind the proof is similar to the one used in (Gorbunov et al., 2022a; Sadiev et al.,
2023): we prove by induction that the iterates do not leave some ball and the sums decrease as 1/K+1.
To formulate the statement rigorously, we introduce probability event Ek for each k = 0, 1, . . . , K +1
as follows: inequalities
                                       tвҲ’1
                                       X                           tвҲ’1
                                                                   X
                   вҲҘx0 вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲҘ2 вҲ’ 2Оі        вҹЁПүl , xМӮl вҲ’ xвҲ— вҹ© + 2Оі 2     вҲҘПүl вҲҘ2 вүӨ 2V,                  (85)
                                        l=0                          l=0
                   |                            {z                             }
                                                At

                                                rвҲ’1         вҲҡ
                                              ОіX u            V
                                                    Пү     вүӨ                                          (86)
                                              n i=1 i,tвҲ’1    2
hold for t = 0, 1, . . . , k and r = 1, 2, . . . , n simultaneously, where
                                               Пүl = Пүlu + Пүlb ,                                      (87)
                                              n                    n
                                     def 1                  def 1
                                             X                    X
                                 Пүlu =            u
                                                 Пүi,l , Пүlb =        Пүb ,                            (88)
                                         n i=1                  n i=1 i,l
                     u def                      b def
                         = EОҫil geil вҲ’ geil , Пүi,l  = вҲҮf (xl ) вҲ’ EОҫil geil

                    Пүi,l                                                           вҲҖ i вҲҲ [n].        (89)
We will prove by induction that P{Ek } вүҘ 1 вҲ’ kОІ/(K+1) for all k = 0, 1, . . . , K + 1. The base of
                                                                                  PrвҲ’1 u
induction follows immediately: вҲҘx0 вҲ’xвҲ— вҲҘ2 вүӨ V < 2V and for k = 0 we have вҲҘ nОі i=1 Пүi,kвҲ’1    вҲҘ=0
        u
since Пүi,вҲ’1  = 0. Next, we assume that the statement holds for k = T вҲ’ 1 вүӨ K, i.e., P{ET вҲ’1 } вүҘ
1 вҲ’ (T вҲ’1)ОІ/(K+1). Let us show that it also holds for k = T , i.e., P{ET } вүҘ 1 вҲ’ T ОІ/(K+1).


                                                         29
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                                                                      вҲҡ
To proceed, we need to show that ET вҲ’1 implies вҲҘxt вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲҘ вүӨ 3n V for all t = 0, 1, . . . , T . First,
for t = 0, 1, . . . , T вҲ’ 1 probability event ET вҲ’1 implies (in view of, ОҰ(xt ) вҲ’ ОҰ(xвҲ— ) вүҘ 0)
                                                             (76)       (85)
                                             вҲҘxt вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲҘ2 вүӨ At вүӨ 2V.                                              (90)
Next, by definition of V we have
                                                                                                   вҲҡ
                                                     v
                                                     u n
                    вҲ—
                                     p
                                               вҲ—
                                                     uX                                           n V
            вҲҘвҲҮf (x )вҲҘ          =                  2
                                         вҲҘвҲҮf (x )вҲҘ вүӨ t   вҲҘвҲҮfi (xвҲ— )вҲҘ2 вүӨ                                      .   (91)
                                                             i=1                          192Оі ln 48n(K+1)
                                                                                                      ОІ

Then, for t = T we have that ET вҲ’1 implies
    вҲҘxT вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲҘ          =                          g k ) вҲ’ proxОіОЁ (xвҲ— вҲ’ ОівҲҮf (xвҲ— ))вҲҘ
                                   вҲҘ proxОіОЁ (xk вҲ’ Оіe
                        вүӨ                 g k вҲ’ xвҲ— + ОівҲҮf (xвҲ— )вҲҘ вүӨ вҲҘxk вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲҘ + ОівҲҘe
                                   вҲҘxk вҲ’ Оіe                                      g k вҲҘ + ОівҲҘвҲҮf (xвҲ— )вҲҘ
                                                          !
                   (90),(91)         вҲҡ            n         вҲҡ         (81)   вҲҡ
                        вүӨ              2+        48n(K+1)
                                                               V + ОіО» вүӨ 3n V .
                                          192 ln     ОІ

This means that ET вҲ’1 implies xt вҲҲ B3nвҲҡV (xвҲ— ) for t = 0, 1, . . . , T and we can apply Lemma E.1:
ET вҲ’1 implies
                                                     вҲҘx0 вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲҘ2 вҲ’ вҲҘxT вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲҘ2
               2Оі ОҰ(xT ) вҲ’ ОҰ(xвҲ— )

                                              вүӨ
                                                                 T
                                                            T вҲ’1                        T вҲ’1
                                                         2Оі X                      2Оі 2 X
                                                       вҲ’        вҹЁПүl , xМӮl вҲ’ xвҲ— вҹ© +           вҲҘПүl вҲҘ2
                                                         T                          T
                                                                 l=0                               l=0
                                        AT
                                    вүӨ       .                                                                    (92)
                                         T
Before we proceed, we introduce a new notation:
                                                               вҲҡ
                                   xМӮ вҲ’ xвҲ— , if вҲҘxМӮt вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲҘ вүӨ 2 V ,
                                   t
                            О·t =
                                   0,         otherwise,
for all t = 0, 1, . . . , T вҲ’ 1. Random vectors {О·t }Tt=0 are bounded almost surely:
                                                        вҲҡ
                                              вҲҘО·t вҲҘ вүӨ 2 V .                                                      (93)
for all t = 0, 1, . . . , T вҲ’ 1. In addition, ET вҲ’1 implies for all t = 0, 1, . . . , T вҲ’ 1 that
              вҲҘxМӮt вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲҘ = вҲҘ proxОіОЁ xt вҲ’ ОівҲҮf (xt ) вҲ’ proxОіОЁ (xвҲ— вҲ’ ОівҲҮf (xвҲ— )) вҲҘ


                              вҲҘxt вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲ’ Оі(вҲҮf (xt ) вҲ’ вҲҮf (xвҲ— ))вҲҘ
                                вүӨ
                              вҲҘxt вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲҘ + ОівҲҘвҲҮf (xt ) вҲ’ вҲҮf (xвҲ— )вҲҘ
                                вүӨ
                         (4)                     (80) 361                (90) вҲҡ
                         вүӨ (1 + LОі)вҲҘxt вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲҘ вүӨ           вҲҘxt вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲҘ вүӨ 2 V .
                                                      360
meaning that О·t = xМӮt вҲ’ xвҲ— follows from ET вҲ’1 for all t = 0, 1, . . . , T вҲ’ 1. Thus, ET вҲ’1 implies
                                                          T вҲ’1                              T вҲ’1
                              (85)                        X                                 X
                   AT          =     вҲҘx0 вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲҘ2 вҲ’ 2Оі            вҹЁПүl , xМӮl вҲ’ xвҲ— вҹ© + 2Оі 2           вҲҘПүl вҲҘ2
                                                           l=0                              l=0
                                              T
                                              X вҲ’1                      T
                                                                        X вҲ’1
                               вүӨ     V вҲ’ 2Оі         вҹЁПүl , О·l вҹ© + 2Оі 2          вҲҘПүl вҲҘ2 .                          (94)
                                              l=0                       l=0

Using the notation from (87)-(89), we can rewrite вҲҘПүl вҲҘ2 as
                                                         n                           2
                          2                          2 X u
                  вҲҘПүl вҲҘ        вүӨ     2вҲҘПүlu вҲҘ2 + 2вҲҘПүlb вҲҘ2 =  Пү    + 2вҲҘПүlb вҲҘ2
                                                     n2 i=1 i,l
                                          n           n
                                                        *jвҲ’1        +
                                      2 X u 2      4 X X u u
                               =            вҲҘПү вҲҘ + 2         Пү ,Пү     + 2вҲҘПүlb вҲҘ2 .                               (95)
                                      n2 i=1 i,l  n j=2 i=1 i,l j,l


                                                            30
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Putting all together, we obtain that ET вҲ’1 implies
                     T вҲ’1 n                   T вҲ’1                  T вҲ’1 n
                  2Оі X X u                    X                4Оі 2 X X   u 2          h
                                                                                         u 2
                                                                                             i
 AT     вүӨ    VвҲ’              вҹЁПүi,l , О·l вҹ© вҲ’2Оі     вҹЁПүlb , О·l вҹ© + 2           Пүi,l вҲ’ EОҫil Пүi,l
                  n                                            n
                     l=0 i=1                  l=0                   l=0 i=1
                |        {z            }|       {z         } |                 {z             }
                               в‘                                в‘Ў                                           в‘ў
                            вҲ’1 X                                             вҲ’1                        вҲ’1 X
                                                                                                               *jвҲ’1                  +
                        2 T    n                                           T                       2 T    n
                   4Оі     X                   h
                                                     u 2
                                                           i
                                                                       2
                                                                           X               8Оі        X          X
                  + 2                  EОҫil         Пүi,l       + 4Оі               вҲҘПүlb вҲҘ2 + 2                           u
                                                                                                                       Пүi,l    u
                                                                                                                            , Пүj,l       .(96)
                    n                                                                          n
                             l=0 i=1                                        l=0                     l=0 j=2      i=1
                   |                {z                     }       |         {z          }    |                {z                    }
                                       в‘Ј                                      в‘Ө                                в‘Ҙ

To finish the proof, it remains to estimate в‘ , в‘Ў, в‘ў, в‘Ј, в‘Ө, в‘Ҙ with high probability. More precisely,
the goal is to prove that в‘  + в‘Ў + в‘ў + в‘Ј + в‘Ө + в‘Ҙ вүӨ V with high probability. Before we proceed,
                                                          u
we need to derive several useful inequalities related to Пүi,l , Пүlb . First of all, we have
                                                             u
                                                           вҲҘПүi,l вҲҘ вүӨ 2О»                                                                  (97)
by definition of the clipping operator. Next, probability event ET вҲ’1 implies
                                                                                v
                                                                                u n
                                                                                uX     (4)
    вҲҘвҲҮfi (xt )вҲҘ    вүӨ      вҲҘвҲҮfi (xt ) вҲ’ вҲҮfi (xвҲ— )вҲҘ + вҲҘвҲҮfi (xвҲ— )вҲҘ вүӨ LвҲҘxt вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲҘ + t   вҲҘвҲҮfi (xвҲ— )вҲҘ2
                                                                                                                 i=1
                                                       вҲҡ                                      вҲҡ
                          вҲҡ     вҲҡ                     n V                                    n V           О»
                   вүӨ          2L V +                                         вүӨ                         вүӨ     .                           (98)
                                              192Оі ln 48n(K+1)
                                                          ОІ                       96Оі ln 48n(K+1)
                                                                                             ОІ
                                                                                                           2

for t = 0, 1, . . . , T вҲ’ 1 and i вҲҲ [n]. Therefore, Lemma B.2 and ET вҲ’1 imply
                                                                   n
                                                        1X b           2Оұ Пғ Оұ
                                                  Пүlb вүӨ       вҲҘПүi,l вҲҘ вүӨ ОұвҲ’1 ,                                                            (99)
                                                        n i=1          О»
                                                      h     i
                                                        u 2
                                                  EОҫil Пүi,l    вүӨ 18О»2вҲ’Оұ Пғ Оұ ,                                                        (100)

for all l = 0, 1, . . . , T вҲ’ 1 and i вҲҲ [n].
Upper bound for в‘ . To estimate this sum, we will use BernsteinвҖҷs inequality. The summands have
conditional expectations equal to zero:

                                 2Оі u              2Оі D             u
                                                                         E
                         EОҫil вҲ’ вҹЁПүi,l   , О·l вҹ© = вҲ’      О·l , EОҫil [Пүi,l ] = 0.
                                 n                 n
                                                           u n
Moreover, for all l = 0, . . . , T вҲ’ 1 random vectors {Пүi,l  }i=1 are independent. Thus, sequence
n                oT вҲ’1,n
  2Оі        u
 вҲ’ n вҹЁО·l , Пүi,l вҹ©        is a martingale difference sequence. Next, the summands are bounded:
                   l,i=0,1
                                                                   вҲҡ
               2Оі u                  2Оі u             (93),(97) 8ОіО» V (81)       V       def
                  Пүi,l , О·l        вүӨ   вҲҘПүi,l вҲҘ В· вҲҘО·l вҲҘ вүӨ               =        48n(K+1)
                                                                                         = c.                                        (101)
               n                     n                            n        6 ln                            ОІ

                                              def          2
                                 2
Finally, conditional variances Пғi,l = EОҫil [ 4Оі     u       2
                                             n2 вҹЁПүi,l , О·l вҹ© ] of the summands are bounded:
                                   2
                                                            (93) 16Оі 2 V

                      2           4Оі     u 2            2
                                                                               u 2
                     Пғi,t вүӨ EОҫit    2
                                      вҲҘПүi,t  вҲҘ  В· вҲҘО· t вҲҘ     вүӨ       2
                                                                         EОҫit вҲҘПүi,t вҲҘ .                                              (102)
                                   n                               n

Applying BernsteinвҖҷs inequality (Lemma B.1) with Xi,l = вҲ’ 2Оі       u
                                                          n вҹЁО·l , Пүi,l вҹ©, constant c defined in (101),
                        V2
b = V6 , G =            48n(K+1)   , we get
               216 ln       ОІ


                               вҲ’1 X
  (                          T    n
                                                                                  )
                                                               V2                                   b2

        V                    X
                                        2                                                                                          ОІ
P |в‘ | >           and                  Пғi,l вүӨ                                         вүӨ 2 exp вҲ’                            =              .
        6
                             l=0 i=1                216 ln 48n(K+1)
                                                               ОІ
                                                                                                2G + 2cb/24n                   24n(K + 1)


                                                                       31
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


The above is equivalent to
                                                                                   вҲ’1 X
                                                                 (               T    n
                                                                                                                                                  )
                 ОІ                                                               X
                                                                                                  2                V2                         V
P {Eв‘  } вүҘ 1вҲ’            ,                    for       Eв‘  =        either                        Пғi,l >                             or |в‘ | вүӨ          .
             24n(K + 1)
                                                                                    l=0 i=1               216 ln 48n(K+1)
                                                                                                                     ОІ
                                                                                                                                              6
                                                                                                                                        (103)
Moreover, ET вҲ’1 implies
            T вҲ’1 X
                 n                                       T вҲ’1 n
            X
                            2
                                     (102)       16Оі 2 V X X               u 2   (100) 288Оі 2 V Пғ Оұ T О»2вҲ’Оұ
                           Пғi,l       вүӨ                            E Оҫ l вҲҘПүi,l вҲҘ   вүӨ
                                                   n2                  i                        n
            l=0 i=1                                       l=0 i=1
                                                        вҲҡ   4вҲ’Оұ
                                      (81)        48Оұ V         Пғ Оұ T Оі Оұ (80)          V2
                                      =                                     вүӨ                     .                                      (104)
                                                 8nОұвҲ’1 ln2вҲ’Оұ 48n(K+1)ОІ           216 ln 48n(K+1)
                                                                                            ОІ

Upper bound for в‘Ў. Probability event ET вҲ’1 implies
                                       T вҲ’1                          T вҲ’1                                                  вҲҡ
                                       X                             X                           (93),(99) 4 В· 2Оұ ОіПғ Оұ T       V
               в‘Ў    =        вҲ’2Оі                вҹЁПүlb , О·l вҹ© вүӨ 2Оі             вҲҘПүlb вҲҘ В· вҲҘО·l вҲҘ          вүӨ
                                                                                                                   О»ОұвҲ’1
                                       l=0                          l=0
                                  Оұ                Оұ
                                                           вҲҡ    2вҲ’Оұ Оұ
                    (81)     96    Пғ T V       Оі     (80) V
                    =            В·      1вҲ’Оұ 48n(K+1)
                                                      вүӨ     .                                                                            (105)
                              12 nОұвҲ’1 ln                  6
                                                                     ОІ

Upper bound for в‘ў. To estimate this sum, we will use BernsteinвҖҷs inequality. The summands have
conditional expectations equal to zero:
                                  2                         i
                                 4Оі       u 2
                                                    h
                                                        u 2
                           EОҫil         Пүi,l  вҲ’ E l
                                                 Оҫi   Пү i,l     = 0.
                                  n2
                                                           u n
Moreover, for all l = 0, . . . , T вҲ’ 1 random vectors {Пүi,l  }i=1 are independent. Thus, sequence
n 2                 h           i oT вҲ’1,n
 4Оі      u 2            u 2
 n2  вҲҘПүi,l вҲҘ вҲ’ EОҫil вҲҘПүi,l   вҲҘ             is a martingale difference sequence. Next, the summands
                                                   l,i=0,1
are bounded:
               4Оі 2   u 2        h
                                     u 2
                                         i                                          4Оі 2   u 2              h
                                                                                                                u 2
                                                                                                                    i
                     Пүi,l вҲ’ EОҫ l   Пүi,l                                  вүӨ                вҲҘПүi,l вҲҘ  +  E Оҫ l   Пү i,l
               n2              i                                                    n2                    i

                                                                                        2 2
                                                                         (97)       32Оі О» (81)              V
                                                                         вүӨ              2
                                                                                             =         2   48n(K+1)
                                                                                      n           72 ln               ОІ
                                                                                             V             def
                                                                         вүӨ                                 = c.                          (106)
                                                                                    12 ln 48n(K+1)
                                                                                              ОІ

Finally, conditional variances
                                                           16Оі 4   u 2
                                                                             h       i 2
                                    2     def                                    u 2
                                  Пғ
                                  ei,t = EОҫit                     Пүi,t вҲ’ E t
                                                                          Оҫi   Пүi,t
                                                            n4
of the summands are bounded:
                                                                             4Оі 2
                                                                                                                          i
                     2
                             (106)                     V                               u      2
                                                                                                           h
                                                                                                                u     2
                   Пғ
                   ei,t       вүӨ                            Et
                                                   48n(K+1) Оҫi
                                                                                      Пүi,t        вҲ’ EОҫit       Пүi,t
                                        12 ln                                n2
                                                           ОІ
                                                       2
                                                    Оі V                    u 2
                              вүӨ                                      EОҫit вҲҘПүi,t вҲҘ .                                                      (107)
                                        3n2 ln 48n(K+1)
                                                   ОІ
                                                                                             2
                                                                                                                   h        i
Applying BernsteinвҖҷs inequality (Lemma B.1) with Xi,l = 4Оі
                                                        n2
                                                                                                       u 2
                                                                                                     вҲҘПүi,l            u 2
                                                                                                           вҲҘ вҲ’ EОҫil вҲҘПүi,l вҲҘ    , constant
                        V                                  V2
c defined in (106), b = 12 ,G=                             48n(K+1)   , we get
                                                 864 ln        ОІ

                               вҲ’1 X
  (                          T    n
                                                                                    )
                                                                  V2                                 b2

        V                    X
                                               2                                                                                       ОІ
P |в‘ў| >            and                       Пғ
                                             ei,l вүӨ                                     вүӨ 2 exp вҲ’                              =              .
        12
                             l=0 i=1                       864 ln 48n(K+1)
                                                                      ОІ
                                                                                                  2G + 2cb/3                       24n(K + 1)


                                                                         32
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


The above is equivalent to
                                                                  вҲ’1 X
                                                      (         T    n
                                                                                                                                )
                 ОІ                                              X
                                                                                2            V2                            V
P {Eв‘ў } вүҘ 1вҲ’            ,               for    Eв‘ў =   either                  Пғ
                                                                              ei,l >                             or |в‘ў| вүӨ           .
             24n(K + 1)
                                                                l=0 i=1                864 ln 48n(K+1)
                                                                                                  ОІ
                                                                                                                           12
                                                                                                                     (108)
Moreover, ET вҲ’1 implies
        T вҲ’1 X
             n                                            T вҲ’1 X
                                                               n
        X
                        2
                             (107)             Оі2V        X                u 2   (100) 18Оі 2 V О»2вҲ’Оұ Пғ Оұ T
                      Пғ
                      ei,l      вүӨ                              EОҫil       вҲҘПүi,l вҲҘ вүӨ
         l=0 i=1                       3n2 ln 48n(K+1)
                                                  ОІ    l=0 i=1                          3n ln 48n(K+1)
                                                                                                  ОІ
                                         Оұ          Оұ
                                                       вҲҡ 4вҲ’Оұ Оұ
                                (81)   48 В· 6     Пғ T V       Оі     (80)        V2
                                =         2
                                              В·            48n(K+1)
                                                                     вүӨ                   .                             (109)
                                        48      nОұвҲ’1 ln3вҲ’Оұ
                                                                   ОІ     864 ln 48n(K+1)     ОІ


Upper bound for в‘Ј. Probability event ET вҲ’1 implies
        T вҲ’1 n                                                         вҲҡ 2вҲ’Оұ
   4Оі 2 X X         h
                      u 2
                          i (100) 72Оі 2 О»2вҲ’Оұ Пғ Оұ T
                                                   (81)   48Оұ Оі Оұ Пғ Оұ T V     (80) V
 в‘Ј= 2           EОҫil Пүi,l    вүӨ                      =                          вүӨ      . (110)
    n       i=1l=0
                                         n              32nОұвҲ’1 ln2вҲ’Оұ 48n(K+1)      12
                                                                                                 ОІ


Upper bound for в‘Ө. Probability event ET вҲ’1 implies
               T вҲ’1                (Оұ+1) 2Оұ
                                                                                       вҲҡ 2(1вҲ’Оұ)
           2
               X           2 (99) 4     Пғ T Оі 2 (81) 9216Оұ                  Пғ 2Оұ T Оі 2Оұ V                (80) V
  в‘Ө = 4Оі               Пүlb    вүӨ       2(ОұвҲ’1)
                                                 =         В·                                                 вүӨ       . (111)
               l=0
                                     О»                576              n2(1вҲ’Оұ) ln2(1вҲ’Оұ) 48n(K+1)
                                                                                            ОІ
                                                                                                                 6

Upper bounds for в‘Ҙ. This sum requires a more refined analysis. We introduce new vectors:
                                                              вҲҡ
                            пЈұ jвҲ’1                 jвҲ’1
                            пЈІОі P u              Оі P u           V
                        l           Пү i,l , if        Пү i,l вүӨ  2 ,
                      Оҙj = n i=1                n
                                                  i=1                                   (112)
                              0,            otherwise,
                            пЈі

for all j вҲҲ [n] and l = 0, . . . , T вҲ’ 1. Then, by definition
                                                        вҲҡ
                                                  l        V
                                                вҲҘОҙj вҲҘ вүӨ                                                                (113)
                                                          2
and
                        T вҲ’1 n                 T вҲ’1 n                           jвҲ’1
                                                                         *                           +
                     8Оі X X l u             8Оі X X                           ОіX u
                 в‘Ҙ =            Оҙj , Пүj,l +                                       Пү вҲ’ Оҙjl , Пүj,l
                                                                                             u
                                                                                                         .             (114)
                      n                     n                                n i=1 i,l
                        l=0 j=2                l=0 j=2
                     |       {z          }
                                          в‘ҘвҖІ

We also note here that ET вҲ’1 implies
         T вҲ’1 n
                   * jвҲ’1                     +                     n
                                                                        *     jвҲ’1
                                                                                                                 +
      8Оі X X Оі X u                                          8Оі X            ОіX u
                           Пүi,l вҲ’ Оҙjl , Пүj,l
                                         u
                                               =                                 Пү       вҲ’ ОҙjT вҲ’1 , Пүj,T
                                                                                                     u
                                                                                                                      . (115)
       n      j=2
                     n i=1
                                                            n j=2           n i=1 i,T вҲ’1                 вҲ’1
           l=0


Upper bound for в‘ҘвҖІ . To estimate this sum, we will use BernsteinвҖҷs inequality. The summands
have conditional expectations equal to zero:

                                 8Оі l u         8Оі D l          u
                                                                     E
                          EОҫjl      Оҙj , Пүj,l =     Оҙj , EОҫjl [Пүj,l ] = 0.
                                 n              n
                                                           u n
Moreover, for all l = 0, . . . , T вҲ’ 1 random vectors {Пүi,l  }i=1 are independent. Thus, sequence
n D             EoT вҲ’1,n
 8Оі
 n   Оҙjl , Пүj,l
            u
                         is a martingale difference sequence. Next, the summands are bounded:
                      l,j=0,2
                                                              вҲҡ
        8Оі l u                 8Оі l      u
                                              (113),(97) 8Оі     V              V       def
           Оҙ ,Пү              вүӨ    Оҙj В· вҲҘПүj,l вҲҘ вүӨ            В·     В· 2О» =               = c.                            (116)
        n j j,l                n                         n     2         6 ln 48n(K+1)
                                                                                             ОІ


                                                           33
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                                              h 2                     i
                                  вҖІ 2 def
Finally, conditional variances (Пғj,l ) = EОҫjl 64Оіn 2  вҹЁОҙ  l
                                                          j , Пү u 2
                                                               j,l вҹ©    of the summands are bounded:

                                   64Оі 2 l 2                  (113) 16Оі 2 V

                     вҖІ 2                            u 2
                                                                                        u 2
                  (Пғj,l ) вүӨ EОҫjl        вҲҘОҙj вҲҘ В· вҲҘПү  j,l вҲҘ       вүӨ               EОҫjl вҲҘПүj,l вҲҘ .                (117)
                                    n2                                  n2
                                                                       D            E
Applying BernsteinвҖҷs inequality (Lemma B.1) with Xi,l = 8Оі          n    Оҙjl , Пүj,l
                                                                                u
                                                                                     , constant c defined in (116),
                          2
b = V6 , G =         V
                     48n(K+1) , we get
              216 ln     ОІ
  пЈұ                                                      пЈј
                     T вҲ’1 X n                     2
                                                                          b2

  пЈІ         V         X                         V        пЈҪ                                ОІ
P |в‘ҘвҖІ | >      and               вҖІ 2
                               (Пғi,l ) вүӨ        48n(K+1) пЈҫ
                                                           вүӨ 2 exp   вҲ’              =            .
  пЈі         6              j=2           216 ln                        2G + 2cb/3     24n(K + 1)
                         l=0                                           ОІ

The above is equivalent to
                                   пЈұ                                                        пЈј
                                           T вҲ’1 Xn                     2
                 ОІ                 пЈІ       X
                                                      вҖІ 2            V              вҖІ     V пЈҪ
P{Eв‘ҘвҖІ } вүҘ 1вҲ’            , for Eв‘ҘвҖІ = either          (Пғi,l ) >                 or |в‘Ҙ   | вүӨ     .
             24n(K + 1)            пЈі
                                                j=2           216 ln 48n(K+1)l=0
                                                                                          6пЈҫ
                                                                                                                             ОІ
                                                                                                                                           (118)
Moreover, ET вҲ’1 implies
    T вҲ’1 X
         n                                      T вҲ’1 n
    X
                вҖІ 2
                          (117)      16Оі 2 V X X         u 2   (100),T вүӨK+1 288(K + 1)Оі 2 V О»2вҲ’Оұ Пғ Оұ
              (Пғj,l )         вүӨ         2
                                                   EОҫjl вҲҘПүj,l вҲҘ      вүӨ
                                       n                                              n
    l=0 j=2                                    j=2
                                                l=0
                                                                              Оұ
                          (81)          288(K + 1)Оі Оұ Пғ Оұ V 2вҲ’ 2                     (80)                V2
                              вүӨ                                                      вүӨ                               .                     (119)
                                     482вҲ’Оұ nОұвҲ’1 ln2вҲ’Оұ 48n(K+1)
                                                          ОІ                                 216 ln 48n(K+1)
                                                                                                       ОІ

That is, we derive the upper bounds for в‘ , в‘Ў, в‘ў, в‘Ј, в‘Ө, в‘Ҙ. More precisely, ET вҲ’1 implies
                                              (96)
                                     AT вүӨ V + в‘  + в‘Ў + в‘ў + в‘Ј + в‘Ө + в‘Ҙ,
                                            n
                                              * jвҲ’1                           +
                               (114)    8Оі X    Оі X
                              в‘Ҙ = в‘ҘвҖІ +               Пүu     вҲ’ ОҙjT вҲ’1 , Пүj,T
                                                                        u
                                                                            вҲ’1 ,
                                         n j=2 n i=1 i,T вҲ’1
                                              (105) V                (110)    V             (111) V
                                            в‘Ў вүӨ           ,       в‘Ј вүӨ           ,     в‘Ө вүӨ                ,
                                                      6                      12                      6
                        T вҲ’1                                                 T вҲ’1
                        X           (104)            V2                      X         (109)                 V2
                               Пғt2 вүӨ                 48n(K+1)
                                                              ,                     et2 вүӨ
                                                                                    Пғ                                        ,
                        t=0                 216 ln            ОІ              t=0                 864 ln 48n(K+1)
                                                                                                            ОІ
                                            T вҲ’1 X
                                                 n
                                            X
                                                        вҖІ 2
                                                                    (119)             V2
                                                      (Пғj,l ) вүӨ                                          .
                                            l=0 j=2                          216 ln 48n(K+1)
                                                                                        ОІ

In addition, we also establish (see (103), (108), (118) and our induction assumption)
                                                              (T вҲ’ 1)ОІ
                                                P{ET вҲ’1 } вүҘ 1 вҲ’        ,
                                                                K +1
                            ОІ                                   ОІ                                                                    ОІ
   P{Eв‘  } вүҘ 1 вҲ’                    ,           P{Eв‘ў } вүҘ 1 вҲ’            ,                             P{Eв‘ҘвҖІ } вүҘ 1 вҲ’                          ,
                        24n(K + 1)                          24n(K + 1)                                                           24n(K + 1)
where
                                               вҲ’1
                              (              T
                                                                                                                    )
                                             X                             V2                               V
              Eв‘     =             either             Пғl2 >                                      or    |в‘ | вүӨ              ,
                                              l=0                 216 ln 48n(K+1)
                                                                             ОІ
                                                                                                            6
                                               вҲ’1
                              (              T
                                                                                                                     )
                                             X                             V2                               V
              Eв‘ў    =             either             el2 >
                                                     Пғ                                          or    |в‘ў| вүӨ              ,
                                              l=0                 864 ln 48n(K+1)
                                                                             ОІ
                                                                                                            12
                              пЈұ                                                                                                   пЈј
                                             T вҲ’1 X
                                                  n                                         2
                              пЈІ              X                                        V                                          VпЈҪ
            Eв‘ҘвҖІ     =             either                    вҖІ 2
                                                          (Пғj,l ) >                                           or   |в‘ҘвҖІ | вүӨ            .
                              пЈі
                                              t=0 j=2                        216 ln 48n(K+1)
                                                                                        ОІ
                                                                                                                                 6пЈҫ


                                                                       34
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Therefore, probability event ET вҲ’1 вҲ© Eв‘  вҲ© Eв‘ў вҲ© Eв‘ҘвҖІ implies


                                   V     V   V     V   V    V
                     AT     вүӨ V +     + +      +     + +
                                   6     6   12 12     6    6
                                       n
                                          * jвҲ’1                      +
                                  8Оі  X    Оі X
                                                  u      T вҲ’1   u
                                +               Пү     вҲ’ Оҙj , Пүj,T вҲ’1
                                  n j=2 n i=1 i,T вҲ’1
                                         n
                                           * jвҲ’1                       +
                                    8Оі X Оі X u             T вҲ’1   u
                            вүӨ 2V +                Пү     вҲ’ Оҙj , Пүj,T вҲ’1                                  (120)
                                     n j=2 n i=1 i,T вҲ’1

for t = T .
                                                         jвҲ’1
                                                                           T вҲ’1
In the final part of the proof, we will show that nОі             u
                                                         P
                                                                Пүi,T вҲ’1 = Оҙj    with high probability. In
                                                         i=1
particular, we consider probability event E
                                          eT вҲ’1,j defined as follows: inequalities
                                          rвҲ’1             вҲҡ
                                        ОіX u                 V
                                              Пүi,T вҲ’1 вүӨ
                                        n i=1               2

hold for r = 2, . . . , j simultaneously. We want to show that P{ET вҲ’1 вҲ© E  eT вҲ’1,j } вүҘ 1 вҲ’ (T вҲ’1)ОІ вҲ’
                                                                                              K+1
   jОІ
8n(K+1) for all j = 2, . . . , n. For j = 2 the statement is trivial since
                                                             вҲҡ
                                      Оі u         (97) 2ОіО»      V
                                        Пү          вүӨ       вүӨ      .
                                      n 1,T вҲ’1          n      2
Next, we assume that the statement holds for some j = m вҲ’ 1 < n, i.e., P{ET вҲ’1 вҲ© E      eT вҲ’1,mвҲ’1 } вүҘ
    (T вҲ’1)ОІ     (mвҲ’1)ОІ                                                             (T вҲ’1)ОІ
1вҲ’    K+1   вҲ’   8n(K+1)     . Our goal is to prove that P{ET вҲ’1 вҲ© ET вҲ’1,m } вүҘ 1 вҲ’
                                                                    e                      вҲ’ mОІ .
                                                                                           K+1       8n(K+1)
We have
                              v
              mвҲ’1                                 2
                              u Оі 2 mвҲ’1
                              u
          Оі   X                     X
               Пүu           = t         Пү u
          n i=1 i,T вҲ’1          n2 i=1 i,T вҲ’1
                              v                              * iвҲ’1              +
                              u mвҲ’1                      mвҲ’1
                              u Оі2 X                  2Оі X ОіX
                                         u
                                      вҲҘПүi,T       2                Пүu   , Пүu
                            = t 2            вҲ’1 вҲҘ +
                                n i=1                 n i=1 n r=1 r,T вҲ’1 i,T вҲ’1
                              v
                              u T вҲ’1 mвҲ’1                  mвҲ’1
                                                              * iвҲ’1              +
                              u Оі2 X X                 2Оі X Оі X u
                            вүӨ t               u     2
                                            вҲҘПүi,l вҲҘ +               Пү     ,Пү u    .
                                n2    i=1
                                                       n i=1 n r=1 r,T вҲ’1 i,T вҲ’1
                                        l=0


Next, we introduce a new notation:
                                                                  вҲҡ
                               пЈұ iвҲ’1                 iвҲ’1
                               пЈІОі P u
                                     Пүr,T вҲ’1 , if nОі     Пүr,T вҲ’1 вүӨ 2V ,
                                                     P u
                      вҖІ          n
                     ПҒi,T вҲ’1 =
                               пЈі r=1                 r=1
                                 0,            otherwise
for i = 1, . . . , m вҲ’ 1. By definition, we have
                                                            вҲҡ
                                                              V
                                            вҲҘПҒвҖІi,T вҲ’1 вҲҘ вүӨ                                               (121)
                                                             2
                                                                         iвҲ’1
                                    eT вҲ’1,mвҲ’1 implies ПҒвҖІ        Оі        P      u
for i = 1, . . . , m вҲ’ 1. Moreover, E                  i,T вҲ’1 = n              Пүr,T вҲ’1 for i = 1, . . . , m вҲ’ 1
                                                                         r=1
and
                                      mвҲ’1
                                   Оі X u                 вҲҡ
                                        Пү          вүӨ         в‘ў + в‘Ј + в‘Ұ,
                                   n i=1 i,l


                                                    35
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


where
                                                            mвҲ’1
                                                     2Оі X вҖІ
                                                в‘Ұ=         ПҒ     , Пүu    .
                                                     n i=1 i,T вҲ’1 i,T вҲ’1
It remains to estimate в‘Ұ.
Upper bound for в‘Ұ. To estimate this sum, we will use BernsteinвҖҷs inequality. The summands have
conditional expectations equal to zero:

                            2Оі вҖІ           u              2Оі D вҖІ                         u
                                                                                                  E
                  EОҫT вҲ’1      вҹЁПҒi,T вҲ’1 , Пүi,T  вҲ’1 вҹ©   =         ПҒ i,T вҲ’1   , E T
                                                                              Оҫi  вҲ’1 [Пү  i,T вҲ’1 ]   = 0,
                     i      n                              n
                            u      n
                                                                                       2Оі вҖІ              u        mвҲ’1
since random vectors {Пүi,T    вҲ’1 }i=1 are independent. Thus, sequence                    n вҹЁПҒi,T вҲ’1 , Пүi,T вҲ’1 вҹ© i=1 is a
martingale difference sequence. Next, the summands are bounded:
   2Оі вҖІ                       2Оі вҖІ                           (121),(97) Оі вҲҡ         (81)            V         def
                  u                                 u
      вҹЁПҒi,T вҲ’1 , Пүi,T вҲ’1 вҹ© вүӨ     вҲҘПҒi,T вҲ’1 вҲҘ В· вҲҘПүi,T    вҲ’1 вҲҘ     вүӨ              VО» =                48n(K+1)
                                                                                                              = c. (122)
    n                          n                                        n                  24 ln       ОІ
                                                               h 2                              i
                                     вҖІ        2 def             4Оі       вҖІ           u        2
Finally, conditional variances (e   Пғi,T вҲ’1  )   =    EОҫiT вҲ’1
                                                                 n 2  вҹЁПҒ i,T вҲ’1  , Пүi,T вҲ’1   вҹ©     of the summands are
bounded:
                                2
                                                                     (121) Оі 2 V

          вҖІ      2             4Оі      вҖІ        2      u        2
                                                                                               u          2

        Пғi,T вҲ’1 ) вүӨ EОҫT вҲ’1
       (e                         2
                                    вҲҘПҒ i,T вҲ’1  вҲҘ  В· вҲҘПү i,T вҲ’1  вҲҘ       вүӨ        2
                                                                                   EОҫT вҲ’1 вҲҘПүi,T       вҲ’1 вҲҘ .        (123)
                          i     n                                             n        i


Applying BernsteinвҖҷs inequality (Lemma B.1) with Xi = 2Оі  вҖІ         u
                                                      n вҹЁПҒi,T вҲ’1 , Пүi,T вҲ’1 вҹ©, constant c defined in
           V                        V2
(122), b = 24 ,G=                   48n(K+1)    , we get
                          3456 ln       ОІ
  (            mвҲ’1
                                                                               )
                                       V2                                                          b2

        V      X
                      вҖІ      2                                                                                                 ОІ
P |в‘Ұ| >    and     (e
                    Пғi,T вҲ’1 ) вүӨ                                                    вүӨ 2 exp вҲ’                       =                  .
        24     i=1              3456 ln 48n(K+1)                     ОІ
                                                                                                2G + 2cb/3                 24n(K + 1)

The above is equivalent to
                                                        (            mвҲ’1
                                                                                                                        )
                ОІ                                                    X
                                                                               вҖІ      2                  V2          V
P{Eв‘Ұ } вүҘ 1вҲ’            , for Eв‘Ұ =                           either          (e
                                                                             Пғi,T вҲ’1 ) >                    or |в‘Ұ| вүӨ      .
            24n(K + 1)                                                i=1                  3456 ln 48n(K+1)
                                                                                                       ОІ
                                                                                                                     24
                                                                                                                    (124)
Moreover, ET вҲ’1 implies
              mвҲ’1                                    n
              X
                        вҖІ       2
                                     (123)      Оі2V X           u         2
                                                                              (100) 18Оі 2 V О»2вҲ’Оұ Пғ Оұ
                     (e
                      Пғi,T вҲ’1 )          вүӨ             EОҫ T вҲ’1 вҲҘПү
                                                                  i,T вҲ’1 вҲҘ     вүӨ
               i=1
                                                 n2 i=1 i                                   n
                                                                               Оұ
                                         (81)               18Оі Оұ Пғ Оұ V 2вҲ’ 2            (80)              V2
                                         вүӨ                                               вүӨ                             .         (125)
                                                482вҲ’Оұ nОұвҲ’1 ln2вҲ’Оұ 48n(K+1)
                                                                     ОІ                         3456 ln 48n(K+1)
                                                                                                           ОІ


Putting all together we get that ET вҲ’1 вҲ© E
                                         eT вҲ’1,mвҲ’1 implies
                                         mвҲ’1
                                    Оі X u          вҲҡ                                       (110) V
                                          Пүi,T вҲ’1 вүӨ в‘ў + в‘Ј + в‘Ұ,                         в‘Ј вүӨ           ,
                                    n i=1                                                        6
               T вҲ’1 X
                    n                                                    mвҲ’1
               X
                            2
                               (109)               V2                    X
                                                                                  вҖІ      2               V2
                          Пғ
                          ei,l вүӨ                   48n(K+1)
                                                            ,                  (e
                                                                                Пғi,T вҲ’1 ) вүӨ                            .
               l=0 i=1                    216 ln        ОІ                i=1                   3456 ln 48n(K+1)
                                                                                                           ОІ

In addition, we also establish (see (108), (124) and our induction assumption)

                                    eT вҲ’1,mвҲ’1 } вүҘ 1 вҲ’ (T вҲ’ 1)ОІ вҲ’ (m вҲ’ 1)ОІ ,
                          P{ET вҲ’1 вҲ© E
                                                       K +1      8n(K + 1)
                                           ОІ                          ОІ
                         P{Eв‘ў } вүҘ 1 вҲ’             , P{Eв‘Ұ } вүҘ 1 вҲ’
                                      24n(K + 1)                  24n(K + 1)


                                                                     36
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


where
                                        вҲ’1 X
                          (           T    n
                                                                                               )
                                      X
                                                  2               V2              V
               Eв‘ў    =       either             Пғ
                                                ei,l >          48n(K+1)
                                                                         or |в‘ў| вүӨ                  ,
                                                         864 ln                   12
                                      l=0 i=1                           ОІ
                          (           mвҲ’1
                                                                                                       )
                                      X
                                               вҖІ      2                V2               V
               Eв‘Ұ    =       either         (e
                                             Пғi,T вҲ’1 ) >              48n(K+1)
                                                                               or |в‘Ұ| вүӨ
                                      i=1                     3456 ln                   24
                                                                              ОІ

Therefore, probability event ET вҲ’1 вҲ© EeT вҲ’1,mвҲ’1 вҲ© Eв‘ў вҲ© Eв‘Ұ implies
                              mвҲ’1             r                  вҲҡ
                            Оі X u               V     V    V       V
                                   Пүi,T вҲ’1 вүӨ       +    +    вүӨ       .
                            n i=1               12 12 24          2

This implies E
             eT вҲ’1,m and

              P{ET вҲ’1 вҲ© E
                        eT вҲ’1,m }           вүҘ   P{ET вҲ’1 вҲ© E
                                                          eT вҲ’1,mвҲ’1 вҲ© Eв‘ў вҲ© Eв‘Ұ }
                                                     n                               o
                                            =   1 вҲ’ P ET вҲ’1 вҲ© EeT вҲ’1,mвҲ’1 вҲӘ E в‘ў вҲӘ E в‘Ұ

                                                      (T вҲ’ 1)ОІ      mОІ
                                            вүҘ   1вҲ’             вҲ’           .
                                                       K +1      8n(K + 1)
Therefore, for all m = 2, . . . , n the statement holds and, in particular, P{ET вҲ’1 вҲ© E eT вҲ’1,n } вүҘ
    (T вҲ’1)ОІ       ОІ
1 вҲ’ K+1 вҲ’ 8(K+1) . Taking into account (120), we conclude that ET вҲ’1 вҲ© E   eT вҲ’1,n вҲ© Eв‘  вҲ© Eв‘ў вҲ© Eв‘ҘвҖІ
implies
                                              AT вүӨ 2V
that is equivalent to (85) for t = T . Moreover,
                              n                                    o
            P {ET } вүҘ P ET вҲ’1 вҲ© E       eT вҲ’1,n вҲ© Eв‘  вҲ© Eв‘ў вҲ© Eв‘ҘвҖІ
                                  n                                o
                       = 1 вҲ’ P ET вҲ’1 вҲ© E     en вҲӘ E в‘  вҲӘ E в‘ў вҲӘ E в‘ҘвҖІ

                                (T вҲ’ 1)ОІ      ОІ             ОІ           TОІ
                     =     1вҲ’            вҲ’          вҲ’3В·            =1вҲ’      .
                                 K +1      8(K + 1)     24n(K + 1)     K +1
In other words, we showed that P{Ek } вүҘ 1 вҲ’ kОІ/(K+1) for all k = 0, 1, . . . , K + 1. For k = K + 1
we have that with probability at least 1 вҲ’ ОІ
                                                          (92),(85)      V
                                ОҰ(xK+1 ) вҲ’ ОҰ(xвҲ— )             вүӨ                .
                                                                      Оі(K + 1)
Finally, if
                         пЈұ                                                                         пЈј
                         пЈҙ
                         пЈҙ                                                 ОұвҲ’1   вҲҡ                 пЈҙ
                                                                                                   пЈҙ
                         пЈІ            1                                n    Оұ        V             пЈҪ
               Оі вүӨ min             48n(K+1)
                                                  ,                                           ОұвҲ’1   ,
                         пЈі 360L ln
                                                                                               Оұ пЈҙ
                                                                              ln 48n(K+1)
                         пЈҙ                                1             1
                         пЈҙ             ОІ              27 В· 48ПғK
                                                          Оұ            Оұ
                                                                                     ОІ
                                                                                                  пЈҙ
                                                                                                  пЈҫ

then with probability at least 1 вҲ’ ОІ
                              V
 ОҰ(xK+1 ) вҲ’ ОҰ(xвҲ— ) вүӨ
                           Оі(K + 1)
                               пЈұ                                                        пЈј
                                                           1   вҲҡ     1

                                                                         48n(K+1)
                                                                                    ОұвҲ’1
                                                                                     Оұ пЈҙ
                               пЈІ 360LV ln 48n(K+1) 48 В· 27 Оұ Пғ V K Оұ ln
                               пЈҙ
                               пЈҙ                                                        пЈҙ
                                                                             ОІ
                                                                                        пЈҪ
                                              ОІ
                         = max                     ,              ОұвҲ’1
                               пЈҙ
                               пЈҙ      K +1                      n Оұ (K + 1)             пЈҙ
                                                                                        пЈҙ
                               пЈі                                                        пЈҫ
                             пЈ«     пЈұ             вҲҡ              пЈј пЈ¶
                                   пЈІ LV ln nK Пғ V ln ОұвҲ’1Оұ   nK пЈҪ
                                            ОІ                ОІ
                         = O пЈӯmax              ,   ОұвҲ’1   ОұвҲ’1
                                                                  пЈё.
                                   пЈі    K        n   Оұ K  Оұ     пЈҫ


                                                         37
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


To get ОҰ(xK+1 ) вҲ’ ОҰ(xвҲ— ) вүӨ Оө with probability at least 1 вҲ’ ОІ it is sufficient to choose K such that
both terms in the maximum above are O(Оө). This leads to
                                            вҲҡ ! ОұвҲ’1   Оұ               вҲҡ ! ОұвҲ’1 Оұ пЈ¶
                    пЈ«    пЈұ                                  пЈ«                      пЈјпЈ¶
                         пЈІ LV      LV     Пғ    V              1     Пғ   V          пЈҪ
            K = O пЈӯmax          ln    ,      ОұвҲ’1         ln пЈӯ                    пЈё пЈё,
                         пЈі Оө       ОөОІ     Оөn Оұ                ОІ       Оө            пЈҫ

which concludes the proof.

In view of Lemma D.1, the result in the quasi-strongly convex case for DProx-clipped-SGD-shift
follows from our result for DProx-clipped-SGDA-shift.


                                                38
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


F     M ISSING P ROOFS FOR DProx-clipped-SSTM-shift

In this section, we provide the complete formulations of our results for DProx-clipped-SSTM-shift
and proofs. For the readersвҖҷ convenience, the methodвҖҷs update rule is repeated below: x0 = y 0 = z 0 ,
A0 = Оұ0 = 0, Оұk+1 = k+2  2aL , Ak+1 = Ak + Оұk+1 and

                      Ak y k + Оұk+1 z k
              xk+1 =                      , z k+1 = proxОұk+1 ОЁ z k вҲ’ Оұk+1 ge(xk+1 ) ,

                             Ak+1
                                          n
                                    1X                                       ЛҶ ki ,
                        ge(xk+1 ) =         gei (xk+1 ), gei (xk+1 ) = hki + вҲҶ
                                    n i=1

                   hk+1             ЛҶ ki , вҲҶ
                         = hki + ОҪk вҲҶ        ЛҶ ki = clip вҲҮfОҫk (xk+1 ) вҲ’ hki , О»k ,
                    i                                            i

                                                    Ak y k + Оұk+1 z k+1
                                       y k+1 =
                                                           Ak+1

where Оҫ1k , . . . , Оҫnk are sampled independently from each other and previous steps.

F.1    C ONVEX CASE

The following lemma is the main вҖңoptimizationвҖқ part of the analysis of DProx-clipped-SSTM-shift.
Lemma F.1. Let Assumptions 1, 2 and 3(Вө = 0) hold on Q = B5nвҲҡM (xвҲ— ), where M вүҘ вҲҘx0 вҲ’
                         Pn
xвҲ— вҲҘ2 + C 2 ОұK
             2
                0 +1 n
                      1               вҲ— 2                                   k  k   k         вҲҡ    вҲ—
                           i=1 вҲҘвҲҮfi (x )вҲҘ , where C > 0, and a вүҘ 0. Let x , y , z lie in B5n M (x )
for all k = 0, 1, . . . , K for some K вүҘ 0. Additionally, let parameters of DProx-clipped-SSTM-shift
satisfy

                                              7                    3 2
                                  a вүҘ max 2, C 2 , K0 =              C n ;                     (126)
                                              6                    2

                                                 (k+2)2
                                         (
                                  ОҪk =       C 2 (K0 +2)2 n ,    if k < K0 ;
                                                                             ,                       (127)
                                              2k+5
                                             (k+3)2 ,            if k вүҘ K0 ;

then the iterates produced by DProx-clipped-SSTM-shift satisfy
                                                        KвҲ’1                                   KвҲ’1
                                  1     1     X                           X
    AK (ОҰ(y K ) вҲ’ ОҰ(xвҲ— )) вүӨ         M0 вҲ’ MK +   Оұk+1 вҹЁПүk+1 , xвҲ— вҲ’ z k вҹ© +    2
                                                                            Оұk+1 вҲҘПүk+1 вҲҘ2
                                  2     2
                                                        k=0                                    k=0
                                      KвҲ’1 n      2
                                      XX        Оұk+1
                                  +                  вҲҘПүi,k+1 вҲҘ2 ,                                    (128)
                                                 n2
                                      k=0 i=1

where Lyapunov function Mk is defined as follows
                                                                     n
                                                                  1X k
                          Mk = вҲҘz k вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲҘ2 + C 2 Оұ 2
                                                  ek+1                 вҲҘh вҲ’ hвҲ—i вҲҘ2 ,                 (129)
                                                                  n i=1 i

where

                                                  ОұK0 +1        if k < K0 ;
                                      Оұ
                                      ek+1 =                                ,                        (130)
                                                  Оұk+1          if k вүҘ K0 ;

and Пүk+1 is defined as follows
                                                                                n
                            def                                           def 1 X
                    Пүi,k+1 = gei (xk+1 ) вҲ’ вҲҮfi (xk+1 ),            Пүk+1 =               Пүi,k+1 .     (131)
                                                                                n i=1


                                                        39
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Proof. By optimality condition for the problem (17), we have for any z вҲҲ B3вҲҡM (xвҲ— )


    Оұk+1 ge(xk+1 ), z k вҲ’ z          вүӨ      Оұk+1 (ОЁ(z) вҲ’ ОЁ(z k+1 )) + Оұk+1 ge(xk+1 ), z k вҲ’ z k+1
                                              1            1                 1
                                            + вҲҘz k вҲ’ zвҲҘ2 вҲ’ вҲҘz k+1 вҲ’ zвҲҘ2 вҲ’ вҲҘz k+1 вҲ’ z k вҲҘ2
                                              2            2                 2
                                    (131)
                                     вүӨ      Оұk+1 (ОЁ(z) вҲ’ ОЁ(z k+1 )) + Оұk+1 Пүk+1 , z k вҲ’ z k+1
                                            +Оұk+1 вҲҮf (xk+1 ), z k вҲ’ z k+1
                                             1            1               1
                                            + вҲҘz k вҲ’ zвҲҘ2 вҲ’ вҲҘz k+1 вҲ’ zвҲҘ2 вҲ’ вҲҘz k+1 вҲ’ z k вҲҘ2
                                             2            2               2

Using Ak+1 (y k+1 вҲ’ xk+1 ) = Оұk+1 (z k+1 вҲ’ z k ), we get


 Оұk+1 ge(xk+1 ), z k вҲ’ z      вүӨ       Оұk+1 (ОЁ(z) вҲ’ ОЁ(z k+1 )) + Оұk+1 Пүk+1 , z k вҲ’ z k+1
                                      +Ak+1 вҲҮf (xk+1 ), xk+1 вҲ’ y k+1
                                       1            1                1
                                      + вҲҘz k вҲ’ zвҲҘ2 вҲ’ вҲҘz k+1 вҲ’ zвҲҘ2 вҲ’ вҲҘz k+1 вҲ’ z k вҲҘ2
                                       2            2                2
                              (вҲ—)
                              вүӨ       Оұk+1 (ОЁ(z) вҲ’ ОЁ(z k+1 )) + Оұk+1 Пүk+1 , z k вҲ’ z k+1

                                                  k+1          k+1    L k+1       k+1 2
                                      +Ak+1 f (x      ) вҲ’ f (y     ) + вҲҘy     вҲ’x      вҲҘ
                                                                      2
                                        1             1                 1
                                      + вҲҘz k вҲ’ zвҲҘ2 вҲ’ вҲҘz k+1 вҲ’ zвҲҘ2 вҲ’ вҲҘz k+1 вҲ’ z k вҲҘ2
                                        2             2                 2
                              =       Оұk+1 (ОЁ(z) вҲ’ ОЁ(z k+1 )) + Оұk+1 Пүk+1 , z k вҲ’ z k+1
                                                                    Оұ2 L
                                      +Ak+1 f (xk+1 ) вҲ’ f (y k+1 ) + k+1 вҲҘz k+1 вҲ’ z k вҲҘ2
                                                                      2Ak+1
                                        1 k          1                 1
                                      + вҲҘz вҲ’ zвҲҘ2 вҲ’ вҲҘz k+1 вҲ’ zвҲҘ2 вҲ’ вҲҘz k+1 вҲ’ z k вҲҘ2
                                        2            2                 2
                              =       Оұk+1 (ОЁ(z) вҲ’ ОЁ(z k+1 )) + Оұk+1 Пүk+1 , z k вҲ’ z k+1
                                                                    1                1
                                      +Ak+1 f (xk+1 ) вҲ’ f (y k+1 ) + вҲҘz k вҲ’ zвҲҘ2 вҲ’ вҲҘz k+1 вҲ’ zвҲҘ2
                                                                     2               2
                                                 2
                                               Оұk+1 L

                                        1                  k+1     k 2
                                      вҲ’     1вҲ’          вҲҘz     вҲ’z вҲҘ
                                        2       Ak+1


where in (вҲ—) L-smoothness of f was used. Using YoungвҖҷs inequality, we have

                                                                            D             Оұk+1 k
Оұk+1 ge(xk+1 ), z k вҲ’ z        вүӨ            Оұk+1 (ОЁ(z) вҲ’ ОЁ(z k+1 )) + Оұk+1     вҲҘПүk+1 вҲҘ2 +     вҲҘz вҲ’ z k+1 вҲҘ2
                                                                             2             2D
                                                                          1                1
                                            +Ak+1 f (xk+1 ) вҲ’ f (y k+1 ) + вҲҘz k вҲ’ zвҲҘ2 вҲ’ вҲҘz k+1 вҲ’ zвҲҘ2
                                                                             2             2
                                                       2
                                                     Оұk+1 L

                                              1
                                            вҲ’     1вҲ’          вҲҘz k+1 вҲ’ z k вҲҘ2
                                              2       Ak+1
                           D=2Оұk+1                                                      1
                               =            Оұk+1 (ОЁ(z) вҲ’ ОЁ(z k+1 )) + Оұk+1
                                                                        2
                                                                            вҲҘПүk+1 вҲҘ2 + вҲҘz k вҲ’ z k+1 вҲҘ2
                                                                                        4
                                                                          1                1
                                            +Ak+1 f (xk+1 ) вҲ’ f (y k+1 ) + вҲҘz k вҲ’ zвҲҘ2 вҲ’ вҲҘz k+1 вҲ’ zвҲҘ2
                                                                             2             2
                                                       2
                                                     Оұk+1 L

                                              1
                                            вҲ’     1вҲ’          вҲҘz k+1 вҲ’ z k вҲҘ2
                                              2       Ak+1

                                                     40
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                               Оұ2     L
Now, by a вүҘ 2, we have 12 вҲ’ Ak+1
                              k+1
                                  вүҘ 0 and

Оұk+1 ge(xk+1 ), z k вҲ’ z    вүӨ Оұk+1 (ОЁ(z) вҲ’ ОЁ(z k+1 )) + Оұk+1
                                                         2
                                                             вҲҘПүk+1 вҲҘ2
                                                           1            1
                             +Ak+1 f (xk+1 ) вҲ’ f (y k+1 ) + вҲҘz k вҲ’ zвҲҘ2 вҲ’ вҲҘz k+1 вҲ’ zвҲҘ2                         (132)
                                                              2         2
                                        2
                               1 1 Оұk+1

                                           L

                             вҲ’      вҲ’           вҲҘz k+1 вҲ’ z k вҲҘ2
                               2 2      Ak+1
                           вүӨ Оұk+1 (ОЁ(z) вҲ’ ОЁ(z k+1 )) + Оұk+1
                                                        2
                                                            вҲҘПүk+1 вҲҘ2 + Ak+1 f (xk+1 ) вҲ’ f (y k+1 )


                               1            1
                             + вҲҘz k вҲ’ zвҲҘ2 вҲ’ вҲҘz k+1 вҲ’ zвҲҘ2 .                                    (133)
                               2            2

To continue the proof, we have to mention that
                                       (131)
           ge(xk+1 ), y k вҲ’ xk+1          =      вҲҮf (xk+1 ), y k вҲ’ xk+1 + Пүk+1 , y k вҲ’ xk+1
                                          вүӨ     f (y k ) вҲ’ f (xk+1 ) + Пүk+1 , y k вҲ’ xk+1 ,            (134)

where in the last inequality we used convexity of f . Also, by convexity of ОЁ and definition of y k+1 ,
we have

                   k+1             Ak k Оұk+1 k+1                 Ak            Оұk+1
             ОЁ(y       ) = ОЁ            y +          z       вүӨ       ОЁ(y k ) +      ОЁ(z k+1 );
                                  Ak+1        Ak+1             Ak+1            Ak+1
      вҲ’Оұk+1 ОЁ(z k+1 ) вүӨ       вҲ’Ak+1 ОЁ(y k+1 ) + Ak ОЁ(y k ).                                           (135)

Thus, we acquire

    Оұk+1 ge(xk+1 ), xk+1 вҲ’ z          = Оұk+1 ge(xk+1 ), xk+1 вҲ’ z k + Оұk+1 ge(xk+1 ), z k вҲ’ z
                                      = Ak ge(xk+1 ), y k вҲ’ xk+1 + Оұk+1 ge(xk+1 ), z k вҲ’ z

where the last equation is true due to that Оұk+1 (xk+1 вҲ’ z k ) = Ak (y k вҲ’ xk+1 ). By (132), (134), we
get

Оұk+1 ge(xk+1 ), xk+1 вҲ’ z       вүӨ          Ak (f (y k ) вҲ’ f (xk+1 )) + Ak Пүk+1 , y k вҲ’ xk+1
                                          +Оұk+1 (ОЁ(z) вҲ’ ОЁ(z k+1 )) + Ak+1 f (xk+1 ) вҲ’ f (y k+1 )


                                            2             1              1
                                          +Оұk+1 вҲҘПүk+1 вҲҘ2 + вҲҘz k вҲ’ zвҲҘ2 вҲ’ вҲҘz k+1 вҲ’ zвҲҘ2
                                                          2              2
                              (135)
                               вүӨ          Ak (f (y k ) вҲ’ f (xk+1 )) + Ak Пүk+1 , y k вҲ’ xk+1
                                          +Оұk+1 ОЁ(z) вҲ’ Ak+1 ОЁ(y k+1 ) + Ak ОЁ(y k ) + Ak+1 f (xk+1 ) вҲ’ f (y k+1 )


                                            2             1              1
                                          +Оұk+1 вҲҘПүk+1 вҲҘ2 + вҲҘz k вҲ’ zвҲҘ2 вҲ’ вҲҘz k+1 вҲ’ zвҲҘ2 .
                                                          2              2
By definition of function ОҰ(В·) (1), we have

    Оұk+1 ge(xk+1 ), xk+1 вҲ’ z          вүӨ        Ak ОҰ(y k ) вҲ’ Ak+1 ОҰ(y k+1 ) + Ak Пүk+1 , y k вҲ’ xk+1
                                               +Оұk+1 ОЁ(z) + (Ak+1 вҲ’ Ak )f (xk+1 )
                                                 2             1             1
                                               +Оұk+1 вҲҘПүk+1 вҲҘ2 + вҲҘz k вҲ’ zвҲҘ2 вҲ’ вҲҘz k+1 вҲ’ zвҲҘ2
                                                               2             2
                                      (вҲ—вҲ—)
                                      =        Ak ОҰ(y k ) вҲ’ Ak+1 ОҰ(y k+1 ) + Оұk+1 Пүk+1 , xk+1 вҲ’ z k
                                               +Оұk+1 ОЁ(z) + Оұk+1 f (xk+1 )
                                                 2             1            1
                                               +Оұk+1 вҲҘПүk+1 вҲҘ2 + вҲҘz k вҲ’ zвҲҘ2 вҲ’ вҲҘz k+1 вҲ’ zвҲҘ2
                                                               2            2

                                                       41
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


where in (вҲ—вҲ—) we used Оұk+1 (xk+1 вҲ’ z k ) = Ak (y k вҲ’ xk+1 ) and Ak+1 = Ak + Оұk+1 . Making a
small rearrangement, we derive
                                 1 k             1
Ak+1 ОҰ(y k+1 ) вҲ’ Ak ОҰ(y k ) вүӨ      вҲҘz вҲ’ zвҲҘ2 вҲ’ вҲҘz k+1 вҲ’ zвҲҘ2 + Оұk+1 ОЁ(z)
                                 2               2
                                 +Оұk+1 f (xk+1 ) + Оұk+1 ge(xk+1 ), z вҲ’ xk+1
                                        +Оұk+1 Пүk+1 , xk+1 вҲ’ z k + Оұk+1 2
                                                                          вҲҘПүk+1 вҲҘ2
                              (131)     1 k           1
                               =          вҲҘz вҲ’ zвҲҘ2 вҲ’ вҲҘz k+1 вҲ’ zвҲҘ2 + Оұk+1 ОЁ(z)
                                        2             2                * n                             +
                                                 n
                                              1X          k+1            1X           k+1          k+1
                                        +Оұk+1       fi (x     ) + Оұk+1         вҲҮfi (x     ), z вҲ’ x
                                              n i=1                      n i=1
                                        +Оұk+1 Пүk+1 , z вҲ’ xk+1 + Оұk+1 Пүk+1 , xk+1 вҲ’ z k + Оұk+1
                                                                                           2
                                                                                              вҲҘПүk+1 вҲҘ2
                                        1 k          1
                               вүӨ          вҲҘz вҲ’ zвҲҘ2 вҲ’ вҲҘz k+1 вҲ’ zвҲҘ2 + Оұk+1 ОЁ(z) + Оұk+1 f (z)
                                        2            2
                                        +Оұk+1 Пүk+1 , z вҲ’ z k + Оұk+1
                                                                  2
                                                                     вҲҘПүk+1 вҲҘ2
                                                n
                                          Оұk+1 X
                                        вҲ’          вҲҘвҲҮfi (xk+1 ) вҲ’ вҲҮfi (z)вҲҘ2 ,                    (136)
                                           2Ln i=1
where in the last inequality we used L-smoothness and convexity of each fi . Now we consider the
sequences of hki , produced by the method, for any i вҲҲ [n]. Denoting hвҲ—i = вҲҮfi (xвҲ— ) and , we have
                                            D                 E
                   (19)                       ЛҶ ki , hki вҲ’ hвҲ—i + ОҪk2 вҲҘвҲҶ
                                                                      ЛҶ ki вҲҘ2
вҲҘhk+1
  i   вҲ’ hвҲ—i вҲҘ2      =    вҲҘhki вҲ’ hвҲ—i вҲҘ2 + 2ОҪk вҲҶ
                  =      вҲҘhki вҲ’ hвҲ—i вҲҘ2 + 2ОҪk gei (xk+1 ) вҲ’ hki , hki вҲ’ hвҲ—i + ОҪk2 вҲҘe
                                                                                  gi (xk+1 ) вҲ’ hki вҲҘ2
                ОҪk вүӨ1
                  вүӨ      вҲҘhki вҲ’ hвҲ—i вҲҘ2 + 2ОҪk gei (xk+1 ) вҲ’ hki , hki вҲ’ hвҲ—i + ОҪk вҲҘe
                                                                                 gi (xk+1 ) вҲ’ hki вҲҘ2
                  =      вҲҘhki вҲ’ hвҲ—i вҲҘ2 + ОҪk gei (xk+1 ) вҲ’ hki , gei (xk+1 ) + hki вҲ’ 2hвҲ—i
                  вүӨ      (1 вҲ’ ОҪk )вҲҘhki вҲ’ hвҲ—i вҲҘ2 + ОҪk вҲҘe
                                                      gi (xk+1 ) вҲ’ hвҲ—i вҲҘ2
                  вүӨ      (1 вҲ’ ОҪk )вҲҘhki вҲ’ hвҲ—i вҲҘ2 + 2ОҪk вҲҘe
                                                       gi (xk+1 ) вҲ’ вҲҮfi (xk+1 )вҲҘ2 + 2ОҪk вҲҘвҲҮfi (xk+1 ) вҲ’ hвҲ—i вҲҘ2
                 (131)
                =     (1 вҲ’ ОҪk )вҲҘhki вҲ’ hвҲ—i вҲҘ2 + 2ОҪk вҲҘПүi,k+1 вҲҘ2 + 2ОҪk вҲҘвҲҮfi (xk+1 ) вҲ’ вҲҮfi (xвӢҶ )вҲҘ2 .                (137)
Summing up (137) by i from 1 to n, we obtain
            n                                     n                       n
         1 X k+1          вҲ— 2                  1X k           вҲ— 2    2ОҪk X
               вҲҘh      вҲ’ hi вҲҘ вүӨ (1 вҲ’ ОҪk )            вҲҘh вҲ’ hi вҲҘ +            вҲҘПүi,k+1 вҲҘ2
         n i=1 i                               n i=1 i                n i=1
                                                   n
                                               2ОҪk X
                                           +          вҲҘвҲҮfi (xk+1 ) вҲ’ вҲҮfi (xвӢҶ )вҲҘ2 .                      (138)
                                                n i=1

Combining inequality (136), where we take z = xвҲ— , and inequality (138) multiplied by 12 C 2 Оұ 2
                                                                                             ek+2 ,
we get
                                                                                     n
                                                     1                  1         1X k
Ak+1 ОҰ(y k+1 ) вҲ’ ОҰ(xвҲ— ) вүӨ Ak ОҰ(y k ) вҲ’ ОҰ(xвҲ— ) + вҲҘz k вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲҘ2 + C 2 Оұ          2
                                                                                          вҲҘh вҲ’ hвҲ—i вҲҘ2

                                                                             ek+1
                                                        2               2         n i=1 i
                                                                     n
                                       1                1         1 X k+1
                                      вҲ’ вҲҘz k+1 вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲҘ2 вҲ’ C 2 Оұ 2
                                                             ek+2      вҲҘh вҲ’ hвҲ—i вҲҘ2
                                       2                2         n i=1 i
                                                             n                             n
                                       1                  1X k                1         1X k
                                      + (1 вҲ’ ОҪk )C 2 Оұ 2
                                                     ek+2       вҲҘhi вҲ’ hвҲ—i вҲҘ2 вҲ’ C 2 Оұ 2
                                                                                   ek+1      вҲҘh вҲ’ hвҲ—i вҲҘ2
                                       2                  n i=1               2         n i=1 i
                                                                                              n
                                                                                1        2ОҪk X
                                      +Оұk+1 Пүk+1 , xвҲ— вҲ’ z k + Оұk+1
                                                                2
                                                                   вҲҘПүk+1 вҲҘ2 + C 2 Оұ 2
                                                                                   ek+2         вҲҘПүi,k+1 вҲҘ2
                                                                                2         n i=1
                                                              X n
                                          Оұk+1  1
                                      вҲ’        вҲ’ ОҪk C 2 Оұ 2
                                                        ek+2       вҲҘвҲҮfi (xk+1 ) вҲ’ вҲҮfi (z)вҲҘ2 .
                                          2Ln   n              i=1


                                                     42
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


By the selection of parameters (126), (127) and definition of Lyapunov function Mk (129), we have
                                                     1    1
Ak+1 ОҰ(y k+1 ) вҲ’ ОҰ(xвҲ— )       вүӨ Ak ОҰ(y k ) вҲ’ ОҰ(xвҲ— ) + Mk вҲ’ Mk+1

                                                     2    2
                                                                                    2   n
                                                                                   Оұk+1 X
                                   +Оұk+1 Пүk+1 , xвҲ— вҲ’ z k + Оұk+1
                                                            2
                                                                вҲҘПүk+1 вҲҘ2 +                 вҲҘПүi,k+1 вҲҘ2 .
                                                                                    n2 i=1

Summing up the previous inequality by k from 0 to K вҲ’ 1, we finish the proof.



Theorem F.1. Let Assumptions 1, 2 and 3(Вө = 0) hold on Q = B5nвҲҡM (xвҲ— ), where M вүҘ вҲҘx0 вҲ’
                      Pn
xвҲ— вҲҘ2 + C 2 ОұK
             2      1
               0 +1 n
                                  вҲ— 2             864 10nK
                       i=1 вҲҘвҲҮfi (x )вҲҘ , where C = n ln ОІ , and a вүҘ 0, and

                      (                                         1
                                                                                         )
                       8 В· 35 В· 724 4 10nK 18 В· 65 ПғK Оұ (K + 1) ОұвҲ’1 10nK
            a вүҘ max 2,             ln      ,     вҲҡ       ОұвҲ’1   ln Оұ                          ,      (139)
                            n           ОІ          M Ln Оұ             ОІ
                                              вҲҡ
                                             n M
                                   О»k =                ,                                            (140)
                                          Оұk+1 ln 10nK
                                        72e         ОІ


for some K вүҘ K0 = 32 C 2 n > 0 and ОІ вҲҲ (0, 1] such that ln 10nK

                                                              ОІ   вүҘ 1. Then, after K iterations
of DProx-clipped-SSTM-shift the following inequality holds with probability at least 1 вҲ’ ОІ

                           6aLM
     ОҰ(y K ) вҲ’ ОҰ(xвҲ— ) вүӨ                 and {xk }K+1     k K       k K       вҲҡ    вҲ—
                                                 k=0 , {z }k=0 , {y }k=0 вҠҶ B2 M (x ).               (141)
                          K(K + 3)

In particular, when parameter a equals the maximum from (139), then after K iterations of DProx-
clipped-SSTM-shift, we have with probability at least 1 вҲ’ ОІ
                                  пЈ«      пЈұ                     вҲҡ               пЈјпЈ¶
                                         пЈІ LM LM ln4 nK Пғ M ln ОұвҲ’1      Оұ  nK пЈҪ
                                                          ОІ                 ОІ
             ОҰ(y K ) вҲ’ ОҰ(xвҲ— ) = O пЈӯmax         ,            ,     ОұвҲ’1   ОұвҲ’1
                                                                                 пЈё,        (142)
                                         пЈі K2       nK 2        n Оұ K Оұ        пЈҫ

i.e. achieve ОҰ(y K ) вҲ’ ОҰ(xвҲ— ) вүӨ Оө with probability at least 1 вҲ’ ОІ DProx-clipped-SSTM-shift requires

                                                                   вҲҡ ! ОұвҲ’1
                                                                         Оұ       вҲҡ пЈҪпЈ¶
                     пЈ«     пЈұr                                                       пЈј
                           пЈІ LM r LM               nLM      1    Пғ   M         Пғ  M
            K = O пЈӯmax               ,        ln2         ,                 ln        пЈё       (143)
                           пЈі      Оө       Оөn         ОөОІ n           Оө            ОөОІ пЈҫ

iterations/oracle calls per worker.


Proof. The key idea behind the proof is similar to the one used in (Gorbunov et al., 2021; Sadiev
et al., 2023). We prove by induction that the iterates do not leave some ball and ОҰ(y K ) вҲ’ ОҰ(y вҲ— )
decreases as вҲј 1/K(K+3)
Firstly, we denote Rk = вҲҘz k вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲҘ, R  e0 = R0 , R
                                                  ek+1 = max{R    ek , Rk+1 } for all k вүҘ 0, and now we
show by induction that for all k вүҘ 0 the iterates xk+1 , z k , y k lie in BRek (xвҲ— ). The induction base
                             e0 = R0 , and x1 = A0 y0 +Оұ1 z0 = z 0 . Next, we assume this statement is
is trivial since y 0 = z 0 , R                       A1
true for some l вүҘ 1: xl , z lвҲ’1 , y lвҲ’1 вҲҲ BRelвҲ’1 (xвҲ— ). According to definitions of Rl and Rel , we obtain
             вҲ—            вҲ—
  l                                         l
z вҲҲ BRl (x ) вҠҶ BRel (x ). Due to that y is a convex combination of y       lвҲ’1
                                                                               вҲҲ BRelвҲ’1 (x ) вҠҶ BRel (xвҲ— ),
                                                                                          вҲ—

z l вҲҲ BRel (xвҲ— ) and BRel (xвҲ— ) is a convex set, we have that y l вҲҲ BRel (xвҲ— ). Finally, since xl+1 is a
convex combination of y l and z l , we conclude xl+1 lies in BRel (xвҲ— ) as well.


                                                   43
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Now to formulate the statement rigorously, we introduce probability event Ek for each for each
k = 0, . . . , K as follows: inequalities
          tвҲ’1                                 tвҲ’1                       tвҲ’1 X
                                                                            n  2
          X                                   X                         X     Оұl+1
      2         Оұl+1 вҹЁПүl+1 , xвҲ— вҲ’ z l вҹ© + 2          2
                                                    Оұl+1 вҲҘПүl+1 вҲҘ2 + 2                   вҲҘПүi,l+1 вҲҘ2 вүӨ M,   (144)
                                                                                   n2
          l=0                                 l=0                       l=0 i=1
      |                                               {z                                         }
                                                      Bt
                                                        p         вҲҡ
                                               Rt вүӨ         Mt вүӨ 2 M ,                                    (145)
                                                        r
                                                     Оұt X
                                                            u     M
                                                           Пүi,t вүӨ                                         (146)
                                                     n i=1        2
hold for t = 0, 1, . . . , k and r = 1, 2 . . . , n simultaneously, where
                                                     u       b
                                          Пүl+1 = Пүl+1    + Пүl+1  ,                               (147)
                                          n                         n
                                   def 1                     def 1
                                         X                         X
                              u               u          b
                            Пүl+1   =         Пүi,l+1 , Пүl+1   =         Пүb ,                      (148)
                                       n i=1                     n i=1 i,l+1
  u     def                                          def
        = gei (xl+1 ) вҲ’ EОҫil gei (xl+1 ) , Пүi,k+1
                                              b
                                                     = EОҫik gei (xk+1 ) вҲ’ вҲҮfi (xk+1 ), вҲҖi вҲҲ [n]. (149)

 Пүi,l+1
                                         вҲҡ
We want to show via induction R  el вүӨ 5n M with high probability, which allows us to apply the
result of Lemma F.1 and BernsteinвҖҷs inequality to estimate the stochastic part of the upper-bound.
After that, we will prove by induction that P{Ek } вүҘ 1 вҲ’ kОІ/K for all k = 0, 1, . . . , K. The base
induction follows immediately: the left-hand side of (144) equals zero and M вүҘ M0 by definition,
                             r
and for k = 0 we have Оұn0        u
                            P
                                Пүi,0 = 0, since Оұ0 = 0. Next we assume that the statement holds
                                  i=1
for some k = T вҲ’ 1 вүӨ K вҲ’ 1: P{ET вҲ’1 } вүҘ 1 вҲ’ (T вҲ’1)ОІ/K . Let us show that P{ET } вүҘ 1 вҲ’ T ОІ/K .
                                                                                     вҲҡ
To proceed, we need to show that probability event ET вҲ’1 impliesвҲҡ            et вүӨ 2 M for all t =
                                                                        that R
                                                                  et вүӨ 2 M for all t = 0, 1, . . . , tвҖІ for
0, 1, . . . , T . The base is already proven. Next we assume that R
          вҖІ                                   вҖІ
some t < T . Then for all t = 0, 1, . . . , t
           вҲҘz t вҲ’ xвӢҶ вҲҘ = вҲҘ proxОұt ОЁ z tвҲ’1 вҲ’ Оұt ge(xt ) вҲ’ proxОұt ОЁ (xвӢҶ вҲ’ Оұt вҲҮf (xвӢҶ )) вҲҘ


                         вүӨ вҲҘz tвҲ’1 вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲ’ Оұt ge(xt ) вҲ’ вҲҮf (xвӢҶ ) вҲҘ


                         вүӨ    вҲҘz tвҲ’1 вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲҘ + Оұt вҲҘe
                                                  g (xt ) вҲ’ htвҲ’1 вҲҘ + Оұt вҲҘhtвҲ’1 вҲ’ hвҲ— вҲҘ
                                         v
                                        u                                n
                                     1 u                              1 X tвҲ’1
                         вүӨ      1+       tвҲҘz tвҲ’1 вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲҘ2 + C 2 Оұ  et2      вҲҘh   вҲ’ hвҲ—i вҲҘ2 + Оұt О»tвҲ’1
                                     C                                n i=1 i
                               p               (140),(145) вҲҡ     вҲҡ      вҲҡ
                         вүӨ    2 MtвҲ’1 + Оұt О»tвҲ’1     вүӨ      4 M + n M вүӨ 5n M .

This means that xt , z t , y t вҲҲ B5nвҲҡM (xвҲ— ) for t = 0, 1, . . . , tвҖІ and we can apply Lemma F.1: ET вҲ’1
implies
                                                              tвҖІ вҲ’1                          tвҖІ вҲ’1
            вҖІ
                                        1     1      X                           X
   AtвҖІ ОҰ(y t ) вҲ’ ОҰ(xвҲ— )           вүӨ       M0 вҲ’ MtвҖІ +   Оұl+1 вҹЁПүl+1 , xвҲ— вҲ’ z l вҹ© +    2
                                                                                   Оұl+1 вҲҘПүl+1 вҲҘ2
                                        2     2
                                                                 l=0                         l=0
                                             вҖІ
                                            tX вҲ’1 X
                                                  n      2
                                                        Оұl+1
                                        +                  2
                                                             вҲҘПүi,k+1 вҲҘ2
                                                    i=1
                                                         n
                                            k=0
                                        1     1           3
                                  вүӨ       M0 вҲ’ MtвҖІ + BtвҖІ вүӨ M                                              (150)
                                        2     2           2
that gives
                                    MtвҖІ вүӨ M0 + M вүӨ 2M.
That is, we showed that ET вҲ’1 implies xt , z t , y t вҲҲ B2вҲҡM (xвҲ— ) and
                                      (144),(150) 1 M0 вҲ’ 1 Mt + M             3M     6aLM
                   ОҰ(y t ) вҲ’ ОҰ(xвҲ— )      вүӨ        2      2
                                                                          вүӨ       =          .            (151)
                                                            At                2At   t(t + 3)

                                                            44
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


for all t = 0, 1, . . . , T . Before we proceed, we introduce a new notation:
                                          вҲ—                           вҲҡ
                                          x вҲ’ z t , if вҲҘxвҲ— вҲ’ z t вҲҘ вүӨ 2 M ,
                                   О·t =
                                          0,         otherwise,
for all t = 0, 1, . . . , T . Random vectors {О·t }Tt=0 are bounded almost surely:
                                                          вҲҡ
                                               вҲҘО·t вҲҘ вүӨ 2 M                                                                  (152)
                                                         вҲ—      t
for all t = 0, 1, . . . , T . In addition, О·t = x вҲ’ z follows from ET вҲ’1 for all t = 0, 1, . . . , T and,
thus, ET вҲ’1 implies
                    T вҲ’1                                      T вҲ’1                                  T вҲ’1 X
                                                                                                         n     2
                    X                                         X                                     X         Оұk+1
    BT    =     2          Оұk+1 вҹЁПүk+1 , xвҲ— вҲ’ z k вҹ© + 2                2
                                                                     Оұk+1 вҲҘПүk+1 вҲҘ2 + 2                           2
                                                                                                                   вҲҘПүi,k+1 вҲҘ2
                                                                                                          i=1
                                                                                                               n
                    k=0                                       k=0                                   k=0
                    T вҲ’1                             T вҲ’1                                  T вҲ’1 X
                                                                                                n       2
                    X                                X
                                                              2
                                                                                           X           Оұk+1
          =     2          Оұk+1 вҹЁПүk+1 , О·k вҹ© + 2             Оұk+1 вҲҘПүk+1 вҲҘ2 + 2                            2
                                                                                                            вҲҘПүi,k+1 вҲҘ2 .    (153)
                                                                                                   i=1
                                                                                                        n
                    k=0                              k=0                                   k=0

Using the notation from (147)-(149), we can rewrite вҲҘПүk+1 вҲҘ2 and вҲҘПүi,k+1 вҲҘ2 as
                             n                    n
                                                     *jвҲ’1               +
                          2 X                 4 X     X
         вҲҘПүk+1 вҲҘ2 вүӨ             вҲҘПү u   вҲҘ2 + 2             Пүu     , Пүu           b
                                                                           + 2вҲҘПүk+1 вҲҘ2 .                                    (154)
                         n2 i=1 i,k+1        n j=2 i=1 i,k+1 j,k+1

Putting all together, we obtain that ET вҲ’1 implies
                            T вҲ’1 X
                                 n                        T вҲ’1 X
                                                               n
                            X        Оұk+1 u               X       Оұk+1 b
           BT       вүӨ 2                   Пүi,k+1 , О·k + 2              Пүi,k+1 , О·k
                                      n                            n
                             k=0 i=1                      k=0 i=1
                           |           {z            } |            {z             }
                                           в‘                                                    в‘Ў
                                    T вҲ’1 X
                                         n      2
                                    X          Оұk+1
                                                          u           2
                                                                                   h
                                                                                        u            2
                                                                                                         i
                             +8                          Пүi,k+1           вҲ’ EОҫik       Пүi,k+1
                                                n2
                                    k=0 i=1
                                |                               {z                                        }
                                                                в‘ў
                                    T вҲ’1 X
                                         n 2                           T вҲ’1 X
                                                                            n   2
                                    X     Оұk+1        h
                                                          u    2
                                                                 i     X       Оұk+1  b     2
                             +8              2
                                                E Оҫ k   Пүi,k+1     + 8              Пүi,k+1
                                           n                                    n
                                  k=0 i=1                              k=0 i=1
                                |              {z                } |            {z         }
                                                     в‘Ј                                                   в‘Ө
                                    T вҲ’1 X
                                         n
                                                    *jвҲ’1                           +
                                                2
                                    X          Оұk+1  X
                                                                u        u
                             +8                                Пүi,k+1 , Пүj,k+1             .                                (155)
                                                n2
                                    k=0 j=2              i=1
                                |                        {z                            }
                                                         в‘Ҙ

To finish the proof, it remains to estimate в‘ , в‘Ў, в‘ў, в‘Ј, в‘Ө, в‘Ҙ with high probability. More precisely,
the goal to prove that в‘  + в‘Ў + в‘ў + в‘Ј + в‘Ө + в‘Ҙ вүӨ M with high probability. Before we proceed, we
                                                       u        b
need to derive several useful inequalities related to Пүi,k+1 , Пүi,k+1 . First of all, we have
                                                       u
                                                     вҲҘПүi,k+1 вҲҘ вүӨ 2О»k .                                                      (156)
by definition of the clipping operator. Next, probability event ET вҲ’1 implies that for t = 0 we have
x1 = x0 and
           вҲҘвҲҮfi (x1 ) вҲ’ h0i вҲҘ             вүӨ          вҲҘвҲҮfi (x0 ) вҲ’ вҲҮfi (xвӢҶ )вҲҘ + вҲҘh0i вҲ’ hвҲ—i вҲҘ
                                                                    вҲҡ u
                                                                          v
                                                                                       n
                                       smooth                          n            1X 0
                                                     LвҲҘx0 вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲҘ +
                                                                          u
                                          вүӨ                               tC 2 Оұe12       вҲҘh вҲ’ hвҲ—i вҲҘ2
                                                                    CОұ e1           n i=1 i
                                                                      вҲҡ
                                                                        n вҲҡ

                                                       2(K0 + 2)
                                          вүӨ                       +            M
                                                          ae
                                                           Оұ1       CОұ  e1
                                      (139),(140)    О»0
                                          вүӨ             .                                                                   (157)
                                                      2

                                                               45
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Next, for t = 1, . . . , T вҲ’ 1 event ET вҲ’1 implies


 вҲҘвҲҮfi (xt+1 ) вҲ’ hti вҲҘ    вүӨ       вҲҘвҲҮfi (xt+1 ) вҲ’ вҲҮfi (y t )вҲҘ + вҲҘвҲҮfi (y t ) вҲ’ вҲҮfi (xвӢҶ )вҲҘ + вҲҘhti вҲ’ hвҲ—i вҲҘ
                                                 p
                         вүӨ       LвҲҘxt+1 вҲ’ y t вҲҘ + 2L (fi (y t ) вҲ’ fi (xвҲ— ) вҲ’ вҹЁвҲҮfi (xвӢҶ ), y t вҲ’ xвӢҶ вҹ©)
                                                                                 v
                                                                                 u n
                        (вҲ—)                      p                               uX
                         вүӨ       LвҲҘxt+1 вҲ’ y t вҲҘ + 2nL (ОҰ(y t ) вҲ’ ОҰ(xвҲ— )) + t           вҲҘhti вҲ’ hвҲ—i вҲҘ2 (158)
                                                                                     i=1

                                                                                вҲҡ u X
                                                               s                    v
                                                                          2             n
                        (151)     LОұt+1 t+1                        12anL M        n u
                                                                                    t1
                         вүӨ              вҲҘx     вҲ’ ztвҲҘ +                       +            вҲҘht вҲ’ hвҲ—i вҲҘ2
                                    At                              t(t + 3)    et+1 n i=1 i
                                                                               CОұ
                                     вҲҡ           s                вҲҡ p
                                  4L M Оұt+1         12anL2 M        n
                         вүӨ                    +                +           Mt
                                       At            t(t + 3)    CОұ
                                                                  et+1
                                     пЈ«                             s                              пЈ¶
                                                                                           2 10nK
                        (140)                      et+1 ln 10nK
                                  О»t пЈӯ 8 В· 72LОұt+1 Оұ         ОІ        12 В· 722 aL2 Оұ
                                                                                   e 2
                                                                                     t+1 ln    ОІ пЈё
                         вүӨ                                      +2
                                  2              nAt                            nt(t + 3)
                                      О»t 288   10nK
                                 +      В· вҲҡ ln
                                      2 C n      ОІ
                                                 2                                 10nK
                                 О»t 576aL max {K0 + 2, t + 2} (t + 2) ln ОІ
                         вүӨ          В·
                                 2                a2 L2 t(t + 3)n
                                       s
                                   О»t    12aL2 max {(K0 + 2)2 , (t + 2)2 } 722 ln2 10nK
                                                                                     ОІ
                                 + В·
                                   2                    na2 L2 t(t + 3)
                                   О»t 288     10nK
                                 + В· вҲҡ ln
                                   2 C n        ОІ
                                 О»t 9                     72 10nK
                         вүӨ          В· max {(K0 + 2), 2}      ln
                                 2 a                      n       ОІ
                                      s
                                   О»t 3                       722 2 10nK
                                 +       max {(K0 + 2)2 , 9}     ln
                                   2 a                         n        ОІ
                                      О»t 288   10nK (139) О»t
                                 +      В· вҲҡ ln       вүӨ       ,                                      (159)
                                      2 C n      ОІ        2

                                n
where in (вҲ—) we use вҲ’вҹЁ n1             вҲҮfi (xвӢҶ ), y t вҲ’ xвӢҶ вҹ© вүӨ ОЁ(y t ) вҲ’ ОЁ(xвӢҶ ), and in the last row we use
                                P
                                i=1
(t+2)2   9                                 10nK
t(t+3) вүӨ 4 for all t вүҘ 1 and C вүҘ 12 В· 72 ln ОІ .

Therefore, Lemma B.2 and ET вҲ’1 imply


                                                  b                2Оұ Пғ Оұ
                                                вҲҘПүi,k+1 вҲҘ      вүӨ          ,                         (160)
                                                                   О»kОұвҲ’1
                                                                   18О»2вҲ’Оұ
                                             u
                                                    вҲҘ2 вүӨ                  ПғОұ .

                                       EОҫik вҲҘПүi,k+1                   k                             (161)


Upper bound for в‘ . To estimate this sum, we will use BernsteinвҖҷs inequality. The summands have
                                        u
conditional equal to zero, since EОҫik [Пүi,k+1 ] = 0:

                                                hОұ                     i
                                                 k+1      u
                                         EОҫik            Пүi,k+1 , О·k       = 0.
                                                     n

                                                          46
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                                                        n         oT вҲ’1
                                                            u
Moreover, for all k = 0, . . . , T вҲ’ 1 random vectors Пүi,k+1    вҹ©       are independent. Thus, sequence
                                                                   k=0
n       D             EoT вҲ’1
 2 Оұk+1
    n
           u
         Пүi,k+1  , О·k           is a martingale difference sequence. Next, the summands are bounded:
                                k=0

                  Оұk+1 u                                          Оұk+1 u                 (156) Оұk+1      вҲҡ
                2      Пүi,k+1 , О·k                        вүӨ      2     вҲҘПүi,k+1 вҲҘ В· вҲҘО·k вҲҘ вүӨ 4           О»k M
                   n                                                n      вҲҡ              вҲҡ       n
                                                       (140)       4nОұk+1 M                  M     def
                                                          =                 10nK
                                                                                    вүӨ        10nK
                                                                                                   = c.                      (162)
                                                                 72neОұk+1 ln ОІ         6 ln ОІ
                                                                                 E2
                                                                 Оұ2k+1
                                                                       D
                                2 def                                    u
Finally, conditional variances Пғi,k = EОҫik                      4 n2 Пүi,k+1 , О·k      of the summands are bounded::

                            2
                                                       Оұ2

                          Оұk+1

                 2
                         4 2 вҲҘПүi,k+1 вҲҘ В· вҲҘО·k вҲҘ вүӨ 16 k+1
                                   u   2       2
                                                                     u
                                                                             вҲҘ2 .

                Пғi,k вүӨ EОҫik                                  M EОҫt вҲҘПүi,k+1               (163)
                            n                           n2
                                                               D           E
Applying BernsteinвҖҷs inequality (Lemma B.1) with Xi,k = 2 Оұk+1
                                                           n
                                                                 u
                                                                Пүi,k+1 , О·k , parameter c as in
                                   2
(162), b = M           M
           6 , G = 63 ln 10nK :        ОІ

                                             вҲ’1 X
       (                                   T    n
                                                                               )
                                                                      M2                           b2

             M                             X
                                                        2                                                             ОІ
     P |в‘ | >                 and                       Пғi,k вүӨ                       вүӨ 2 exp вҲ’                    =       .
             6
                                           k=0 i=1
                                                                  63 ln 10nK
                                                                          ОІ
                                                                                                2G + 2cb/3           5nK
The above is equivalent to
                                                                           вҲ’1 X
                                                          (              T    n
                                                                                                                             )
                 ОІ                                                       X
                                                                                  2       M2                    M
  P {Eв‘  } вүҘ 1 вҲ’     ,                  for      Eв‘  =           either            Пғi,k > 3 10nK         or |в‘ | вүӨ                  .
                5nK                                                                    6 ln ОІ                   6
                                                                         k=0 i=1
                                                                                                                             (164)
Moreover, ET вҲ’1 implies that
   T вҲ’1 X
        n                                    T вҲ’1 X
                                                  n       2                                      T вҲ’1 Xn   2
   X                    (163)                X           Оұk+1                     (161)          X        Оұk+1
              2
                                                                                                               О»2вҲ’Оұ
                                                                     u        2              Оұ
             Пғi,k        вүӨ       16M                        2
                                                              EОҫ t  вҲҘПүi,k+1 вҲҘ      вүӨ    288Пғ   M             2  k
                                                          n                                                n
   k=0 i=1                                     k=0   i=1                                              i=1
                                                                                                    k=0
                                                         2        T вҲ’1              T вҲ’1 Оұ
                        (140)      288Пғ Оұ M           2вҲ’Оұ/2
                                                        Оұk+1      X  288Пғ Оұ M 2вҲ’Оұ/2 X Оұk+1
                         вүӨ                                       вүӨ
                                 722вҲ’Оұ ln2вҲ’Оұ 10nK
                                               ОІ  k=0
                                                      nОұвҲ’1 Оұ 2вҲ’Оұ
                                                           ek+1    722вҲ’Оұ ln2вҲ’Оұ 10nK
                                                                                  ОІ k=0
                                                                                        nОұвҲ’1
                                                                  T вҲ’1
                                          288Пғ Оұ M 2вҲ’Оұ/2          X
                         вүӨ                                            (k + 2)Оұ
                                 nОұвҲ’1 722вҲ’Оұ В· 2Оұ aОұ LОұ ln2вҲ’Оұ 10nK
                                                               ОІ  k=0
                                  1 144Пғ Оұ M 2вҲ’Оұ/2 T (T + 1)Оұ (139)     M2
                         вүӨ          В·                          вүӨ               .                                             (165)
                                 aОұ   nОұвҲ’1 LОұ ln2вҲ’Оұ 10nKОІ
                                                                    63 ln 10nK
                                                                            ОІ


Upper bound for в‘Ў. Probability event ET вҲ’1 implies
                        T вҲ’1 X
                             n                                                              T вҲ’1
                        X           Оұk+1 b               (160) вҲҡ         X Оұk+1
 в‘Ў       вүӨ          2                   вҲҘПүi,k+1 вҲҘ В· вҲҘО·k вҲҘ вүӨ 4 M В· 2Оұ Пғ Оұ
                        k=0     i=1
                                     n                                     О»kОұвҲ’1            k=0
                                ОұвҲ’1            1вҲ’Оұ/2 Оұ                       T вҲ’1
        (140)       16 В· 72                M          Пғ              10nK    X
                                                          lnОұвҲ’1                                ОұвҲ’1    Оұ

         вүӨ                                                                          max Оұk+1 Оұ
                                                                                             ek+1  , Оұk+1
                                 nОұвҲ’1                                  ОІ
                                                                             k=0
                                ОұвҲ’1 Оұ            1вҲ’Оұ/2                       T вҲ’1
                    16 В· 72    Пғ M                                   10nK    X
                                                          lnОұвҲ’1              max (K0 + 2)(k + 2)ОұвҲ’1 , (k + 2)Оұ

         вүӨ
                           2Оұ aОұ LОұ                                    ОІ t=0
      T,K0 вүӨK        1 12 В· 16 В· 72ОұвҲ’1 Пғ Оұ M 1вҲ’Оұ/2 K(K + 1)Оұ ОұвҲ’1 10nK
         вүӨ              В·                                   ln
                    aОұ                  4Оұ LОұ                      ОІ
        (139)       M
         вүӨ             .                                                                                                     (166)
                     6

                                                                        47
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Upper bound for в‘ў. To estimate this sum, we will use BernsteinвҖҷs inequality. The summands have
conditional expectations equal to zero:
                              2
                         8Оұk+1           h
                                             u     2
                                                            h
                                                                u     2
                                                                        ii
                                   E   k
                                      Оҫi   Пү i,k+1   вҲ’ E  k
                                                         Оҫi   Пүi,k+1       = 0.
                             n2
                                                        n        on
                                                            u
Moreover, for all k = 0, . . . , T вҲ’ 1 random vectors Пүi,k+1          are independent. Thus, sequence
                                                                  i=1
                                                T вҲ’1,n
  8Оұ2k+1            2                      2
             u                      u
    n 2    Пүi,k+1     вҲ’ E Оҫ k
                            i
                                  Пүi,k+1                is a martingale difference sequence. Next, the
                                                        k,i=0,1
summands are bounded:
     2                                                                      2
   8Оұk+1
              u     2
                            h
                                u    2
                                       i                                 8Оұk+1
                                                                                      u      2
                                                                                                      h
                                                                                                           u     2
                                                                                                                   i
            Пү i,k+1   вҲ’ E k
                         Оҫi   Пүi,k+1                             вүӨ                 вҲҘПүi,k+1 вҲҘ   + E  k
                                                                                                   Оҫi    Пү i,k+1
    n2                                                                     n2
                                                                              2    2 (140)
                                                                (156)    64Оұk+1 О»k             M       def
                                                                 вүӨ                     вүӨ               = c.         (167)
                                                                              n2           9 ln 10nK
                                                                                                  ОІ


Finally, conditional variances
                                                   4
                                                64Оұk+1                 h        i 2
                              2    def                     u   2           u  2
                            Пғ
                            ei,k = EОҫik                  Оё t+1   вҲ’ E k
                                                                    Оҫi   Пүk+1
                                                  n4
of the summands are bounded:
                                            2
                    2
                              (167)       8Оұk+1 M           h
                                                                      u       2
                                                                                           h
                                                                                                u        2
                                                                                                             ii
                  Пғ
                  ei,k         вүӨ                      Ek
                                                  10nK Оҫi
                                                                     Пүi,k+1       вҲ’ EОҫik       Пүi,k+1
                                         9n2 ln    ОІ
                                             2
                                         16Оұk+1  M       u
                                                                вҲҘ2 .

                               вүӨ               2
                                                   EОҫik вҲҘПүi,k+1                                                                (168)
                                            9n

                                                                                   2
                                                                                                    2                          2
                                                 ei,k = 8Оұk+1
Applying BernsteinвҖҷs inequality (Lemma B.1) with X                                              u
                                                                                               Пүk+1   вҲ’ EОҫik           u
                                                                                                                      Пүi,k+1            ,
                                                          n2
                                                                 2
parameter c defined in (167), b = M            M
                                  9 , G = 6В·92 ln 10nK :             ОІ


                                     вҲ’1 X
      (                            T    n
                                                                              )
                                                        M2                                     b2

            M                      X
                                             2                                                                             ОІ
    P |в‘ў| >             and                Пғ
                                           ei,k вүӨ                                 вүӨ 2 exp вҲ’                           =       .
            9
                                   k=0 i=1
                                                  6 В· 92 ln 10nK
                                                              ОІ
                                                                                            2G + 2cb/3                    5nK

The above is equivalent to
                                                              вҲ’1 X
                                                  (         T    n
                                                                                                                         )
               ОІ                                            X
                                                                            2                M2                        M
P {Eв‘ў } вүҘ 1 вҲ’     ,             for      Eв‘ў =      either                 Пғ
                                                                          ei,k >                              or |в‘ў| вүӨ     .
              5nK
                                                                k=0 i=1
                                                                                       6 В· 92 ln 10nK
                                                                                                   ОІ
                                                                                                                       9
                                                                                                                        (169)
Moreover, ET вҲ’1 implies
           T вҲ’1 X
                n                              T вҲ’1 n  2
           X
                         2
                                (168)      16 X X Оұk+1           u 2   (165)       M2
                       Пғ
                       ei,k        вүӨ         M             EОҫik вҲҘПүk+1 вҲҘ вүӨ                   .                                  (170)
           k=0 i=1
                                           9       i=1
                                                  k=0
                                                       n 2
                                                                             6 В· 92 ln 10nK
                                                                                         ОІ


Upper bound for в‘Ј. Probability event ET вҲ’1 implies
                      T вҲ’1 X
                           n     2                             T вҲ’1 Xn   2
                      X         Оұk+1     h
                                             u    2
                                                    i   1      X        Оұk+1    h
                                                                                  u     2
                                                                                          i
     в‘Ј     =      8                2
                                     E k
                                      Оҫi   Пүi,k+1     вүӨ   В· 8M             2
                                                                             EОҫt Пүi,k+1
                            i=1
                                 n                      M           i=1
                                                                         n
                      k=0                                                           k=0
          (165)      M       M
           вүӨ       3  10nK
                           вүӨ   .                                                                                               (171)
                  6 ln ОІ     9


                                                                48
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Upper bound for в‘Ө. Probability event ET вҲ’1 implies
                      T вҲ’1 X
                           n     2                         T вҲ’1   2
                      X         Оұk+1  b     2              X    Оұk+1
      в‘Ө     =     8                  Пүi,k+1   вүӨ 22Оұ+3 Пғ 2Оұ
                      k=0   i=1
                                 n                              О»2ОұвҲ’2
                                                                 k          k=0

          (140)   22Оұ+3 В· 722ОұвҲ’2 Пғ 2Оұ ln2ОұвҲ’2 10nK
                                               ОІ
                                                  T
                                                  X вҲ’1
                                                                             2     2ОұвҲ’2    2
            =                                                           max Оұk+1 Оұ
                                                                                 ek+1   , Оұk+1
                                n2ОұвҲ’2 M ОұвҲ’1
                                                     k=0
                      2Оұ+3       2ОұвҲ’2 2Оұ  2ОұвҲ’2 10nK T вҲ’1
                  2       В· 72     Пғ ln          ОІ
                                                     X
                                                         max (k + 2)2 , (K0 + 2)2ОұвҲ’2 (k + 2)2

            =            2Оұ  2Оұ  2ОұвҲ’2   2Оұ   ОұвҲ’1
                       2 a n          L M
                                                     k=0
                                2ОұвҲ’2 2Оұ            2Оұ 2ОұвҲ’2 10nK
                   1 8 В· 72         Пғ K(K + 1) ln            ОІ  (139) M
            вүӨ       2Оұ
                       В·                2ОұвҲ’2  2Оұ   ОұвҲ’1
                                                                 вүӨ       .                    (172)
                  a                   n      L M                       6

Upper bound for в‘Ҙ. This sum requires more refined analysis. We introduce a new vector:
                                                                    вҲҡ
                      пЈІ Оұk+1 jвҲ’1                    jвҲ’1
                      пЈұ
                                 Пүi,k+1 , if Оұk+1       Пүi,k+1 вүӨ 2M ,
                              P u                   P u
                  k        n                     n
                 ПҮj =        i=1                    i=1                                (173)
                        0,                 otherwise,
                      пЈі

Then, by definition                                                    вҲҡ
                                                                        V
                                                           вҲҘПҮkj вҲҘ вүӨ                                                (174)
                                                                       2
and
                        вҲ’1 X                      вҲ’1 X                               jвҲ’1
                      T    n                    T    n
                                                                            *                                 +
                      X     Оұk+1 k u            X                               Оұk+1 X u
      в‘Ҙ =         8              ПҮj , Пүj,k+1 +8                                       Пү      вҲ’ ПҮkj , Пүj,k+1
                                                                                                      u
                                                                                                                  . (175)
                             n                                                   n i=1 i,k+1
                    k=0 j=2                     k=0 j=2
                  |           {z            }
                                       в‘ҘвҖІ


We also note here that ET вҲ’1 implies
       вҲ’1 X            jвҲ’1                                  jвҲ’1
     T     n
              *                               +     n
                                                       *                     +
     X          Оұk+1 X u             k   u
                                                   X     ОұT X u      T вҲ’1 u
   8                       Пү     вҲ’ ПҮj , Пүj,k+1 = 8              Пү вҲ’ ПҮj , Пүj,T .                                    (176)
          j=2
                  n i=1 i,k+1                      j=2
                                                          n i=1 i,T
      k=0


Upper bound for в‘ҘвҖІ . To estimate this sum, we will use BernsteinвҖҷs inequality. The summands
have conditional expectations equal to zero:

                          8Оұk+1 k u             8Оұk+1 k          u
                   EОҫjk        вҹЁПҮj , Пүj,k+1 вҹ© =      вҹЁПҮj , EОҫjk Пүj,k+1   вҹ© = 0.
                            n                     n

                                                            u n
Moreover, for all k = 0, . . . , T вҲ’ 1 random vectors {Пүi,l   }i=1 are independent. Thus, sequence
n                    oT вҲ’1,n
  8Оұk+1  k   u
    n вҹЁПҮj , Пүj,k+1 вҹ©           is a martingale difference sequence. Next, the summands are bounded:
                             k,j=0,2
                                                                                     вҲҡ
 8Оұk+1 k u             8Оұk+1 k     u
                                           (156),(174) 8Оұ
                                                         k+1                             M             M     def
      вҹЁПҮj , Пүj,k+1 вҹ© вүӨ      вҲҘПҮj вҲҘвҲҘПүj,k+1 вҲҘ     вүӨ             В·                             В· 2О»k вүӨ           = c.(177)
   n                     n                               n                               2         6 ln 10nK
                                                                                                          ОІ


Finally, conditional variances
                                                                  2
                                                               64Оұk+1

                                                 def
                                              2
                                            ПғМӮj,k = EОҫjk              вҹЁПҮjk , Пүj,k+1
                                                                              u
                                                                                    вҹ©2
                                                                 n2
of summands are bounded:
                                2                             2
                    2        64Оұk+1                        16Оұk+1 M
                                    EОҫjk вҲҘПҮkj вҲҘ2 вҲҘПүk+1
                                                   u
                                                       вҲҘ2 вүӨ
                                                                          u
                                                                                 вҲҘ2 .

                  ПғМӮj,k вүӨ        2                              2
                                                                    EОҫjk вҲҘПүj,k+1                                   (178)
                               n                              n

                                                                  49
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                                                              D             E
Applying BernsteinвҖҷs inequality (Lemma B.1) with Xj,k = 8Оұnk+1 ПҮkj , Пүj,k+1
                                                                      u
                                                                             , constant c defined
                                     2
in (177), b = M           M
              6 , G = 63 ln 10nK , we getОІ

            пЈұ                                                               пЈј
                                   T вҲ’1 X
                                        n                           2
                                                                                          b2

            пЈІ             M        X                              M         пЈҪ                          ОІ
        P       |в‘ҘвҖІ | >     and                    2
                                                 ПғМӮi,k вүӨ                   вүӨ 2 exp   вҲ’              =     .
            пЈі             6
                                   k=0 j=2
                                                              63 ln 10nK
                                                                      ОІ
                                                                         пЈҫ             2G + 2cb/3     5nK

The above is equivalent to
                                                   пЈұ                                                                пЈј
                                                                 T вҲ’1 X
                                                                      n                          2
                         ОІ                         пЈІ             X                         M                       MпЈҪ
 P{Eв‘ҘвҖІ } вүҘ 1 вҲ’              , for Eв‘ҘвҖІ = either                                 2
                                                                             ПғМӮi,l >                    or |в‘ҘвҖІ |         . (179)
                        5nK            пЈі
                                                                  k=0 j=2
                                                                                       63 ln 10nK
                                                                                               ОІ
                                                                                                                   6 пЈҫ


Moreover, ET вҲ’1 implies

                   T вҲ’1 X
                        n                          T вҲ’1 X
                                                        n         2
                   X
                                2
                                   (178)           X             Оұk+1        u      2
                                                                                        (165)     M2
                              ПғМӮi,k вүӨ 16M                             EОҫ k вҲҘПүj,k+1 вҲҘ     вүӨ                                 (180)
                   k=0 j=2                         k=0       j=1
                                                                  n2     j
                                                                                              63 ln 10nK
                                                                                                      ОІ



That is, we derive the upper bounds for в‘ , в‘Ў, в‘ў, в‘Ј, в‘Ө, в‘Ҙ. More precisely, ET вҲ’1 implies


                                                 (155)
                                         BT вүӨ в‘  + в‘Ў + в‘ў + в‘Ј + в‘Ө + в‘Ҙ,
                                                          jвҲ’1
                                                  n
                                                     *                     +
                                (175),(176)  вҖІ
                                                 X     ОұT X u      T вҲ’1 u
                              в‘Ҙ     =       в‘Ҙ +8              Пү вҲ’ ПҮj , Пүj,T ,
                                                 j=2
                                                        n i=1 i,T
                                             (166) M             (171) M             (172) M
                                         в‘Ў вүӨ             ,     в‘Ј вүӨ          ,    в‘Ө вүӨ             ,
                                                    6                   9                    6
                      T вҲ’1 X
                           n                                         T вҲ’1 X
                                                                          n
                      X
                                 2
                                         (165)       M2              X
                                                                                  2
                                                                                       (170)         M2
                                Пғi,k вүӨ                      ,                   Пғ
                                                                                ei,k вүӨ                        ,
                      k=0 i=1
                                                 63 ln 10nK
                                                         ОІ           k=0 i=1
                                                                                               6 В· 92 ln 10nK
                                                                                                           ОІ
                                                 T вҲ’1 X
                                                      n
                                                 X
                                                                2
                                                                   (180)        M2
                                                              ПғМӮi,k вүӨ                   .
                                                 k=0 j=2
                                                                           63 ln 10nK
                                                                                   ОІ



In addition, we also establish (see (164), (169), (179) and our induction assumption):

                                                                  (T вҲ’ 1)ОІ
                                                 P{ET вҲ’1 } вүҘ 1 вҲ’           ,
                                                                     K
                                          ОІ                         ОІ                   ОІ
                   P{Eв‘  } вүҘ 1 вҲ’              ,       P{Eв‘ў } вүҘ 1 вҲ’      , P{Eв‘ҘвҖІ } вүҘ 1 вҲ’     ,
                                         5nK                       5nK                 5nK
where
                                                   вҲ’1 X
                               (                 T    n
                                                                                                           )
                                                 X
                                                               2           M2                        M
                   Eв‘      =        either                     Пғi,k >                        or |в‘ | вүӨ           .
                                                 k=0 i=1
                                                                        6 ln 10nK
                                                                         3
                                                                               ОІ
                                                                                                     6
                                                   вҲ’1 X
                               (                 T    n
                                                                                                          )
                                                 X
                                                                2             M2                        M
                   Eв‘ў     =        either                     Пғ
                                                              ei,k >                          or |в‘ў| вүӨ       ,
                                                 k=0 i=1
                                                                        6 В· 92 ln 10nK
                                                                                    ОІ
                                                                                                        9
                               пЈұ                                                                         пЈј
                                                 T вҲ’1 X
                                                      n
                               пЈІ                 X                          M2                         MпЈҪ
                  Eв‘ҘвҖІ     =        either                       2
                                                              ПғМӮi,l >                       or |в‘ҘвҖІ | вүӨ     .
                               пЈі
                                                 k=0 j=2
                                                                        63 ln 10nK
                                                                                ОІ
                                                                                                       6 пЈҫ


                                                                   50
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Therefore, probability event ET вҲ’1 вҲ© Eв‘  вҲ© Eв‘ў вҲ© Eв‘ҘвҖІ implies
                               M      M     M     M     M     M
                     BT вүӨ          +      +     +     +    +
                                6      6     9     9     6    6
                                     вҲ’1 X          jвҲ’1
                                   T     n
                                           *                               +
                                   X          Оұk+1 X
                                                         u       k   u
                               +8                      Пү     вҲ’ ПҮj , Пүj,k+1
                                               n i=1 i,k+1
                                   k=0 j=2
                                                 jвҲ’1
                                        n
                                           *                          +
                                       X     ОұT X u         T вҲ’1   u
                           вүӨ M +8                    Пү вҲ’ ПҮj , Пүj,T .                            (181)
                                       j=2
                                              n i=1 i,T

                                                         jвҲ’1
In the final part of the proof, we will show that Оұk+1          u
                                                                      = ПҮkj with high probability. In
                                                         P
                                                   n           Пүi,k+1
                                                         i=1
particular, we consider probability event E
                                          eT вҲ’1,j defined as follows: inequalities
                                            rвҲ’1          вҲҡ
                                        ОұT X u              M
                                                Пү      вүӨ                                        (182)
                                         n i=1 i,T         2
                                                                         eT вҲ’1,j } вүҘ 1вҲ’ (T вҲ’1)ОІ вҲ’ 2jОІ
hold for r = 2, . . . , j simultaneously. We want to show that P{ET вҲ’1 вҲ© E                 K      5nK
for all j = 2, . . . , n. For j = 2 the statement is trivial since
                                                                   вҲҡ
                                   ОұT u       (156) 2ОұT О»T вҲ’1        M
                                       Пү1,T вүӨ                   вүӨ      .
                                    n                   n           2
Next, we assume that the statement holds for some j = m вҲ’ 1 < n, i.e., P{ET вҲ’1 вҲ© E   eT вҲ’1,mвҲ’1 } вүҘ
    (T вҲ’1)ОІ   2(mвҲ’1)ОІ                                                        (T вҲ’1)ОІ      2mОІ
1 вҲ’ K+1 вҲ’ 5n(K+1) . Our goal is to prove that P{ET вҲ’1 вҲ© E   eT вҲ’1,m } вүҘ 1 вҲ’
                                                                                K     вҲ’ 5nK   . First,
                 mвҲ’1
we consider ОұnT
                  P u
                      Пүi,T :
                  i=1
                             v
            mвҲ’1                                2
                             u Оұ2 mвҲ’1
                             u
        ОұT  X
                  u             T
                                    X
                                           u
                Пү       =    t           Пү
         n i=1 i,T             n2 i=1 i,T
                             v                              *                    +
                             u Оұ2 mвҲ’1                   mвҲ’1        iвҲ’1
                             u
                                   X               2Оұ T
                                                         X ОұT X
                        = t T2            u вҲҘ2 +
                                       вҲҘПүi,T                           Пүu , Пүu
                               n i=1                n i=1       n r=1 r,T i,T
                             v
                             uT вҲ’1 mвҲ’1 2                        mвҲ’1
                                                                     *     iвҲ’1
                                                                                           +
                             u X X Оұk+1                    2ОұT
                                                                 X ОұT X
                        вүӨ t                      u
                                              вҲҘПүi,k+1 вҲҘ2 +                       u , Пүu
                                                                                Пүr,T
                                           2                                            i,T .
                                   i=1
                                         n                  n    i=1
                                                                        n  r=1
                                k=0
Next, we introduce a new notation:
                                                                           вҲҡ
                                    пЈұ
                                    пЈІ ОұT iвҲ’1                  iвҲ’1
                                              Пүr,T , if ОұnT       Пүr,T вүӨ 2M ,
                                           P u                P u
                          ПҒi,T вҲ’1 =     n
                                    пЈі r=1                     r=1
                                       0,              otherwise
for i = 1, . . . , m вҲ’ 1 a. By definition, we have
                                                          вҲҡ
                                                            M
                                            вҲҘПҒi,T вҲ’1 вҲҘ вүӨ                                        (183)
                                                            2
                                                                  iвҲ’1
for i = 1, . . . , m вҲ’ 1. Moreover, E emвҲ’1 implies ПҒi,T вҲ’1 = ОұT P Пү u for i = 1, . . . , m вҲ’ 1 and
                                                               n       r,T
                                                                 r=1
                                      mвҲ’1
                                 ОұT   X                вҲҡ
                                       Пүu         вүӨ        в‘ў + в‘Ј + в‘Ұ,
                                  n i=1 i,T
where
                                            mвҲ’1
                                        2ОұT X              u
                                  в‘Ұ=            ПҒi,T вҲ’1 , Пүi,T .
                                         n i=1
It remains to estimate в‘Ұ.


                                                 51
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Upper bound for в‘Ұ . To estimate this sum, we will use BernsteinвҖҷs inequality. The summands
have conditional expectations equal to zero:

                            2ОұT              u          2ОұT D                        u
                                                                                          E
                   EОҫT вҲ’1        вҹЁПҒi,T вҲ’1 , Пүi,T вҹ© =            ПҒi,T вҲ’1 , EОҫT вҲ’1 [Пүi,T   ] = 0,
                      i      n                           n                  i

                                                                                                        mвҲ’1
                               }ni=1 are independent. Thus, sequence 2ОұnT вҹЁПҒi,T вҲ’1 , Пүi,T
                            u
                                                                                                    u
since random vectors {Пүi,T                                                                            вҹ© i=1 is a
martingale difference sequence. Next, the summands are bounded:
 2ОұT                       2ОұT                        (156),(183) 2Оұ вҲҡ                (140)     M      def
                  u                              u                    T
      вҹЁПҒi,T вҲ’1 , Пүi,T вҹ© вүӨ       вҲҘПҒi,T вҲ’1 вҲҘ В· вҲҘПүi,T  вҲҘ     вүӨ               M О»T вҲ’1 =                     = c.(184)
   n                         n                                      n                       36 ln 10nK
                                                                                                    ОІ
                                                     h 2                      i
                                  2      def           4ОұT               u 2
Finally, conditional variances ПғМ„i,T вҲ’1 = EОҫiT вҲ’1       n2 вҹЁПҒi,T вҲ’1 , Пүi,T вҹ©    of the summands are bounded:
                                  2
                                                                   (183) Оұ2 M

                2                 4ОұT
                                        вҲҘПҒi,T вҲ’1 вҲҘ2 В· вҲҘПүi,T
                                                          u
                                                              вҲҘ2 вүӨ T 2 EОҫT вҲ’1 вҲҘПүi,T
                                                                                            u 2
             ПғМ„i,T вҲ’1 вүӨ EОҫiT вҲ’1      2
                                                                                                 вҲҘ .        (185)
                                   n                                      n        i



Applying BernsteinвҖҷs inequality (Lemma B.1) with Xi = 2ОұnT вҹЁПҒi,T вҲ’1 , Пүi,T
                                                                       u
                                                                           вҹ©, constant c defined in
                              2
           V
(184), b = 36 , G = 65 lnM10nK , we get
                            ОІ
          (                 mвҲ’1
                                                    )
                                                2
                                                                b2

                   M         X
                                   2          M                              ОІ
        P |в‘Ұ| >       and        ПғМ„i,T вҲ’1 вүӨ 5 10nK вүӨ 2 exp вҲ’              =     .
                   36        i=1
                                           6 ln   ОІ
                                                             2G + 2cb/3     5nK
The above is equivalent to
                                              (            mвҲ’1
                                                                                                       )
                  ОІ                                        X
                                                                   2              M2              M
    P{Eв‘Ұ } вүҘ 1 вҲ’     , for Eв‘Ұ =                   either         ПғМ„i,T вҲ’1 >              or |в‘Ұ| вүӨ          .   (186)
                 5nK                                       i=1
                                                                              65 ln 10nK
                                                                                      ОІ
                                                                                                  36

Moreover, ET вҲ’1 implies
   mвҲ’1                             mвҲ’1
   X                  (185)        X    ОұT2 M         u 2   (161)           ОұT2
           2
         ПғМ„i,T вҲ’1      вүӨ                    2
                                              E T вҲ’1 вҲҘПү
                                               Оҫi      i,T вҲҘ вүӨ    18(m вҲ’ 1)   2
                                                                                M Пғ Оұ О»2вҲ’Оұ
                                                                                       T вҲ’1
   i=1                              i=1
                                          n                                 n
                      (140)                    ОұT2 n2вҲ’Оұ M 2вҲ’Оұ/2 ОұвҲ’2 10nK
                       вүӨ           18(m вҲ’ 1)       В·              ln
                                               n2 722вҲ’Оұ Оұ  eT2вҲ’Оұ          ОІ
                                             2
                                                         Оұ
                                                                             M2

                    mвүӨn,T вүӨK                ОұK       Пғ            10nK
                       вүӨ           18 В· 65 ОұвҲ’1     вҲҡ       lnОұвҲ’1        В· 5 10nK
                                           n         M               ОІ   6 ln ОІ
                                                               Оұ
                                    1 18 В· 65 1                                          M2

                                                         Пғ                      10nK
                       вүӨ             Оұ    Оұ     ОұвҲ’1
                                                        вҲҡ        (K + 1)Оұ lnОұвҲ’1      В· 5 10nK
                                   a     2     n       L M                        ОІ   6 ln ОІ
                      (139)            M2
                       вүӨ                      .                                                                (187)
                                   65 ln 10nK
                                           ОІ


Putting all together we get that ET вҲ’1 вҲ© E
                                         eT вҲ’1,mвҲ’1 implies
                                     mвҲ’1
                                  ОұT X u       вҲҡ                                (171) M
                                         Пүi,T вүӨ в‘ў + в‘Ј + в‘Ұ,                    в‘Ј вүӨ            ,
                                   n i=1                                                 9
                    T вҲ’1 X
                         n                                        mвҲ’1
                    X
                                2
                                    (170)         M2              X
                                                                           2
                                                                                 (187)       M2
                              Пғ
                              ei,k вүӨ                       ,             ПғМ„i,T вҲ’1 вүӨ
                    k=0 i=1
                                            6 В· 92 ln 10nK
                                                        ОІ          i=1
                                                                                         65 ln 10nK
                                                                                                 ОІ

In addition, we also establish (see and our induction assumption):
                                 eT вҲ’1,mвҲ’1 } вүҘ 1 вҲ’ (T вҲ’ 1)ОІ вҲ’ 2(m вҲ’ 1)ОІ ,
                       P{ET вҲ’1 вҲ© E
                                                    K +1         5nK
                                           ОІ                    ОІ
                           P{Eв‘ў } вүҘ 1 вҲ’       , P{Eв‘Ұ } вүҘ 1 вҲ’       ,
                                         5nK                  5nK


                                                           52
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


where
                                         вҲ’1 X
                            (          T    n
                                                                              )
                                       X
                                                  2     M2              M
                  Eв‘ў   =     either             Пғ
                                                ei,k > 2  10nK
                                                               or |в‘Ј| вүӨ            ,
                                                  6 В· 9 ln ОІ            9
                                    k=0 i=1
                            (       mвҲ’1
                                                                     )
                                    X
                                          2       M2              M
                  Eв‘Ұ   =     either     ПғМ„i,k > 5 10nK or |в‘Ұ| вүӨ
                                    i=1
                                               6 ln ОІ             36

Therefore, probability event ET вҲ’1 вҲ© E
                                     eT вҲ’1,mвҲ’1 вҲ© Eв‘ў вҲ© Eв‘Ұ implies
                               mвҲ’1          r                  вҲҡ
                            ОұT X u            M     M    M       M
                                    Пүi,T вүӨ       +     +    вүӨ      .
                             n i=1             9    9    36      2

This implies E
             eT вҲ’1,m and

                P{ET вҲ’1 вҲ© E
                          eT вҲ’1,m }     вүҘ   P{ET вҲ’1 вҲ© E
                                                      eT вҲ’1,mвҲ’1 вҲ© Eв‘ў вҲ© Eв‘Ұ }
                                                 n                               o
                                        =   1 вҲ’ P ET вҲ’1 вҲ© EeT вҲ’1,mвҲ’1 вҲӘ E в‘ў вҲӘ E в‘Ұ

                                                  (T вҲ’ 1)ОІ   2mОІ
                                        вүҘ   1вҲ’             вҲ’     .
                                                     K       5nK
Therefore, for all m = 2, . . . , n the statement holds and, in particular, P{ET вҲ’1 вҲ© E
                                                                                      eT вҲ’1,n } вүҘ
   (T вҲ’1)ОІ   2ОІ
1вҲ’ K вҲ’ 5K . Taking into account (181), we conclude that ET вҲ’1 вҲ© E     eT вҲ’1,n вҲ©Eв‘  вҲ©Eв‘ў вҲ©Eв‘ҘвҖІ вҲ©Eв‘Ұ
implies
                                              BT вүӨ M
that is equivalent to (144) for t = T . Moreover,
                                     n                                        o
                    P {ET } вүҘ P ET вҲ’1 вҲ© E      eT вҲ’1,n вҲ© Eв‘  вҲ© Eв‘ў вҲ© Eв‘ҘвҖІ вҲ© Eв‘Ұ
                                         n                                     o
                               = 1 вҲ’ P ET вҲ’1 вҲ© E   en вҲӘ E в‘  вҲӘ E в‘ў вҲӘ E в‘ҘвҖІ вҲӘ E в‘Ұ

                                        (T вҲ’ 1)ОІ   2ОІ      ОІ      TОІ
                             =    1вҲ’             вҲ’    вҲ’3В·     вүҘ1вҲ’    .
                                           K       5K     5nK     K

Finally, if
                       (                                    1
                                                                                       )
                         8 В· 35 В· 724 4 10nK 18 В· 65 ПғK Оұ (K + 1) ОұвҲ’1 10nK
              a = max 2,             ln     ,     вҲҡ       ОұвҲ’1    ln Оұ                      ,
                              n           ОІ         M Ln Оұ              ОІ

then with probability at least 1 вҲ’ ОІ
                        6aLM
ОҰ(y K ) вҲ’ ОҰ(xвҲ— ) вүӨ
                      K(K + 3)
                          (                                                              )
                                                                      7 K+1
                             12LM      162 В· 725 LM 4 10nK 3 В· 6 Пғ K+3          ОұвҲ’1 10nK
                    = max            ,              ln          ,вҲҡ       ОұвҲ’1 ln
                                                                                 Оұ
                            K(K + 3) nK(K + 3)             ОІ       M (Kn) Оұ           ОІ
                        пЈ«    пЈұ                      вҲҡ       ОұвҲ’1
                                                                   пЈјпЈ¶
                             пЈІ LM LM ln4 nK Пғ M ln Оұ nK пЈҪ
                                               ОІ                 ОІ
                    = O пЈӯmax       ,              ,    ОұвҲ’1   ОұвҲ’1
                                                                      пЈё.
                             пЈі K2        nK 2        n  Оұ  K  Оұ    пЈҫ

To get ОҰ(y K ) вҲ’ ОҰ(xвҲ— ) вүӨ Оө wit probability 1 вҲ’ ОІ, K should be
                                                           вҲҡ ! ОұвҲ’1
                                                                Оұ      вҲҡ пЈҪпЈ¶
                пЈ«       пЈұr                                                пЈј
                        пЈІ LM r LM              nLM 1 Пғ M              Пғ M пЈё
              O пЈӯmax             ,         ln2      ,              ln
                        пЈі    Оө       Оөn         ОөОІ n        Оө          ОөОІ пЈҫ

that concludes the proof.


                                                   53
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


F.2    S TRONGLY C ONVEX CASE

In this section, we provide the complete formulation of our result for R-DProx-clipped-SSTM-shift
(a restarted version for DProx-clipped-SSTM-shift) and proofs. We should mention that the results
for DProx-clipped-SSTM-shift), Theorem F.1 and Lemma F.1, can      Pnbe proven  in the same way if we
assume that h0i = вҲҮfi (x0 ) and M вүҘ вҲҘx0 вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲҘ2 + C 2 ОұK  2      1
                                                            0 +1 n    i=1 вҲҘh0
                                                                            i вҲ’ вҲҮfi (xвҲ— )вҲҘ2 .
For the readersвҖҷ convenience, the methodвҖҷs update rule is repeated below:

Algorithm 1 Restarted DProx-clipped-SSTM-shift (R-DProx-clipped-SSTM-shift)
Input: starting point x0 , number of restarts П„ , number of steps of DProx-clipped-SSTM-shift
                                                                                        1 вҲ’1   2 K2 вҲ’1
    between restarts {Kt }П„t=1 , stepsize parameters {at }П„t=1 , clipping levels {О»1k }K
                                                                                       k=0 , {О»k }k=0 ,
                     П„ вҲ’1
    . . . , {О»П„k }K
                  k=0 , smoothness constant L, the constant {Nt }t=1 .
                                                                      П„
       0       0
 1: xМӮ = x
 2: for t = 1, . . . , П„ do
 3:      Run DProx-clipped-SSTM-shift for Kt iterations with stepsize parameter at , clipping levels
                  t вҲ’1
         {О»tk }Kk=0 , and starting point xМӮ
                                            tвҲ’1
                                                . Define the output of DProx-clipped-SSTM-shift by xМӮt .
 4: end for
Output: xМӮП„

Theorem F.2. Let Assumptions 1, 2, 3 with Вө > 0 hold for Q = B5nвҲҡM (xвҲ— ), where M вүҘ
                                  Pn
вҲҘx0 вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲҘ2 + Ct2 ОұN     2      1
                           1 +1 n
                                             0             вҲ— 2
                                     i=1 вҲҘhi вҲ’ вҲҮfi (x )вҲҘ and R-DProx-clipped-SSTM-shift runs DProx-
clipped-SSTM-shift П„ times. Let
                         &        (r                                                        p
                                                                    LMtвҲ’1 2 В· 1016 n LMtвҲ’1 П„
                                                                 r
                                        24LMtвҲ’1
                 Kt = max                            , 2 В· 1015              ln           вҲҡ              ,
                                            Оөt                        nОөt                   Оөt ОІ
                                      p          ! ОұвҲ’1Оұ      пЈ«              p              Оұ пЈ¶
                                                                                       ! ОұвҲ’1
                             1 68 Пғ MtвҲ’1                         10П„   68 Пғ MtвҲ’1
                                                          ln пЈӯ                                 пЈё
                            n           Оөt                        ОІ           Оөt
                                 p             Оұ
                                           ! ОұвҲ’1             пЈ«                        p            Оұ пЈ¶ )'
                                                                                               ! ОұвҲ’1
        1          16 В· 1024 Пғ MtвҲ’1                    7ОұвҲ’1      10П„   16 В· 1024 Пғ MtвҲ’1
       5ОұвҲ’1                                        ln ОұвҲ’1 пЈӯ                                          пЈё      , (188)
      n ОұвҲ’1                   Оөt                                  ОІ                Оөt

                        ВөMtвҲ’1                      M                       ВөM              10nKt П„
               Оөt =              , MtвҲ’1 = (tвҲ’1) , П„ = log2                          , ln             вүҘ 1,     (189)
                           4                     2                          2Оө                 ОІ
                          (                                               1                              )
                                8 В· 35 В· 724 4 10nKt 18 В· 65 ПғKtОұ (Kt + 1) ОұвҲ’1                   10nK  t
            a вүҘ max 2,                        ln             ,      вҲҡ         ОұвҲ’1        ln Оұ              ,  (190)
                                     n                  ОІ             Mt Ln Оұ                       ОІ
                                                                 вҲҡ
                                                 t             n Mt
                                               О»k =                         ,                                 (191)
                                                        72e  t
                                                           Оұk+1   ln 10nK
                                                                       ОІ
                                                                          t



                                             10nKt
for t = 1, . . . , П„ , where Ct = 864                 , Nt = 32 Ct2 n > 0. Then to achieve ОҰ(xМӮП„ )вҲ’ОҰ(xвҲ— ) вүӨ Оө

                                       n ln      ОІ
with probability at least 1 вҲ’ ОІ R-DProx-clipped-SSTM-shift requires
                              (s                    s                               вҲҡ                !
                                   L       ВөM              L        ВөM        5        L       ВөM
                 O max                ln            ,          ln          ln       вҲҡ     ln             ,
                                   Вө         Оө            nВө         Оө                ВөОІ         Оө
                                      Оұ                         Оұ                        !
                                1 Пғ 2 2(ОұвҲ’1)              1 Пғ 2 2(ОұвҲ’1)

                                                                                   ВөM
                                                   ln                       ln               ,
                               n ВөОө                       ОІ ВөОө                       Оө
                                           Оұ
                                   2   2(ОұвҲ’1)                        Оұ                      ! )!
                                                               1 Пғ 2 2(ОұвҲ’1)

                           1       Пғ                7ОұвҲ’1                               ВөM
                         5ОұвҲ’1                    ln  ОұвҲ’1                         ln                           (192)
                        n ОұвҲ’1 ВөОө                              ОІ ВөОө                      Оө

iterations/oracle calls per worker. Moreover, with probability вүҘ 1 вҲ’ ОІ the iterates of R-DProx-
clipped-SSTM-shift at stage t stay in the ball B2вҲҡMtвҲ’1 (xвҲ— ).


                                                       54
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Proof. The key idea behind the proof is similar to the one used in (Gorbunov et al., 2021; Sadiev
et al., 2023). We prove by induction that for any t = 1, . . . , П„ with probability at least 1 вҲ’ tОІ/П„
inequalities
                                                                             M
                                   ОҰ(xМӮl ) вҲ’ ОҰ(xвҲ— ) вүӨ Оөl , MМӮl вүӨ Ml = l                                (193)
                                                                             2
hold for l = 1, . . . , t simultaneously. We recall the Lyapunov function is determined as
                                           n
                                      21
                                          X                            (4)
MМӮl = вҲҘxМӮl вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲҘ2 + Cl2 (ОұN  l
                                l +1
                                     )       вҲҘвҲҮfi (xМӮl ) вҲ’ вҲҮfi (xвҲ— )вҲҘ2 вүӨ (1 + Cl2 (ОұN
                                                                                    l       2 2     l   вҲ— 2
                                                                                        +1 ) L ) вҲҘxМӮ вҲ’ x вҲҘ ,
                                       n i=1                               |       {z l        }
                                                                                   def
                                                                                   =Gl
                             l
where by definition of Cl , ОұN l +1
                                    , we can estimate Gl
                                                       6

                                                    9 В· 864      6 10nKl+1 П„
                               Gl вүӨ 2 max 1,                  ln                                             (194)
                                                      4n4                ОІ
Now, we prove the base of the induction. Theorem F.1 implies that with probability at least 1 вҲ’ ОІ/П„
                                       6a1 LR2 (190)                    9 В· 8646 6 10nK1 П„

G1 (ОҰ(xМӮ1 ) вҲ’ ОҰ(xвҲ— )) вүӨ G1                            = 2 max 1,                    ln
                                   K1 (K1 + 3)                             4n4              ОІ
                                          (                                                                                       )
                                                                                                        7 K +1
                                               12LM            162 В· 72 LM 4 10nK1 П„ 3 В· 6 Пғ K11 +3
                                                                         5                                            ОұвҲ’1 10nK1 П„
                                Г— max                       ,                     ln            ,вҲҡ            ОұвҲ’1 ln
                                                                                                                       Оұ
                                            K1 (K1 + 3) nK1 (K1 + 3)                      ОІ        M (K1 n) Оұ                ОІ
                                      (
                                         24LM 162 В· 725 В· 9 В· 8646 LM 10 10nK1 П„
                           вүӨ max                 ,                                ln             ,
                                           K12                 nK12                        ОІ
                                        вҲҡ        ОұвҲ’1                                вҲҡ       7ОұвҲ’1
                                   68 Пғ M ln Оұ 10nK         1П„
                                                                  81 В· 51846 В· Пғ M ln Оұ 10nK           1П„
                                                                                                          )
                                                          ОІ                                          ОІ
                                                    ОұвҲ’1         ,                  5ОұвҲ’1   ОұвҲ’1
                                           (nK1 ) Оұ                             n Оұ K1 Оұ
                          (188)        ВөM
                           вүӨ Оө1 =
                                         4
and, due to the strong convexity,
                                                 2G1 (ОҰ(xМӮ1 ) вҲ’ ОҰ(xвҲ— ))            M
                    MМӮ1 вүӨ G1 вҲҘxМӮ1 вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲҘ2 вүӨ                                     вүӨ      = M1 .
                                                              Вө                     2
The base of the induction is proven. Now, assume that the statement holds for some t = T < П„ , i.e.,
with probability at least 1 вҲ’ T ОІ/П„ inequalities
                                                                                M
                                ОҰ(xМӮl ) вҲ’ ОҰ(xвҲ— ) вүӨ Оөl , MМӮl вүӨ Ml = l                                         (195)
                                                                                2
hold for l = 1, . . . , T simultaneously. In particular, with probability at least 1 вҲ’ T ОІ/П„ we have
MМӮT вүӨ MT . Applying Theorem F.1 and using union bound for probability events, we get that with
probability at least 1 вҲ’ (T +1)ОІ/П„
                                                   6aT +1 LMT2                            9 В· 8646 6 10nKT +1 П„

                                                                       (190)
GT +1 (ОҰ(xМӮT +1 ) вҲ’ ОҰ(xвҲ— )) вүӨ GT +1                                     = 2 max 1,                  ln
                                               KT +1 (KT +1 + 3)                             4n4              ОІ
                                                 (
                                                                                        5
                                                          12LMT                 162 В· 72 LMT +1           10nKT +1 П„
                                       Г— max                                ,                        ln4               ,
                                                    KT +1 (KT +1 + 3) nKT +1 (KT +1 + 3)                       ОІ
                                               3 В· 67 Пғ K T +1 +1
                                                                                            )
                                                         KT +1 +3       ОұвҲ’1 10nKT +1 П„
                                              вҲҡ                 ОұвҲ’1 ln
                                                                          Оұ

                                                M (KT +1 n) Оұ                        ОІ
                                             (
                                                24LMT 162 В· 725 В· 9 В· 8646 LMT +1 10 10nKT +1 П„
                                вүӨ max                     ,                                   ln                ,
                                                 KT2 +1                 nKT2 +1                          ОІ
                                               вҲҡ          ОұвҲ’1                                  вҲҡ        7ОұвҲ’1
                                           68 Пғ MT ln Оұ 10nKОІT +1 П„ 81 В· 51846 В· Пғ MT ln Оұ 10nK                     TП„
                                                                                                                       )
                                                                                                                  ОІ
                                                               ОұвҲ’1            ,               5ОұвҲ’1    ОұвҲ’1
                                                   (nKT +1 ) Оұ                              n Оұ KT +1  Оұ


                                (188)             ВөMT
                                 вүӨ      ОөT +1 =
                                                   4

                                                      55
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


and, due to the strong convexity,

                                                   2GT +1 (ОҰ(xМӮT +1 ) вҲ’ ОҰ(xвҲ— ))   MT
          MМӮT +1 вүӨ GT +1 вҲҘxМӮT +1 вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲҘ2 вүӨ                                      вүӨ    = MT +1 .
                                                                Вө                  2
Thus, we finished the inductive part of the proof. In particular, with probability at least 1 вҲ’ ОІ
inequalities
                                                                  M
                            ОҰ(xМӮl ) вҲ’ ОҰ(xвҲ— ) вүӨ Оөl , MМӮl вүӨ Ml = l
                                                                  2
hold for l = 1, . . . , П„ simultaneously, which gives for l = П„ that with probability at least 1 вҲ’ ОІ

                                                          ВөMП„ вҲ’1   ВөM (189)
                             ОҰ(xМӮl ) вҲ’ ОҰ(xвҲ— ) вүӨ ОөП„ =             = П„ +1 вүӨ Оө.
                                                            4     2
It remains to calculate the overall number of oracle calls during all runs of clipped-SSTM. We have
                                                   s                   пЈ« q                   пЈ¶
  П„                  П„
                               (r
                                                            2              n    LM     2 П„
X                   X                 LMtвҲ’1            LM  tвҲ’1                        tвҲ’1
     Kt = O              max                     ,                ln5 пЈӯ         вҲҡ            пЈё,
t=1                 t=1
                                          Оө t            nОө t                      Оөt ОІ
                      p          ! ОұвҲ’1Оұ        пЈ«          p           ! ОұвҲ’1Оұ пЈ¶

               1    Пғ    M  tвҲ’1                   П„     Пғ   M   tвҲ’1
                                          ln пЈӯ                                 пЈё,
               n         Оөt                       ОІ         Оөt
                            p           ! ОұвҲ’1 Оұ            пЈ«            p           ! ОұвҲ’1Оұ пЈ¶ )!

                  1       Пғ    M   tвҲ’1               5ОұвҲ’1      П„      Пғ    M   tвҲ’1
                 7ОұвҲ’1                             ln ОұвҲ’1 пЈӯ                                  пЈё
               n  ОұвҲ’1          Оө t                             ОІ           Оө t

                     П„
                               (s s                        вҲҡ !                                    Оұ
                                                                                              ! ОұвҲ’1      пЈ«                 Оұ пЈ¶
                                                                                                                       ! ОұвҲ’1
                    X                 L         L         n LП„           1            Пғ                    П„       Пғ
          = O            max            ,           ln вҲҡ               ,          p                   ln пЈӯ       p           пЈё,
                    t=1
                                      Вө        nВө             ВөОІ         n Вө MtвҲ’1                          ОІ Вө MtвҲ’1
                                        ! ОұвҲ’1 Оұ            пЈ«                        ! ОұвҲ’1Оұ пЈ¶ )!

                  1            Пғ                     7ОұвҲ’1      П„           Пғ
                 5ОұвҲ’1
                            p                     ln ОұвҲ’1 пЈӯ              p                   пЈё
               n ОұвҲ’1      Вө MtвҲ’1                               ОІ Вө MtвҲ’1
                          ( s             s                вҲҡ !                 П„                 Оұ                      Оұ !
                                                                         1 X Пғ В· 2t/2 ОұвҲ’1                   П„ Пғ В· 2t/2 ОұвҲ’1

                                    L           L         n LП„
          = O max {П„                   ,П„           ln вҲҡ               ,                вҲҡ              ln        вҲҡ           ,
                                    Вө          nВө             ВөОІ         n t=1 Вө M                         ОІ Вө M
                         П„                 Оұ                                         Оұ ! )!
                  1 X Пғ В· 2t/2 ОұвҲ’1 7ОұвҲ’1                                     t/2   ОұвҲ’1

                                                                П„     Пғ  В· 2
                 5ОұвҲ’1                              ln ОұвҲ’1                вҲҡ
               n ОұвҲ’1 t=1          ВөR                           ОІ Вө M
                          (s                       s                                      вҲҡ                !
                                L         ВөM              L          ВөM           5    n L           ВөM
          = O max                   ln              ,         ln               ln      вҲҡ       ln              ,
                                Вө            Оө           nВө            Оө                   ВөОІ          Оө
                                Оұ                            Оұ ! П„
                                            П„ Пғ В· 2П„/2 ОұвҲ’1 X 2(ОұвҲ’1)
                              ОұвҲ’1
               1       Пғ                                                           Оұt
                      вҲҡ              ln              вҲҡ                        2          ,
               n Вө M                        ОІ Вө M                       t=1
                                       Оұ                                       Оұ !                   )!
                                     ОұвҲ’1                              П„/2   ОұвҲ’1         П„
                  1          Пғ                  7ОұвҲ’1     П„     Пғ  В· 2                 X         Оұt
                 5ОұвҲ’1
                            вҲҡ               ln ОұвҲ’1                вҲҡ                         2 2(ОұвҲ’1)
               n ОұвҲ’1 Вө M                                 ОІ Вө M                        t=1
                          (s                       s                                  вҲҡ            2  !
                                L         ВөM              L          ВөM                   L        ВөR
          = O max                   ln              ,         ln               ln вҲҡ          ln              ,
                                Вө            Оө           nВө            Оө                ВөОІ           Оө
                                Оұ
                              ОұвҲ’1                           ОұвҲ’1Оұ                 !
               1       Пғ                    П„         Пғ                    Оұ             ОұП„
                      вҲҡ              ln             вҲҡ               В· 2 2(ОұвҲ’1) 2 2(ОұвҲ’1) ,
               n Вө M                        ОІ Вө M
                                       Оұ
                                     ОұвҲ’1                                   ОұвҲ’1Оұ               !           )!
                  1          Пғ                  7ОұвҲ’1     П„         Пғ                      Оұ          ОұП„
                 5ОұвҲ’1
                            вҲҡ               ln ОұвҲ’1                вҲҡ               В· 2 2(ОұвҲ’1) 2 2(ОұвҲ’1)          .
               n ОұвҲ’1 Вө M                                 ОІ Вө M


                                                         56
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Thus, we have
     П„
                             (s               s                        вҲҡ             !
     X                            L    ВөM         L       ВөM      5      L      ВөM
           Kt   =   O max           ln        ,     ln          ln    вҲҡ    ln          ,
     t=1
                                  Вө      Оө       nВө        Оө            ВөОІ        Оө
                          Оұ                  Оұ                  !
                    1 Пғ 2 2(ОұвҲ’1)       1 Пғ 2 2(ОұвҲ’1)

                                                           ВөM
                                  ln                  ln           ,
                    n ВөОө               ОІ ВөОө                 Оө
                                   Оұ
                            2   2(ОұвҲ’1)                      Оұ
                                                    2   2(ОұвҲ’1)           ! )!
                      1    Пғ             7ОұвҲ’1   1   Пғ                ВөM
                     5ОұвҲ’1              ln ОұвҲ’1                  ln               ,
                    n ОұвҲ’1 ВөОө                    ОІ ВөОө                  Оө

which concludes the proof.


                                              57
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


G     M ISSING P ROOFS FOR DProx-clipped-SGDA-shift

G.1   C OCOERCIVE CASE

In this section, we give the complete formulations of our results for DProx-clipped-SGDA-shift and
rigorous proofs. For the readersвҖҷ convenience, the methodвҖҷs update rule is repeated below:
                                                           n
                                                       1X k                      ЛҶ ki ,
             xk+1 = proxОіОЁ xk вҲ’ Оіe g k , where gek =           ge , geik = hki + вҲҶ

                                                       n i=1 i

                   hk+1 = hk
                           i + ОҪ ЛҶ
                                 вҲҶ k
                                   i ,   ЛҶ
                                         вҲҶ k
                                           i = clip   F  k
                                                        Оҫi (x k
                                                                ) вҲ’ h k
                                                                      i , О»k .
                    i

Lemma G.1. Let Assumptions 7, 9 and 10 hold for Q = B3вҲҡV (xвҲ— ), where V вүҘ вҲҘx0 вҲ’
                        48n(K+1) P
         25600Оі 2 ln2             n
xвҲ— вҲҘ2 +             n 2
                            ОІ               вҲ— 2                         k           вҲҡ     вҲ—
                                  i=1 вҲҘFi (x )вҲҘ and 0 < Оі вүӨ /в„“. If x lies in B3 V (x ) for all
                                                               1
                                                           вҲҡ     вҲ—
k = 0, 1, . . . , K вҲ’ 1 for some K вүҘ 0, then for all u вҲҲ B3 V (x ) the iterates produced by DProx-
clipped-SGDA-shift satisfy
                                                                                       KвҲ’1
                                                    вҲҘx0 вҲ’ uвҲҘ2 вҲ’ вҲҘxK вҲ’ uвҲҘ2   Оі X
      вҹЁF (u), xK             K
               avg вҲ’ uвҹ© + ОЁ(xavg ) вҲ’ ОЁ(u)     вүӨ                           +     вҲҘПүk вҲҘ2
                                                             2ОіK            K
                                                                                       k=0
                                                                KвҲ’1
                                                            1   X
                                                        +             вҹЁxk вҲ’ u, Пүk вҹ©,              (196)
                                                            K
                                                                k=0
                                                         KвҲ’1
                                             def    1 X k+1
                                      xK
                                       avg    =        x    ,                                     (197)
                                                    K
                                                         k=0
                                             def
                                        Пүk    =     F (xk ) вҲ’ gek .                               (198)

Proof. The proof of this lemma follows the proof of Theorem D.3 from (Beznosikov et al., 2023).
For completeness, we provide here the full proof. We start with the application of Lemma B.4 with
x+ = xk+1 , x = xk вҲ’ Оіg k , and y = u for arbitrary u вҲҲ B3вҲҡV (xвҲ— ):

                     вҹЁxk+1 вҲ’ xk + Оіeg k , u вҲ’ xk+1 вҹ© вүҘ Оі ОЁ(xk+1 ) вҲ’ ОЁ(u) .


Rearranging the terms, we get
              2Оі ОЁ(xk+1 ) вҲ’ ОЁ(u)            g k , u вҲ’ xk вҹ© + 2вҹЁxk+1 вҲ’ xk , u вҲ’ xk вҹ©

                                       вүӨ 2ОівҹЁe
                                              +2вҹЁxk+1 вҲ’ xk + Оіe
                                                              g k , xk вҲ’ xk+1 вҹ©
implying
2Оі вҹЁF (xk ), xk вҲ’ uвҹ© + ОЁ(xk+1 ) вҲ’ ОЁ(u)       вүӨ 2вҹЁxk+1 вҲ’ xk , u вҲ’ xk вҹ© + 2ОівҹЁF (xk ) вҲ’ gek , xk вҲ’ uвҹ©


                                                        +2вҹЁxk+1 вҲ’ xk + Оіe
                                                                        g k , xk вҲ’ xk+1 вҹ©
                                             = вҲҘxk+1 вҲ’ xk вҲҘ2 + вҲҘxk вҲ’ uвҲҘ2 вҲ’ вҲҘxk+1 вҲ’ uвҲҘ2
                                                        +2ОівҹЁF (xk ) вҲ’ gek , xk вҲ’ uвҹ©
                                                        вҲ’2вҲҘxk+1 вҲ’ xk вҲҘ2 + 2ОівҹЁe
                                                                             g k , xk вҲ’ xk+1 вҹ©
                                             = вҲҘxk вҲ’ uвҲҘ2 вҲ’ вҲҘxk+1 вҲ’ uвҲҘ2 вҲ’ вҲҘxk+1 вҲ’ xk вҲҘ2
                                                        +2ОівҹЁF (xk ) вҲ’ gek , xk вҲ’ uвҹ©
                                                        +2ОівҹЁF (u), xk вҲ’ xk+1 вҹ©
                                                            g k вҲ’ F (u), xk вҲ’ xk+1 вҹ©
                                                        +2ОівҹЁe
                                             вүӨ     вҲҘxk вҲ’ uвҲҘ2 вҲ’ вҲҘxk+1 вҲ’ uвҲҘ2
                                                        +2ОівҹЁF (xk ) вҲ’ gek , xk вҲ’ uвҹ©
                                                        +2ОівҹЁF (u), xk вҲ’ xk+1 вҹ© + Оі 2 вҲҘe
                                                                                      g k вҲ’ F (u)вҲҘ2 ,


                                                   58
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                   g k вҲ’ F (u), xk вҲ’ xk+1 вҹ© вүӨ Оі 2 вҲҘe
where in the last step we apply 2ОівҹЁe                               g k вҲ’ F (u)вҲҘ2 + вҲҘxk вҲ’ xk+1 вҲҘ2 .
Adding 2ОівҹЁF (u), xk+1 вҲ’ uвҹ© вҲ’ 2ОівҹЁF (xk ), xk вҲ’ uвҹ© to the both sides, we derive
2Оі вҹЁF (u), xk+1 вҲ’ uвҹ© + ОЁ(xk+1 ) вҲ’ ОЁ(u)        вүӨ вҲҘxk вҲ’ uвҲҘ2 вҲ’ вҲҘxk+1 вҲ’ uвҲҘ2


                                                         +2ОівҹЁF (u) вҲ’ gek , xk вҲ’ uвҹ© + Оі 2 вҲҘe
                                                                                          g k вҲ’ F (u)вҲҘ2
                                               =      вҲҘxk вҲ’ uвҲҘ2 вҲ’ вҲҘxk+1 вҲ’ uвҲҘ2
                                                         вҲ’2ОівҹЁF (xk ) вҲ’ F (u), xk вҲ’ uвҹ© + Оі 2 вҲҘe
                                                                                             g k вҲ’ F (u)вҲҘ2
                                                         +2ОівҹЁF (xk ) вҲ’ gek , xk вҲ’ uвҹ©
                                              (36)
                                               вүӨ      вҲҘxk вҲ’ uвҲҘ2 вҲ’ вҲҘxk+1 вҲ’ uвҲҘ2
                                                          2Оі
                                                        вҲ’ вҲҘF (xk ) вҲ’ F (u)вҲҘ2 + 2Оі 2 вҲҘF (xk ) вҲ’ F (u)вҲҘ2
                                                           в„“
                                                        +2ОівҹЁF (xk ) вҲ’ gek , xk вҲ’ uвҹ© + 2Оі 2 вҲҘF (xk ) вҲ’ gek вҲҘ2
                                               вүӨ      вҲҘxk вҲ’ uвҲҘ2 вҲ’ вҲҘxk+1 вҲ’ uвҲҘ2
                                                         +2ОівҹЁПүk , xk вҲ’ uвҹ© + 2Оі 2 вҲҘПүk вҲҘ2 .
Next, we sum up the above inequality for k = 0, 1, . . . , K вҲ’ 1 and divide both sides by 2ОіK:
  KвҲ’1                                                                                              KвҲ’1
1 X                                                       вҲҘx0 вҲ’ uвҲҘ2 вҲ’ вҲҘxK вҲ’ uвҲҘ2   Оі X
      вҹЁF (u), xk+1 вҲ’ uвҹ© + ОЁ(xk+1 ) вҲ’ ОЁ(u)                                             вҲҘПүk вҲҘ2

                                                     вүӨ                          +
K                                                                  2ОіK            K
   k=0                                                                                             k=0
                                                                      KвҲ’1
                                                                  1   X
                                                              +             вҹЁxk вҲ’ u, Пүk вҹ©,
                                                                  K
                                                                      k=0
                                                                    KвҲ’1
                                                                                          KвҲ’1
                                                                1                     1
                                                                          xk+1                  ОЁ(xk+1 ):
                                                                    P                     P
To finish the proof, we need to use JensenвҖҷs inequality ОЁ       K                    вүӨK
                                                                    k=0                   k=0
                                                                                             KвҲ’1
                                                     вҲҘx0 вҲ’ uвҲҘ2 вҲ’ вҲҘxK вҲ’ uвҲҘ2   Оі X
     вҹЁF (u), xK             K
              avg вҲ’ uвҹ© + ОЁ(xavg ) вҲ’ ОЁ(u) вүӨ                                 +     вҲҘПүk вҲҘ2
                                                              2ОіK            K
                                                                                             k=0
                                                              KвҲ’1
                                                          1   X
                                                      +             вҹЁxk вҲ’ u, Пүk вҹ©,
                                                          K
                                                              k=0
                 KвҲ’1
             1
where xK                xk+1 .
                 P
       avg = K
                  k=0

Theorem G.1. Let Assumptions 7, 9, and 10 hold for Q = B3вҲҡV (xвҲ— ), where V вүҘ вҲҘx0 вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲҘ2 +
              48n(K+1) P
25600Оі 2 ln2      ОІ     n         вҲ— 2
          n 2           i=1 вҲҘFi (x )вҲҘ , and
                                                              вҲҡ
                             пЈұ                                                        пЈј
                                                                      ОұвҲ’1
                             пЈІ         1                        Vn Оұ                  пЈҪ
           0 < Оі вүӨ min                         ,                          ОұвҲ’1           , (199)
                             пЈі 480в„“ ln 48n(K+1) (86400) Оұ1 (K + 1) Оұ1 Пғ ln Оұ 48n(K+1) пЈҫ
                                           ОІ                                     ОІ
                                вҲҡ
                              n V
         О»k вүЎ О» =                        ,                                                (200)
                         40Оі ln 48n(K+1)
                                    ОІ

for some K вүҘ 0 and ОІ вҲҲ (0, 1]. Then, after K iterations the iterates produced by DProx-clipped-
SGDA-shift with probability at least 1 вҲ’ ОІ satisfy
                                        4V                                  вҲ—
                GapвҲҡV (xK+1avg ) вүӨ                 and {xk }K+1        вҲҡ
                                                            k=0 вҠҶ B3 V (x ),               (201)
                                     Оі(K + 1)
where xK+1
         avg is defined in (197). In particular, when Оі equals the minimum from (199), then the
iterates produced by DProx-clipped-SGDA-shift after K iterations with probability at least 1 вҲ’ ОІ
satisfy                               пЈ«       пЈұ             вҲҡ              пЈјпЈ¶
                                              пЈІ в„“V ln nK Пғ V ln ОұвҲ’1 Оұ   nK пЈҪ
                                                       ОІ                 ОІ
                 GapвҲҡV (xK+1avg ) = O
                                      пЈӯmax               ,    ОұвҲ’1    ОұвҲ’1
                                                                             пЈё,            (202)
                                              пЈі     K       n   Оұ K   Оұ    пЈҫ


                                                59
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


meaning that to achieve GapвҲҡV (xK+1
                                avg ) вүӨ Оө with probability at least 1 вҲ’ ОІ DProx-clipped-SGDA-
shift requires
          пЈ«                 вҲҡ ! ОұвҲ’1 Оұ    пЈ«       вҲҡ ! ОұвҲ’1  Оұ пЈ¶пЈ¶

             в„“V    nв„“V 1 Пғ V               1 Пғ V
 K = OпЈӯ         ln     ,              ln пЈӯ                   пЈёпЈё iterations/oracle calls. (203)
              Оө     ОөОІ n     Оө             ОІ      Оө


Proof. The key idea behind the proof is similar to the one used in (Gorbunov et al., 2022a; Sadiev et al.,
2023): we prove by induction that the iterates do not leave some ball and the sums decrease as 1/K+1.
To formulate the statement rigorously, we introduce probability event Ek for each k = 0, 1, . . . , K +1
as follows: inequalities
                         (                   tвҲ’1                       tвҲ’1
                                                                                 )
                                             X                         X
                 max вҲ— вҲҘx0 вҲ’ uвҲҘ2 + 2Оі             вҹЁxl вҲ’ u, Пүl вҹ© + 2Оі 2     вҲҘПүl вҲҘ2 вүӨ 8V,             (204)
               uвҲҲBвҲҡV (x )
                                                    l=0                              l=0
               |                                      {z                                     }
                                                      At
                                                    tвҲ’1
                                                    X             вҲҡ
                                                Оі          Пүl вүӨ       V,                                    (205)
                                                    l=0
                                                rвҲ’1                   вҲҡ
                                                X
                                                       u                 V
                                            Оі         Пүi,tвҲ’1      вүӨ                                         (206)
                                                i=1
                                                                        2

hold for t = 0, 1, . . . , k and r = 1, 2, . . . , n simultaneously, where

                                               Пүl = Пүlu + Пүlb ,                                             (207)
                                              n                    n
                                      def 1                 def 1
                                              X                   X
                                 Пүlu =            u
                                                 Пүi,l , Пүlb =          Пүb ,                                 (208)
                                          n i=1                 n i=1 i,l
                      u def                      b def
                          = EОҫil geil вҲ’ geil , Пүi,l  = Fi (xl ) вҲ’ EОҫil geil

                     Пүi,l                                                   вҲҖ i вҲҲ [n].                      (209)

We will prove by induction that P{Ek } вүҘ 1 вҲ’ kОІ/(K+1) for all k = 0, 1, . . . , K + 1. The base of
induction follows immediately: for all u вҲҲ BвҲҡV (xвҲ— ) we have вҲҘx0 вҲ’ uвҲҘ2 вүӨ 2вҲҘx0 вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲҘ2 + 2вҲҘxвҲ— вҲ’
                                                   PkвҲ’1
uвҲҘ2 вүӨ 4V < 8V and for k = 0 we have вҲҘОі l=0 Пүl вҲҘ = 0. Next, we assume that the statement
holds for k = T вҲ’ 1 вүӨ K, i.e., P{ET вҲ’1 } вүҘ 1 вҲ’ (T вҲ’1)ОІ/(K+1). Let us show that it also holds for
k = T , i.e., P{ET } вүҘ 1 вҲ’ T ОІ/(K+1).
                                                                       вҲҡ
To proceed, we need to show that ET вҲ’1 implies вҲҘxt вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲҘ вүӨ 3 V for all t = 0, 1, . . . , T вҲ’ 1.
We will use theвҲҡinduction argument as well. The base is already proven. Next, we assume that
вҲҘxt вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲҘ вүӨ 3 V for all t = 0, 1, . . . , tвҖІ for some tвҖІ < T вҲ’ 1. This means that xt вҲҲ B3вҲҡV (xвҲ— ) for
t = 0, 1, . . . , tвҖІ and we can apply Lemma G.1: ET вҲ’1 implies
                  n                     вҖІ                 вҖІ
                                                                             вҖІ
                                                                                        o
     max вҲ— 2Оі(tвҖІ + 1) вҹЁF (u), xtavg       +1
                                             вҲ’ uвҹ© + ОЁ(xtavg +1
                                                               ) вҲ’ ОЁ(u) + вҲҘxt +1 вҲ’ uвҲҘ2
  uвҲҲBвҲҡV (x )
                                                                            (                  t
                                                                                                              )
                                                                                               X
                                                       вүӨ        max             вҲҘx0 вҲ’ uвҲҘ2 + 2Оі   вҹЁxl вҲ’ u, Пүl вҹ©
                                                            uвҲҲBвҲҡV (xвҲ— )
                                                                                                 l=0
                                                                     t
                                                                     X
                                                            + 2Оі 2          вҲҘПүl вҲҘ2
                                                                      l=0
                                                       (204)
                                                           вүӨ 8V.
that gives
   вҖІ
                                     n                      вҖІ              вҖІ
                                                                                            вҖІ
                                                                                                      o
вҲҘxt +1 вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲҘ2     вүӨ        max вҲ—     2Оі(tвҖІ + 1) вҹЁF (u), xtavg вҲ’ uвҹ© + ОЁ(xtavg ) вҲ’ ОЁ(u) + вҲҘxt +1 вҲ’ uвҲҘ2
                        uвҲҲBвҲҡV (x )

                   вүӨ 8V.


                                                           60
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                                                      вҲҡ
That is, we showed that ET вҲ’1 implies вҲҘxt вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲҘ вүӨ 3 V and
                               etavg вҲ’ uвҹ© + ОЁ(extavg ) вҲ’ ОЁ(u) + вҲҘxt+1 вҲ’ uвҲҘ2 вүӨ 8V

          max вҲ— 2Оіt вҹЁF (u), x                                                                                                                (210)
       uвҲҲBвҲҡV (x )

for all t = 0, 1, . . . , T вҲ’ 1. Before we proceed, we introduce a new notation:
                                                                     вҲҡ
                                         x вҲ’ xвҲ— , if вҲҘxt вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲҘ вүӨ 3 V ,
                                          t
                                  О·t =
                                         0,         otherwise,
for all t = 0, 1, . . . , T вҲ’ 1. Random vectors {О·t }Tt=0 are bounded almost surely:
                                                         вҲҡ
                                                вҲҘО·t вҲҘ вүӨ 3 V                                           (211)
for all t = 0, 1, . . . , T . In addition, О·t = xt вҲ’ xвҲ— follows from ET вҲ’1 for all t = 0, 1, . . . , T and,
thus, ET вҲ’1 implies
                                                 вҲ’1                      вҲ’1                          вҲ’1
                             (                 T
                                                               )       T                          T
       (204)                                    X
                                                      вҲ—
                                                                       X                          X
AT      =                         0
                 max вҲ— вҲҘx вҲ’ uвҲҘ + 2Оі      2
                                                   вҹЁx вҲ’ u, Пүl вҹ© + 2Оі       вҹЁxl вҲ’ xвҲ— , Пүl вҹ© + 2Оі 2       вҲҘПүl вҲҘ2
             uвҲҲBвҲҡV (x )
                                                          l=0                                        l=0                                   l=0
                                                                 вҲ’1                          вҲ’1                              вҲ’1
                                             (*                T
                                                                           +)              T                               T
                                                               X                           X                               X
       вүӨ     4V + 2Оі             max                xвҲ— вҲ’ u,           Пүl          + 2Оі              вҹЁО·l , Пүl вҹ© + 2Оі 2             вҲҘПүl вҲҘ2
                         uвҲҲBвҲҡV (xвҲ— )
                                                               l=0                         l=0                             l=0
                                     T вҲ’1                T вҲ’1                          T вҲ’1
                    вҲҡ                X                   X                             X
       =     4V + 2Оі V                      Пүl + 2Оі             вҹЁО·l , Пүl вҹ© + 2Оі 2               вҲҘПүl вҲҘ2 .
                                     l=0                 l=0                              l=0
Using the notation from (207)-(209), we can rewrite вҲҘПүl вҲҘ2 as
                                                                                n               2
                         2                                   2                  X
                 вҲҘПүl вҲҘ           вүӨ     2вҲҘПүlu вҲҘ2 + 2вҲҘПүlb вҲҘ2 =                           u
                                                                                      Пүi,l          + 2вҲҘПүlb вҲҘ2
                                                                        n       i=1
                                             n                       n
                                                                       *jвҲ’1                             +
                                           2 X        u 2          4 X X                   u      u
                                 =                  вҲҘПүi,l вҲҘ +                             Пүi,l , Пүj,l          + 2вҲҘПүlb вҲҘ2 .                  (212)
                                       n2 i=1                     n2 j=2            i=1
Putting all together, we obtain that ET вҲ’1 implies
                                             T вҲ’1                T вҲ’1 n                    T вҲ’1
                       вҲҡ                     X                2Оі X X            u
                                                                                           X
       AT     вүӨ 4V + 2Оі V                           Пүl +                 вҹЁО·l , Пүi,l вҹ© + 2Оі     вҹЁО·l , Пүlb вҹ©
                                                               n
                                             l=0                 l=0 i=1                   l=0
                                                              |       {z           } |        {z        }
                                                                            в‘                                    в‘Ў
                                 2 T вҲ’1 X
                                        n                                       2 T вҲ’1 X
                                                                                       n
                             4Оі    X               u 2   4Оі                       X
                                                                                                      u 2
                                                                                                                    u 2
                     +                       EОҫil вҲҘПүi,l вҲҘ + 2                                       вҲҘПүi,l вҲҘ вҲ’ EОҫil вҲҘПүi,l вҲҘ
                              n2                            n
                                     l=0 i=1                                        l=0 i=1
                             |             {z            } |                                               {z                          }
                                                в‘ў                                                          в‘Ј
                                   T вҲ’1                      T вҲ’1 n
                                                                    *jвҲ’1                              +
                                   X                    8Оі 2 X X X
                     + 4Оі 2                 вҲҘПүlb вҲҘ2 +                                  u
                                                                                      Пүi,l    u
                                                                                           , Пүj,l          .                                 (213)
                                                         n2
                                     l=0                        l=0 j=2         i=1
                             |        {z           }    |                    {z                        }
                                       в‘Ө                                      в‘Ҙ
                                              вҲҡ  PT вҲ’1
To finish the proof, it remains to estimate 2Оі V   l=0 Пүl , в‘ , в‘Ў, в‘ў, в‘Ј, в‘Ө, в‘Ҙ with high probability.
                                              вҲҡ  PT вҲ’1
More precisely, the goal is to prove that 2Оі V    l=0 Пүl + в‘  + в‘Ў + в‘ў + в‘Ј + в‘Ө + в‘Ҙ вүӨ 4V with
                                                                                               u
high probability. Before we proceed, we need to derive several useful inequalities related to Пүi,l , Пүlb .
First of all, we have
                                                u
                                             вҲҘПүi,l вҲҘ вүӨ 2О»                                       (214)
by definition of the clipping operator. Next, probability event ET вҲ’1 implies
                                                                           v
                                                                           u n
                l               l        вҲ—            вҲ—          l    вҲ—
                                                                           uX
         вҲҘFi (x )вҲҘ вүӨ вҲҘFi (x ) вҲ’ Fi (x )вҲҘ + вҲҘFi (x )вҲҘ вүӨ в„“вҲҘx вҲ’ x вҲҘ + t             вҲҘFi (xвҲ— )вҲҘ2
                                                                                                                     i=1
                                                         вҲҡ                                      вҲҡ
                         вҲҡ                              n V                 (199)            n V                    (200) О»
                     вүӨ 3в„“ V +                                                вүӨ                                       =                       (215)
                                               160Оі ln 48n(K+1)
                                                           ОІ                        80Оі ln 48n(K+1)
                                                                                               ОІ
                                                                                                                           2


                                                                   61
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


for l = 0, 1, . . . , T вҲ’ 1 and i вҲҲ [n]. Therefore, Lemma B.2 and ET вҲ’1 imply
                                                              n
                                                     1X b             2Оұ Пғ Оұ
                                               Пүlb вүӨ         вҲҘПүi,l вҲҘ вүӨ ОұвҲ’1 ,                                               (216)
                                                     n i=1            О»
                                                   h       i
                                                     u   2
                                               EОҫil Пүi,l      вүӨ 18О»2вҲ’Оұ Пғ Оұ ,                                               (217)

for all l = 0, 1, . . . , T вҲ’ 1 and i вҲҲ [n].

Upper bound for в‘ . To estimate this sum, we will use BernsteinвҖҷs inequality. The summands have
conditional expectations equal to zero:

                                  2Оі        u       2Оі D            u
                                                                         E
                           EОҫil      вҹЁО·l , Пүi,l вҹ© =     О·l , EОҫil [Пүi,l ] = 0.
                                  n                 n
                                                            u n
Moreover, for all l = 0, . . . , T вҲ’ 1 random vectors {Пүi,l   }i=1 are independent. Thus, sequence
n               oT вҲ’1,n
  2Оі       u
  n вҹЁО·l , Пүi,l вҹ©        is a martingale difference sequence. Next, the summands are bounded:
                 l,i=0,1
                                                                       вҲҡ
          2Оі        u        2Оі             u
                                                  (211),(214) 12Оі V О» (200)              3V       def
             вҹЁО·l , Пүi,l вҹ© вүӨ      вҲҘО·l вҲҘ В· вҲҘПүi,l вҲҘ      вүӨ                        вүӨ         48n(K+1)
                                                                                                  = c.                     (218)
          n                  n                                         n           10 ln     ОІ
                                                  h 2                   i
                                     2 def
Finally, conditional variances Пғi,l      = EОҫil 4Оі  n 2  вҹЁО· l , Пү u 2
                                                                  i,l вҹ©   of the summands are bounded:
                                   2
                                                                (211) 36Оі 2 V

                      2           4Оі          2       u 2
                                                                                      u 2
                    Пғi,l  вүӨ EОҫil        вҲҘО·l вҲҘ   В· вҲҘПү  i,l вҲҘ      вүӨ             EОҫil вҲҘПүi,l вҲҘ .                              (219)
                                   n2                                     n2
Applying BernsteinвҖҷs inequality (Lemma B.1) with Xi,l = 2Оі       u
                                                        n вҹЁО·l , Пүi,l вҹ©, constant c defined in (218),
                         3V 2
b = 3V
    10 , G =             48n(K+1)     , we get
                200 ln       ОІ
   (                       T      n
                                                                            )
                                  3V 2                                                           b2

         3V     XX
                      2                                                                                                ОІ
 P |в‘ | >    and      Пғi,l вүӨ                                                     вүӨ 2 exp вҲ’                      =              .
         10      i=1        200 ln 48n(K+1)
                           l=0                                 ОІ
                                                                                              2G + 2cb/3           24n(K + 1)

The above is equivalent to
                                                  (           T X
                                                                n
                                                                                                                           )
                 ОІ
                                                              X
                                                                                 2            3V 2                      3V
P{Eв‘  } вүҘ 1 вҲ’ 24n(K+1) , for Eв‘  =                  either                        Пғi,l >                         or |в‘ | вүӨ      .
                                                               l=0 i=1                   200 ln 48n(K+1)
                                                                                                    ОІ
                                                                                                                        10
                                                                                                                         (220)
Moreover, ET вҲ’1 implies
               T X
                 n                                               T  n
               X
                            2
                                          (219)          36Оі 2 V X X         u 2
                           Пғi,l            вүӨ                           EОҫil вҲҘПүi,l вҲҘ
                                                           n2
                l=0 i=1                                            i=1
                                                                    l=0
                                      (217),T вүӨK+1       648Оі 2 V Пғ Оұ (K + 1)О»2вҲ’Оұ
                                           вүӨ
                                                                       n
                                                                вҲҡ 4вҲ’Оұ Оұ
                                          (200)
                                                              Оұ
                                                         648Оі V          Пғ (K + 1) lnОұвҲ’2 48n(K+1)
                                                                                             ОІ
                                           вүӨ
                                                                                  402вҲ’Оұ nОұвҲ’1
                                                                        2
                                          (199)                    3V
                                           вүӨ                                        .                                      (221)
                                                         200 ln 48n(K+1)
                                                                    ОІ


Upper bound for в‘Ў. Probability event ET вҲ’1 implies
                              T
                              X                                вҲҡ
                                                      (211),(216),T вүӨK+1  ПғОұ
          в‘Ў     вүӨ        2Оі       вҲҘО·l вҲҘ В· вҲҘПүlb вҲҘ       6 В· 2Оұ Оі V (K + 1) ОұвҲ’1
                                                             вүӨ
                                                                         О»
                             l=0
                               ОұвҲ’1
                                   В· 2 Оұ Оұ вҲҡ 2вҲ’Оұ
                                      Оұ

               (200)     6 В· 40                            ОұвҲ’1   48n(K + 1) (199) 3V
                =                       Оі Пғ V    (K + 1) ln                   вүӨ       .                                    (222)
                              nОұвҲ’1                                   ОІ            100

                                                                   62
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Upper bound for в‘ў. Probability event ET вҲ’1 implies
                                 T   n
                           4Оі 2 X X           u 2   (217),T вүӨK+1 72Оі 2 О»2вҲ’Оұ Пғ Оұ (K + 1)
             в‘ў      =        2
                                        EОҫil вҲҘПүi,l вҲҘ      вүӨ
                           n                                               n
                                l=0 i=1
                                           вҲҡ 2вҲ’Оұ Оұ

                   (200)        72       Оұ                      ОұвҲ’2   48n(K + 1) (199) 3V
                    вүӨ                   Оі V         Пғ (K + 1) ln                      вүӨ     .                              (223)
                           402вҲ’Оұ nОұвҲ’1                                      ОІ            100

Upper bound for в‘Ј. To estimate this sum, we will use BernsteinвҖҷs inequality. The summands have
conditional expectations equal to zero:

                                     4Оі 2     h
                                                 u 2
                                                               u 2  i
                                          EОҫ l вҲҘПүi,l вҲҘ вҲ’ EОҫ l вҲҘПүi,l вҲҘ = 0.
                                     n2 i                  i


                                                           u n
Moreover, for all l = 0, . . . , T вҲ’ 1 random vectors {Пүi,l  }i=1 are independent. Thus, sequence
n 2                 h           i oT вҲ’1,n
 4Оі      u 2            u 2
 n2  вҲҘПүi,l вҲҘ вҲ’ EОҫil вҲҘПүi,l   вҲҘ             is a martingale difference sequence. Next, the summands
                                           l,i=0,1
are bounded:
            4Оі 2   u 2
                                 u 2                             4Оі 2   u 2             u 2    (214) 32Оі 2 О»2
              2
                 вҲҘПүi,l вҲҘ вҲ’ EОҫil вҲҘПүi,l вҲҘ               вүӨ                вҲҘПү i,l вҲҘ + EОҫi вҲҘПүi,l вҲҘ
                                                                                    l             вүӨ
            n                                                    n2                                      n2
                                                     (200)              V                    V       def
                                                      вүӨ                            вүӨ                 = c.                  (224)
                                                                 20 ln2 48n(K+1)
                                                                              ОІ       10 ln 48n(K+1)
                                                                                                ОІ

Finally, conditional variances
                                               4

                                  2 def 16Оі                       u 2
                                                                                   u 2    2
                                Пғ
                                ei,l =    2
                                                    EОҫil        вҲҘПүi,l вҲҘ вҲ’ EОҫil    вҲҘПүi,l вҲҘ
                                           n
of the summands are bounded:

  2
    (224)            Оі2V             h
                                            u 2
                                                          u 2  i                              2Оі 2 V             u 2
Пғ
ei,l вүӨ                         El
                     2 48n(K+1) Оҫi
                                          вҲҘПүi,l вҲҘ вҲ’ EОҫil вҲҘПүi,l вҲҘ вүӨ                                         EОҫil вҲҘПүi,l вҲҘ .(225)
            5n2 ln         ОІ                                                          5n2 ln2 48n(K+1)
                                                                                                  ОІ

                                                                                  2

Applying BernsteinвҖҷs inequality (Lemma B.1) with Xi,l = 4Оі
                                                        n2
                                                                                            u 2
                                                                                          вҲҘПүi,l             u 2
                                                                                                вҲҘ вҲ’ EОҫil [вҲҘПүi,l вҲҘ ] , constant c
                      V                        V2
defined in (224), b = 10 ,G=                   48n(K+1)      , we get
                                      600 ln       ОІ

   (             T X n
                                                                         )
                                      V2                                                        b2

         V      X
                          2                                                                                            ОІ
 P |в‘Ј| >    and         Пғ
                        ei,t вүӨ                                               вүӨ 2 exp вҲ’                        =               .
         10     t=0 i=1        600 ln 48n(K+1)                  ОІ
                                                                                             2G + 2cb/3            24n(K + 1)

The above is equivalent to
                                               (                 T X
                                                                   n
                                                                                                                             )
                 ОІ
                                                                 X
                                                                               2               V2                         V
P{Eв‘Ј } вүҘ 1 вҲ’ 24n(K+1) , for Eв‘Ј =                    either                   Пғ
                                                                             ei,l >                           or    |в‘Ј| вүӨ      .
                                                                 l=0 i=1              600 ln 48n(K+1)
                                                                                                 ОІ
                                                                                                                          10
                                                                                                                           (226)
Moreover, ET вҲ’1 implies
T X
  n                                                 T X
                                                      n
X
              2
                   (225)         2Оі 2 V             X      u 2   (217),T вүӨK+1 36Оі 2 V (K + 1) 2вҲ’Оұ Оұ
            Пғ
            ei,l     вүӨ              48n(K+1)
                                                     EОҫil вҲҘПүi,l вҲҘ      вүӨ                     О»   Пғ
l=0 i=1                    5n2 ln 2
                                        ОІ    l=0 i=1                          5n ln 48n(K+1)
                                                                                        ОІ
                                   вҲҡ Оұ
                   (200)   9 В· 40Оұ 2 Оұ вҲҡ 4вҲ’Оұ                       48n(K + 1)
                     вүӨ             ОұвҲ’1
                                        Оі V       (K + 1)Пғ Оұ lnОұвҲ’4
                            2000n                                         ОІ
                   (199)         V2
                     вүӨ                          .                                                                          (227)
                           600 ln 48n(K+1)
                                      ОІ


                                                                    63
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Upper bound for в‘Ө. Probability event ET вҲ’1 implies
                                       T
                                       X               (216),T вүӨK+1                              Пғ 2Оұ
                 в‘Ө       =      4Оі 2         вҲҘПүlb вҲҘ2          вүӨ          22Оұ+2 Оі 2 (K + 1)
                                                                                                О»2ОұвҲ’2
                                       l=0
                        (200)   12800Оұ 2Оұ           Пғ 2Оұ      2ОұвҲ’2 48n(K + 1)
                         =            Оі (K + 1)      вҲҡ 2ОұвҲ’2 ln
                                  800           n2ОұвҲ’2 V                ОІ
                        (199)   V
                         вүӨ         .                                                                                  (228)
                                10
Upper bound for в‘Ҙ. This sum requires more refined analysis. We introduce new vectors:
                                                             вҲҡ
                           пЈұ jвҲ’1                 jвҲ’1
                           пЈІОі P u              Оі P u           V
                        l           Пү  ,  if         Пү     вүӨ  2 ,
                       Оҙj = n i=1 i,l          n
                                                 i=1
                                                       i,l                                                            (229)
                              0,          otherwise,
                           пЈі

for all j вҲҲ [n] and l = 0, . . . , T вҲ’ 1. Then, by definition
                                                        вҲҡ
                                                  l        V
                                                вҲҘОҙj вҲҘ вүӨ                                                               (230)
                                                          2
and

                                 T вҲ’1 n                                T вҲ’1 n         jвҲ’1
                                                                                *                         +
                    8Оі X X l u             8Оі X X                                   ОіX u
                в‘Ҙ =            Оҙj , Пүj,l +                                               Пү вҲ’ Оҙjl , Пүj,l
                                                                                                    u
                                                                                                              .       (231)
                     n                     n                                        n i=1 i,l
                       l=0 j=2                l=0 j=2
                    |       {z          }
                                           в‘ҘвҖІ

We also note here that ET вҲ’1 implies
              T вҲ’1 n
                        * jвҲ’1                +                                  n
                                                                                    *     jвҲ’1
                                                                                                              +
           8Оі X X Оі X u              l   u                                8Оі X          ОіX u
                               Пү вҲ’ Оҙj , Пүj,l   =                                             Пү вҲ’ Оҙjl , Пүj,l
                                                                                                        u
                                                                                                                  .   (232)
            n       j=2
                          n i=1 i,l                                       n j=2         n i=1 i,l
                  l=0


Upper bound for в‘ҘвҖІ . To estimate this sum, we will use BernsteinвҖҷs inequality. The summands
have conditional expectations equal to zero:

                                           8Оі l u                 8Оі D l          u
                                                                                       E
                                EОҫjl          Оҙ ,Пү            =       Оҙj , EОҫjl [Пүj,l ] = 0.
                                           n j j,l                n
                                                           u n
Moreover, for all l = 0, . . . , T вҲ’ 1 random vectors {Пүi,l  }i=1 are independent. Thus, sequence
n D             EoT вҲ’1,n
 8Оі
 n   Оҙjl , Пүj,l
            u
                         is a martingale difference sequence. Next, the summands are bounded:
                   l,j=0,2
                                                                 вҲҡ
        8Оі l u            8Оі l          u
                                             (230),(214) 8Оі         V                    V        def
           Оҙ ,Пү        вүӨ      Оҙj В· вҲҘПүj,l вҲҘ       вүӨ            В·        В· 2О» вүӨ                     = c.        (233)
        n j j,l           n                              n         2               5 ln 48n(K+1)
                                                                                            ОІ
                                                h 2                    i
                                  вҖІ 2 def
Finally, conditional variances (Пғj,l ) = EОҫjl 64Оі          l     u 2
                                                    n2 вҹЁОҙj , Пүj,l вҹ©      of the summands are bounded:

                                   64Оі 2 l 2                    (230) 16Оі 2 V

                     вҖІ 2                              u 2
                                                                                         u 2
                  (Пғj,l ) вүӨ EОҫjl      2
                                         вҲҘОҙj вҲҘ В· вҲҘПүj,l   вҲҘ       вүӨ         2
                                                                                 EОҫjl вҲҘПүj,l  вҲҘ .              (234)
                                    n                                    n
                                                                        D            E
Applying BernsteinвҖҷs inequality (Lemma B.1) with Xi,l = 8Оі           n    Оҙ l
                                                                            j , Пү u
                                                                                 j,l , constant c defined in (233),
                         2
b = V5 , G =         V
                     48n(K+1) , we get
              150 ln     ОІ
  пЈұ                                                      пЈј
                     T вҲ’1 X n                     2
                                                                          b2

  пЈІ         V         X                         V        пЈҪ                                ОІ
P |в‘ҘвҖІ | >      and               вҖІ 2
                               (Пғi,l ) вүӨ        48n(K+1) пЈҫ
                                                           вүӨ 2 exp   вҲ’              =            .
  пЈі         5              j=2           150 ln                        2G + 2cb/3     24n(K + 1)
                        l=0                                       ОІ



                                                                  64
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


The above is equivalent to
                                                        пЈұ                                                                      пЈј
                                                                    T вҲ’1 X
                                                                         n                               2
                     ОІ                                  пЈІ           X                                V                        VпЈҪ
P{Eв‘ҘвҖІ } вүҘ 1вҲ’                , for Eв‘ҘвҖІ = either                                      вҖІ 2
                                                                                  (Пғi,l ) >                      or |в‘ҘвҖІ | вүӨ        .
                 24n(K + 1)            пЈі
                                                                      l=0 j=2                 150 ln 48n(K+1)
                                                                                                         ОІ
                                                                                                                              5пЈҫ
                                                                                                                         (235)
Moreover, ET вҲ’1 implies
   T вҲ’1 X
        n                                       T вҲ’1 n
   X
                вҖІ 2
                        (234)      16Оі 2 V X X         u 2   (217),T вүӨK+1 288(K + 1)Оі 2 V О»2вҲ’Оұ Пғ Оұ
              (Пғj,l )       вүӨ         2
                                                 EОҫjl вҲҘПүj,l вҲҘ      вүӨ
                                     n                                              n
    l=0 j=2                                  j=2 l=0
                                                                             Оұ
                        (200)          288(K + 1)Оі Оұ Пғ Оұ V 2вҲ’ 2   (199)        V2
                            вүӨ           вҲҡ 2вҲ’Оұ                      вүӨ           48n(K+1)
                                                                                        .                                (236)
                                   402вҲ’Оұ 2    nОұвҲ’1 ln2вҲ’Оұ 48n(K+1)
                                                                ОІ
                                                                        150 ln     ОІ

                  вҲҡ  PT вҲ’1
Upper bound for 2Оі V  l=0 Пүt . We introduce new random vectors:

                                                                   вҲҡ
                                          пЈұ lвҲ’1           lвҲ’1
                                          пЈІ P              P
                                           Оі    Пүr , if Оі      Пүr вүӨ V ,
                                     О¶l =
                                          пЈі r=0           r=0
                                           0,        otherwise
for l = 1, 2, . . . , T вҲ’ 1. With probability 1 we have
                                                       вҲҡ
                                                вҲҘО¶l вҲҘ вүӨ V .                                                              (237)
Using this and (205), we obtain that ET вҲ’1 implies
                          v
          T вҲ’1
                          u       T вҲ’1    2
          X               u       X
      Оі        Пүl     =   t  Оі 2       Пүl
           l=0                                  l=0
                                   v
                                   u T вҲ’1            T вҲ’1
                                                          * lвҲ’1         +
                                   u X               X       X
                            =      tОі 2        2
                                          вҲҘПүl вҲҘ + 2Оі       Оі    Пүr , Пүl
                                              l=0                  l=0           r=0
                                   v
                                   u T вҲ’1             T вҲ’1
                                   u X                X
                            =      tОі 2   вҲҘПүl вҲҘ2 + 2Оі     вҹЁО¶l , Пүl вҹ©
                                              l=0                  l=0
                                   v
                                   u                      T вҲ’1 X
                                                               n                     T вҲ’1
                                   u1
                                   u (в‘ў + в‘Ј + в‘Ө + в‘Ҙ) + 2Оі
                           (213)                          X                          X
                                                                           u
                            вүӨ      u4                             вҹЁО¶ l , Пүi,l вҹ© + 2Оі      вҹЁО¶l , Пүlb вҹ©. (238)
                                                        n
                                   t                      l=0 i=1                    l=0
                                                       |       {z            } |        {z       }
                                                                                       в‘Ұ                     в‘§


Upper bound for в‘Ұ. To estimate this sum, we will use BernsteinвҖҷs inequality. The summands have
conditional expectations equal to zero:

                                              2Оі        u       2Оі D            u
                                                                                     E
                                   EОҫil          вҹЁО¶l , Пүi,l вҹ© =     О¶l , EОҫil [Пүi,l ] = 0.
                                              n                 n
                                                            u n
Moreover, for all l = 0, . . . , T вҲ’ 1 random vectors {Пүi,l   }i=1 are independent. Thus, sequence
n               oT вҲ’1,n
  2Оі       u
  n вҹЁО¶l , Пүi,l вҹ©        is a martingale difference sequence. Next, the summands are bounded:
                 l,i=0,1

              2Оі        u       2Оі           u
                                                   (237),(214) 4Оі   (200)       V       def
                 вҹЁО¶l , Пүi,l вҹ© вүӨ    вҲҘО¶l вҲҘ В· вҲҘПүi,l вҲҘ     вүӨ          RО» вүӨ         48n(K+1)
                                                                                        = c.                             (239)
              n                 n                              n          5 ln                   ОІ
                                                       h                     i
                                 2             def         4Оі 2      u 2
Finally, conditional variances Пғ
                               bi,l = EОҫil                 n2 вҹЁО¶l , Пүi,l вҹ©       of the summands are bounded:


                                                                 65
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                             4Оі 2                               (237) 4Оі 2

                     2
                                                  вҲҘО¶l вҲҘ2 В· вҲҘПүi,l
                                                             u 2
                                                                                                     u 2
                   Пғ
                   bi,l вүӨ EОҫil                                   вҲҘ               вүӨ           V EОҫil вҲҘПүi,l вҲҘ .                             (240)
                                             n2                                       n2
Applying BernsteinвҖҷs inequality (Lemma B.1) with Xi,l = 2Оі       u
                                                        n вҹЁО¶l , Пүi,l вҹ©, constant c defined in (239),
                          2
b = V5 , G =         V
                     48n(K+1) , we get
              150 ln     ОІ
   (                   T X  n
                                                       )
                                                2
                                                                      b2

             V         X
                                 2            V                                       ОІ
  P |в‘Ұ| >       and            bi,l вүӨ
                               Пғ              48n(K+1)
                                                         вүӨ 2 exp вҲ’              =            .
             5             i=1         150 ln                      2G + 2cb/3     24n(K + 1)
                      l=0                                              ОІ
The above is equivalent to
                                                       (               T X
                                                                         n
                                                                                                                                        )
                 ОІ
                                                                       X
                                                                                       2                    V2                        V
P{Eв‘Ұ } вүҘ 1 вҲ’ 24n(K+1) for Eв‘Ұ =                             either                    Пғ
                                                                                     bi,l >                                  or |в‘Ұ| вүӨ     .
                                                                       l=0 i=1                 150 ln 48n(K+1)
                                                                                                          ОІ
                                                                                                                                      5
                                                                                                                                       (241)
Moreover, ET вҲ’1 implies
         T X
           n                                                   T
         X
                     2
                                      (240)              4Оі 2 X
                                                                 EОҫl вҲҘПүlu вҲҘ2

                   Пғ
                   bi,l                  вүӨ                 2
                                                             V
                                                         n
         l=0 i=1                                                    l=0
                               (217),T вүӨK+1              72Оі V Пғ (K + 1)О»2вҲ’Оұ
                                                                2     Оұ
                                         вүӨ
                                                                    n
                                                                вҲҡ Оұ
                                      (200)              9 В· 20Оұ 2 Оұ 4вҲ’Оұ Оұ                 48n(K + 1)
                                         вүӨ                       ОұвҲ’1
                                                                     Оі R   Пғ (K + 1) lnОұвҲ’2
                                                         100 В· n                               ОІ
                                      (199)                     V2
                                         вүӨ                               .                                                                (242)
                                                         150 ln 48n(K+1)
                                                                    ОІ

Upper bound for в‘§. Probability event ET вҲ’1 implies
                                         T
                                         X                          (211),(216),T вүӨK+1                                      ПғОұ
              в‘§      вүӨ           2Оі               вҲҘО¶l вҲҘ В· вҲҘПүlb вҲҘ               вүӨ             2 В· 2Оұ ОіR(K + 1)
                                                                                                                           О»ОұвҲ’1
                                         l=0
                               вҲҡ Оұ
                    (200)   40Оұ 2                              48n(K + 1) (199) V
                     =            вҲҡ Оі Оұ Пғ Оұ R2вҲ’Оұ (K + 1) lnОұвҲ’1               вүӨ     .         (243)
                          nОұвҲ’1 10 2                                  ОІ           5
                                          вҲҡ    PT вҲ’1
That is, we derive the upper bounds for 2Оі V      l=0 Пүl , в‘ , в‘Ў, в‘ў, в‘Ј, в‘Ө, в‘Ҙ. More precisely, ET вҲ’1
implies

                                                                T вҲ’1
                       (213)    вҲҡ                               X
                    AT вүӨ 4V + 2Оі V                                     Пүl + в‘  + в‘Ў + в‘ў + в‘Ј + в‘Ө + в‘Ҙ,
                                                                l=0
                                                                 jвҲ’1
                                                            n
                                                                *                         +
                                 (231)8Оі X    вҖІ                ОіX u            T вҲ’1 u
                              в‘Ҙ = в‘Ҙ +                                Пү      вҲ’ Оҙj , Пүj,T вҲ’1 ,
                                      n j=2                    n i=1 i,T вҲ’1
                                      T вҲ’1
                      вҲҡ                                (238) вҲҡ
                                                                r
                                      X                            1
                    2Оі V                          Пүl    вүӨ 2 V        (в‘ў + в‘Ј + в‘Ө + в‘Ҙ) + в‘Ұ + в‘§,
                                                                   4
                                         l=0
                                 (222)       3V             (223)    3V              (228)   V               (243) V
                              в‘Ў вүӨ                ,       в‘ў вүӨ             ,       в‘Ө вүӨ            ,      в‘§ вүӨ             ,
                                             100                     100                     10                   5
             T вҲ’1 X
                  n                                                             T вҲ’1 X
                                                                                     n
             X
                               2
                                     (221)              3V 2                    X
                                                                                               2
                                                                                                    (227)          V2
                              Пғi,l    вүӨ                  48n(K+1)
                                                                  ,                          Пғ
                                                                                             ei,l вүӨ                               ,
             l=0 i=1                          200 ln            ОІ               l=0 i=1                     600 ln 48n(K+1)
                                                                                                                       ОІ
            T вҲ’1 X
                 n                                                           T вҲ’1 X
                                                                                  n
            X
                        2
                                 (242)                 V2                    X
                                                                                          вҖІ 2
                                                                                                     (236)             V2
                      Пғ
                      bi,l           вүӨ                 48n(K+1)
                                                                ,                       (Пғj,l ) вүӨ                                     .
            l=0 i=1                       150 ln            ОІ                l=0 i=1                         150 ln 48n(K+1)
                                                                                                                        ОІ



                                                                           66
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


In addition, we also establish (see (220), (226), (243), (235) and our induction assumption)
                                                          (T вҲ’ 1)ОІ
                                       P{ET вҲ’1 } вүҘ 1 вҲ’             ,
                                                           K +1
                                         ОІ                                ОІ
                       P{Eв‘  } вүҘ 1 вҲ’             ,        P{Eв‘Ј } вүҘ 1 вҲ’            ,
                                     24n(K + 1)                       24n(K + 1)
                                         ОІ                                ОІ
                       P{Eв‘ҘвҖІ } вүҘ 1 вҲ’            ,        P{Eв‘Ұ } вүҘ 1 вҲ’            ,
                                     24n(K + 1)                       24n(K + 1)
where
                                        вҲ’1 X
                             (        T    n
                                                                                      )
                                      X
                                               2            3V 2                  3V
                 Eв‘     =  either             Пғi,l >                    or |в‘ | вүӨ           ,
                                    l=0 i=1          200 ln 48n(K+1)
                                                                 ОІ
                                                                                  10
                                      вҲ’1 X
                         (          T     n
                                                                                     )
                                                              2
                                    X
                                               2            V                     V
                 Eв‘Ј    =  either             Пғ
                                             ei,l >                    or |в‘Ј| вүӨ         ,
                                    l=0 i=1          600 ln 48n(K+1)
                                                                 ОІ
                                                                                  10
                         пЈұ                                                        пЈј
                                  T вҲ’1 Xn                      2
                         пЈІ        X
                                             вҖІ 2             V             вҖІ     VпЈҪ
                 Eв‘ҘвҖІ   =   either          (Пғi,l ) >                  or |в‘Ҙ  | вүӨ     ,
                         пЈі
                                  l=0 j=2             150 ln 48n(K+1)
                                                                  ОІ
                                                                                 5пЈҫ
                                      вҲ’1 X
                         (          T     n
                                                                                    )
                                                              2
                                    X
                                               2            V                     V
                 Eв‘Ұ    =  either             Пғ
                                             bi,l >                    or |в‘Ұ| вүӨ        .
                                      l=0i=1         150 ln 48n(K+1)
                                                                   ОІ
                                                                                  5

Therefore, probability event ET вҲ’1 вҲ© Eв‘  вҲ© Eв‘Ј вҲ© Eв‘ҘвҖІ вҲ© Eв‘Ұ implies

                    v                                            * jвҲ’1
       вҲ’1
     T              u                                         n
                                                                                                +
     X              u 1 3V     V    V    V     V    V    2Оі X     Оі X
 Оі          Пүl    вүӨ t        +    +   +      + + +                     Пүu    вҲ’ ОҙjT вҲ’1 , Пүj,T
                                                                                         u
                       4 10    10 10     5     5     5    n j=2 n i=1 i,T вҲ’1                 вҲ’1
     l=0
                          v       * jвҲ’1                       +
                                n
                    вҲҡ
                          u
                          u 2Оі X    ОіX u          T вҲ’1
                  вүӨ   V + t             Пү               u
                                               вҲ’ Оҙj , Пүj,T вҲ’1 ,                             (244)
                            n j=2 n i=1 i,T вҲ’1
                                  v        * jвҲ’1                       +
                                        n
                               вҲҡ u 2Оі X
                                  u
                                             ОіX u           T вҲ’1  u
            AT    вүӨ 4V + 2V + 2 V t               Пү     вҲ’ Оҙj , Пүj,T вҲ’1
                                     n j=2 n i=1 i,T вҲ’1
                        3V    3V    3V      V     V   V
                         +  +     +       +    + +
                        10    100 100 10          5   5
                            n
                              * jвҲ’1                          +
                        8Оі X    Оі X
                                        u        T вҲ’1 u
                      +               Пү       вҲ’ Оҙj , Пүj,T вҲ’1
                        n j=2 n i=1 i,T вҲ’1
                              v        * jвҲ’1                         +
                                    n
                           вҲҡ u 2Оі X
                              u
                                          ОіX u            T вҲ’1 u
                  вүӨ 8V + 2 V  t                 Пү     вҲ’ Оҙj , Пүj,T вҲ’1
                                 n j=2 n i=1 i,T вҲ’1
                            n
                              * jвҲ’1                          +
                        8Оі X Оі X u               T вҲ’1 u
                      +               Пү       вҲ’ Оҙj , Пүj,T вҲ’1 .                                              (245)
                        n j=2 n i=1 i,T вҲ’1

                                                          jвҲ’1
                                                                           T вҲ’1
In the final part of the proof, we will show that nОі             u
                                                          P
                                                                Пүi,T вҲ’1 = Оҙj    with high probability. In
                                                          i=1
particular, we consider probability event E
                                          eT вҲ’1,j defined as follows: inequalities
                                          rвҲ’1             вҲҡ
                                        ОіX u                 V
                                              Пүi,T вҲ’1 вүӨ                                            (246)
                                        n i=1               2


                                                    67
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


hold for r = 2, . . . , j simultaneously. We want to show that P{ET вҲ’1 вҲ© E     eT вҲ’1,j } вүҘ 1 вҲ’ (T вҲ’1)ОІ вҲ’
                                                                                                K+1
   jОІ
8n(K+1)  for all j  =   2, . . . , n. For j = 2 the statement is trivial since
                                                                        вҲҡ
                                   Оі u         (214) 2ОіО»                 V
                                    Пү              вүӨ           вүӨ           .
                                   n 1,T вҲ’1                n            2
Next, we assume that the statement holds for some j = m вҲ’ 1 < n, i.e., P{ET вҲ’1 вҲ© EeT вҲ’1,mвҲ’1 } вүҘ
     (T вҲ’1)ОІ    (mвҲ’1)ОІ                                                       (T вҲ’1)ОІ     mОІ
1 вҲ’ K+1 вҲ’ 8n(K+1) . Our goal is to prove that P{ET вҲ’1 вҲ© E  eT вҲ’1,m } вүҘ 1 вҲ’
                                                                              K+1 вҲ’ 8n(K+1) .
                      mвҲ’1
First, we consider nОі
                       P u
                          Пүi,T вҲ’1 :
                        i=1
                                v
           mвҲ’1                                      2
                                u Оі 2 mвҲ’1
                                u
         Оі X                          X
              Пүu              = t         Пү u
         n i=1 i,T вҲ’1             n2 i=1 i,T вҲ’1
                                v                              * iвҲ’1              +
                                u mвҲ’1                      mвҲ’1
                                u Оі2 X                  2Оі X Оі X u
                              = t          u        2
                                         вҲҘПүi,T вҲ’1 вҲҘ +                Пү    ,Пү u
                                  n2 i=1                n i=1 n r=1 r,T вҲ’1 i,T вҲ’1
                                v
                                u T вҲ’1 mвҲ’1                  mвҲ’1
                                                                * iвҲ’1              +
                                u Оі2 X X                 2Оі X Оі X u
                              вүӨ t               u     2
                                              вҲҘПүi,l вҲҘ +               Пү    ,Пү u     .
                                  n2     i=1
                                                         n i=1 n r=1 r,T вҲ’1 i,T вҲ’1
                                        l=0

Next, we introduce a new notation:
                                                                  вҲҡ
                               пЈұ iвҲ’1                 iвҲ’1
                               пЈІОі P u
                                     Пүr,T вҲ’1 , if nОі     Пүr,T вҲ’1 вүӨ 2V ,
                                                     P u
                     ПҒi,T вҲ’1 =   n
                               пЈі r=1                 r=1
                                 0,            otherwise
for i = 1, . . . , m вҲ’ 1. By definition, we have
                                                               вҲҡ
                                                                    V
                                            вҲҘПҒi,T вҲ’1 вҲҘ вүӨ                                                      (247)
                                                                   2
                                                                               iвҲ’1
                                    eT вҲ’1,mвҲ’1 implies ПҒi,T вҲ’1 = Оі
for i = 1, . . . , m вҲ’ 1. Moreover, E
                                                                               P      u
                                                                n                    Пүr,T вҲ’1 for i = 1, . . . , m вҲ’ 1
                                                                               r=1
and
                                      mвҲ’1
                                   Оі X u                       вҲҡ
                                        Пү              вүӨ           в‘ў + в‘Ј + в‘Ё,
                                   n i=1 i,l

where
                                              mвҲ’1
                                         2Оі X             u
                                   в‘Ё=          ПҒi,T вҲ’1 , Пүi,T вҲ’1 .
                                         n i=1

It remains to estimate в‘Ё.
Upper bound for в‘Ё. To estimate this sum, we will use BernsteinвҖҷs inequality. The summands have
conditional expectations equal to zero:

                         2Оі             u          2Оі D                    u
                                                                                   E
                EОҫT вҲ’1      вҹЁПҒi,T вҲ’1 , Пүi,T вҲ’1 вҹ© =     ПҒi,T вҲ’1 , EОҫiT вҲ’1 [Пүi,T вҲ’1 ] =0
                   i     n                         n
                         u      n
                                                                          2Оі             u        mвҲ’1
since random vectors {Пүi,T  вҲ’1 }i=1 are independent. Thus, sequence        n вҹЁПҒi,T вҲ’1 , Пүi,T вҲ’1 вҹ© i=1 is a
martingale difference sequence. Next, the summands are bounded:
  2Оі                        2Оі                         (247),(214) Оі вҲҡ   (200)        V       def
                 u                            u
     вҹЁПҒi,T вҲ’1 , Пүi,T вҲ’1 вҹ© вүӨ    вҲҘПҒi,T вҲ’1 вҲҘ В· вҲҘПүi,T вҲ’1 вҲҘ     вүӨ           VО» вүӨ          48n(K+1)
                                                                                              = c. (248)
  n                         n                                      n           20 ln             ОІ


                                                       68
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                                                         h 2                           i
                                  вҖІ       2 def           4Оі                  u      2
Finally, conditional variances (bПғi,T вҲ’1 )   =   E  T вҲ’1
                                                   Оҫi      n 2  вҹЁПҒ i,T вҲ’1 , Пүi,T вҲ’1 вҹ©    of the summands are
bounded:
                              2
                                                               (247) Оі 2 V

          вҖІ      2           4Оі             2      u      2
                                                                                      u
                                                                                               вҲҘ2 .

       (b
        Пғi,T вҲ’1 )  вүӨ E T вҲ’1
                      Оҫi       2
                                 вҲҘПҒ i,T вҲ’1 вҲҘ  В· вҲҘПүi,T вҲ’1 вҲҘ       вүӨ       2
                                                                            EОҫT вҲ’1 вҲҘПүi,T    вҲ’1         (249)
                             n                                         n        i


Applying BernsteinвҖҷs inequality (Lemma B.1) with XT вҲ’1,i = 2Оі            u
                                                           n вҹЁПҒi,T вҲ’1 , Пүi,T вҲ’1 вҹ©, constant c defined
                                        2
               V               V
in (248), b = 20 ,G=           48n(K+1) , we get
                       2400 ln     ОІ
  (                mвҲ’1
                                                        )
                                              V2                         b2

            V      X
                          вҖІ       2                                                    ОІ
P |в‘Ё| >        and      Пғi,T вҲ’1 ) вүӨ
                       (b                      48n(K+1)
                                                          вүӨ 2 exp   вҲ’            =            .
            20     i=1                2400 ln                         2G + /3
                                                                           2cb     24n(K + 1)
                                                                ОІ
The above is equivalent to
                                                      (         mвҲ’1
                                                                                                               )
                ОІ                                               X
                                                                        вҖІ      2                       V2   V
P{Eв‘Ё } вүҘ 1вҲ’            , for Eв‘Ё =                         either     (b
                                                                      Пғi,T вҲ’1 ) >                  or |в‘Ё| вүӨ      .
            24n(K + 1)                                           i=1              2400 ln 48n(K+1)
                                                                                              ОІ
                                                                                                            20
                                                                                                           (250)
Moreover, ET вҲ’1 implies
            mвҲ’1                                 n
            X
                      вҖІ      2
                                   (249)    Оі2V X        u 2   (217) 18Оі 2 V О»2вҲ’Оұ Пғ Оұ
                   (b
                    Пғi,T вҲ’1 )        вүӨ        2
                                                   EОҫil вҲҘПүi,l вҲҘ вүӨ
             i=1
                                             n i=1                           n
                                                                           Оұ
                                   (200)              18Оі Оұ Пғ Оұ V 2вҲ’ 2                (199)             V2
                                     вүӨ                                                 вүӨ                         .   (251)
                                            402вҲ’Оұ nОұвҲ’1 ln2вҲ’Оұ 48n(K+1)
                                                                 ОІ                            2400 ln 48n(K+1)
                                                                                                          ОІ

Putting all together we get that ET вҲ’1 вҲ© E
                                         eT вҲ’1,mвҲ’1 implies
                                     mвҲ’1
                                 Оі X u          вҲҡ                                      (223)    V
                                       Пүi,T вҲ’1 вүӨ в‘ў + в‘Ј + в‘Ё,                       в‘ў вүӨ              ,
                                 n i=1                                                          10
             T вҲ’1 X
                  n                                                 mвҲ’1
             X
                           2
                                (227)            V2                 X
                                                                              вҖІ      2                 V2
                         Пғ
                         ei,l    вүӨ               48n(K+1)
                                                          ,                (b
                                                                            Пғi,T вҲ’1 ) вүӨ
              l=0 i=1                   600 ln        ОІ              i=1                      2400 ln 48n(K+1)
                                                                                                          ОІ
In addition, we also establish (see (226), (250) and our induction assumption)

                      P{ET вҲ’1 вҲ© E eT вҲ’1,mвҲ’1 } вүҘ 1 вҲ’ (T вҲ’ 1)ОІ вҲ’ (m вҲ’ 1)ОІ ,
                                                         K +1       8n(K + 1)
                                          ОІ                               ОІ
                    P{Eв‘Ј } вүҘ 1 вҲ’                   , P{Eв‘Ё } вүҘ 1 вҲ’                ,
                                    24n(K + 1)                      24n(K + 1)
where
                                    вҲ’1 X
                         (        T     n
                                                                                 )
                                   X
                                              2            V2                 V
              Eв‘Ј =         either           Пғ
                                            ei,l >                  or |в‘Ј| вүӨ       ,
                                   l=0 i=1          600 ln 48n(K+1)
                                                               ОІ
                                                                              10
                         (        mвҲ’1
                                                                                     )
                                   X
                                          вҖІ      2           V2                  V
              Eв‘Ё =         either      (b
                                        Пғi,T вҲ’1 ) >                     or |в‘©| вүӨ       .
                                   i=1                2400 ln 48n(K+1)           20
                                                                                  ОІ

Therefore, probability event ET вҲ’1 вҲ© E
                                     eT вҲ’1,mвҲ’1 вҲ© Eв‘Ј вҲ© Eв‘Ё implies
                                mвҲ’1         r                 вҲҡ
                              Оі X u           V    V    V        V
                                    Пү    вүӨ       +    +    =       .
                              n i=1 i,l       10 10 20         2

This implies E
             eT вҲ’1,m and

               P{ET вҲ’1 вҲ© E
                         eT вҲ’1,m }               вүҘ        P{ET вҲ’1 вҲ© E
                                                                    eT вҲ’1,mвҲ’1 вҲ© Eв‘Ј вҲ© Eв‘Ё }
                                                               n                               o
                                                 =        1 вҲ’ P ET вҲ’1 вҲ© EeT вҲ’1,mвҲ’1 вҲӘ E в‘Ј вҲӘ E в‘Ё

                                                               (T вҲ’ 1)ОІ      mОІ
                                                 вүҘ        1вҲ’            вҲ’           .
                                                                K +1      8n(K + 1)

                                                                69
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Therefore, for all m = 2, . . . , n the statement holds and, in particular, P{ET вҲ’1 вҲ© E
                                                                                      eT вҲ’1,n } вүҘ
    (T вҲ’1)ОІ       ОІ
1 вҲ’ K+1 вҲ’ 8(K+1) . Taking into account (244) and (245), we conclude that ET вҲ’1 вҲ© E        eT вҲ’1,n
implies
                                      T вҲ’1
                                      X         вҲҡ
                                    Оі      Пүl вүӨ V , AT вүӨ 8V,
                                             l=0
which is equivalent to (204) and (205) for t = T . Moreover,
                              n                                               o
            P {ET } вүҘ P ET вҲ’1 вҲ© E       eT вҲ’1,n вҲ© Eв‘  вҲ© Eв‘Ј вҲ© Eв‘ҘвҖІ вҲ© Eв‘Ұ вҲ© Eв‘Ё
                                  n                                                 o
                       = 1 вҲ’ P ET вҲ’1 вҲ© E     eT вҲ’1,n вҲӘ E в‘  вҲӘ E в‘Ј вҲӘ E в‘ҘвҖІ вҲӘ E в‘Ұ вҲӘ E в‘Ё

                                   (T вҲ’ 1)ОІ      ОІ            ОІ          TОІ
                         =    1вҲ’            вҲ’          вҲ’5В·          вүҘ1вҲ’      .
                                    K +1      8(K + 1)     8(K + 1)     K +1

In other words, we showed that P{Ek } вүҘ 1 вҲ’ kОІ/(K+1) for all k = 0, 1, . . . , K + 1. For k = K + 1
we have that with probability at least 1 вҲ’ ОІ

                                                            (210)           4V
                                   GapвҲҡV (xK+1
                                           avg )                вүӨ                  .
                                                                          Оі(K + 1)

Finally, if
                                                                                   вҲҡ
                        пЈұ                                                                                 пЈј
                                                                 Оұ1                         ОұвҲ’1
                        пЈІ         1                      1                             Vn    Оұ
                                                                                                          пЈҪ
              Оі = min                      ,                          В·                 ОұвҲ’1
                        пЈі 480в„“ ln 48n(K+1)             86400                       1
                                                                          (K + 1) Пғ ln Оұ
                                                                                   Оұ
                                                                                                  48n(K+1) пЈҫ
                                         ОІ                                                            ОІ

then with probability at least 1 вҲ’ ОІ
                               пЈұ                                  вҲҡ                  пЈј
                   4V          пЈІ 480в„“V ln 48n(K+1)   86400   Оұ1 4Пғ V ln ОұвҲ’1
                                                                         Оұ
                                                                            48n(K+1) пЈҪ
                                              ОІ                                 ОІ
GapвҲҡV (xK+1
        avg ) вүӨ          = max                      ,          В·   ОұвҲ’1         ОұвҲ’1
                Оі(K + 1)       пЈі      K +1               1        n Оұ (K + 1) Оұ      пЈҫ
                  пЈ«    пЈұ вҲҡ            вҲҡ             пЈјпЈ¶
                       пЈІ в„“ V ln nK Пғ V ln ОұвҲ’1 Оұ  K пЈҪ
                                 ОІ                ОІ
              = O пЈӯmax             ,   ОұвҲ’1    ОұвҲ’1
                                                      пЈё.
                       пЈі     K        n Оұ K Оұ пЈҫ

To get GapR (xK+1
               avg ) вүӨ Оө with probability at least 1 вҲ’ ОІ it is sufficient to choose K such that both
terms in the maximum above are O(Оө). This leads to
                       пЈ«                      вҲҡ ! ОұвҲ’1 Оұ     пЈ«         вҲҡ ! ОұвҲ’1 Оұ пЈ¶пЈ¶

                          в„“V     nв„“V 1 Пғ V                     1 Пғ V
                K = OпЈӯ        ln    ,                   ln пЈӯ                    пЈёпЈё
                           Оө      ОөОІ n        Оө                ОІ       Оө

that concludes the proof.

G.2    Q UASI -S TRONGLY M ONOTONE CASE

Lemma G.2. Let Assumptions 8, 9 hold for Q = BвҲҡ2V (xвҲ— ), where V вүҘ вҲҘx0 вҲ’
         9000000Оі 2 ln2 (          ) n
                          48n(K+1) P
xвҲ— вҲҘ +               n2
                              ОІ
                                         вҲҘFi (xвҲ— )вҲҘ2 , and 0 < Оі вүӨ                   1
                                                                                       48n(K+1)      , ОҪ вүӨ
                                     i=1                             в„“+18000000ОҪ ln2 (     ОІ    )в„“/n
           1                     k                     вҲ—
               48n(K+1) . If x      lies in BвҲҡ2V (x ) for all k = 0, 1, . . . , K for some K вүҘ 0, then
18000000 ln2 (     ОІ     )
the iterates produced by DProx-clipped-SGDA-shift satisfy
                                                   K   n
                                          2Оі X X
      VK+1    вүӨ (1 вҲ’ ОіВө)K+1 V0 +                   (1 вҲ’ ОіВө)KвҲ’k вҹЁxk вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲ’ Оі(F (xk ) вҲ’ hвҲ— ), Пүi,k вҹ©
                                          n    i=1
                                               k=0
                              K X
                            2 X n                                            K
                        Оі                                                    X
                    +                  (1 вҲ’ ОіВө)KвҲ’k вҲҘПүi,k вҲҘ2 + Оі 2                (1 вҲ’ ОіВө)KвҲ’k вҲҘПүk вҲҘ2 ,          (252)
                        n2
                             k=0 i=1                                         k=0


                                                           70
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                        9000000Оі 2 ln2 (
                                                           48n(K+1)      n
                                                                       ) P
where Vk = вҲҘxk вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲҘ2 +                            n2
                                                               ОІ
                                                                               вҲҘhki вҲ’ hвҲ—i вҲҘ2 , hвҲ—i = Fi (xвҲ— ), and
                                                                        i=1
Пүk , Пүku , Пүkb , Пүk,i
                  u      b
                      , Пүk,i are defined in (207)-(209).


Proof. Using the update rule of DProx-clipped-SGDA-shift and Пүk = F (xk ) вҲ’ gek we obtain


      вҲҘxk+1 вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲҘ2                         g k вҲ’ proxОіОЁ (xвҲ— вҲ’ ОіhвҲ— ) вҲҘ2
                           = вҲҘ proxОіОЁ xk вҲ’ Оіe


                           вүӨ    вҲҘxk вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲ’ Оі(e
                                             g k вҲ’ hвҲ— )вҲҘ2
                           = вҲҘxk вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲҘ2 вҲ’ 2ОівҹЁxk вҲ’ xвҲ— , gek вҲ’ hвҲ— вҹ© + Оі 2 вҲҘe
                                                                          g k вҲ’ hвҲ— вҲҘ2
                           = вҲҘxk вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲҘ2 вҲ’ 2ОівҹЁxk вҲ’ xвҲ— , F (xk ) вҲ’ hвҲ— вҹ© вҲ’ 2Оі 2 вҹЁF (xk ) вҲ’ hвҲ— , Пүk вҹ©
                                  +2ОівҹЁxk вҲ’ xвҲ— , Пүk вҹ© + Оі 2 вҲҘF (xk ) вҲ’ hвҲ— вҲҘ2 + Оі 2 вҲҘПүk вҲҘ2 ,


Next, let us recall that


hk+1           ЛҶ ki ,
     = hki + ОҪ вҲҶ           ЛҶ ki = clip FОҫk (xk ) вҲ’ hki , О»k ,
                           вҲҶ                                                            ЛҶ ki ,
                                                                           geik = hki + вҲҶ                Пүi,k = Fi (xk ) вҲ’ geik .
 i                                       i


Then, вҲҖi вҲҲ [n] we have


    вҲҘhk+1 вҲ’ hвҲ—i вҲҘ2         =                   ЛҶ ki вҲҘ2 = вҲҘhki вҲ’ hвҲ—i вҲҘ2 + 2ОҪвҹЁhki вҲ’ hвҲ—i , вҲҶ
                                вҲҘhki вҲ’ hвҲ—i + ОҪ вҲҶ                                        ЛҶ ki вҹ© + ОҪ 2 вҲҘвҲҶ
                                                                                                      ЛҶ ki вҲҘ2
      i
                           =    вҲҘhki вҲ’ hвҲ—i вҲҘ2 + 2ОҪвҹЁhki вҲ’ hвҲ—i , geik вҲ’ hki вҹ© + ОҪ 2 вҲҘe
                                                                                   gik вҲ’ hki вҲҘ2
                        ОҪвүӨ 12
                           вүӨ    вҲҘhki вҲ’ hвҲ—i вҲҘ2 + 2ОҪвҹЁhki вҲ’ hвҲ—i , geik вҲ’ hki вҹ© + ОҪвҲҘe
                                                                                gik вҲ’ hki вҲҘ2
                           =    вҲҘhki вҲ’ hвҲ—i вҲҘ2 + ОҪвҹЁe
                                                  gik вҲ’ hki , geik + hki вҲ’ 2hвҲ—i вҹ©
                           =    (1 вҲ’ ОҪ)вҲҘhki вҲ’ hвҲ—i вҲҘ2 + ОҪвҲҘe
                                                         gik вҲ’ hвҲ—i вҲҘ2
                           вүӨ    (1 вҲ’ ОҪ)вҲҘhki вҲ’ hвҲ—i вҲҘ2 + 2ОҪвҲҘe
                                                          gik вҲ’ Fi (xk )вҲҘ2 + 2ОҪвҲҘFi (xk ) вҲ’ hвҲ—i вҲҘ2
                           =    (1 вҲ’ ОҪ)вҲҘhki вҲ’ hвҲ—i вҲҘ2 + 2ОҪвҲҘПүi,k вҲҘ2 + 2ОҪвҲҘFi (xk ) вҲ’ hвҲ—i вҲҘ2 .


Let us consider the following stepsize condition


                                                                1
                                0<ОівүӨ                                  48n(K+1)
                                                                                        .                                 (253)
                                              18000000ОҪ ln2 (             ОІ        )в„“
                                           в„“+             n



Lyapunov function


                                                                    48n(K+1)
                                        9000000Оі 2 ln2                  ОІ
                                                                                   n
                                                                                   X
                Vk = вҲҘxk вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲҘ2 +                                                          вҲҘhki вҲ’ hвҲ—i вҲҘ2 .
                                                           n2                      i=1


                                                           71
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Vk+1     вүӨ          вҲҘxk вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲҘ2 вҲ’ 2ОівҹЁxk вҲ’ xвҲ— , F (xk ) вҲ’ hвҲ— вҹ© вҲ’ 2Оі 2 вҹЁF (xk ) вҲ’ hвҲ— , Пүk вҹ©
                      +2ОівҹЁxk вҲ’ xвҲ— , Пүk вҹ© + Оі 2 вҲҘF (xk ) вҲ’ hвҲ— вҲҘ2 + Оі 2 вҲҘПүk вҲҘ2

                        9 В· 106 Оі 2 ln2 48n(K+1)
                                               ОІ         Xn h                                                          i
                      +                  2
                                                              (1 вҲ’ ОҪ)вҲҘhki вҲ’ hвҲ—i вҲҘ2 + 2ОҪвҲҘПүi,k вҲҘ2 + 2ОҪвҲҘFi (xk ) вҲ’ hвҲ—i вҲҘ2
                                       n                 i=1

        (35)                                  9 В· 106 Оі 2 ln2 48n(K+1)
                                                                   ОІ       Xn
         вүӨ          вҲҘxk вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲҘ2 + (1 вҲ’ ОҪ)                                       вҲҘhki вҲ’ hвҲ—i вҲҘ2
                                                            n2             i=1
                            пЈ«                                                       пЈ¶
                                                        6 2 2 48n(K+1)
                                    Оів„“     ОҪn     9 В· 10  Оі  ln       ОІ
                      вҲ’2Оі пЈӯ1 вҲ’          вҲ’      В·                              в„“max пЈё вҹЁxk вҲ’ xвҲ— , F (xk ) вҲ’ hвҲ— вҹ©
                                     2      Оі                  n2
                            n                                                           n
                        2Оі X k                                                   Оі2 X
                      +        вҹЁx вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲ’ Оі(F (xk ) вҲ’ hвҲ— ), Пүi,k вҹ© + Оі 2 вҲҘПүk вҲҘ2 + 2        вҲҘПүi,k вҲҘ2
                        n i=1                                                    n i=1

        (253)                             9 В· 106 Оі 2 ln2 48n(K+1)
                                                              ОІ      Xn
         вүӨ          вҲҘxk вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲҘ2 + (1 вҲ’ ОҪ)                                 вҲҘhki вҲ’ hвҲ—i вҲҘ2
                                                        n2           i=1
                       вҲ’ОівҹЁxk вҲ’ xвҲ— , F (xk ) вҲ’ hвҲ— вҹ©
                            n                                                         n
                         2Оі X k                                                   Оі2 X
                       +       вҹЁx вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲ’ Оі(F (xk ) вҲ’ hвҲ— ), Пүi,k вҹ© + Оі 2 вҲҘПүk вҲҘ2 + 2       вҲҘПүi,k вҲҘ2
                         n i=1                                                   n i=1

        (34)                                       9 В· 106 Оі 2 ln2 48n(K+1)
                                                                       ОІ       Xn
         вүӨ          (1 вҲ’ ОіВө)вҲҘxk вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲҘ2 + (1 вҲ’ ОҪ)                                  вҲҘhki вҲ’ hвҲ—i вҲҘ2
                                                                 n2            i=1
                               n                                                            n
                          2Оі X k                                                 Оі2 X
                      +         вҹЁx вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲ’ Оі(F (xk ) вҲ’ hвҲ— ), Пүi,k вҹ© + Оі 2 вҲҘПүk вҲҘ2 + 2    вҲҘПүi,k вҲҘ2
                          n i=1                                                  n i=1
          ОҪ
       ОівүӨ Вө                                n
                                    2Оі X k
         вүӨ          (1 вҲ’ ОіВө)Vk +          вҹЁx вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲ’ Оі(F (xk ) вҲ’ hвҲ— ), Пүi,k вҹ©
                                    n i=1
                                               n
                                      Оі2 X
                      +Оі 2 вҲҘПүk вҲҘ2 +          вҲҘПүi,k вҲҘ2 .
                                      n2 i=1

Unrolling the recurrence, we obtain (45).

Theorem G.2. Let Assumptions 8, 9, hold for Q = BвҲҡ2V (xвҲ— ), where V вүҘ вҲҘx0 вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲҘ +
9000000Оі 2 ln2 (         ) n
                 48n(K+1) P

            n2
                     ОІ
                             вҲҘFi (xвҲ— )вҲҘ2 , and R вүҘ вҲҘx0 вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲҘ,
                             i=1
                           (                                   вҲҡ                          )
                                       1                           nR         ln(BK )
   0<Оі          вүӨ     min                        ,                         ,                 ,               (254)
                             4096в„“ ln 48n(K+1)
                                          ОІ        3000О¶вҲ— ln 48n(K+1)
                                                                    ОІ
                                                                             Вө(K + 1)
                                  вҲҡ ! Оұ2
                           пЈұ                                                             пЈј
                                                             2(ОұвҲ’1)         2(ОұвҲ’1)
                                                                      2
                           пЈІ         2            (K + 1)       Оұ   Вө Vn       Оұ
                                                                                         пЈҪ
       BK       =     max 2,                В·         2(ОұвҲ’1)
                                                                                                             (255)
                           пЈі     3456         Пғ 2 ln Оұ         48n(K+1)
                                                                            ln 2
                                                                                 (B    ) пЈҫ
                                                                   ОІ                 K
                        пЈ«      пЈұ                                                                         пЈјпЈ¶
                               пЈҙ
                               пЈҙ                                                                         пЈҙ
                                                                                                         пЈҙ
                               пЈҙ                             2(ОұвҲ’1)         2(ОұвҲ’1)
                                                                                                         пЈҙ
                                                                      2
                        пЈ¬      пЈҙ                                                                         пЈҙ
                                                                                                         пЈҪпЈ·
                        пЈ¬      пЈІ                          K     Оұ   Вө   V n    Оұ                           пЈ·
                =     O пЈ¬max 2,
                        пЈ¬                                               (                             )!   пЈ·,
                                                                                                           пЈ· (256)
                                                                                2(ОұвҲ’1)         2(ОұвҲ’1)
                               пЈҙ          2(ОұвҲ’1)                                         2
                                                                                                         пЈҙ
                               пЈҙ       2             nK      2               K      Оұ   Вө Vn      Оұ      пЈҙ
                               пЈі Пғ ln                      ln max 2,
                        пЈӯ      пЈҙ             Оұ                                                           пЈҙ пЈё
                                                       ОІ                              2(ОұвҲ’1)
                               пЈҙ                                                                         пЈҙ
                                                                                                         пЈҫ
                                                                                  2
                                                                                Пғ ln Оұ       ( ОІ )
                                                                                               nK

                                               вҲҡ
                      n В· exp(вҲ’ОіВө(1 + k/2)) V
       О»k       =            вҲҡ                      ,                                                        (257)
                          256 2Оі ln 48n(K+1)
                                         ОІ


                                                          72
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


for some K вүҘ 0 and ОІ вҲҲ (0, 1]. Then, after K iterations the iterates produced by DProx-clipped-
SGDA-shift with probability at least 1 вҲ’ ОІ satisfy
                                     VK+1 вүӨ 2 exp(вҲ’ОіВө(K + 1))V,                                              (258)
                                 9000000Оі 2 ln2 (
                                                    48n(K+1)     n
                                                               ) P
where Vk = вҲҘxk вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲҘ2 +                     n2
                                                        ОІ
                                                                      вҲҘhki вҲ’ hвҲ—i вҲҘ2 , hвҲ—i = Fi (xвҲ— ). In particular,
                                                                i=1
V вүӨ 2R2 , and when Оі equals the minimum from (254), then the iterates produced by Dprox-clipped-
SGDA-shift after K iterations with probability at least 1 вҲ’ ОІ satisfy
                                                               ! 2 2(ОұвҲ’1)
                                                       вҲҡ
       пЈ«       пЈұ                                                                              пЈјпЈ¶
                                                                                 nK
                                                                                       ln2 BK пЈҪ
                                     !
               пЈІ                ВөK                   Вө    nRK       Пғ ln   Оұ
                                                                                  ОІ
VK = O пЈӯmax R2 exp вҲ’                   , R2 exp вҲ’                 ,                            пЈё,
               пЈі             в„“ ln nK
                                   ОІ                  О¶вҲ— ln nK
                                                             ОІ
                                                                         2(ОұвҲ’1)
                                                                       K Оұ Вө2 n Оұ
                                                                                    2(ОұвҲ’1)
                                                                                              пЈҫ
                                                                                           (259)
meaning that to achieve VK вүӨ Оө with probability at least 1 вҲ’ ОІ DProx-clipped-SGDA-shift requires
                   (        2                                    2    вҲҡ
                                           R2                                nО¶вҲ— R2

                     в„“     R         nв„“               О¶вҲ—        R
   K = O max           ln       ln      ln        ,вҲҡ        ln       ln          ln      ,
                     Вө      Оө        ВөОІ      Оө        nRВө        Оө         RВөОІ      Оө
                                          Оұ                       Оұ !                  )!
                                1 Пғ 2 2(ОұвҲ’1)            1 Пғ 2 2(ОұвҲ’1)

                                                                              Оұ
                                                  ln                      ln ОұвҲ’1 (BОө )     (260)
                                n Вө2 Оө                  ОІ Вө2 Оө

iterations/oracle calls, where
                                             пЈұ                                   пЈј
                                             пЈҙ                                   пЈҙ
                                                              2R2
                                             пЈҙ
                                             пЈІ                                   пЈҙ
                                                                                 пЈҪ
                              BОө = max           2,             Оұ   .
                                                                 2  2(ОұвҲ’1)
                                                      Оө ln ОІ1 ВөПғ2 Оө
                                             пЈҙ
                                             пЈҙ                             пЈҙ
                                                                           пЈҙ
                                             пЈі                             пЈҫ


Proof. The Lyapunov function has the following form

                                 9000000Оі 2 ln2 48n(K+1)
                                                    ОІ      Xn
            Vk = вҲҘxk вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲҘ2 +                                 вҲҘhki вҲ’ hвҲ—i вҲҘ2 .
                                             n2            i=1

Similar to previous results, our proof is induction-based. To formulate the statement rigorously, we
introduce probability event Ek for each k = 0, 1, . . . , K + 1 as follows: inequalities
                                            Vt вүӨ 2 exp(вҲ’ОіВөt)V                                                (261)

                                 rвҲ’1                           вҲҡ
                               ОіX u                 ОіВө(t вҲ’ 1)    V
                                     Пүi,tвҲ’1 вүӨ exp вҲ’                                                          (262)
                               n i=1                    2       2

hold for t = 0, 1, . . . , k and r = 1, 2, . . . , n simultaneously. We will prove by induction that
P{Ek } вүҘ 1 вҲ’ kОІ/(K+1) for all k = 0, 1, . . . , K + 1. The base of induction follows immediately
by the definition of V . Next, we assume that the statement holds for k = T вҲ’ 1 вүӨ K, i.e.,
P{ET вҲ’1 } вүҘ 1вҲ’ (T вҲ’1)ОІ/(K+1). Let us show that it also holds for k = T , i.e., P{ET } вүҘ 1вҲ’ T ОІ/(K+1).
Similarly to the monotone case, one can show that due to our choice of the clipping level, we have that
ET вҲ’1 implies xt вҲҲ BвҲҡ2nвҲҡV (xвҲ— ) for t = 0, . . . , T вҲ’ 1. Indeed, for t = 0, 1, . . . , T вҲ’ 1 inequality
(261) gives xt вҲҲ BвҲҡ2V (xвҲ— ). This means that we can apply Lemma G.2: ET вҲ’1 implies


                                        T вҲ’1 n
                                    2Оі X X
      VT    вүӨ (1 вҲ’ ОіВө)T V +                   (1 вҲ’ ОіВө)T вҲ’1вҲ’t вҹЁxt вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲ’ Оі(F (xt ) вҲ’ hвҲ— ), Пүi,t вҹ©
                                    n t=0 i=1
                          T вҲ’1 n                                 T вҲ’1
                       Оі2 X X             T вҲ’1вҲ’t
                                                                 X
                   +              (1 вҲ’ ОіВө)       вҲҘПүi,t вҲҘ 2
                                                           + Оі 2
                                                                      (1 вҲ’ ОіВө)T вҲ’1вҲ’t вҲҘПүt вҲҘ2 .
                       n2 t=0 i=1                                t=0


                                                         73
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Before we proceed, we introduce a new notation:
                                                                       вҲҡ             вҲҡ
         x вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲ’ Оі(F (xt ) вҲ’ hвҲ— ), if вҲҘxt вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲ’ Оі(F (xt ) вҲ’ hвҲ— )вҲҘ вүӨ 2 2 exp(вҲ’ОіВөt/2) V ,
         t
  Оҫt =
         0,                          otherwise,
                                                                                       (263)
for t = 0, 1, . . . , T . Random vectors {Оҫt }Tt=0 are bounded almost surely:
                                                 вҲҡ               вҲҡ
                                        вҲҘОҫt вҲҘ вүӨ 2 2 exp(вҲ’ОіВөt/2) V                              (264)
for all t = 0, 1, . . . , T . In addition, Оҫt = xt вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲ’ Оі(F (xt ) вҲ’ hвҲ— ) follows from ET вҲ’1 for all
t = 0, 1, . . . , T and, thus, ET вҲ’1 implies
                                      T вҲ’1 n                                  T вҲ’1 n
                                   2Оі X X                                  2Оі X X
VT   вүӨ    exp(вҲ’ОіВөT )V +                       (1 вҲ’ ОіВө)T вҲ’1вҲ’t вҹЁОҫt , Пүi,t
                                                                    u
                                                                        вҹ©+           (1 вҲ’ ОіВө)T вҲ’1вҲ’t вҹЁОҫt , Пүi,t
                                                                                                           b
                                                                                                               вҹ©
                                    n t=0 i=1                              n t=0 i=1
                                   |               {z                  } |                {z                  }
                                                            в‘                                            в‘Ў
                       2 T вҲ’1 X
                              n
                 4Оі      X
                                   (1 вҲ’ ОіВө)T вҲ’1вҲ’t вҲҘПүi,t
                                                   u 2             u 2

             +                                          вҲҘ вҲ’ EОҫt [вҲҘПүi,t вҲҘ ]
                  n2     t=0 i=1
                 |                                    {z                                      }
                                                      в‘ў
                        T вҲ’1 n
                 4Оі 2 X X
             +               (1 вҲ’ ОіВө)T вҲ’1вҲ’t EОҫt [вҲҘПүi,t
                                                   u 2
                                                       вҲҘ ]
                  n2 t=0 i=1
                 |                 {z                    }
                                             в‘Ј
                       2 T вҲ’1 X
                              n
                 4Оі      X
             +                     (1 вҲ’ ОіВө)T вҲ’1вҲ’t вҲҘПүi,t
                                                    b 2
                                                        вҲҘ
                   n     t=0 i=1
                 |                      {z                         }
                                         в‘Ө
                        T вҲ’1 n
                                                           *jвҲ’1                  +
              4Оі 2 X X                                      X
             + 2         (1 вҲ’ ОіВө)T вҲ’1вҲ’t                             u
                                                                   Пүi,t    u
                                                                        , Пүj,t       .                                 (265)
               n t=0 j=1                                     i=1
              |                  {z                                              }
                                                 в‘Ҙ
To derive high-probability bounds for в‘ , в‘Ў, в‘ў, в‘Ј, в‘Ө, в‘Ҙ we need to establish several useful inequali-
                 u      b
ties related to Пүi,t , Пүi,t . First, by definition of clipping
                                                            u
                                                          вҲҘПүi,t вҲҘ вүӨ 2О»t .                                           (266)
Next, we notice that ET вҲ’1 implies
                                                                                  v
                                                                                  u n
                                                                             (35) uX
     вҲҘFi (xt ) вҲ’ hti вҲҘ      вүӨ       вҲҘFi (xt ) вҲ’ hвҲ— вҲҘ + вҲҘht вҲ’ hвҲ— вҲҘ вүӨ в„“вҲҘxt вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲҘ + t
                                                      i            i     i            вҲҘht вҲ’ hвҲ— вҲҘ2           i   i
                                                                                                  i=1
                                    пЈ«                                        пЈ¶
                                                            n                     p
                            вүӨ       пЈӯв„“ +                                      пЈё          Vt
                                                                48n(K+1)
                                             3000Оі ln               ОІ
                                         пЈ«                                           пЈ¶
                           (261)    вҲҡ                             n                   вҲҡ (254),(257) О»t
                            вүӨ           2 пЈӯв„“ +                           пЈё exp(вҲ’ОіВөt/2) V    вүӨ          .(267)
                                                     3000Оі ln 48n(K+1)                              2
                                                                  ОІ

for t = 0, 1, . . . , T вҲ’ 1 and i вҲҲ [n]. Therefore, one can apply Lemma B.2 and get
                                                  n
                                               1X b             2Оұ Пғ Оұ
                                        Пүtb вүӨ         вҲҘПүi,t вҲҘ вүӨ ОұвҲ’1 ,                                               (268)
                                               n i=1            О»t
                                            h        i
                                                u 2
                                        EОҫit Пүi,t      вүӨ 18О»2вҲ’Оұ
                                                              t  ПғОұ ,                                               (269)
for all t = 0, 1, . . . , T вҲ’ 1 and i вҲҲ [n]. In addition, we require the following condition
                                                       1
                                    ОҪвүӨ                              .                                               (270)
                                                       2 48n(K+1)
                                         18000000 ln          ОІ



                                                                 74
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Upper bound for в‘ . To estimate this sum, we will use BernsteinвҖҷs inequality. The summands have
conditional expectations equal to zero:

                  2Оі                               2Оі                     D                 E
       EОҫil          (1 вҲ’ ОіВө)T вҲ’1вҲ’l вҹЁОҫt , Пүi,l
                                           u
                                               вҹ© =                                     u
                                                      exp (вҲ’ОіВө(T вҲ’ 1 вҲ’ l)) Оҫl , EОҫil [Пүi,l ] = 0.
                  n                                n
                                                          u n
Moreover, for all l = 0, . . . , T вҲ’ 1 random vectors {Пүi,l }i=1 are independent. Thus, sequence
n                                     oT вҲ’1,n
  2Оі                               u
  n exp (вҲ’ОіВө(T вҲ’ 1 вҲ’ l)) вҹЁОҫl , Пүi,l вҹ©         is a martingale difference sequence. Next, the sum-
                                                       l,i=0,1
mands are bounded:

      2Оі                           u                                           2Оі                               u
         exp(вҲ’ОіВө(T вҲ’ 1 вҲ’ l))вҹЁОҫl , Пүi,l вҹ©                             вүӨ             exp(вҲ’ОіВө(T вҲ’ 1 вҲ’ l))вҲҘОҫl вҲҘ В· вҲҘПүi,l вҲҘ
      n                                                                         n
                                                                                вҲҡ
                                                                 (264),(266)   8 2                          вҲҡ
                                                                     вүӨ              Оі exp(вҲ’ОіВө(T вҲ’ 1 вҲ’ l/2)) V О»l
                                                                                 n
                                                                   (257)       exp(вҲ’ОіВөT )V def
                                                                     вүӨ                       = c.                     (271)
                                                                               8 ln 48n(K+1)
                                                                                        ОІ

                                          h 2                                      i
                                2 def
Finally, conditional variances Пғi,l = EОҫil 4Оі                               u 2
                                            n2 exp (вҲ’2ОіВө(T вҲ’ 1 вҲ’ l)) вҹЁОҫl , Пүi,l вҹ©    of the summands
are bounded:
                                      2
                     2                4Оі                           2       u 2
                   Пғi,l вүӨ EОҫil            exp(вҲ’2ОіВө(T вҲ’ 1 вҲ’ l))вҲҘОҫl вҲҘ В· вҲҘПүi,l вҲҘ
                                      n2
                          (264) 32Оі 2                             u 2
                           вүӨ          exp(вҲ’ОіВө(2T вҲ’ 2 вҲ’ l))V EОҫil вҲҘПүi,l вҲҘ .                      (272)
                                 n2

Applying BernsteinвҖҷs inequality (Lemma B.1) with Xi,l = 2Оі                            u
                                                        n exp (вҲ’ОіВө(T вҲ’ 1 вҲ’ l)) вҹЁОҫl , Пүi,l вҹ©, con-
                                                                                     2
stant c defined in (271), b = exp(вҲ’ОіВөT
                                   8
                                       )V
                                          , G = exp(вҲ’2ОіВөT )V
                                                     48n(K+1) , we get
                                                                     384 ln     ОІ


                                         T вҲ’1 n
 (                                                                                         )
                                    exp(вҲ’2ОіВөT )V 2                                                          b2

        exp(вҲ’ОіВөT )V     XX
                              2                                                                                                   ОІ
P |в‘ | >             and      Пғi,l вүӨ                                                            вүӨ 2 exp вҲ’                  =              .
             8           i=1        384 ln 48n(K+1)
                                             l=0                                 ОІ
                                                                                                         2G + 2cb/3           24n(K + 1)

                                            ОІ
The above is equivalent to P{Eв‘  } вүҘ 1 вҲ’ 24n(K+1) for

                                   вҲ’1 X
                (                T    n
                                                                                                              )
                                 X
                                              2        exp(вҲ’2ОіВөT )V 2                        exp(вҲ’ОіВөT )V
      Eв‘  =           either                  Пғi,l >                                 or |в‘ | вүӨ                      .       (273)
                                   l=0 i=1             384 ln 48n(K+1)
                                                                  ОІ
                                                                                                  8

Moreover, ET вҲ’1 implies
                                                                               h      i
  T вҲ’1 X
       n                                                             T вҲ’1 E l вҲҘПү u вҲҘ2
  X
               2
                              (272)          32Оі 2                   X      Оҫi   i,l
              Пғi,l             вүӨ                   exp(вҲ’2ОіВө(T вҲ’ 1))V
                                              n                            exp(вҲ’ОіВөl)
  l=0 i=1                                                                            l=0
                                                   2                     X О»2вҲ’Оұ            K
                       (269),T вүӨK+1          576Оі
                               вүӨ                    exp(вҲ’2ОіВө(T вҲ’ 1)V Пғ Оұ          l
                                               n                              exp(вҲ’ОіВөl)
                                                                         l=0
                                                 вҲҡ Оұ Оұ                     вҲҡ 4вҲ’Оұ Оұ
                              (257)          9(64 2) Оі exp(вҲ’2ОіВө(T вҲ’ 1) V            Пғ (K + 1) exp( ОіВөОұK
                                                                                                     2 )
                               вүӨ                вҲҡ                            2вҲ’Оұ 48n(K+1)
                                                  2                 n ОұвҲ’1 ln          ОІ
                              (254)          exp(вҲ’2ОіВөT )V 2
                               вүӨ                                      .                                                   (274)
                                             384 ln 48n(K+1)
                                                        ОІ


                                                                      75
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Upper bound for в‘Ў. Probability event ET вҲ’1 implies
                                              T вҲ’1 Xn            b
                           2Оі                 X        вҲҘОҫl вҲҘ В· вҲҘПүi,l вҲҘ
в‘Ў         вүӨ                   exp(вҲ’ОіВө(T вҲ’ 1))
                           n                       i=1
                                                       exp(вҲ’ОіВөl)
                                                 l=0
                                                       T вҲ’1
      (264),(268)            вҲҡ                  вҲҡ      X                              1
          вүӨ              22+Оұ 2Оі exp(вҲ’ОіВө(T вҲ’ 1)) V Пғ Оұ
                                                                       О»ОұвҲ’1 exp(вҲ’ОіВөl/2)
                                                                    l=0 l
                               вҲҡ

     (257),T вүӨK+1          (128 2) Оұ Оі Оұ Оұ
                                         Пғ exp(вҲ’ОіВө(T вҲ’ 1))(K + 1) exp   ОіВөОұK
                                                                          2    exp(ОіВөОұ) lnОұвҲ’1 48n(K+1)
                                                                                                  ОІ
          вүӨ                        В·                                вҲҡ ОұвҲ’2
                              16                              nОұвҲ’1 V
         (254)             exp(вҲ’ОіВөT )V
          вүӨ                            .                                                          (275)
                                 8

Upper bound for в‘ў. To estimate this sum, we will use BernsteinвҖҷs inequality. The summands have
conditional expectations equal to zero:
                            2
                           4Оі           T вҲ’1вҲ’l
                                               h
                                                   u 2
                                                                 u 2  i
                     EОҫil     (1 вҲ’ ОіВө)           вҲҘПүi,l вҲҘ вҲ’ EОҫil вҲҘПүi,l вҲҘ   = 0.
                           n2
                                                        u n
Moreover, for all l = 0, . . . , T вҲ’ 1 random vectors {Пүi,l }i=1 are independent. Thus, sequence
n 2                                          h       i oT вҲ’1,n
 4Оі                                u 2          u 2
 n2 exp (вҲ’ОіВө(T вҲ’ 1 вҲ’ l)) вҲҘПүi,l вҲҘ вҲ’ EОҫil вҲҘПүi,l вҲҘ                  is a martingale difference sequence.
                                                                      l,i=0,1
Next, the summands are bounded:
          4Оі 2                                                       (266)       32Оі 2 О»2l exp(вҲ’ОіВөT )
               (1 вҲ’ ОіВө)T вҲ’1вҲ’l вҲҘПүi,l
                                u 2
                                              u 2
            2
                                    вҲҘ вҲ’ EОҫil вҲҘПүi,l вҲҘ                  вүӨ
          n                                                                        n2 exp(вҲ’ОіВө(1 + l))
                                                                     (257)       exp(вҲ’ОіВө(T + 1))V
                                                                      вүӨ
                                                                                  256 ln2 48n(K+1)
                                                                                              ОІ
                                                                                 exp(вҲ’ОіВөT )V def
                                                                      вүӨ                        = c.                  (276)
                                                                                 8 ln 48n(K+1)
                                                                                          ОІ


Finally, conditional variances
                                16Оі 4

                    2 def                      2T вҲ’2вҲ’2l    u 2
                                                                         u 2  2
                  Пғ
                  ei,l = EОҫil         (1 вҲ’ ОіВө)          вҲҘПү i,l вҲҘ вҲ’ E l
                                                                    Оҫi  вҲҘПүi,l вҲҘ
                                 n4
of the summands are bounded:
             2
                      (276)            4Оі 2 exp(вҲ’2ОіВөT )V                     h
                                                                                   u 2
                                                                                                 u 2  i
           Пғ
           ei,l        вүӨ                                       El
                                                       48n(K+1) Оҫi
                                                                                 вҲҘПүi,l вҲҘ вҲ’ EОҫil вҲҘПүi,l вҲҘ
                              8n2 exp(вҲ’ОіВө(1 + l)) ln           ОІ
                                       Оі 2 exp(вҲ’2ОіВөT )V                   u 2
                       вүӨ                                            EОҫil вҲҘПүi,l вҲҘ .                                   (277)
                              n2 exp(вҲ’ОіВө(1 + l)) ln 48n(K+1)
                                                        ОІ

                                                                                                               4Оі 2
Applying h BernsteinвҖҷs h inequality
                               ii                (Lemma            B.1)      with         Xi,l       =         n2 (1   вҲ’
                                                                                                             exp(вҲ’ОіВөT )V
ОіВө)T вҲ’1вҲ’l вҲҘПүi,l
            u 2            u 2
                вҲҘ вҲ’ EОҫil вҲҘПүi,l вҲҘ ,              constant c defined in (276),                     b   =              8    ,
                 )V 2
G = exp(вҲ’2ОіВөT
           48n(K+1) , we get
    384 ln     ОІ

                                       T вҲ’1 n
 (                                                                               )
                                    exp(вҲ’2ОіВөT )V 2                                                b2

        exp(вҲ’ОіВөT )V     XX
                               2                                                                                             ОІ
P |в‘ў| >             and      Пғ
                             ei,l вүӨ                                                  вүӨ 2 exp вҲ’                       =              .
             8           i=1        384 ln 48n(K+1)
                                        l=0                           ОІ
                                                                                               2G + 2cb/3                24n(K + 1)
                                            ОІ
The above is equivalent to P{Eв‘ў } вүҘ 1 вҲ’ 24n(K+1) for
                                 вҲ’1 X
                 (             T    n
                                                                                                         )
                               X
                                         2    exp(вҲ’2ОіВөT )V 2                       exp(вҲ’ОіВөT )V
      Eв‘ў =           either            Пғ
                                       ei,l >                             or |в‘ў| вүӨ                           .       (278)
                               l=0 i=1        384 ln 48n(K+1)
                                                         ОІ
                                                                                        8


                                                          76
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Moreover, ET вҲ’1 implies
                                                                                         h             i
                                                                                               u 2
 T
 X вҲ’1 X
      n
                          (277)          2
                                        Оі exp(вҲ’ОіВө(2T вҲ’ 1))V
                                                                          T
                                                                          X вҲ’1 X
                                                                               n E l
                                                                                  Оҫi         вҲҘПүi,l вҲҘ
             2
           Пғ
           ei,l            вүӨ
 l=0 i=1                                      n2 ln 48n(K+1)
                                                        ОІ                 l=0 i=1
                                                                                     exp(вҲ’ОіВөl)
                                                                               K
                  (269),T вүӨK+1          18Оі 2 exp(вҲ’ОіВө(2T вҲ’ 1))V Пғ Оұ X     О»2вҲ’Оұ
                                                                            l
                           вүӨ
                                                 n ln 48n(K+1)
                                                          ОІ         l=0
                                                                        exp(вҲ’ОіВөl)
                                            вҲҡ                            вҲҡ 4вҲ’Оұ Оұ
                          (257)         9(64 2)Оұ     Оі Оұ exp(вҲ’ОіВө(2T вҲ’ 1)) V    Пғ (K + 1) exp( ОіВөОұK
                                                                                                2 )
                           вүӨ                     В·
                                          4096                               nОұвҲ’1 ln3вҲ’Оұ 48n(K+1)
                                                                                            ОІ
                          (254)         exp(вҲ’2ОіВөT )V 2
                           вүӨ                              .                                                        (279)
                                        384 ln 48n(K+1)
                                                   ОІ

Upper bound for в‘Ј. Probability event ET вҲ’1 implies
                          T вҲ’1 n
                     4Оі 2 X X
     в‘Ј       =                    (1 вҲ’ ОіВө)T вҲ’1вҲ’l EОҫil [вҲҘПүi,l
                                                         u 2
                                                             вҲҘ ]
                     n2       i=1       l=0
                                                                     T вҲ’1
                  (269)            72Оі 2 exp(вҲ’ОіВө(T вҲ’ 1))Пғ Оұ X      О»2вҲ’Оұ
                                                                     l
                   вүӨ
                                                n               exp(вҲ’ОіВөl)
                                                            l=0
                                        вҲҡ Оұ        вҲҡ 2вҲ’Оұ
            (257),T вүӨK+1           9(64 2)       Оұ
                                                Оі V      exp(вҲ’ОіВө(T вҲ’ 1))Пғ Оұ (K + 1) exp( ОіВөОұK
                                                                                           2 )
                   вүӨ                          В·                     2вҲ’Оұ 48n(K+1)
                                     1024                    nОұвҲ’1 ln                          ОІ
                  (254)            exp(вҲ’ОіВөT )V
                   вүӨ                           .                                                                   (280)
                                        8
Upper bound for в‘Ө. Probability event ET вҲ’1 implies
                     T вҲ’1 n
                4Оі 2 X X
в‘Ө      =                     (1 вҲ’ ОіВө)T вҲ’1вҲ’l вҲҘПүi,l
                                              b 2
                                                  вҲҘ
                 n       i=1      l=0
                                                                   T вҲ’1
         (268)                                                     X                1
           вүӨ           4 В· 22Оұ Оі 2 exp(вҲ’ОіВө(T вҲ’ 1))Пғ 2Оұ
                                                                      О»2ОұвҲ’2 exp(вҲ’ОіВөl)
                                                                   l=0 l
                              вҲҡ       2Оұ             2Оұ 2(ОұвҲ’1) 48n(K+1)
    (257),T вүӨK+1          (128 2)Оұ Оі exp(вҲ’ОіВө(T вҲ’ 3))Пғ ln            ОІ   (K + 1) exp(ОіВөОұK)
           вүӨ                      В·                     2(ОұвҲ’1)   ОұвҲ’1
                            2048                       n       V
         (254)            exp(вҲ’ОіВөT )V
           вүӨ                          .                                               (281)
                               8
Upper bounds for в‘Ҙ. This sum requires more refined analysis. We introduce new vectors:
                     пЈұ jвҲ’1              jвҲ’1                     вҲҡ
                     пЈІОі P u
                           Пүi,l , if nОі     Пүi,l вүӨ exp вҲ’ ОіВөl        V
                                        P u
                 l
                Оҙj =  n                                      2     2 ,                 (282)
                     пЈі i=1              i=1
                      0,          otherwise,
for all j вҲҲ [n] and l = 0, . . . , T вҲ’ 1. Then, by definition
                                                               вҲҡ
                                                         ОіВөl     V
                                         вҲҘОҙjl вҲҘ вүӨ exp вҲ’                                                            (283)
                                                           2    2
and
                           T вҲ’1 n
                       4Оі X X
              в‘Ҙ =                     exp (вҲ’ОіВө(T вҲ’ 1 вҲ’ t)) Оҙjl , Пүj,l
                                                                   u
                        n
                            l=0 j=2
                       |                         {z                   }
                                                     в‘ҘвҖІ
                                        T вҲ’1 n                                          jвҲ’1
                                                                               *                           +
                                    4Оі X X                                          ОіX u
                                  +          exp (вҲ’ОіВө(T вҲ’ 1 вҲ’ t))                        Пү вҲ’ Оҙjl , Пүj,l
                                                                                                    u
                                                                                                               .   (284)
                                    n    j=2
                                                                                    n i=1 i,l
                                        l=0


                                                              77
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


We also note here that ET вҲ’1 implies

          T вҲ’1 n                                jвҲ’1
                                                       *          +
    4Оі X X                                    ОіX u         l    u
             exp (вҲ’ОіВө(T вҲ’ 1 вҲ’ t))                   Пү вҲ’ Оҙj , Пүj,l
    n    j=2
                                              n i=1 i,l
              l=0
                                  n
                                                          * jвҲ’1                         +
                               4Оі X                          ОіX u            T вҲ’1 u
                             =       exp (вҲ’ОіВө(T вҲ’ 1 вҲ’ t))          Пү      вҲ’ Оҙj , Пүj,T вҲ’1 .                                  (285)
                               n j=2                         n i=1 i,T вҲ’1


Upper bound for в‘ҘвҖІ . To estimate this sum, we will use BernsteinвҖҷs inequality. The summands
have conditional expectations equal to zero:

              4Оі                                      4Оі                     D                  E
   EОҫjl          exp (вҲ’ОіВө(T вҲ’ 1 вҲ’ l)) вҹЁОҙjl , Пүj,l
                                              u
                                                  вҹ© =                                      u
                                                         exp (вҲ’ОіВө(T вҲ’ 1 вҲ’ l)) Оҙjl , EОҫjl [Пүj,l ] = 0.
              n                                       n
                                                          u n
Moreover, for all l = 0, . . . , T вҲ’ 1 random vectors {Пүj,l }j=1 are independent. Thus, sequence
n                                      oT вҲ’1,n
  4Оі                             l  u
  n exp (вҲ’ОіВө(T вҲ’ 1 вҲ’ l)) вҹЁОҙj , Пүj,l вҹ©          is a martingale difference sequence. Next, the sum-
                                                   l,j=0,1
mands are bounded:

    4Оі                                                                     4Оі
       exp (вҲ’ОіВө(T вҲ’ 1 вҲ’ l)) вҹЁОҙjl , Пүj,l
                                    u
                                        вҹ©                      вүӨ              exp (вҲ’ОіВө(T вҲ’ 1 вҲ’ l)) вҲҘОҙjl вҲҘ В· вҲҘПүj,l
                                                                                                               u
                                                                                                                  вҲҘ
    n                                                                      n
                                                                            вҲҡ
                                                           (283),(266)     4 V Оі exp (вҲ’ОіВө(T вҲ’ 1))           ОіВөl
                                                               вүӨ                                   exp              О»l
                                                                                      n                      2
                                                             (257)          exp (вҲ’ОіВөT ) V
                                                               =             вҲҡ
                                                                           16 2 ln 48n(K+1)
                                                                                       ОІ
                                                                           exp (вҲ’ОіВөT ) V def
                                                               вүӨ                          = c.                              (286)
                                                                            8 ln 48n(K+1)
                                                                                     ОІ

                                               h 2                                             i
                                 вҖІ 2 def
Finally, conditional variances (Пғj,l ) = EОҫjl 16Оі n 2 exp (вҲ’ОіВө(2T   вҲ’ 2 вҲ’   2l)) вҹЁОҙ l
                                                                                    j , Пү u 2
                                                                                         j,l вҹ©   of the sum-
mands are bounded:

                                       16Оі 2

                  вҖІ 2                                                    l 2       u 2
                (Пғj,l )   вүӨ EОҫjl             exp (вҲ’ОіВө(2T   вҲ’ 2 вҲ’ 2l)) вҲҘОҙ j вҲҘ  В· вҲҘПү j,l вҲҘ
                                        n2
                         (283)  4Оі 2 V exp (вҲ’ОіВө (2T вҲ’ 2 вҲ’ l))         u 2
                          вүӨ                      2
                                                                EОҫjl вҲҘПүj,l  вҲҘ .                        (287)
                                               n

Applying BernsteinвҖҷs inequality (Lemma B.1) with Xj,l = 4Оі                       l    u
                                                        n exp (вҲ’ОіВө(T вҲ’ 1 вҲ’ l)) вҹЁОҙj , Пүj,l вҹ©,
                                                                                              2
constant c defined in (287), b = exp(вҲ’ОіВөT
                                      8
                                          )V
                                             , G = exp(вҲ’2ОіВөT )V
                                                        48n(K+1) , we get
                                                                        384 ln        ОІ

 пЈұ                                                            пЈј
                           T вҲ’1 X
                                n                            2пЈҪ
                                                                             b2

 пЈІ
    вҖІ    exp (вҲ’ОіВөT ) V     X
                                    вҖІ 2     exp (вҲ’2ОіВөT   ) V
P |в‘Ҙ | >               and        (Пғj,l ) вүӨ                     вүӨ 2 exp вҲ’
 пЈі             8                             384 ln 48n(K+1) пЈҫ
                                             l=0 j=2
                                                                          2G + 2cb/3
                                                                                          ОІ
                                                                                                                 ОІ
                                                                                                     =                  .
                                                                                                             24n(K + 1)
                                             ОІ
The above is equivalent to P{Eв‘ҘвҖІ } вүҘ 1 вҲ’ 24n(K+1) for
                    пЈұ                                                                                           пЈј
                                 T вҲ’1 X
                                      n                                          2
                    пЈІ            X                     exp (вҲ’2ОіВөT ) V                             exp (вҲ’ОіВөT ) V пЈҪ
      Eв‘ҘвҖІ =             either               вҖІ 2
                                           (Пғj,l ) >                                 or |в‘ҘвҖІ | вүӨ                       .     (288)
                    пЈі
                                 l=0 j=2               384 ln 48n(K+1)
                                                                  ОІ
                                                                                                         8        пЈҫ


                                                                   78
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Moreover, ET вҲ’1 implies

   T вҲ’1 X
        n                                                             T вҲ’1            n
   X
                вҖІ 2
                              (287)         4Оі 2 V exp (вҲ’ОіВө (2T вҲ’ 2)) X              X         u 2
              (Пғj,l )             вүӨ                       2
                                                                           exp (ОіВөl)     EОҫil вҲҘПүi,l вҲҘ
                                                        n
    l=0 j=2                                                                          i=1
                                                                                    l=0
                                                                                          T вҲ’1
                          (269),T вүӨK+1      72Оі 2 V exp (вҲ’ОіВө (2T вҲ’ 2)) Пғ Оұ X
                                  вүӨ                                               exp (ОіВөl) О»2вҲ’Оұ
                                                                                              l
                                                            n
                                                                             l=0
                                                         Оұ                     T вҲ’1
                                              72Оі Оұ V 2вҲ’ 2 exp (вҲ’2ОіВөT ) Пғ Оұ X

                              (257)                                                        ОіВөlОұ
                                  вүӨ            вҲҡ                                     exp
                                            (64 2)2вҲ’Оұ nОұвҲ’1 ln2вҲ’Оұ 48n(K+1) ОІ     l=0
                                                                                             2
                                                       Оұ

                                            72Оі Оұ V 2вҲ’ 2 exp (вҲ’2ОіВөT ) Пғ Оұ (K + 1) exp ОіВөKОұ  2
                                  вүӨ                      вҲҡ                2вҲ’Оұ 48n(K+1)
                                                     (64 2)   2вҲ’Оұ n ОұвҲ’1 ln         ОІ
                              (254)         exp (вҲ’2ОіВөT ) V 2
                                  вүӨ                                    .                                                         (289)
                                             384 ln 48n(K+1)
                                                        ОІ



That is, we derive the upper bounds for в‘ , в‘Ў, в‘ў, в‘Ј, в‘Ө, в‘Ҙ. More precisely, ET вҲ’1 implies

                                  (265)
                   VT вүӨ exp (ОіВөT ) V + в‘  + в‘Ў + в‘ў + в‘Ј + в‘Ө + в‘Ҙ,
                      n
                                              * jвҲ’1                       +
           (284) вҖІ 4Оі X                        ОіX u            T вҲ’1 u
          в‘Ҙ = в‘Ҙ +        exp (вҲ’ОіВө(T вҲ’ 1 вҲ’ t))       Пү       вҲ’ Оҙj , Пүj,T вҲ’1 ,
                   n j=2                       n i=1 i,T вҲ’1
                                  (275) exp (вҲ’ОіВөT ) V                  (280) exp (вҲ’ОіВөT ) V
                             в‘Ў вүӨ                            ,        в‘Ј вүӨ                          ,
                                                8                                     8
                                                    (281) exp (вҲ’ОіВөT ) V
                                               в‘Ө вүӨ                              ,
                                                                       8
              T вҲ’1 X
                   n                                                 T вҲ’1 X
                                                                          n
              X               (274) exp (вҲ’2ОіВөT ) V 2                 X              (279) exp (вҲ’2ОіВөT ) V 2
                          2                                                      2
                         Пғi,l вүӨ                48n(K+1)
                                                        ,                      Пғ
                                                                               ej,l вүӨ                            ,
              l=0 i=1                 384 ln        ОІ                l=0 j=2                  384 ln 48n(K+1)
                                                                                                         ОІ
                                      T вҲ’1 X
                                           n
                                      X                    (289) exp (вҲ’2ОіВөT ) V 2
                                                  вҖІ 2
                                                (Пғj,l ) вүӨ                                 .
                                      l=0 j=2                        384 ln 48n(K+1)
                                                                                ОІ


In addition, we also establish (see (273), (278), (288), and our induction assumption)

                                                           (T вҲ’ 1)ОІ
                                            P{ET вҲ’1 } вүҘ 1 вҲ’         ,
                                                             K +1
                            ОІ                                ОІ                                                    ОІ
   P{Eв‘  } вүҘ 1 вҲ’                    ,        P{Eв‘ў } вүҘ 1 вҲ’            ,                  P{Eв‘ҘвҖІ } вүҘ 1 вҲ’                     ,
                        24n(K + 1)                       24n(K + 1)                                           24n(K + 1)

where
                                    вҲ’1 X
                    (             T    n
                                                                                                                )
                                  X
                                           2     exp (вҲ’2ОіВөT ) V 2          exp (вҲ’ОіВөT ) V
        Eв‘      =        either            Пғi,l >         48n(K+1)
                                                                  or |в‘ | вүӨ                                           ,
                                                  384 ln                         8
                                  l=0 i=1                    ОІ
                    пЈұ                                                                                        пЈј
                                  T вҲ’1 X
                                       n                                    2
                    пЈІ             X
                                              2         exp (вҲ’2ОіВөT ) V                         exp (вҲ’ОіВөT ) V пЈҪ
        Eв‘ў     =         either             Пғ
                                            ej,l >                              or |в‘ў| вүӨ                             ,
                    пЈі
                                  l=0 j=2               384 ln 48n(K+1)
                                                                   ОІ
                                                                                                      8          пЈҫ
                    пЈұ                                                                                           пЈј
                                  T вҲ’1 X
                                       n                                        2
                    пЈІ             X                       exp (вҲ’2ОіВөT ) V                          exp (вҲ’ОіВөT ) V пЈҪ
        Eв‘ҘвҖІ    =         either               вҖІ 2
                                            (Пғj,l ) >                               or |в‘ҘвҖІ | вүӨ                               .
                    пЈі
                                  l=0 j=2                 384 ln 48n(K+1)
                                                                     ОІ
                                                                                                          8              пЈҫ


                                                                79
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Therefore, probability event ET вҲ’1 вҲ© Eв‘  вҲ© Eв‘ў вҲ© Eв‘ҘвҖІ implies

                                        1 1 1 1 1 1
        VT вүӨ exp (вҲ’ОіВөT ) V 1 + + + + + +
                                        8 8 8 8 8 8
                                   |            {z         }
                                                           <2
                                                                      jвҲ’1
                              n
                                                                *                                     +
                          4Оі  X                                     ОіX u
                        +       exp (вҲ’ОіВө(T вҲ’ 1 вҲ’ t))                     Пү       вҲ’ ОҙjT вҲ’1 , Пүj,T
                                                                                             u
                                                                                                          .     (290)
                          n j=2                                     n i=1 i,T вҲ’1                 вҲ’1


                                                jвҲ’1
                                                                  T вҲ’1
To finish the proof, we need to show that nОі            u
                                                P
                                                       Пүi,T вҲ’1 = Оҙj    with high probability. In particular,
                                                 i=1
we consider probability event E
                              eT вҲ’1,j defined as follows: inequalities
                              rвҲ’1                                  вҲҡ
                            ОіX u                       ОіВө(T вҲ’ 1)        V
                                  Пүi,T вҲ’1 вүӨ exp вҲ’
                            n i=1                           2          2

hold for r = 2, . . . , j simultaneously. We want to show that P{ET вҲ’1 вҲ© E           eT вҲ’1,j } вүҘ 1 вҲ’ (T вҲ’1)ОІ вҲ’
                                                                                                        K+1
   jОІ
8n(K+1)  for all  j =   2, . . . , n. For j  =  2 the statement is trivial since
                                                                                     вҲҡ
                         Оі u              (266)   2ОіО»T вҲ’1               ОіВө(T вҲ’ 1)        V
                           Пү1,T вҲ’1         вүӨ                вүӨ exp вҲ’                        .
                         n                            n                       2         2
Next, we assume that the statement holds for some j = m вҲ’ 1 < n, i.e., P{ET вҲ’1 вҲ© E                eT вҲ’1,mвҲ’1 } вүҘ
    (T вҲ’1)ОІ      (mвҲ’1)ОІ                                                                      (T вҲ’1)ОІ
1вҲ’     K+1  вҲ’  8n(K+1)      . Our goal is to prove that P{ET вҲ’1 вҲ© E        eT вҲ’1,m } вүҘ 1 вҲ’
                                                                                             K+1     вҲ’ mОІ .   8n(K+1)
                      mвҲ’1
First, we consider nОі
                      P u
                          Пүi,T вҲ’1
                                :
                      i=1
                       v
      mвҲ’1                                 2
                       u Оі 2 mвҲ’1
                       u
  Оі X u                      X
                                    u
       Пү             = t          Пү
  n i=1 i,T вҲ’1           n2 i=1 i,T вҲ’1
                       v                            * iвҲ’1                  +
                       u mвҲ’1                    mвҲ’1
                       u Оі2 X                2Оі X ОіX
                                   u
                               вҲҘПүi,T      2                Пүu     , Пүu
                     = t 2            вҲ’1 вҲҘ +
                         n i=1               n i=1 n r=1 r,T вҲ’1 i,T вҲ’1
                       v
                       u T вҲ’1                        mвҲ’1               mвҲ’1
                                                                           * iвҲ’1                    +
                       u Оі2 X                        X             2Оі  X ОіX
                     вүӨ t 2     exp (вҲ’ОіВө(T вҲ’ 1 вҲ’ t))        u вҲҘ2 +
                                                         вҲҘПүi,t                      u
                                                                                   Пүr,T       u
                                                                                        вҲ’1 , Пүi,T вҲ’1 .
                         n t=0                       i=1
                                                                    n  i=1
                                                                             n r=1

Next, we introduce a new notation:
                          пЈұ iвҲ’1                    iвҲ’1                              вҲҡ
                                                       Пүr,T вҲ’1 вүӨ exp вҲ’ ОіВө(T2 вҲ’1) 2V ,
                          пЈІОі P u
                                  Пүr,T вҲ’1 , if nОі
                                                   P u
                  вҖІ         n
                ПҒi,T вҲ’1 =
                          пЈі r=1                    r=1
                            0,               otherwise
for i = 1, . . . , m вҲ’ 1. By definition, we have
                                                                  вҲҡ
                                    вҖІ                 ОіВө(T вҲ’ 1)       V
                                 вҲҘПҒi,T вҲ’1 вҲҘ вүӨ exp вҲ’                                                 (291)
                                                           2         2
                                                                     iвҲ’1
                                      eT вҲ’1,mвҲ’1 implies ПҒвҖІ         Оі P u
for i = 1, . . . , m вҲ’ 1. Moreover, E                     i,T вҲ’1 = n     Пүr,T вҲ’1 for i = 1, . . . , m вҲ’ 1
                                                                             r=1
and
                                       mвҲ’1
                                     Оі X u                  вҲҡ
                                          Пү            вүӨ        в‘ў + в‘Ј + в‘Ұ,
                                     n i=1 i,l
where
                                               mвҲ’1
                                           2Оі X вҖІ
                                     в‘Ұ=          ПҒ     , Пүu    .
                                           n i=1 i,T вҲ’1 i,T вҲ’1
It remains to estimate в‘Ё.


                                                       80
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Upper bound for в‘Ұ. To estimate this sum, we will use BernsteinвҖҷs inequality. The summands have
conditional expectations equal to zero:

                         2Оі вҖІ            u          2Оі D вҖІ                    u
                                                                                       E
               EОҫT вҲ’1       вҹЁПҒi,T вҲ’1 , Пүi,T вҲ’1 вҹ©  =      ПҒ i,T вҲ’1 , E T вҲ’1 [Пү
                                                                     Оҫi       i,T вҲ’1 ]   = 0.
                  i      n                          n
                                         n
Thus, sequence 2Оі     вҖІ
                                u
                  n вҹЁПҒi,T вҲ’1 , Пүi,T вҲ’1 вҹ© i=1 is a martingale difference sequence. Next, the summands
are bounded:
                  2Оі вҖІ                                        2Оі вҖІ
                    вҹЁПҒ    , Пүu    вҹ©                  вүӨ          вҲҘПҒ           u
                                                                       вҲҘ В· вҲҘПүi,T вҲ’1 вҲҘ
                  n i,T вҲ’1 i,T вҲ’1                             n i,T вҲ’1
                                                               вҲҡ
                                               (291),(266)    2 V Оі exp вҲ’ ОіВө(T2 вҲ’1)
                                                     вүӨ                                   О»T вҲ’1
                                                                         n
                                                 (257)         exp (вҲ’ОіВөT ) V
                                                     =          вҲҡ
                                                              32 2 ln 48n(K+1)
                                                                          ОІ
                                                        exp (вҲ’ОіВөT ) V def
                                                     вүӨ                    = c.                    (292)
                                                         8 ln 48n(K+1)
                                                                   ОІ
                                                         h 2                      i
                                   вҖІ       2 def           4Оі    вҖІ       u      2
Finally, conditional variances (eПғi,T вҲ’1 ) = EОҫiT вҲ’1 n2 вҹЁПҒi,T вҲ’1 , Пүi,T вҲ’1 вҹ©        of the summands are
bounded:
                                                2
                     вҖІ      2                    4Оі    вҖІ       2     u      2
                  (e
                   Пғi,T вҲ’1 )   вүӨ EОҫT вҲ’1              вҲҘПҒ       вҲҘ В· вҲҘПүi,T вҲ’1 вҲҘ
                                         i       n2 i,T вҲ’1
                              (291)   Оі 2 V exp (вҲ’ОіВө(T вҲ’ 1))               u         2

                               вүӨ                                   EОҫT вҲ’1 вҲҘПүi,T вҲ’1 вҲҘ .            (293)
                                                    n2               i


Applying BernsteinвҖҷs inequality (Lemma B.1) with Xi = 2Оі  вҖІ         u
                                                      n вҹЁПҒi,T вҲ’1 , Пүi,T вҲ’1 вҹ©, constant c defined in
                                                 2
(292), b = exp(вҲ’ОіВөT
                8
                    )V
                       , G = exp(вҲ’2ОіВөT )V
                                  48n(K+1) , we get
                                  384 ln   ОІ
  (                                 n
                                                                            )
                                            exp (вҲ’2ОіВөT ) V 2                                    b2

        exp (вҲ’ОіВөT ) V            вҖІ
                                    X
                                        2
P |в‘Ұ| >               and     (e
                               Пғi,T вҲ’1 )  вүӨ                                      вүӨ   2 exp вҲ’
              8           i=1                384 ln 48n(K+1)          ОІ
                                                                                             2G + 2cb/3
                                                                                         ОІ
                                                                                 =              .
                                                                                     24n(K + 1)
                                             ОІ
The above is equivalent to P{Eв‘Ұ } вүҘ 1 вҲ’ 24n(K+1)    for
              (         n
                                                                               )
                      X
                             вҖІ      2  exp (вҲ’2ОіВөT ) V 2          exp (вҲ’ОіВөT ) V
      Eв‘Ұ = either         (e
                           Пғi,T вҲ’1 ) >                  or |в‘Ұ| >                 .                  (294)
                      i=1               384 ln 48n(K+1)
                                                   ОІ
                                                                       8

Moreover, ET вҲ’1 implies
        n                                                             n
        X
             вҖІ       2
                          (293)        Оі 2 V exp (вҲ’ОіВө (T вҲ’ 1)) X            u         2

          (e
           Пғi,T вҲ’1 )       вүӨ                        2
                                                                   EОҫiT вҲ’1 вҲҘПүi,T вҲ’1 вҲҘ
        i=1
                                                  n            i=1
                          (269)        18Оі 2 V exp (вҲ’ОіВө (T вҲ’ 1)) Пғ Оұ 2вҲ’Оұ
                           вүӨ                                          О»T вҲ’1
                                                      n
                                                  Оұ
                                       18Оі Оұ V 2вҲ’ 2 exp (вҲ’ОіВө(T вҲ’ 1)) Пғ Оұ

                          (257)                                                 ОіВө(T вҲ’ 1)Оұ
                           вүӨ               вҲҡ                              exp
                                       (64 2)2вҲ’Оұ nОұвҲ’1 ln2вҲ’Оұ 48n(K+1)ОІ
                                                                                    4
                                                  Оұ

                         T вҲ’1вүӨK        18Оі Оұ V 2вҲ’ 2 exp (вҲ’ОіВө(T вҲ’ 1)) Пғ Оұ exp ОіВөKОұ2
                           вүӨ                      вҲҡ               2вҲ’Оұ 48n(K+1)
                                               (64 2) 2вҲ’Оұ n ОұвҲ’1 ln         ОІ
                          (254)        exp (вҲ’2ОіВөT ) V 2
                           вүӨ                                  .                                     (295)
                                       384 ln 48n(K+1)
                                                  ОІ


                                                         81
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Putting all together we get that ET вҲ’1 вҲ© E
                                         eT вҲ’1,mвҲ’1 implies
                                       mвҲ’1
                                  Оі X u          вҲҡ
                                        Пүi,T вҲ’1 вүӨ в‘ў + в‘Ј + в‘Ұ,
                                  n i=1
                                                 T вҲ’1 X
                                                      n
                       (280) exp (вҲ’ОіВөT ) V       X                    (279) exp (вҲ’2ОіВөT ) V
                                                                2
                   в‘Ј вүӨ                       ,                Пғ
                                                              ei,l вүӨ                         ,
                                  8
                                                 l=0 i=1                  384 ln 48n(K+1)
                                                                                     ОІ
                                mвҲ’1
                                X
                                          вҖІ      2    exp (вҲ’2ОіВөT ) V 2
                                       (e
                                        Пғi,T вҲ’1 ) вүӨ                           .
                                 i=1                   384 ln 48n(K+1)
                                                                  ОІ

In addition, we also establish (see (278), (294) and our induction assumption)
                                                            (T вҲ’ 1)ОІ     (m вҲ’ 1)ОІ
                       P{ET вҲ’1 вҲ© E
                                 eT вҲ’1,mвҲ’1 } вүҘ 1 вҲ’                   вҲ’            ,
                                                             K +1       8n(K + 1)
                                          ОІ                                  ОІ
                    P{Eв‘ў } вүҘ 1 вҲ’                 ,         P{Eв‘Ұ } вүҘ 1 вҲ’
                                      24n(K + 1)                         24n(K + 1)
where
                              вҲ’1 X
                   (        T    n
                                                                                                 )
                            X
                                      2    exp (вҲ’2ОіВөT ) V 2            exp (вҲ’ОіВөT ) V
        Eв‘ў    =     either          Пғ
                                    ei,l >         48n(K+1)
                                                              or |в‘ў| вүӨ                ,
                                            384 ln                           8
                           l=0 i=1                     ОІ
                   (        n
                                                                                      )
                           X
                                  вҖІ      2   exp (вҲ’2ОіВөT ) V 2           exp (вҲ’ОіВөT ) V
        Eв‘Ұ    =     either     (e
                                Пғi,T вҲ’1 ) >                    or |в‘Ұ| >                 .
                           i=1                384 ln 48n(K+1)
                                                         ОІ
                                                                               8

Therefore, probability event ET вҲ’1 вҲ© E
                                     emвҲ’1 вҲ© Eв‘ў вҲ© Eв‘Ұ implies
                                                                                                вҲҡ
             mвҲ’1
                                                          вҲҡ                    exp вҲ’ ОіВө(T2 вҲ’1)    V
                                                                  r
          Оі  X
                 u              ОіВө(T вҲ’ 1)                             1 1
                Пүi,T вҲ’1 вүӨ exp вҲ’                               V        + вүӨ                            .
          n i=1                     2                                 8 8                2

This implies E
             eT вҲ’1,m and

              P{ET вҲ’1 вҲ© E
                        eT вҲ’1,m }        вүҘ P{ET вҲ’1 вҲ© E
                                                     eT вҲ’1,mвҲ’1 вҲ© Eв‘Ҙ вҲ© Eв‘ҘвҖІ }
                                                n                                o
                                         = 1 вҲ’ P ET вҲ’1 вҲ© EeT вҲ’1,mвҲ’1 вҲӘ E в‘Ҙ вҲӘ E в‘ҘвҖІ

                                                  (T вҲ’ 1)ОІ      mОІ
                                         вүҘ 1вҲ’              вҲ’           .
                                                   K +1      8n(K + 1)
Therefore, for all m = 2, . . . , n the statement holds and, in particular, P{ET вҲ’1 вҲ© E
                                                                                      eT вҲ’1,n } вүҘ
     (T вҲ’1)ОІ       ОІ
1 вҲ’ K+1 вҲ’ 8(K+1) , i.e., (262) holds. Taking into account (290), we conclude that ET вҲ’1 вҲ©
EeT вҲ’1,n вҲ© Eв‘  вҲ© Eв‘ў вҲ© Eв‘Ө вҲ© Eв‘§вҖІ implies

                                         VT вүӨ 2 exp (вҲ’ОіВөT ) V
that is equivalent to (261) for t = T . Moreover,
                             n                                     o
            P {ET } вүҘ P ET вҲ’1 вҲ© E        eT вҲ’1,n вҲ© Eв‘  вҲ© Eв‘ў вҲ© Eв‘ҘвҖІ
                                  n                                o
                       = 1 вҲ’ P ET вҲ’1 вҲ© E     en вҲӘ E в‘  вҲӘ E в‘ў вҲӘ E в‘ҘвҖІ

                                (T вҲ’ 1)ОІ      ОІ             ОІ           TОІ
                       =   1вҲ’            вҲ’          вҲ’3В·            вүҘ1вҲ’      .
                                 K +1      8(K + 1)     24n(K + 1)     K +1

In other words, we showed that P{Ek } вүҘ 1 вҲ’ kОІ/(K+1) for all k = 0, 1, . . . , K + 1. For k = K + 1
we have that with probability at least 1 вҲ’ ОІ
                              вҲҘxK+1 вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲҘ2 вүӨ 2 exp(вҲ’ОіВө(K + 1))V.


                                                      82
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Finally, if
                       (                                   вҲҡ                      )
                                  1                            nR      ln(BK )
         Оі    = min                       ,                        ,                 ,
                     4096в„“ ln 48n(K+1)
                                   ОІ        3000О¶вҲ— ln 48n(K+1)
                                                            ОІ
                                                                     Вө(K + 1)
                          вҲҡ ! Оұ2
                    пЈұ                                                            пЈј
                                                    2(ОұвҲ’1)          2(ОұвҲ’1)
                    пЈІ        2             (K + 1) Оұ Вө2 V n Оұ                    пЈҪ
      BK      = max 2,               В·       2(ОұвҲ’1)

                    пЈі    3456          Пғ 2 ln Оұ       48n(K+1)
                                                                     ln2 (BK ) пЈҫ
                                                           ОІ
                  пЈ«     пЈұ                                                                        пЈјпЈ¶
                        пЈҙ
                        пЈҙ                                                                        пЈҙ
                                                                                                 пЈҙ
                        пЈҙ                            2(ОұвҲ’1)         2(ОұвҲ’1)
                                                                                                 пЈҙ
                                                              2
                  пЈ¬     пЈҙ                                                                        пЈҙ
                                                                                                 пЈҪпЈ·
                  пЈ¬     пЈІ                        K      Оұ   Вө   V n     Оұ                         пЈ·
              = OпЈ¬  max  2,                                     (                             )!  пЈ·
                  пЈ¬                                                      2(ОұвҲ’1)        2(ОұвҲ’1)     пЈ·
                        пЈҙ          2(ОұвҲ’1)                                        2V n
                                                                                                 пЈҙ
                        пЈҙ      2 ln Оұ        nK     2                 K     Оұ   Вө         Оұ      пЈҙ
                            Пғ                     ln      max     2,
                  пЈӯ     пЈҙ                                                                        пЈҙпЈё
                                              ОІ                               2(ОұвҲ’1)
                        пЈҙ
                        пЈі                                                                        пЈҙ
                                                                                                 пЈҫ
                                                                        Пғ 2 ln Оұ     ( ОІ )
                                                                                       nK



then with probability at least 1 вҲ’ ОІ
вҲҘxK+1 вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲҘ2      вүӨ    2 exp(вҲ’ОіВө(K + 1))V
                               (                              вҲҡ     !    !       )
                                                   Вө(K + 1)  Вө nRK            1
          = 2V max exp вҲ’                         , exp вҲ’                   ,
                              4096в„“ ln 48n(K+1)
                                           ОІ
                                                          3000О¶вҲ— ln 48nK
                                                                      ОІ
                                                                             BK
                                         вҲҡ
    пЈ«   пЈұ                !                      !                                    пЈјпЈ¶
                                                               2 2
        пЈІ            ВөK                 Вө nRK                 Пғ ln BK                пЈҪ
= O пЈӯmax R2 exp вҲ’     nK
                           , R2 exp вҲ’        nK
                                                  , 2(1вҲ’Оұ)     2(ОұвҲ’1)         2(ОұвҲ’1)
                                                                                      пЈё.
        пЈі         в„“ ln ОІ                О¶вҲ— ln ОІ     ln Оұ    nK
                                                                  K Оұ Вө2 n Оұ пЈҫ  ОІ

To get вҲҘxK+1 вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲҘ2 вүӨ Оө with probability вүҘ 1 вҲ’ ОІ, K should be
                   (         2                                 2    вҲҡ
                                             R2                         nО¶вҲ— R2

                      в„“     R          nв„“            О¶вҲ—        R
      K = O max         ln       ln       ln      ,вҲҡ      ln      ln        ln      ,
                     Вө       Оө        ВөОІ      Оө      nRВө        Оө     RВөОІ      Оө
                                            Оұ                    Оұ !              )!
                                 1 Пғ 2 2(ОұвҲ’1)         1 Пғ 2 2(ОұвҲ’1)

                                                                         Оұ
                                                  ln                 ln ОұвҲ’1 (BОө )     ,
                                 n Вө2 Оө               ОІ Вө2 Оө

where                                     пЈұ                             пЈј
                                          пЈҙ                             пЈҙ
                                                           2R2
                                          пЈҙ
                                          пЈІ                             пЈҙ
                                                                        пЈҪ
                              BОө = max        2,             Оұ   .
                                                              2  2(ОұвҲ’1)
                                                   Оө ln ОІ1 ВөПғ2 Оө
                                          пЈҙ
                                          пЈҙ                             пЈҙ
                                                                        пЈҙ
                                          пЈі                             пЈҫ

This concludes the proof.


                                                      83
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


H     M ISSING P ROOFS FOR DProx-clipped-SEG-shift
In this section, we give the complete formulations of our results for DProx-clipped-SEG-shift and
rigorous proofs. For the readersвҖҷ convenience, the methodвҖҷs update rule is repeated below:
                                               n
                                           1X k                     Лң ki , e             Лң ki ,
         ek = proxОіОЁ xk вҲ’ Оіe   g k , gek =        ge , geik = e
                                                              hki + вҲҶ      hk+1  hki + ОҪ вҲҶ

         x                                                                      =e
                                           n i=1 i                           i

                                           n
                                        1X k                   ЛҶ ki , b             ЛҶ ki ,
        xk+1 = proxОіОЁ xk вҲ’ Оіb
                            g k , gbk =      gb , gbik = b
                                                         hki + вҲҶ      hk+1  hki + ОҪ вҲҶ

                                                                           =b
                                        n i=1 i                         i


               Лң ki = clip(FОҫk (xk ) вҲ’ e
               вҲҶ                                   ЛҶ ki = clip(FОҫk (e
                                       hki , О»k ), вҲҶ                 xk ) вҲ’ b
                                                                            hki , О»k ).
                             1,i                                 2,i



H.1     M ONOTONE C ASE

The following lemma is the main вҖңoptimizationвҖқ part of the analysis of DProx-clipped-SEG-shift.
Lemma H.1. Let Assumptions 6 and 7 hold for Q = B4nвҲҡV (xвҲ— ), where V вүҘ вҲҘx0 вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲҘ2 +
              48n(K+1) P
409600Оі 2 ln2             n         вҲ— 2                вҲҡ
           n2
                  ОІ                                               k
                          i=1 вҲҘFi (x )вҲҘ , and 0 < Оі вүӨ / 12L. If x and x
                                                     1                 ek lie in B4nвҲҡV (xвҲ— ) for all
                                                                вҲ—
k = 0, 1, . . . , K for some K вүҘ 0, then for all u вҲҲ B4nвҲҡV (x ) the iterates produced by DProx-
clipped-SEG-shift satisfy
                                                       вҲҘx0 вҲ’ uвҲҘ2 вҲ’ вҲҘxK+1 вҲ’ uвҲҘ2
           вҹЁF (u), xeK
                     avg вҲ’ uвҹ© + ОЁ(e xK
                                     avg ) вҲ’ ОЁ(u) вүӨ
                                                               2Оі(K + 1)
                                                                              K
                                                                    Оі X
                                                              +         (3вҲҘПүk вҲҘ2 + 4вҲҘОёk вҲҘ2 )
                                                                  K +1
                                                                          k=0
                                                                              K
                                                                    1 X
                                                              +         вҹЁОёk , xk вҲ’ uвҹ©,              (296)
                                                                  K +1
                                                                          k=0
                                                                     K
                                                      def     1 X k
                                              eK
                                              x avg    =         x
                                                                 e ,                                (297)
                                                            K +1
                                                                    k=0
                                                      def
                                                Оёk     =       xk ) вҲ’ gbk ,
                                                            F (e                                    (298)
                                                      def
                                                Пүk     =    F (xk ) вҲ’ gek .                         (299)

             ek = proxОіОЁ xk вҲ’ Оіe
Proof. Since x                    g k and xk+1 = proxОіОЁ xk вҲ’ Оіb         g k , we have xk вҲ’ Оіe
                                                                                            gk вҲ’ x
                                                                                                 ek вҲҲ
       k       k      k     k+1          k+1
ОівҲӮОЁ(ex ) and x вҲ’ Оіb  g вҲ’x       вҲҲ ОівҲӮОЁ(x      ). By definition of the subgradient, we have вҲҖu вҲҲ Rd
                        xk ) вҲ’ ОЁ(xk+1 ) вүӨ вҹЁe     xk вҲ’ xk + Оіe g k , xk+1 вҲ’ x  ek вҹ©,

                  Оі ОЁ(e
                   Оі ОЁ(xk+1 ) вҲ’ ОЁ(u) вүӨ вҹЁxk+1 вҲ’ xk + Оіb            g k , u вҲ’ xk+1 вҹ©.


Summing up the above inequalities, we get
                 xk ) вҲ’ ОЁ(u) вүӨ вҹЁe     xk вҲ’ xk , xk+1 вҲ’ xek вҹ© + вҹЁxk+1 вҲ’ xk , u вҲ’ xk+1 вҹ©

           Оі ОЁ(e
                                             g k вҲ’ gbk , xk+1 вҲ’ x
                                          +ОівҹЁe                  ek вҹ© + ОівҹЁb
                                                                         gk , u вҲ’ x
                                                                                  ek вҹ©.             (300)
Since
                                       1 k+1           1 k           1
          xk вҲ’ xk , xk+1 вҲ’ x
         вҹЁe                ek вҹ© =        вҲҘx   вҲ’ xk вҲҘ2 вҲ’ вҲҘe
                                                         x вҲ’ xk вҲҘ2 вҲ’ вҲҘxk+1 вҲ’ x
                                                                             ek вҲҘ2 ,
                                       2               2             2
                                       1 k           1              1
        вҹЁxk+1 вҲ’ xk , u вҲ’ xk+1 вҹ© =        вҲҘx вҲ’ uвҲҘ2 вҲ’ вҲҘxk+1 вҲ’ xk вҲҘ2 вҲ’ вҲҘxk+1 вҲ’ uвҲҘ2 ,
                                       2             2              2
we can rewrite (300) as follows
                                                      1 k             1                  1 k
          xk ), x
                ek вҲ’ uвҹ© + ОЁ(e
                            xk ) вҲ’ ОЁ(u)                 вҲҘx вҲ’ uвҲҘ2 вҲ’ вҲҘxk+1 вҲ’ uвҲҘ2 вҲ’ вҲҘe          x вҲ’ xk вҲҘ2

    Оі вҹЁF (e                                     вүӨ
                                                      2               2                  2
                                                          1
                                                         вҲ’ вҲҘxk+1 вҲ’ x  ek вҲҘ2 + ОівҹЁe
                                                                                g k вҲ’ gbk , xk+1 вҲ’ x
                                                                                                   ek вҹ©
                                                          2
                                                                 ek вҲ’ uвҹ©.
                                                         +ОівҹЁОёk , x                                   (301)


                                                      84
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                                1
Next, we upper-bound ОівҹЁeg k вҲ’b
                             g k , xk+1 вҲ’ x
                                          ek вҹ© using YoungвҖҷs inequality, stating that вҹЁa, bвҹ© вүӨ 2О· вҲҘaвҲҘ2 +
О·    2                d
2 вҲҘbвҲҘ for all a, b вҲҲ R and О· > 0, and JensenвҖҷs inequality for the squared norm:
                                                       1
  g k вҲ’ gbk , xk+1 вҲ’ x
ОівҹЁe                  ek вҹ©    вүӨ      Оі 2 вҲҘe
                                         g k вҲ’ gbk вҲҘ2 + вҲҘxk+1 вҲ’ x
                                                                ek вҲҘ2
                                                       4
                                                                         1
                             =      Оі 2 вҲҘF (xk ) вҲ’ F (e
                                                      xk ) вҲ’ Пүk + Оёk вҲҘ2 + вҲҘxk+1 вҲ’ x
                                                                                  ek вҲҘ2
                                                                         4
                                                                                           1
                             вүӨ      3Оі 2 вҲҘF (xk ) вҲ’ F (e
                                                       xk )вҲҘ2 + 3Оі 2 вҲҘПүk вҲҘ2 + 3Оі 2 вҲҘОёk вҲҘ2 + вҲҘxk+1 вҲ’ xek вҲҘ2
                                                                                           4
                             (32)                                                       1
                             вүӨ      3Оі 2 L2 вҲҘxk вҲ’ xek вҲҘ2 + 3Оі 2 вҲҘПүk вҲҘ2 + 3Оі 2 вҲҘОёk вҲҘ2 + вҲҘxk+1 вҲ’ xek вҲҘ2(302)
                                                                                                     .
                                                                                        4
Plugging (302) in (301), we derive for all u вҲҲ Rd
                                               1 k             1
       xk ), x
             ek вҲ’ uвҹ© + ОЁ(exk ) вҲ’ ОЁ(u) вүӨ          вҲҘx вҲ’ uвҲҘ2 вҲ’ вҲҘxk+1 вҲ’ uвҲҘ2

 Оі вҹЁF (e
                                               2               2
                                                   1                                1
                                                  вҲ’ 1 вҲ’ 6Оі 2 L2 вҲҘe
                                                                    k
                                                                      x вҲ’ xk вҲҘ2 вҲ’ вҲҘxk+1 вҲ’ x    ek вҲҘ2
                                                   2                                4
                                                  +3Оі 2 вҲҘПүk вҲҘ2 + 3Оі 2 вҲҘОёk вҲҘ2 + ОівҹЁОёk , x
                                                                                      ek вҲ’ uвҹ©. (303)
We notice that the above inequality does not rely on monotonicity. Next, we apply monotonicity and
get that for all u вҲҲ B4nвҲҡV (xвҲ— ):
                                                   1 k             1
            ek вҲ’ uвҹ© + ОЁ(e
                        xk ) вҲ’ ОЁ(u)                  вҲҘx вҲ’ uвҲҘ2 вҲ’ вҲҘxk+1 вҲ’ uвҲҘ2

  Оі вҹЁF (u), x                                 вүӨ
                                                   2               2
                                                        1         2 2
                                                                        k
                                                      вҲ’ 1 вҲ’ 6Оі L вҲҘe       x вҲ’ xk вҲҘ2 + ОівҹЁОёk , xek вҲ’ xk вҹ©
                                                        2
                                                      +3Оі 2 вҲҘПүk вҲҘ2 + 3Оі 2 вҲҘОёk вҲҘ2 + ОівҹЁОёk , xk вҲ’ uвҹ©
                                                   1 k             1
                                              вүӨ      вҲҘx вҲ’ uвҲҘ2 вҲ’ вҲҘxk+1 вҲ’ uвҲҘ2
                                                   2               2
                                                        1 1
                                                      вҲ’       вҲ’ 6Оі 2 L2 вҲҘe  xk вҲ’ xk вҲҘ2
                                                        2 2
                                                     +3Оі 2 вҲҘПүk вҲҘ2 + 4Оі 2 вҲҘОёk вҲҘ2 + ОівҹЁОёk , xk вҲ’ uвҹ©,
                                                                                                    вҲҡ
                                       ek вҲ’ xk вҹ© вүӨ Оі 2 вҲҘОёk вҲҘ2 + 14 вҲҘe
where in the last step we apply ОівҹЁОёk , x                            xk вҲ’ xk вҲҘ2 . Since Оі вүӨ 1/ 12L, we
have
                                                  1 k               1
               ek вҲ’ uвҹ© + ОЁ(e xk ) вҲ’ ОЁ(u) вүӨ          вҲҘx вҲ’ uвҲҘ2 вҲ’ вҲҘxk+1 вҲ’ uвҲҘ2

     Оі вҹЁF (u), x
                                                  2                 2
                                                     +3Оі 2 вҲҘПүk вҲҘ2 + 4Оі 2 вҲҘОёk вҲҘ2 + ОівҹЁОёk , xk вҲ’ uвҹ©,
Summing up the above inequalities for k = 0, 1, . . . , K and dividing both sides by Оі(K + 1), we
obtain
         K+1
      1  X                                                      вҲҘx0 вҲ’ uвҲҘ2 вҲ’ вҲҘxK+1 вҲ’ uвҲҘ2
                     ek вҲ’ uвҹ© + ОЁ(e
                                 xk ) вҲ’ ОЁ(u)

             вҹЁF (u), x                                     вүӨ
    K +1                                                               2Оі(K + 1)
             k=0
                                                                             K+1
                                                                        Оі  X
                                                                  +          (3вҲҘПүk вҲҘ2 + 4вҲҘОёk вҲҘ2 )
                                                                      K +1
                                                                             k=0
                                                                             K+1
                                                                        1    X
                                                                  +                вҹЁОёk , xk вҲ’ uвҹ©.
                                                                      K +1
                                                                             k=0
                  n                                                                          n
          1                                                                  вҲ—     1
                              ek вҲ’ uвҹ© = вҹЁF (u), x
                                                eK               xK                                  xk ), we
                  P                                                                          P
Applying K+1          вҹЁF (u), x                   avg вҲ’ uвҹ© and ОЁ(eavg ) вҲ’ ОЁ(x ) вүӨ K+1              ОЁ(e
                  i=1                                                                        i=1
get the result.

Next, we proceed with the full statement of our main result for DProx-clipped-SEG-shift in the
monotone case.


                                                     85
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Theorem H.1 (Case 2 from Theorem C.2). Let Assumptions 1, 6 and 7 hold for Q = B4nвҲҡV (xвҲ— ),
                                      48n(K+1) P
                        409600Оі 2 ln2             n
where V вүҘ вҲҘx0 вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲҘ2 +            n2
                                          ОІ                 вҲ— 2
                                                  i=1 вҲҘFi (x )вҲҘ and

                                                               2вҲ’Оұ вҲҡ
                        пЈұ                                                       пЈј
                                                                     ОұвҲ’1
                        пЈІ             1                      60 Оұ V n Оұ         пЈҪ
            Оі вүӨ min                             ,                    ОұвҲ’1          , (304)
                        пЈі 1920L ln 48n(K+1) 97200 Оұ1 (K + 1) Оұ1 Пғ ln Оұ 48n(K+1) пЈҫ
                                            ОІ                              ОІ
                           вҲҡ
                         n V
       О»k вүЎ О» =                        ,                                            (305)
                    60Оі ln 48n(K+1)
                               ОІ
               ОҪ    =    0                                                                           (306)
for some K вүҘ 1 and ОІ вҲҲ (0, 1]. Then, after K iterations of DProx-clipped-SEG-shift, the following
inequality holds with probability at least 1 вҲ’ ОІ:
                           9V                                  вҲ—                      вҲ—
         xK
  GapвҲҡV (eavg ) вүӨ                     and    {xk }K+1     вҲҡ         xk }K+1
                                                  k=0 вҠҶ B3 V (x ), {e
                                                                                 вҲҡ
                                                                        k=0 вҠҶ B4n V (x ),            (307)
                        2Оі(K + 1)
where x eK
         avg is defined in (297). In particular, when Оі equals the minimum from (304), then after K
iterations of DProx-clipped-SEG-shift, we have with probability at least 1 вҲ’ ОІ
                                        пЈ«       пЈұ              вҲҡ              пЈјпЈ¶
                                                пЈІ LV ln nK Пғ V ln ОұвҲ’1  Оұ   nK пЈҪ
                                                          ОІ                 ОІ
                   GapвҲҡV (e  xK
                              avg ) = O
                                        пЈӯmax                ,     ОұвҲ’1   ОұвҲ’1
                                                                                пЈё,             (308)
                                                пЈі     K         n  Оұ  K  Оұ    пЈҫ

                        xK
i.e., to achieve GapвҲҡV (eavg ) вүӨ Оө with probability at least 1 вҲ’ ОІ DProx-clipped-SEG-shift needs
                                                           вҲҡ ! ОұвҲ’1Оұ      вҲҡ пЈҪпЈ¶
                          пЈ«       пЈұ                                          пЈј
                                  пЈІ LV      nLV     1    Пғ   V         Пғ   V
                   K = O пЈӯmax            ln       ,                 ln         пЈё            (309)
                                  пЈі Оө        ОөОІ n          Оө             ОөОІ пЈҫ

iterations/oracle calls per worker.

Proof. The key idea behind the proof is similar to the one used in (Gorbunov et al., 2022a; Sadiev et al.,
2023): we prove by induction that the iterates do not leave some ball and the sums decrease as 1/K+1.
To formulate the statement rigorously, we introduce probability event Ek for each k = 0, 1, . . . , K +1
as follows: inequalities
                 (                  tвҲ’1                     tвҲ’1
                                                                                     )
                                    X                       X
                      0      2            l               2            2         2

         max вҲ— вҲҘx вҲ’ uвҲҘ + 2Оі             вҹЁx вҲ’ u, Оёl вҹ© + Оі         8вҲҘОёl вҲҘ + 6вҲҘПүl вҲҘ       вүӨ 9V,        (310)
     uвҲҲBвҲҡV (x )
                                       l=0                         l=0
     |                                         {z                                         }
                                               At
                                                  tвҲ’1
                                                  X            вҲҡ
                                              Оі         Оёl вүӨ       V,                                (311)
                                                  l=0
                               rвҲ’1          вҲҡ                  rвҲ’1          вҲҡ
                             ОіX u             V              ОіX u             V
                                   Оёi,tвҲ’1 вүӨ     ,                  Пүi,tвҲ’1 вүӨ                          (312)
                             n i=1           2               n i=1           2
hold for t = 0, 1, . . . , k and r = 1, 2, . . . , n simultaneously, where
                                      Оёl = Оёlu + Оёlb , Пүl = Пүlu + Пүlb ,                              (313)
                         n                     n                     n                      n
                def 1                  def 1                  def 1                  def 1
                       X                      X                     X                      X
            Оёlu =           u
                           Оёi,l , Оёlb =            b
                                                 Оёi,l , Пүlu =              u
                                                                          Пүi,l , Пүlb =        Пүb ,   (314)
                    n i=1                  n i=1                  n i=1                  n i=1 i,l
                     u def                        b def
                                    l
                                   gbi вҲ’ gbil , Оёi,l         xl ) вҲ’ EОҫ2,i
                                                                             l
                    Оёi,l = EОҫ2,il                     = Fi (e          l    gbi   вҲҖ i вҲҲ [n],         (315)
                     u def                        b def
                                    l
                                   gei вҲ’ geil , Пүi,l   = Fi (xl ) вҲ’ EОҫ1,i
                                                                             l
                   Пүi,l  = EОҫ1,il                                       l    gbi  вҲҖ i вҲҲ [n].         (316)

We will prove by induction that P{Ek } вүҘ 1вҲ’ kОІ/(K+1) for all k = 0, 1, . . . , K +1. The base of induc-
tion follows immediately: for all u вҲҲ BвҲҡV (xвҲ— ) we have вҲҘx0 вҲ’ uвҲҘ2 вүӨ 2вҲҘx0 вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲҘ2 + 2вҲҘxвҲ— вҲ’ uвҲҘ2 вүӨ


                                                        86
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                                             PkвҲ’1             PrвҲ’1 u              PrвҲ’1 u
4V < 9V and for k = 0 we have вҲҘОі l=0 Оёl вҲҘ = 0, вҲҘ nОі i=1 Оёi,kвҲ’1            вҲҘ = вҲҘ nОі i=1 Пүi,kвҲ’1    вҲҘ=0
         u          u
since Оёi,вҲ’1  = Пүi,вҲ’1         = 0. Next, we assume that the statement holds for k = T вҲ’ 1 вүӨ K, i.e.,
P{ET вҲ’1 } вүҘ 1вҲ’ (T вҲ’1)ОІ/(K+1). Let us show that it also holds for k = T , i.e., P{ET } вүҘ 1вҲ’ T ОІ/(K+1).
                                                                вҲҡ
To proceed, we need to show that ET вҲ’1 implies вҲҘxt вҲ’xвҲ— вҲҘ вүӨ 3 V for all t = 0, 1, . . . , T . We willвҲҡ
                                                                                                    use
the induction argument as well. The base is already proven. Next, we assume that вҲҘxt вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲҘ вүӨ 3 V
for all t = 0, 1, . . . , tвҖІ for some tвҖІ < T . Then

                                                                                           вҲҡ
                                                          v
                                                          u n
                                        p                 uX                              n V
                    вҲҘF (xвҲ— )вҲҘ      =         вҲҘF (xвҲ— )вҲҘ2 вүӨ t   вҲҘFi (xвҲ— )вҲҘ2 вүӨ                                 <О»           (317)
                                                            i=1                   160Оі ln 48n(K+1)
                                                                                              ОІ


and for t = 0, 1, . . . , tвҖІ

 xt вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲҘ
вҲҘe                   =                        g t ) вҲ’ proxОіОЁ (xвҲ— вҲ’ ОіF (xвҲ— ))вҲҘ
                              вҲҘ proxОіОЁ (xt вҲ’ Оіe
                     вүӨ вҲҘxt вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲ’ Оі(eg t вҲ’ F (xвҲ— ))вҲҘ вүӨ вҲҘxt вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲҘ + ОівҲҘe   g t вҲ’ F (xвҲ— )вҲҘ
                                                                                                                  вҲҡ
                                                            (305),(317) вҲҡ               вҲҡ                        n V
                     вүӨ вҲҘxt вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲҘ + Оі(вҲҘe g k вҲҘ + вҲҘF (xвҲ— )вҲҘ)     вүӨ      3 V + 2ОіО» вүӨ 3 V +
                                                                                                            30 ln 48(K+1)
                                                                                                                     ОІ
                                вҲҡ
                     вүӨ        4n V .                                                                                     (318)

                     et вҲҲ B4nвҲҡV (xвҲ— ) for t = 0, 1, . . . , tвҖІ and we can apply Lemma H.1: ET вҲ’1
This means that xt , x
implies
                        n                      вҖІ              вҖІ
                                                                               вҖІ
                                                                                         o
         maxвҲ—            2Оі(tвҖІ + 1) вҹЁF (u), x
                                            etavg вҲ’ uвҹ© + ОЁ(e
                                                           xtavg ) вҲ’ ОЁ(u) + вҲҘxt +1 вҲ’ uвҲҘ2
        BвҲҡV (x )
                                                                         (                      tвҲ’1
                                                                                                                     )
                                                                                                X
                                                                              0       2                 l
                                                           вүӨ maxвҲ—            вҲҘx вҲ’ uвҲҘ + 2Оі             вҹЁx вҲ’ u, Оёl вҹ©
                                                              BвҲҡV (x )
                                                                                                l=0
                                                                     tвҲ’1
                                                                     X
                                                              + Оі2         8вҲҘОёl вҲҘ2 + 6вҲҘПүl вҲҘ2


                                                                     l=0
                                                           (310)
                                                            вүӨ 9V

that gives

    вҖІ
                                             n                      вҖІ              вҖІ
                                                                                                    вҖІ
                                                                                                              o
вҲҘxt +1 вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲҘ2                вүӨ    maxвҲ—       2Оі(tвҖІ + 1) вҹЁF (u), x
                                                                 etavg вҲ’ uвҹ© + ОЁ(e
                                                                                xtavg ) вҲ’ ОЁ(u) + вҲҘxt +1 вҲ’ uвҲҘ2
                                  BвҲҡV (x )

                              вүӨ 9V.
                                                    вҲҡ                   вҲҡ
That is, we showed that ET вҲ’1 implies вҲҘxt вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲҘ вүӨ 3 V , вҲҘe
                                                          xt вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲҘ вүӨ 4n V and

                                              etavg вҲ’ uвҹ© + ОЁ(e
                                                             xtavg ) вҲ’ ОЁ(u) + вҲҘxt+1 вҲ’ uвҲҘ2 вүӨ 9V

         maxвҲ—               2Оі(t + 1) вҹЁF (u), x                                                                          (319)
        BвҲҡ   V (x   )


for all t = 0, 1, . . . , T . Before we proceed, we introduce a new notation:
                                                                          вҲҡ
                                                x вҲ’ xвҲ— , if вҲҘxt вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲҘ вүӨ 3 V ,
                                                 t
                                          О·t =
                                                0,       otherwise,

for all t = 0, 1, . . . , T . Random vectors {О·t }Tt=0 are bounded almost surely:
                                                                 вҲҡ
                                                        вҲҘО·t вҲҘ вүӨ 3 V                                                      (320)


                                                             87
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


for all t = 0, 1, . . . , T . In addition, О·t = xt вҲ’ xвҲ— follows from ET вҲ’1 for all t = 0, 1, . . . , T and,
thus, ET вҲ’1 implies
                                                 вҲ’1                     вҲ’1
                             (                 T
                                                               )      T
       (310)                                    X
                                                     вҲ—
                                                                      X
AT      =       max вҲ— вҲҘx вҲ’ uвҲҘ + 2Оі0      2
                                                   вҹЁx вҲ’ u, Оёl вҹ© + 2Оі      вҹЁxl вҲ’ xвҲ— , Оёl вҹ©
             uвҲҲBвҲҡV (x )
                                                        l=0                                    l=0
                      T
                      X вҲ’1
               +Оі 2             8вҲҘОёl вҲҘ2 + 6вҲҘПүl вҲҘ2


                       l=0
                                                               вҲ’1                      вҲ’1                          вҲ’1
                                         (*                  T
                                                                         +)          T                           T
                                                             X                       X                           X
                                                   вҲ—
                                                                                              вҹЁО·l , Оёl вҹ© + Оі 2             8вҲҘОёl вҲҘ2 + 6вҲҘПүl вҲҘ2

       вүӨ     4V + 2Оі            max вҲ—             x вҲ’ u,            Оёl        + 2Оі
                           uвҲҲBвҲҡV (x )
                                                              l=0                       l=0                       l=0
                                  T вҲ’1                 T вҲ’1                       T вҲ’1
                        вҲҡ         X                    X                          X
                                                             вҹЁО·l , Оёl вҹ© + Оі 2            8вҲҘОёl вҲҘ2 + 6вҲҘПүl вҲҘ2 .

       =     4V + 2Оі V                   Оёl + 2Оі
                                  l=0                  l=0                        l=0


Using the notation from (313)-(316), we can rewrite вҲҘОёl вҲҘ2 as

                                                          n                               2
                           2                          2 X u
                   вҲҘОёl вҲҘ         вүӨ     2вҲҘОёlu вҲҘ2 + 2вҲҘОёlb вҲҘ2 =Оё     + 2вҲҘОёlb вҲҘ2
                                                      n2 i=1 i,l
                                           n           n
                                                         *jвҲ’1        +
                                       2 X u 2      4 X X u u
                                 =           вҲҘОё вҲҘ + 2         Оё ,Оё     + 2вҲҘОёlb вҲҘ2                                                    (321)
                                       n2 i=1 i,l  n j=2 i=1 i,l j,l

and, similarly, it holds for вҲҘПүl вҲҘ2 . Putting all together, we obtain that ET вҲ’1 implies
                                       T вҲ’1                  T вҲ’1 n                             T вҲ’1
                    вҲҡ                  X               2Оі X X            u
                                                                                    X
     AT    вүӨ 4V + 2Оі V                        Оёl +                вҹЁО·l , Оёi,l вҹ© + 2Оі     вҹЁО·l , Оёlb вҹ©
                                                        n
                                        l=0               l=0 i=1                   l=0
                                                       |       {z           } |       {z         }
                                                                     в‘                                в‘Ў
                               2 T вҲ’1 X
                                      n
                       2Оі        X                     u 2               u                      2

                   +                          8EОҫ2,i
                                                 l    вҲҘОёi,l вҲҘ + 6EОҫ1,i
                                                                   l    вҲҘПүi,l вҲҘ
                        n2
                                 l=0 i=1
                       |                                    {z                                       }
                                                             в‘ў
                            T вҲ’1 n
                       2Оі 2 X X   u 2             u 2
                                                                   u 2               u 2
                   +      2
                                    8вҲҘОёi,l вҲҘ + 6вҲҘПүi,l вҲҘ вҲ’ 8EОҫ2,i
                                                             l    вҲҘОёi,l вҲҘ вҲ’ 6EОҫ1,i
                                                                               l    вҲҘПүi,l вҲҘ
                        n
                            l=0 i=1
                       |                                {z                                  }
                                                                              в‘Ј
                                T вҲ’1                                              вҲ’1 X
                                                                                               *jвҲ’1                    +
                                X                           32Оі               2 T
                                                                                X    n          X
                   + 2Оі 2              8вҲҘОёlb вҲҘ2 + 6вҲҘПүlb вҲҘ2 + 2                                            u
                                                                                                         Оёi,l    u
                                                                                                              , Оёj,l
                                                              n
                                l=0                                               l=0 j=2          i=1
                       |                  {z              } |                                 {z                       }
                                           в‘Ө                                                  в‘Ҙ
                          T вҲ’1 n
                                  *jвҲ’1              +
                    24Оі 2 X X X u u
                   + 2                   Пүi,l , Пүj,l .                                                                               (322)
                      n
                          l=0 j=2    i=1
                    |             {z                }
                                              в‘Ұ

                                                 вҲҡ    PT вҲ’1
To finish the proof, it remains to estimate 2Оі V       l=0 Оёl , в‘ , в‘Ў, в‘ў, в‘Ј, в‘Ө, в‘Ҙ, в‘Ұ with high proba-
                                                    вҲҡ   PT вҲ’1
bility. More precisely, the goal is to prove that 2Оі V    l=0 Оёl +в‘ +в‘Ў+в‘ў+в‘Ј+в‘Ө+в‘Ҙ+в‘Ұ вүӨ 5V
with high probability. Before we proceed, we need to derive several useful inequalities related to
 u      u
Оёi,l , Пүi,l , Оёlb , Пүlb . First of all, we have
                                                 u                         u
                                               вҲҘОёi,l вҲҘ вүӨ 2О»,             вҲҘПүi,l вҲҘ вүӨ 2О»                                                (323)


                                                                 88
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


by definition of the clipping operator. Next, probability event ET вҲ’1 implies
                                                                            v
                                                                            u n
                                                          (32)              uX
              l                l         вҲ—           вҲ—           l     вҲ—
        вҲҘFi (x )вҲҘ вүӨ вҲҘFi (x ) вҲ’ Fi (x )вҲҘ + вҲҘFi (x )вҲҘ вүӨ LвҲҘx вҲ’ x вҲҘ + t             вҲҘFi (xвҲ— )вҲҘ2
                                                                                                      i=1
                                                 вҲҡ                                  вҲҡ
                                  вҲҡ            n V                (304)           n V             (305) О»
                      вүӨ 3L V +                                     вүӨ                                  =         ,
                                         160Оі ln 48n(K+1)
                                                     ОІ                    120Оі ln 48n(K+1)
                                                                                      ОІ
                                                                                                            2
                                                                           v
                                                                           u n
                                                                       (32)uX
                                                вҲ—           вҲ—           вҲ—
             xl )вҲҘ
        вҲҘFi (e        вүӨ         вҲҘFi (el
                                     x ) вҲ’ Fi (x )вҲҘ + вҲҘFi (x )вҲҘ вүӨ LвҲҘel
                                                                    x вҲ’x вҲҘ+t   вҲҘFi (xвҲ— )вҲҘ2
                                                                                                      i=1
                                                  вҲҡ                                 вҲҡ
                           вҲҡ                     n V               (304)            n V               (305) О»
                      вүӨ 4Ln V +                                       вүӨ                                =
                                           160Оі ln 48n(K+1)
                                                       ОІ                      120Оі ln 48n(K+1)
                                                                                          ОІ
                                                                                                                2
for l = 0, 1, . . . , T вҲ’ 1 and i вҲҲ [n]. Therefore, Lemma B.2 and ET вҲ’1 imply
                                   n                               n
                               1X b           2Оұ Пғ Оұ           1X b            2Оұ Пғ Оұ
                       Оёlb вүӨ         вҲҘОёi,l вҲҘ вүӨ ОұвҲ’1 ,   Пүlb вүӨ          вҲҘПүi,l вҲҘ вүӨ ОұвҲ’1 ,                                       (324)
                               n i=1          О»                n i=1           О»
                             h       i                      h        i
                                u 2                            u 2
                       EОҫ2,i
                          l    Оёi,l    вүӨ 18О»2вҲ’Оұ Пғ Оұ , EОҫ1,i
                                                        l     Пүi,l     вүӨ 18О»2вҲ’Оұ Пғ Оұ ,                                       (325)
for all l = 0, 1, . . . , T вҲ’ 1 and i вҲҲ [n].

Upper bound for в‘ . To estimate this sum, we will use BernsteinвҖҷs inequality. The summands have
conditional expectations equal to zero:

                                  2Оі        u       2Оі D           u
                                                                        E
                          EОҫ2,i
                            l        вҹЁО·l , Оёi,l вҹ© =     О·l , EОҫ2,i
                                                               l [Оёi,l ]  = 0.
                                  n                 n
                                                             u n
Moreover, for all l = 0, . . . , T вҲ’ 1 random vectors {Оёi,l    }i=1 are independent. Thus, sequence
n                oT вҲ’1,n
  2Оі       u
  n вҹЁО·l , Оёi,l вҹ©         is a martingale difference sequence. Next, the summands are bounded:
                l,i=0,1

          2Оі                2Оі                  (320),(323) 12Оі вҲҡ        (305)        3V        def
                    u                    u
             вҹЁО·l , Оёi,l вҹ© вүӨ    вҲҘО·l вҲҘ В· вҲҘОёi,l вҲҘ       вүӨ               VО» вүӨ            48n(K+1)
                                                                                                = c.                        (326)
           n                 n                                n                10 ln     ОІ
                                                   h 2               i
                                   2 def             4Оі         u 2
Finally, conditional variances Пғi,l = EОҫ2,i   l
                                                     n2 вҹЁО·l , Оёi,l вҹ©   of the summands are bounded:
                                     2
                                                                (320) 36Оі 2 V

                         2          4Оі           2      u 2
                                                                                       u 2
                      Пғi,l вүӨ EОҫ2,i
                               l         вҲҘО·  l вҲҘ   В· вҲҘОё i,l вҲҘ    вүӨ             EОҫ2,i
                                                                                 l    вҲҘОёi,l вҲҘ .                             (327)
                                     n2                                 n2
Applying BernsteinвҖҷs inequality (Lemma B.1) with Xi,l = 2Оі       u
                                                        n вҹЁО·l , Оёi,l вҹ©, constant c defined in (326),
                         3V 2
b = 3V
    10 , G =             48n(K+1)   , we get
                200 ln       ОІ

                          T вҲ’1 n
   (                                                              )
                                  3V 2                                                     b2

         3V     XX
                      2                                                                                                 ОІ
 P |в‘ | >    and      Пғi,l вүӨ                                            вүӨ 2 exp вҲ’                              =                .
         10      i=1        200 ln 48n(K+1)
                          l=0                            ОІ
                                                                                        2G + 2cb/3                  24n(K + 1)
The above is equivalent to
                                                                вҲ’1 X
                                                 (            T    n
                                                                                                                )
                 ОІ                                            X
                                                                            2              3V 2              3V
P{Eв‘  } вүҘ 1 вҲ’            , for Eв‘  =                   either                Пғi,l >                   or |в‘ | вүӨ      .
             24n(K + 1)
                                                              l=0 i=1               200 ln 48n(K+1)
                                                                                               ОІ
                                                                                                             10
                                                                                                              (328)
Moreover, ET вҲ’1 implies
     T вҲ’1 X
          n                             T вҲ’1 n
     X
                2
                      (327)      36Оі 2 V X X            u 2   (325),T вүӨK+1 648(K + 1)Оі 2 V О»2вҲ’Оұ Пғ Оұ
               Пғi,l      вүӨ                     EОҫ l    вҲҘОёi,l вҲҘ      вүӨ
                                   n2             2,i                                n
     l=0 i=1                               i=1
                                         l=0
                                                              Оұ
                      (305)        648(K + 1)Оі Оұ Пғ Оұ V 2вҲ’ 2           (304)         3V 2
                         вүӨ                                             вүӨ                          .                         (329)
                                 602вҲ’Оұ nОұвҲ’1 ln2вҲ’Оұ 48n(K+1)
                                                      ОІ                       200 ln 48n(K+1)
                                                                                         ОІ


                                                             89
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Upper bound for в‘Ў. Probability event ET вҲ’1 implies
                                         T вҲ’1                                                         вҲҡ
                                         X                       (320),(324),T вүӨK+1 6 В· 2Оұ (K + 1)Оі       V ПғОұ
                в‘Ў        вүӨ          2Оі          вҲҘО·l вҲҘ В· вҲҘОёlb вҲҘ             вүӨ
                                                                                           О»ОұвҲ’1
                                         l=0

                        (305)       6 В· 2Оұ В· 60ОұвҲ’1 (K + 1)Оі Оұ Пғ Оұ lnОұвҲ’1 48n(K+1)
                                                                            ОІ    (304) 3V
                         =                                  Оұ
                                                              вҲ’1
                                                                                  вүӨ        .                     (330)
                                                     nОұвҲ’1 V 2                          100

Upper bound for в‘ў. Probability event ET вҲ’1 implies
       T вҲ’1 n                                                                                                          Оұ
16Оі 2 X X          u 2
                                           (325),T вүӨK+1           288Оі 2 (K + 1)О»2вҲ’Оұ Пғ Оұ (305) 288Оі Оұ (K + 1)Пғ Оұ V 1вҲ’ 2
              l [вҲҘОёi,l вҲҘ ]
            EОҫ2,i                                  вүӨ                                      =
 n2     i=1
                                                                            n                 602вҲ’Оұ nОұвҲ’1 ln2вҲ’Оұ 48n(K+1)
        l=0                                                                                                        ОІ
                                                  (304)            3
                                                   вүӨ                  V,                                            (331)
                                                                  100
       T вҲ’1 n                                                                                                          Оұ
12Оі 2 X X          u 2
                                           (325),T вүӨK+1           216Оі 2 (K + 1)О»2вҲ’Оұ Пғ Оұ (305) 216Оі Оұ (K + 1)Пғ Оұ V 1вҲ’ 2
              l [вҲҘПүi,l вҲҘ ]
            EОҫ1,i                                  вүӨ                                      =
 n2     i=1
                                                                            n                 602вҲ’Оұ nОұвҲ’1 ln2вҲ’Оұ 48n(K+1)
       l=0                                                                                                         ОІ
                                                  (304)            1
                                                   вүӨ                 V,                                             (332)
                                                                  50
                                               (331),(332)         1
                                    в‘ў              вүӨ                 V.                                             (333)
                                                                  20

Upper bound for в‘Ј. To estimate this sum, we will use BernsteinвҖҷs inequality. The summands have
conditional expectations equal to zero:
          2Оі 2           h
                               u 2        u 2
                                                          u 2               u 2  i
               E l   l     8вҲҘОё    вҲҘ + 6вҲҘПү    вҲҘ вҲ’ 8E l    вҲҘОё     вҲҘ вҲ’ 6EОҫ1,i вҲҘПүi,l вҲҘ
                                                                       l           = 0.
           n2 Оҫ1,i ,Оҫ2,i      i,l        i,l       Оҫ2,i     i,l

                                                         u n          u n
Moreover, for all l = 0, . . . , T вҲ’ 1 random vectors {Оёi,l }i=1 , {Пүi,l }i=1 are independent. Thus,
        n 2                                   h        i           h         i oT вҲ’1,n
          2Оі        u 2           u 2             u 2                  u 2
sequence n2 8вҲҘОёi,l вҲҘ + 6вҲҘПүi,l вҲҘ вҲ’ 8EОҫ2,i    l   вҲҘОёi,l вҲҘ вҲ’ 6EОҫ1,i
                                                               l     вҲҘПүi,l вҲҘ           is a martingale
                                                                                                      l,i=0,1
difference sequence. Next, the summands are bounded:
2Оі 2    u 2        u 2
                                      u 2                  u 2
  2
     8вҲҘОёi,l вҲҘ + 6вҲҘПүi,l вҲҘ вҲ’ 8EОҫ2,il   вҲҘОёi,l вҲҘ вҲ’ 6EОҫ1,il    вҲҘПүi,l вҲҘ
n
                             16Оі 2   u 2                 u 2    12Оі 2   u 2             u 2
                         вүӨ 2 вҲҘОёi,l         вҲҘ + EОҫ2,i
                                                  l     вҲҘОёi,l вҲҘ   + 2 вҲҘПүi,l вҲҘ + EОҫ1,i
                                                                                  l    вҲҘПүi,l вҲҘ
                               n                                    n
                         (323) 224Оі 2 О»2
                          вүӨ
                                   n2
                         (305)        V       def
                          вүӨ         48n(K+1)
                                              = c.                                           (334)
                               6 ln     ОІ

Finally, conditional variances
                    4

           2 def 4Оі                 u 2        u 2
                                                                u 2               u 2  2
         Пғ
         ei,l = 4 EОҫ1,il ,Оҫ l    8вҲҘОёi,l вҲҘ + 6вҲҘПүi,l вҲҘ вҲ’ 8EОҫ2,i
                                                          l    вҲҘОёi,l вҲҘ вҲ’ 6EОҫ1,i
                                                                            l    вҲҘПүi,l вҲҘ
                 n         2,i


of the summands are bounded:
  2
       (334)        Оі2V                                   h
                                                                 u 2        u 2
                                                                                             u 2               u 2  i
Пғ
ei,l    вүӨ                       El l
                        48n(K+1) Оҫ1,i ,Оҫ2,i
                                                              8вҲҘОёi,l вҲҘ + 6вҲҘПүi,l вҲҘ вҲ’ 8EОҫ2,i
                                                                                       l    вҲҘОёi,l вҲҘ вҲ’ 6EОҫ1,i
                                                                                                         l    вҲҘПүi,l вҲҘ
               3n2 ln           ОІ
                    4Оі 2 V                           u 2          u 2

        вүӨ                                EОҫ1,i
                                           l ,Оҫ l   4вҲҘОёi,l вҲҘ + 3вҲҘПүi,l вҲҘ .                                        (335)
               3n2 ln 48n(K+1)
                          ОІ
                                               2,i



Applying
                BernsteinвҖҷs     inequality
                                    h        i   (Lemmah         B.1)
                                                                 i        with    Xi,l        =
2Оі 2      u 2        u 2                u 2                u 2
n2     8вҲҘОёi,l вҲҘ + 6вҲҘПүi,l вҲҘ вҲ’ 8EОҫ2,i
                                l     вҲҘОёi,l вҲҘ вҲ’ 6EОҫ1,i
                                                   l     вҲҘПүi,l вҲҘ   , constant c defined in (334),


                                                                     90
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                        V2
b = V6 , G =            48n(K+1)    , we get
               216 ln       ОІ

                           T вҲ’1 n
   (                                                                  )
                                  V2                                                   b2

         V     XX
                      2                                                                                             ОІ
 P |в‘Ј| >   and      Пғ
                    ei,l вүӨ                                                вүӨ 2 exp вҲ’                         =              .
         6      i=1        216 ln 48n(K+1)
                           l=0                               ОІ
                                                                                    2G + 2cb/3                  24n(K + 1)

The above is equivalent to
                                                                    вҲ’1 X
                                                     (            T    n
                                                                                                          )
                 ОІ                                                X
                                                                          2                       V2    V
P{Eв‘Ј } вүҘ 1 вҲ’            , for Eв‘Ј =                       either         Пғ
                                                                        ei,l >                 or |в‘Ј| вүӨ     .
             24n(K + 1)
                                                                l=0 i=1        216 ln 48n(K+1)
                                                                                          ОІ
                                                                                                        6
                                                                                                        (336)
Moreover, ET вҲ’1 implies
       T вҲ’1 X
            n                                                         T вҲ’1 X
                                                                           n
       X
                   2
                                 (335)              4Оі 2 V            X                       u 2          u 2

                 Пғ
                 ei,l               вүӨ                                             EОҫ1,i
                                                                                    l ,Оҫ l   4вҲҘОёi,l вҲҘ + 3вҲҘПүi,l вҲҘ
       l=0 i=1                                  3n2 ln 48n(K+1)
                                                           ОІ    l=0 i=1
                                                                                        2,i


                           (325),T вүӨK+1                      2   2вҲ’Оұ Оұ
                                                168(K + 1)Оі V О»               Пғ
                                    вүӨ
                                                     n ln 48n(K+1)
                                                              ОІ
                                                                Оұ 2вҲ’ Оұ
                                 (305)           168(K + 1)Оі V       2         ПғОұ       (304)          V2
                                    вүӨ                                                     вүӨ                         .        (337)
                                                602вҲ’Оұ nОұвҲ’1 ln3вҲ’Оұ 48n(K+1)
                                                                     ОІ                          216 ln 48n(K+1)
                                                                                                           ОІ


Upper bound for в‘Ө. Probability event ET вҲ’1 implies
                                    T вҲ’1
                                    X                               (324),T вүӨK+1 28 В· 22Оұ Оі 2 Пғ 2Оұ (K + 1)
            в‘Ө       =        2Оі 2          8вҲҘОёlb вҲҘ2 + 6вҲҘПүlb вҲҘ2            вүӨ
                                                                                          О»2ОұвҲ’2
                                    l=0

                   (305)     28 В· 22Оұ В· 602ОұвҲ’2 Оі 2Оұ Пғ 2Оұ (K + 1) ln2ОұвҲ’2 48n(K+1)
                                                                            ОІ    (304) V
                    =                               2ОұвҲ’2    ОұвҲ’1
                                                                                  вүӨ      .                                   (338)
                                                  n       V                            6

Upper bounds for в‘Ҙ and в‘Ұ. These sums require more refined analysis. We introduce new vectors:
                                       вҲҡ                                          вҲҡ
      пЈұ jвҲ’1                jвҲ’1
                                                    пЈұ jвҲ’1              jвҲ’1
      пЈІОі P u             Оі P u                      пЈІОі P u
                                         V
                                                          Пүi,l , if nОі     Пүi,l вүӨ 2V ,
                                                                       P u
  l     n    Оё i,l , if  n     Оё i,l вүӨ  2  ,    l    n
 О¶j =                                        , Оҙj =                                    (339)
      пЈі i=1                i=1
                                                    пЈі i=1              i=1
       0,            otherwise,                      0,          otherwise,
for all j вҲҲ [n] and l = 0, . . . , T вҲ’ 1. Then, by definition
                                                   вҲҡ               вҲҡ
                                           l          V       l      V
                                        вҲҘО¶j вҲҘ вүӨ          , вҲҘОҙj вҲҘ вүӨ                                                           (340)
                                                     2              2
and
                              T вҲ’1 n                        T вҲ’1 n
                                                                    * jвҲ’1               +
                        32Оі X X l u                     32Оі X X Оі X u           l u
              в‘Ҙ =                         О¶j , Оёj,l +                      Оё вҲ’ О¶j , Оёj,l ,                                   (341)
                         n                                n           n i=1 i,l
                               l=0 j=2                      l=0 j=2
                       |             {z            }
                                           в‘ҘвҖІ
                                      вҲ’1 X                            T вҲ’1 n            jвҲ’1
                                    T    n
                                                                                  *                         +
                       24Оі          X             24Оі X X                             ОіX u
               в‘Ұ     =             Оҙjl , Пүj,l
                                          u
                                                +                                          Пү вҲ’ Оҙjl , Пүj,l
                                                                                                      u
                                                                                                                .            (342)
                         n                         n                                  n i=1 i,l
                           l=0 j=2                    l=0 j=2
                       |        {z            }
                                           в‘ҰвҖІ

We also note here that ET вҲ’1 implies
          T вҲ’1 n
                   * jвҲ’1                     +                            n
                                                                              *       jвҲ’1
                                                                                                                        +
      32Оі X X Оі X u                                               32Оі X           ОіX u
                                     l u
                            Оё вҲ’ О¶j , Оёj,l      =                                       Оё       вҲ’ О¶jT вҲ’1 , Оёj,T
                                                                                                           u
                                                                                                                            , (343)
       n              n i=1 i,l                                    n j=2          n i=1 i,T вҲ’1                 вҲ’1
           l=0 j=2
         T вҲ’1 n
                   * jвҲ’1                     +                            n
                                                                              *       jвҲ’1
                                                                                                                        +
     24Оі X X Оі X u                                                24Оі X           ОіX u
                           Пүi,l вҲ’ Оҙjl , Пүj,l
                                         u
                                               =                                       Пү       вҲ’ ОҙjT вҲ’1 , Пүj,T
                                                                                                           u
                                                                                                                            .(344)
      n       j=2
                     n i=1
                                                                   n j=2          n i=1 i,T вҲ’1                 вҲ’1
           l=0


                                                                 91
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Upper bound for в‘ҘвҖІ . To estimate this sum, we will use BernsteinвҖҷs inequality. The summands
have conditional expectations equal to zero:

                               32Оі l u           32Оі D l         u
                                                                       E
                       EОҫ2,j
                          l          О¶j , Оёj,l =             l [Оёj,l ]
                                                      О¶j , EОҫ2,j         = 0.
                                n                 n
                                                             u n
Moreover, for all l = 0, . . . , T вҲ’ 1 random vectors {Оёi,l    }i=1 are independent. Thus, sequence
n     D            EoT вҲ’1,n
  32Оі
   n
               u
        О¶jl , Оёj,l          is a martingale difference sequence. Next, the summands are bounded:
                     l,j=0,2
                                                              вҲҡ
     32Оі l u               32Оі l      u
                                            (340),(323) 32Оі     V     (305)       4V      def
         О¶j , Оёj,l       вүӨ     О¶j В· вҲҘОёj,l вҲҘ     вүӨ           В·     В· 2О» вүӨ         48n(K+1)
                                                                                          = c.                                  (345)
      n                     n                            n     2            5 ln                               ОІ
                                                         h                            i
                                 2           def             1024Оі 2 l u 2
Finally, conditional variances Пғ
                               bj,l = EОҫ2,j
                                        l
                                                               n2 вҹЁО¶j , Оёj,l вҹ©            of the summands are bounded:

                                       1024Оі 2 l 2                           (340) 256Оі 2 V

                      2                                 u 2
                                                                           u 2
                    Пғ
                    bj,l вүӨ EОҫ2,j
                             l                вҲҘО¶j вҲҘ В· вҲҘОёj,l вҲҘ      EОҫ2,j
                                                                     l    вҲҘОёj,l вҲҘ .
                                                                               вүӨ              (346)
                                         n2                 n2
                                                            D        E
Applying BernsteinвҖҷs inequality (Lemma B.1) with Xi,l = 32Оі
                                                         n   О¶ l u
                                                               j j,l , constant c defined in (345),
                                                                , Оё
                        8V 2
b = 4V
     5 ,G=              48n(K+1)   , we get
                75 ln       ОІ
  пЈұ                                           пЈј
                 T вҲ’1 X
                      n                 2
                                                             b2

  пЈІ
     вҖІ    4V     X
                          2          8V       пЈҪ                            ОІ
 P |в‘Ҙ | >    and        bi,l вүӨ
                        Пғ            48n(K+1)
                                                вүӨ 2 exp вҲ’            =            .
  пЈі        5                   75 ln          пЈҫ           2G + /3
                                                               2cb     24n(K + 1)
                             l=0 j=2                           ОІ

The above is equivalent to
                                                         пЈұ                                                                         пЈј
                                                                     T вҲ’1 X
                                                                          n                                2
                    ОІ                                    пЈІ           X                              8V                          4V пЈҪ
P{Eв‘ҘвҖІ } вүҘ 1вҲ’               , for Eв‘ҘвҖІ = either                                        Пғ 2
                                                                                     bi,l >                        or |в‘ҘвҖІ | вүӨ          .
                24n(K + 1)            пЈі
                                                                        l=0 j=2                75 ln 48n(K+1)
                                                                                                         ОІ
                                                                                                                                5 пЈҫ
                                                                                                                                (347)
Moreover, ET вҲ’1 implies
   T вҲ’1 X
        n                                   T вҲ’1 n
   X
               2
                     (346)     256Оі 2 V X X           u 2   (325),T вүӨK+1 4608(K + 1)Оі 2 V О»2вҲ’Оұ Пғ Оұ
             Пғ
             bj,l       вүӨ         2
                                              EОҫ2,j
                                                l    вҲҘОёj,l вҲҘ      вүӨ
                                 n                                                 n
   l=0 j=2                                j=2
                                            l=0
                                                                    Оұ
                     (305)      4608(K + 1)Оі Оұ Пғ Оұ V 2вҲ’ 2                    (304)         8V 2
                        вүӨ                                                     вүӨ                        .                        (348)
                               402вҲ’Оұ nОұвҲ’1 ln2вҲ’Оұ 48n(K+1)
                                                    ОІ                                75 ln 48n(K+1)
                                                                                               ОІ


Upper bound for в‘ҰвҖІ . To estimate this sum, we will use BernsteinвҖҷs inequality. The summands
have conditional expectations equal to zero:

                               24Оі l u          24Оі D l         u
                                                                     E
                       EОҫ1,j
                          l         Оҙj , Пүj,l =      Оҙj , EОҫ1,j
                                                            l [Пүj,l ]  = 0.
                                n                n
                                                             u n
Moreover, for all l = 0, . . . , T вҲ’ 1 random vectors {Пүi,l    }i=1 are independent. Thus, sequence
n     D            EoT вҲ’1,n
  24Оі
   n    Оҙjl , Пүj,l
               u
                            is a martingale difference sequence. Next, the summands are bounded:
                     l,j=0,2
                                                              вҲҡ
    24Оі l u                24Оі l      u
                                            (340),(323) 24Оі     V     (305)       3V      def
        Оҙj , Пүj,l        вүӨ     Оҙj В· вҲҘПүj,l вҲҘ     вүӨ           В·     В· 2О» вүӨ         48n(K+1)
                                                                                          = c.                                  (349)
     n                      n                            n     2            5 ln                               ОІ
                                                              h                           i
                                 вҖІ 2               def            576Оі 2 l   u 2
Finally, conditional variances (Пғj,l ) = EОҫ1,j
                                           l
                                                                   n2 вҹЁОҙj , Пүj,l вҹ©            of the summands are bounded:

                                           576Оі 2 l 2                          (340) 144Оі 2 V

                  вҖІ 2                                      u 2
                                                                                                          u 2
                (Пғj,l ) вүӨ EОҫ1,j
                            l                    вҲҘОҙj вҲҘ В· вҲҘПүj,l вҲҘ                вүӨ                 EОҫ1,j
                                                                                                    l    вҲҘПүj,l вҲҘ .              (350)
                                            n2                                            n2

                                                                   92
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                                                            D           E
Applying BernsteinвҖҷs inequality (Lemma B.1) with Xi,l = 24Оі
                                                         n    Оҙj
                                                                l
                                                                  , Пү u
                                                                     j,l , constant c defined in (349),
                               2
b = 3V             3V
     5 , G = 50 ln 48n(K+1) , we get
                       ОІ
  пЈұ                                                    пЈј
                     T вҲ’1 Xn                     2
                                                                      b2

  пЈІ
      вҖІ    3V        X
                                вҖІ 2           3V       пЈҪ                            ОІ
P |в‘Ұ | >       and            (Пғi,l ) вүӨ       48n(K+1)
                                                         вүӨ 2 exp вҲ’            =            .
  пЈі         5             j=2           50 ln          пЈҫ           2G + /3
                                                                        2cb     24n(K + 1)
                             l=0                                     ОІ

The above is equivalent to
                                   пЈұ                                                        пЈј
                                           T вҲ’1 Xn                     2
                 ОІ                 пЈІ       X
                                                      вҖІ 2           3V             вҖІ     3V пЈҪ
P{Eв‘ҰвҖІ } вүҘ 1вҲ’            , for Eв‘ҰвҖІ = either          (Пғi,l ) >                or |в‘Ұ   | вүӨ      .
             24n(K + 1)            пЈі
                                                j=2           50 ln 48n(K+1)
                                                                          l=0
                                                                                          5 пЈҫ
                                                                                                             ОІ
                                                                                                                     (351)
Moreover, ET вҲ’1 implies
 T вҲ’1 X
      n                                           T вҲ’1 n
 X
              вҖІ 2
                          (350)       144Оі 2 V X X            u 2   (325),T вүӨK+1 2592(K + 1)Оі 2 V О»2вҲ’Оұ Пғ Оұ
            (Пғj,l )        вүӨ                         EОҫ l    вҲҘПүj,l вҲҘ      вүӨ
                                        n2              1,j                                n
  l=0 j=2                                        j=2
                                                   l=0
                                                                         Оұ
                          (305)            2592(K + 1)Оі Оұ Пғ Оұ V 2вҲ’ 2            (304)        3V 2
                           вүӨ                                                     вүӨ                       .           (352)
                                      602вҲ’Оұ nОұвҲ’1 ln2вҲ’Оұ 48n(K+1)
                                                           ОІ                            50 ln 48n(K+1)
                                                                                                  ОІ

                  вҲҡ  PT вҲ’1
Upper bound for 2Оі V  l=0 Оёl . We introduce new random vectors:

                                                     вҲҡ
                           пЈұ lвҲ’1           lвҲ’1
                           пЈІ P              P
                       вҖІ    Оі    Оёr , if Оі      Оёr вүӨ V ,
                      О·l =
                           пЈі r=0           r=0
                            0,        otherwise
for l = 1, 2, . . . , T вҲ’ 1. With probability 1 we have
                                                        вҲҡ
                                                вҲҘО¶lвҖІ вҲҘ вүӨ V .                                                         (353)
Using this and (311), we obtain that ET вҲ’1 implies
                                  v
            T вҲ’1
                                  u      T вҲ’1    2
      вҲҡ      X                вҲҡ u        X
   2Оі V          Оё     = 2 V Оі    t   2       Оё
                      l                                          l
               l=0                                         l=0
                                                v
                                                     вҲ’1              вҲ’1
                                                                        * lвҲ’1         +
                                              вҲҡ u TX               T
                                                u
                                                                   X       X
                                    =        2 V Оі
                                                t  2         2
                                                        вҲҘОёl вҲҘ + 2Оі       Оі    Оёr , Оёl
                                                         l=0                      l=0       r=0
                                                 v
                                                      вҲ’1               вҲ’1
                                              вҲҡ u TX                 T
                                                 u
                                                                     X
                                    =        2 V tОі 2    вҲҘОёl вҲҘ2 + 2Оі      вҹЁО¶lвҖІ , Оёl вҹ©
                                                         l=0                      l=0
                                                v
                                                                     вҲ’1 X                        вҲ’1
                                              вҲҡ u в‘ў + в‘Ј + в‘Ө + в‘Ҙ 2Оі TX    n                     T
                                                u
                                   (315)                                                       X
                                                                               вҖІ u
                                    вүӨ        2 Vu              +            вҹЁО¶ l , Оёi,l вҹ© + 2Оі      вҹЁО¶lвҖІ , Оёlb вҹ©.
                                                                                                               (354)
                                                u       8         n
                                                t                   l=0 i=1                    l=0
                                                                 |       {z            } |        {z        }
                                                                                              в‘§                  в‘Ё

Upper bound for в‘§. To estimate this sum, we will use BernsteinвҖҷs inequality. The summands have
conditional expectations equal to zero:

                                  2Оі вҖІ u           2Оі D вҖІ         u
                                                                        E
                          EОҫ2,i
                            l       вҹЁО¶l , Оёi,l вҹ© =     О¶l , EОҫ2,i
                                                              l [Оёi,l ]   = 0.
                                  n                n
                                                            u n
Moreover, for all l = 0, . . . , T вҲ’ 1 random vectors {Оёi,l   }i=1 are independent. Thus, sequence
n               oT вҲ’1,n
  2Оі  вҖІ u
  n вҹЁО¶l , Оёi,l вҹ©        is a martingale difference sequence. Next, the summands are bounded:
                 l,i=0,1

            2Оі вҖІ u       2Оі вҖІ             (353),(323) 4Оі вҲҡ   (305)        V       def
                                    u
              вҹЁО¶ , Оё вҹ© вүӨ   вҲҘО¶ вҲҘ В· вҲҘОёi,l вҲҘ     вүӨ            VО» вүӨ                   = c.                               (355)
            n l i,l      n l                          n            10 ln 48n(K+1)
                                                                                                     ОІ


                                                                     93
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                                                   h 2                 i
                                  вҖІ 2 def            4Оі      вҖІ u 2
Finally, conditional variances (e
                                Пғi,l ) = EОҫ2,i  l
                                                     n 2  вҹЁО¶  , Оё
                                                             l i,l  вҹ©    of the summands are bounded:
                                     2
                                                                 (353) 4Оі 2 V

                     вҖІ 2             4Оі      вҖІ 2       u 2
                                                                                      u 2
                  (e
                   Пғi,l ) вүӨ EОҫ2,i
                               l
                                        2
                                          вҲҘО¶ l вҲҘ  В· вҲҘОё i,l вҲҘ      вүӨ       2
                                                                              EОҫ2,i
                                                                                 l   вҲҘОёi,l вҲҘ .        (356)
                                      n                                  n
Applying BernsteinвҖҷs inequality (Lemma B.1) with Xi,l = 2Оі  вҖІ u
                                                        n вҹЁО¶l , Оёi,l вҹ©, constant c defined in (355),
    V                     V2
b = 10 ,G=                48n(K+1)        , we get
                 600 ln       ОІ

                          T вҲ’1 n
  (                                                                                    )
                                     V2                                                                 b2

        V      XX
                       вҖІ 2                                                                                                              ОІ
P |в‘§| >    and      (e
                     Пғi,l ) вүӨ                                                              вүӨ 2 exp вҲ’                            =              .
        10      i=1       l=0 600 ln 48n(K+1)                                ОІ
                                                                                                     2G + 2cb/3                     24n(K + 1)

The above is equivalent to
                                                                                вҲ’1 X
                                                               (              T    n
                                                                                                                                     )
                ОІ                                                             X
                                                                                              вҖІ 2              V2                  V
P{Eв‘§ } вүҘ 1вҲ’            , for Eв‘§ =                                  either                  (e
                                                                                            Пғi,l ) >                     or |в‘§| вүӨ       .
            24n(K + 1)
                                                                                 l=0 i=1                 600 ln 48n(K+1)
                                                                                                                    ОІ
                                                                                                                                  10
                                                                                                                                  (357)
Moreover, ET вҲ’1 implies
      T вҲ’1 X
           n                                        T вҲ’1 n
      X
                   вҖІ 2
                             (356)        4Оі 2 V X X           u 2   (325),T вүӨK+1 72(K + 1)Оі 2 V О»2вҲ’Оұ Пғ Оұ
                (e
                 Пғi,l )        вүӨ             2
                                                       EОҫ2,i
                                                         l    вҲҘОёi,l вҲҘ      вүӨ
                                           n                                               n
      l=0 i=1                                      i=1 l=0
                                                                                   Оұ
                             (305)           72(K + 1)Оі Оұ Пғ Оұ V 2вҲ’ 2                       (304)          V2
                               вүӨ                                                            вүӨ                           .                  (358)
                                          602вҲ’Оұ nОұвҲ’1 ln2вҲ’Оұ 48n(K+1)
                                                               ОІ                                   600 ln 48n(K+1)
                                                                                                              ОІ


Upper bound for в‘Ё. Probability event ET вҲ’1 implies
                                           T вҲ’1                                                                     вҲҡ
                                           X                           (353),(324),T вүӨK+1 2 В· 2Оұ (K + 1)Оі               V ПғОұ
                  в‘Ё        вүӨ         2Оі           вҲҘО¶lвҖІ вҲҘ В· вҲҘОёlb вҲҘ                  вүӨ
                                                                                                           О»ОұвҲ’1
                                           l=0

                          (305)      2 В· 2Оұ В· 60ОұвҲ’1 (K + 1)Оі Оұ Пғ Оұ lnОұвҲ’1 48n(K+1)
                                                                             ОІ    (304) V
                           =                              Оұ                        вүӨ        .                                              (359)
                                                        V 2 вҲ’1                          100
                                          вҲҡ  PT вҲ’1
That is, we derive the upper bounds for 2Оі V  l=0 Оёl , в‘ , в‘Ў, в‘ў, в‘Ј, в‘Ө, в‘Ҙ, в‘Ұ. More precisely,
ET вҲ’1 implies
                                                              T вҲ’1
                       (322)    вҲҡ                             X
                    AT вүӨ 4V + 2Оі V                                     Оёl + в‘  + в‘Ў + в‘ў + в‘Ј + в‘Ө + в‘Ҙ + в‘Ұ,
                                                              l=0
                                                                             jвҲ’1
                                                               n
                                                                       *                                        +
                                     32Оі X
                                  (341)      вҖІ                             ОіX u
                             в‘Ҙ = в‘Ҙ +                                            Оё       вҲ’ О¶jT вҲ’1 , Оёj,T
                                                                                                    u
                                                                                                                    ,
                                      n j=2                                n i=1 i,T вҲ’1                 вҲ’1


                                                                   jвҲ’1
                                                              n
                                                                   *                        +
                                    24Оі X
                                  (342)      вҖІ                   ОіX u            T вҲ’1  u
                            в‘Ұ = в‘Ұ +                                    Пү      вҲ’ Оҙj , Пүj,T вҲ’1 ,
                                     n j=2                       n i=1 i,T вҲ’1
                                            T вҲ’1
                              вҲҡ                           (354) вҲҡ
                                                                   r
                                            X                         в‘ў+в‘Ј+в‘Ө+в‘Ҙ
                            2Оі V                   Оёl      вүӨ 2 V                      + в‘§ + в‘Ё,
                                                                             8
                                            l=0
                                   (330)    3V                   V
                                                              (333)         (338) V        (359) V
                               в‘Ў вүӨ              ,         в‘ў вүӨ       , в‘Ө вүӨ           , в‘Ё вүӨ            ,
                                            100                  20               6              100
T вҲ’1 X
     n                                                    T вҲ’1 X
                                                               n                                    T вҲ’1 X
                                                                                                         n
X
           2
                (329)             3V 2                    X
                                                                    2
                                                                       (337)         V2             X
                                                                                                              2
                                                                                                                 (348)       8V 2
          Пғi,l вүӨ                                   ,              Пғ
                                                                  ei,l  вүӨ                       ,           Пғ
                                                                                                            bj,l  вүӨ                   ,
l=0 i=1                 200 ln 48n(K+1)
                                   ОІ                      l=0 i=1             216 ln 48n(K+1)
                                                                                         ОІ          l=0 j=2            75 ln 48n(K+1)
                                                                                                                                  ОІ
                T вҲ’1 X
                     n                                                             T вҲ’1 X
                                                                                        n
                X
                             вҖІ 2
                                          (352)           3V 2                     X
                                                                                                вҖІ 2               V2
                           (Пғj,l ) вүӨ                         48n(K+1)
                                                                      ,                      (e
                                                                                              Пғi,l ) вүӨ                              .
                l=0 j=2                           50 ln            ОІ               l=0 i=1                 600 ln 48n(K+1)
                                                                                                                      ОІ



                                                                             94
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


In addition, we also establish (see (328), (336), (347), (351), (357) and our induction assumption)


                                             (T вҲ’ 1)ОІ
                                          P{ET вҲ’1 } вүҘ 1 вҲ’
                                                      ,
                                               K +1
                    ОІ                          ОІ                          ОІ
   P{Eв‘  } вүҘ 1 вҲ’            , P{Eв‘Ј } вүҘ 1 вҲ’             , P{Eв‘ҘвҖІ } вүҘ 1 вҲ’            ,
                24n(K + 1)                 24n(K + 1)                 24n(K + 1)
                                  ОІ                         ОІ
                P{Eв‘ҰвҖІ } вүҘ 1 вҲ’            , P{Eв‘§ } вүҘ 1 вҲ’             ,
                              24n(K + 1)                24n(K + 1)


where


                                          вҲ’1 X
                               (        T    n
                                                                                            )
                                        X
                                                   2            3V 2                    3V
               Eв‘      =         either            Пғi,l >                   or |в‘ | вүӨ             ,
                                        l=0 i=1          200 ln 48n(K+1)
                                                                     ОІ
                                                                                         10
                                          вҲ’1 X
                               (        T     n
                                                                                           )
                                        X
                                                   2            V2                      V
               Eв‘Ј     =         either           Пғ
                                                 ei,l >                    or |в‘Ј| вүӨ           ,
                                        l=0 i=1          216 ln 48n(K+1)
                                                                     ОІ
                                                                                         6
                               пЈұ                                                            пЈј
                                        T вҲ’1 Xn                   2
                               пЈІ        X
                                                    2          8V               вҖІ       4V  пЈҪ
              Eв‘ҘвҖІ     =          either           Пғ
                                                  bi,l >                  or |в‘Ҙ   | вүӨ           ,
                               пЈі
                                         l=0 j=2         75 ln 48n(K+1)
                                                                    ОІ
                                                                                         5 пЈҫ
                               пЈұ                                                                пЈј
                                        T вҲ’1 Xn                       2
                               пЈІ        X
                                                     вҖІ 2         3V                 вҖІ      3V   пЈҪ
              Eв‘ҰвҖІ     =          either          (Пғi,l ) >                   or |в‘Ұ    | вүӨ
                               пЈі
                                         l=0 j=2           50 ln 48n(K+1)
                                                                        ОІ
                                                                                            5 пЈҫ
                                          вҲ’1 X
                               (        T     n
                                                                                                )
                                        X
                                                    вҖІ 2           V2                        V
               Eв‘§     =         either           (e
                                                  Пғi,l ) >                    or |в‘§| вүӨ
                                         l=0 i=1           600 ln 48n(K+1)
                                                                         ОІ
                                                                                           10


Therefore, probability event ET вҲ’1 вҲ© Eв‘  вҲ© Eв‘Ј вҲ© Eв‘ҘвҖІ вҲ© Eв‘ҰвҖІ вҲ© Eв‘§ implies


                                       s
                   T вҲ’1
                   X                     1 V     V    V      4V      V      V
               Оі          Оёl       вүӨ           + + +               +    +
                                         8 20     6    6      5      10 100
                   l=0
                                           v
                                                         jвҲ’1
                                           u     n
                                                    *                              +
                                           u 32Оі X    Оі  X
                                                                       T вҲ’1
                                         +t                  Оёu               u
                                                                    вҲ’ О¶j , Оёj,T
                                              n j=2 n i=1 i,T вҲ’1                вҲ’1

                                             v        * jвҲ’1                          +
                                                    n
                                       вҲҡ
                                             u
                                             u 32Оі X     Оі X
                                                                          T вҲ’1
                                   вүӨ     V +t                   Оёu              u
                                                                      вҲ’ О¶j , Оёj,T  вҲ’1 ,             (360)
                                                n j=2 n i=1 i,T вҲ’1


                                                        95
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


and
                                       v      * jвҲ’1                        +
                                            n
                                    вҲҡ u 32Оі X
                                       u
                                               ОіX u            T вҲ’1 u
              AT    вүӨ    4V + 2V + 2 V t            Оё       вҲ’ О¶j , Оёj,T вҲ’1
                                         n j=2 n i=1 i,T вҲ’1
                          3V     3V   V     V   V     4V       3V
                              +
                              +     +    + + +              +
                          10    100 20      6   6       5       5
                               n
                                  * jвҲ’1                          +
                          32Оі X     Оі X
                        +                Оёu   вҲ’ О¶jT вҲ’1 , Оёj,T
                                                          u
                           n j=2 n i=1 i,T вҲ’1                 вҲ’1


                               n
                                  * jвҲ’1                          +
                          24Оі X Оі X u             T вҲ’1     u
                        +                Пү    вҲ’ Оҙj , Пүj,T вҲ’1
                           n j=2 n i=1 i,T вҲ’1
                                v          * jвҲ’1                             +
                                       n
                             вҲҡ u 32Оі X
                                u
                                            Оі X
                    вүӨ 9V + 2 V t                 Оёu       вҲ’ О¶jT вҲ’1 , Оёj,T
                                                                      u
                                    n j=2 n i=1 i,T вҲ’1                    вҲ’1


                               n
                                  * jвҲ’1                          +
                          32Оі X Оі X u             T вҲ’1 u
                        +                Оё    вҲ’ О¶j , Оёj,T вҲ’1
                           n j=2 n i=1 i,T вҲ’1
                               n
                                  * jвҲ’1                          +
                          24Оі X Оі X u             T вҲ’1     u
                        +                Пү    вҲ’ Оҙj , Пүj,T вҲ’1 ,                                            (361)
                           n j=2 n i=1 i,T вҲ’1


                                                       jвҲ’1                            jвҲ’1
                                                                        T вҲ’1                           T вҲ’1
In the final part of the proof, we will show that nОі          u
                                                                             and nОі          u
                                                       P                              P
                                                             Оёi,T вҲ’1 = О¶j                   Пүi,T вҲ’1 = Оҙj    with
                                                       i=1                            i=1
high probability. In particular, we consider probability event E
                                                               eT вҲ’1,j defined as follows: inequalities

                                rвҲ’1           вҲҡ                rвҲ’1           вҲҡ
                              ОіX u              V            ОіX u              V
                                    Оёi,T вҲ’1 вүӨ     ,                Пүi,T вҲ’1 вүӨ
                              n i=1            2             n i=1            2

hold for r = 2, . . . , j simultaneously. We want to show that P{ET вҲ’1 вҲ© E     eT вҲ’1,j } вүҘ 1 вҲ’ (T вҲ’1)ОІ вҲ’
                                                                                                K+1
   jОІ
8n(K+1)  for all j  =   2, . . . , n. For j = 2 the statement is trivial since
                                              вҲҡ                                       вҲҡ
                   Оі u         (323) 2ОіО»    V           Оі u          (323) 2ОіО»         V
                    Оё             вүӨ      вүӨ    ,          Пү            вүӨ          вүӨ       .
                   n 1,T вҲ’1            n   2            n 1,T вҲ’1            n         2

Next, we assume that the statement holds for some j = m вҲ’ 1 < n, i.e., P{ET вҲ’1 вҲ© EeT вҲ’1,mвҲ’1 } вүҘ
     (T вҲ’1)ОІ    (mвҲ’1)ОІ                                                       (T вҲ’1)ОІ     mОІ
1 вҲ’ K+1 вҲ’ 8n(K+1) . Our goal is to prove that P{ET вҲ’1 вҲ© ET вҲ’1,m } вүҘ 1 вҲ’ K+1 вҲ’ 8n(K+1)
                                                           e                                   .
                      mвҲ’1
First, we consider nОі       u
                       P
                          Оёi,T вҲ’1 :
                        i=1

                                      v
             mвҲ’1                                          2
                                      u Оі 2 mвҲ’1
                                      u
          Оі  X                              X
               Оёu              =      t         Оё u
          n i=1 i,T вҲ’1                  n2 i=1 i,T вҲ’1
                                      v                             * iвҲ’1                   +
                                      u mвҲ’1                     mвҲ’1
                                      u Оі2 X                 2Оі  X ОіX
                               =      t       вҲҘОёu       вҲҘ2 +              Оёu      , Оёu
                                        n2 i=1 i,T вҲ’1        n i=1 n r=1 r,T вҲ’1 i,T вҲ’1
                                      v
                                      u T вҲ’1 mвҲ’1                 mвҲ’1
                                                                     * iвҲ’1                   +
                                      u Оі2 X X                2Оі X ОіX
                               вүӨ                      u вҲҘ2 +
                                                    вҲҘОёi,l                    u
                                                                            Оёr,T       u
                                                                                 вҲ’1 , Оёi,T вҲ’1 .
                                      t
                                        n2    i=1
                                                              n  i=1
                                                                      n r=1
                                            l=0


                                                       96
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Similarly, we have
                                   v
             mвҲ’1                                       2
                                   u Оі 2 mвҲ’1
                                   u
           Оі X                           X
                Пүu               = t         Пү u
           n i=1 i,T вҲ’1              n2 i=1 i,T вҲ’1
                                   v                              * iвҲ’1              +
                                   u mвҲ’1                      mвҲ’1
                                   u Оі2 X                  2Оі X Оі X u
                                 = t          u        2
                                            вҲҘПүi,T вҲ’1 вҲҘ +                Пү    ,Пү u
                                     n2 i=1                n i=1 n r=1 r,T вҲ’1 i,T вҲ’1
                                   v
                                   u T вҲ’1 mвҲ’1                  mвҲ’1
                                                                   * iвҲ’1              +
                                   u Оі2 X X                 2Оі X Оі X u
                                 вүӨ t               u     2
                                                 вҲҘПүi,l вҲҘ +               Пү    ,Пү u     .
                                     n2     i=1
                                                            n i=1 n r=1 r,T вҲ’1 i,T вҲ’1
                                              l=0


Next, we introduce a new notation:
                                                                                           вҲҡ
                               пЈұ iвҲ’1                                     iвҲ’1
                               пЈІОі P u                                  Оі P u                V
                                     Оё      ,                 if             Оёr,T вҲ’1   вүӨ   2 , ,
                     ПҒi,T вҲ’1 = n r=1 r,T вҲ’1                            n
                                                                         r=1
                                 0,                           otherwise
                               пЈі
                                                                                           вҲҡ
                               пЈұ iвҲ’1                                     iвҲ’1
                               пЈІОі P u                                  Оі P u                    V
                                     Пү       ,                if             Пүr,T вҲ’1   вүӨ       2 ,
                     ПҒвҖІi,T вҲ’1 = n r=1 r,T вҲ’1                           n
                                                                         r=1
                                 0,                           otherwise
                               пЈі

for i = 1, . . . , m вҲ’ 1. By definition, we have
                                               вҲҡ                                 вҲҡ
                                                   V                 V
                                     вҲҘПҒi,T вҲ’1 вҲҘ вүӨ    ,          вҲҘПҒвҖІi,T вҲ’1 вҲҘ вүӨ                 (362)
                                                  2                 2
                                                                  iвҲ’1                    iвҲ’1
                                    eT вҲ’1,mвҲ’1 implies ПҒi,T вҲ’1 = Оі P Оёu
for i = 1, . . . , m вҲ’ 1. Moreover, E                                        , ПҒ вҖІ
                                                                                     = Оі P u
                                                                                             Пүr,T вҲ’1
                                                                n      r,T вҲ’1 i,T вҲ’1   n
                                                                                 r=1                         r=1
for i = 1, . . . , m вҲ’ 1 and
                                            mвҲ’1
                                         Оі X u                     вҲҡ
                                              Оё           вүӨ            в‘ў + в‘Ј + в‘©,
                                         n i=1 i,l
                                           mвҲ’1
                                        Оі X u                      p
                                             Пү            вүӨ         в‘ў + в‘Ј + в‘©вҖІ ,
                                        n i=1 i,l
where
                              mвҲ’1                                            mвҲ’1
                          2Оі X                                           2Оі X вҖІ
                   в‘©=                      u
                                ПҒi,T вҲ’1 , Оёi,T вҲ’1 ,           в‘©вҖІ =             ПҒ     , Пүu    .
                          n i=1                                          n i=1 i,T вҲ’1 i,T вҲ’1

It remains to estimate в‘© and в‘©вҖІ .
Upper bound for в‘©. To estimate this sum, we will use BernsteinвҖҷs inequality. The summands have
conditional expectations equal to zero:

                             2Оі             u               2Оі D                          u
                                                                                                  E
                   EОҫT вҲ’1       вҹЁПҒi,T вҲ’1 , Оёi,T вҲ’1 вҹ© =             ПҒi,T вҲ’1 , EОҫT вҲ’1 [Оёi,T    вҲ’1  ] = 0,
                      2,i     n                              n                   2,i


                            u       n
                                                                                          2Оі              u        mвҲ’1
since random vectors {Оёi,T      вҲ’1 }i=1 are independent. Thus, sequence                    n вҹЁПҒi,T вҲ’1 , Оёi,T вҲ’1 вҹ© i=1 is a
martingale difference sequence. Next, the summands are bounded:
  2Оі                          2Оі                             (362),(323) 2Оі вҲҡ          (305)         V          def
                 u                                 u
     вҹЁПҒi,T вҲ’1 , Оёi,T вҲ’1 вҹ© вүӨ      вҲҘПҒi,T вҲ’1 вҲҘ В· вҲҘОёi,T    вҲ’1 вҲҘ      вүӨ               VО» =               48n(K+1)
                                                                                                                 = c. (363)
   n                           n                                           n                 30 ln       ОІ
                                                                 h 2                             i
                                       вҖІ        2 def               4Оі                 u       2
Finally, conditional variances (b     Пғi,T вҲ’1 )    =    E   T вҲ’1
                                                          Оҫ2,i      n 2  вҹЁПҒ i,T вҲ’1 , Оёi,T вҲ’1 вҹ©     of the summands are
bounded:
                                  2
                                                                        (360) Оі 2 V

          вҖІ        2             4Оі               2       u        2
                                                                                                u          2

        Пғi,T вҲ’1 ) вүӨ EОҫT вҲ’1
       (b                           2
                                      вҲҘПҒ i,T вҲ’1  вҲҘ   В· вҲҘОё i,T вҲ’1 вҲҘ       вүӨ        2
                                                                                     EОҫT вҲ’1 вҲҘОёi,T    вҲ’1 вҲҘ .           (364)
                          2,i     n                                             n        2,i


                                                           97
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Applying BernsteinвҖҷs inequality (Lemma B.1) with Xi = 2Оі            u
                                                      n вҹЁПҒi,T вҲ’1 , Оёi,T вҲ’1 вҹ©, constant c defined in
           V                     V2
(363), b = 30 ,G=                48n(K+1)   , we get
                       5400 ln       ОІ
  (            mвҲ’1
                                                                      )
                                       V2                                                  b2

        V      X
                      вҖІ      2                                                                                     ОІ
P |в‘©| >    and     (b
                    Пғi,T вҲ’1 ) вүӨ                                               вүӨ 2 exp вҲ’                   =               .
        30     i=1              5400 ln 48n(K+1)            ОІ
                                                                                        2G + 2cb/3             24n(K + 1)

The above is equivalent to
                                                 (          mвҲ’1
                                                                                                                   )
                ОІ                                           X
                                                                      вҖІ      2                 V2               V
P{Eв‘© } вүҘ 1вҲ’            , for Eв‘© =                  either          (b
                                                                    Пғi,T вҲ’1 ) >                        or |в‘©| вүӨ      .
            24n(K + 1)                                       i=1                      5400 ln 48n(K+1)
                                                                                                  ОІ
                                                                                                                30
                                                                                                               (365)
Moreover, ET вҲ’1 implies
            mвҲ’1                                n
            X
                     вҖІ      2
                                  (364)   Оі2V X          u        2
                                                                      (325) 18Оі 2 V О»2вҲ’Оұ Пғ Оұ
                  (b
                   Пғi,T вҲ’1 )          вүӨ          E T вҲ’1 вҲҘОёi,T вҲ’1 вҲҘ     вүӨ
            i=1
                                           n2 i=1 Оҫ2,i                              n
                                                                      Оұ
                                  (305)           18Оі Оұ Пғ Оұ V 2вҲ’ 2                 (304)         V2
                                      вүӨ                                             вүӨ                          .     (366)
                                          602вҲ’Оұ nОұвҲ’1 ln2вҲ’Оұ 48n(K+1)
                                                               ОІ                           5400 ln 48n(K+1)
                                                                                                       ОІ


Upper bound for в‘©вҖІ . To estimate this sum, we will use BernsteinвҖҷs inequality. The summands have
conditional expectations equal to zero:

                         2Оі вҖІ          u          2Оі D вҖІ                 u
                                                                                 E
                EОҫT вҲ’1     вҹЁПҒi,T вҲ’1 , Пүi,T вҲ’1 вҹ© =     ПҒi,T вҲ’1 , EОҫT вҲ’1 [Пүi,T вҲ’1 ] = 0,
                   1,i   n                        n               1,i


                         u     n
                                                                         2Оі вҖІ          u        mвҲ’1
since random vectors {Пүi,T вҲ’1 }i=1 are independent. Thus, sequence       n вҹЁПҒi,T вҲ’1 , Пүi,T вҲ’1 вҹ© i=1 is a
martingale difference sequence. Next, the summands are bounded:
 2Оі вҖІ                     2Оі вҖІ                      (362),(323) 2Оі вҲҡ   (305)        V       def
               u                           u
   вҹЁПҒi,T вҲ’1 , Пүi,T вҲ’1 вҹ© вүӨ   вҲҘПҒi,T вҲ’1 вҲҘ В· вҲҘПүi,T вҲ’1 вҲҘ     вүӨ            VО» =          48n(K+1)
                                                                                            = c.(367)
 n                        n                                     n            30 ln                     ОІ
                                                                 h        2
                                                                                                i
                                  вҖІ       2          def  4Оі     вҖІ         u      2
Finally, conditional variances (e
                                Пғi,T  вҲ’1 ) = EОҫ1,i  T вҲ’1
                                                           n2 вҹЁПҒi,T вҲ’1 , Пүi,T вҲ’1 вҹ©  of the summands are
bounded:
                             2
                                                              (360) Оі 2 V

          вҖІ      2          4Оі      вҖІ       2      u      2
                                                                                   u       2

        Пғi,T вҲ’1 ) вүӨ EОҫT вҲ’1
       (e                       вҲҘПҒ  i,T вҲ’1 вҲҘ  В· вҲҘПүi,T вҲ’1 вҲҘ     вүӨ          E T вҲ’1 вҲҘПүi,T вҲ’1 вҲҘ .     (368)
                      1,i   n2                                       n2 Оҫ1,i
Applying BernsteinвҖҷs inequality (Lemma B.1) with Xi = 2Оі  вҖІ         u
                                                      n вҹЁПҒi,T вҲ’1 , Пүi,T вҲ’1 вҹ©, constant c defined in
           V                     V2
(367), b = 30 ,G=                48n(K+1)   , we get
                       5400 ln       ОІ
  (             mвҲ’1
                                                                      )
                                        V2                                                 b2

      вҖІ  V      X
                       вҖІ      2                                                                                    ОІ
P |в‘© | >    and     (e
                     Пғi,T вҲ’1 ) вүӨ                                              вүӨ 2 exp вҲ’                    =              .
         30     i=1              5400 ln 48n(K+1)            ОІ
                                                                                        2G + 2cb/3             24n(K + 1)

The above is equivalent to
                                                  (             mвҲ’1
                                                                                                                             )
                 ОІ                                              X                               V2          V
P{Eв‘©вҖІ } вүҘ 1вҲ’            , for Eв‘©вҖІ =                    either     (e вҖІ
                                                                   Пғi,T     2
                                                                        вҲ’1 ) >         48n(K+1)
                                                                                                or |в‘©вҖІ | вүӨ                       .
             24n(K + 1)                                       i=1              5400 ln                      30
                                                                                           ОІ
                                                                                                         (369)
Moreover, ET вҲ’1 implies
            mвҲ’1                                n
            X
                     вҖІ      2
                                  (368)   Оі2V X          u         2
                                                                       (325) 18Оі 2 V О»2вҲ’Оұ Пғ Оұ
                  (e
                   Пғi,T вҲ’1 )          вүӨ          E T вҲ’1 вҲҘПүi,T вҲ’1 вҲҘ      вүӨ
            i=1
                                           n2 i=1 Оҫ1,i                               n
                                                                      Оұ
                                  (305)           18Оі Оұ Пғ Оұ V 2вҲ’ 2                 (304)         V2
                                      вүӨ                                             вүӨ                          .     (370)
                                          602вҲ’Оұ nОұвҲ’1 ln2вҲ’Оұ 48n(K+1)
                                                               ОІ                           5400 ln 48n(K+1)
                                                                                                       ОІ


                                                            98
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Putting all together we get that ET вҲ’1 вҲ© E
                                         eT вҲ’1,mвҲ’1 implies

         mвҲ’1                                             mвҲ’1
       Оі X u          вҲҡ                                Оі X u          p                             (333)   V
             Оёi,T вҲ’1 вүӨ в‘ў + в‘Ј + в‘©,                            Пүi,T вҲ’1 вүӨ в‘ў + в‘Ј + в‘©вҖІ ,               в‘ў вүӨ          ,
       n i=1                                           n i=1                                                20
            T вҲ’1 X
                 n                                         mвҲ’1
            X
                         2
                           (337)            V2             X
                                                                     вҖІ      2              V2
                       Пғ
                       ei,l вүӨ               48n(K+1)
                                                     ,            (b
                                                                   Пғi,T вҲ’1 ) вүӨ                          ,
             l=0 i=1               216 ln         ОІ         i=1                      5400 ln 48n(K+1)
                                                                                                 ОІ
                                    mвҲ’1
                                    X
                                             вҖІ      2              V2
                                          (e
                                           Пғi,T вҲ’1 ) вүӨ                           .
                                    i=1                   5400 ln 48n(K+1)
                                                                      ОІ
In addition, we also establish (see (336), (365), (369) and our induction assumption)

                      P{ET вҲ’1 вҲ© E  eT вҲ’1,mвҲ’1 } вүҘ 1 вҲ’ (T вҲ’ 1)ОІ вҲ’ (m вҲ’ 1)ОІ ,
                                                          K +1       8n(K + 1)
                         ОІ                                  ОІ                               ОІ
    P{Eв‘Ј } вүҘ 1 вҲ’                 , P{Eв‘© } вүҘ 1 вҲ’                   , P{Eв‘©вҖІ } вүҘ 1 вҲ’
                   24n(K + 1)                         24n(K + 1)                        24n(K + 1)
where
                                     вҲ’1 X
                          (        T     n
                                                                                   )
                                    X
                                               2            V2                   V
               Eв‘Ј =         either           Пғ
                                             ei,l >                  or |в‘Ј| вүӨ        ,
                                    l=0 i=1          216 ln 48n(K+1)
                                                                ОІ
                                                                                 6
                          (        mвҲ’1
                                                                                    )
                                    X
                                           вҖІ 2             V2                    V
               Eв‘© =         either      (b
                                         Пғi,l ) >                     or |в‘©| вүӨ        ,
                                    i=1             5400 ln 48n(K+1)
                                                                ОІ
                                                                                 30
                          (        mвҲ’1
                                                                                        )
                                    X
                                           вҖІ      2           V2               вҖІ     V
              Eв‘©вҖІ =         either      (e
                                         Пғi,T вҲ’1 ) >                      or |в‘© | вүӨ
                                    i=1                5400 ln 48n(K+1)   ОІ
                                                                                     30

Therefore, probability event ET вҲ’1 вҲ© EeT вҲ’1,mвҲ’1 вҲ© Eв‘Ј вҲ© Eв‘© вҲ© Eв‘©вҖІ implies
                               mвҲ’1            r                 вҲҡ
                             Оі X u               V   V    V       V
                                   Оёi,T вҲ’1 вүӨ       + +       =      ,
                             n i=1              20    6   30     2
                               mвҲ’1            r                 вҲҡ
                            Оі X u                V    V   V       V
                                   Пүi,T вҲ’1 вүӨ       + +       =      .
                            n i=1               20    6   30     2

This implies E
             eT вҲ’1,m and
           P{ET вҲ’1 вҲ© EeT вҲ’1,m }        вүҘ P{ET вҲ’1 вҲ© E
                                                   eT вҲ’1,mвҲ’1 вҲ© Eв‘Ј вҲ© Eв‘© вҲ© Eв‘©вҖІ }
                                              n                                      o
                                       = 1 вҲ’ P ET вҲ’1 вҲ© EeT вҲ’1,mвҲ’1 вҲӘ E в‘Ј вҲӘ E в‘© вҲӘ E в‘©вҖІ

                                                      (T вҲ’ 1)ОІ      mОІ
                                       вүҘ 1вҲ’                    вҲ’           .
                                                       K +1      8n(K + 1)
Therefore, for all m = 2, . . . , n the statement holds and, in particular, P{ET вҲ’1 вҲ© E eT вҲ’1,n } вүҘ
     (T вҲ’1)ОІ      ОІ
1 вҲ’ K+1 вҲ’ 8(K+1) . Taking into account (361), we conclude that ET вҲ’1 вҲ© E      eT вҲ’1,n вҲ© Eв‘  вҲ© Eв‘Ј вҲ©
Eв‘Ҙ вҲ© Eв‘Ұ вҲ© Eв‘§ implies
   вҖІ       вҖІ
                                       T вҲ’1
                                       X        вҲҡ
                                     Оі      Оёl вүӨ V , AT вүӨ 9V
                                            l=0
that is equivalent to (310) and (311) for t = T . Moreover,
                             n                                                 o
            P {ET } вүҘ P ET вҲ’1 вҲ© E       eT вҲ’1,n вҲ© Eв‘  вҲ© Eв‘Ј вҲ© Eв‘ҘвҖІ вҲ© Eв‘ҰвҖІ вҲ© Eв‘§
                                  n                                             o
                       = 1 вҲ’ P ET вҲ’1 вҲ© E     en вҲӘ E в‘  вҲӘ E в‘Ј вҲӘ E в‘ҘвҖІ вҲӘ E в‘ҰвҖІ вҲӘ E в‘§

                                   (T вҲ’ 1)ОІ      ОІ             ОІ           TОІ
                       =   1вҲ’               вҲ’          вҲ’5В·            =1вҲ’      .
                                    K +1      8(K + 1)     24n(K + 1)     K +1

                                                          99
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


In other words, we showed that P{Ek } вүҘ 1 вҲ’ kОІ/(K+1) for all k = 0, 1, . . . , K + 1. For k = K + 1
we have that with probability at least 1 вҲ’ ОІ
                                n            вҖІ              вҖІ
                                                                       o
GapвҲҡV (e xK
          avg )   =     maxвҲ— вҹЁF (u), x    etavg вҲ’ uвҹ© + ОЁ(e
                                                         xtavg ) вҲ’ ОЁ(u)
                            BвҲҡV (x )

                                1              n                  вҖІ              вҖІ
                                                                                                  вҖІ
                                                                                                            o
                     вүӨ                 maxвҲ— 2Оі(tвҖІ + 1) вҹЁF (u), x
                                                               etavg вҲ’ uвҹ© + ОЁ(e
                                                                              xtavg ) вҲ’ ОЁ(u) + вҲҘxt +1 вҲ’ uвҲҘ2
                            2Оі(K + 1) BвҲҡV (x )
                    (319)      9V
                     вүӨ                .
                            2Оі(K + 1)
Finally, if
                                                                        вҲҡ
                            пЈұ                                                            пЈј
                                                                  2вҲ’Оұ         ОұвҲ’1
                            пЈІ              1                    60 Оұ        Vn Оұ         пЈҪ
                Оі = min                        ,
                            пЈі 1920L ln 48n(K+1) 97200 Оұ1 (K + 1) Оұ1 Пғ ln ОұвҲ’1
                                                                          Оұ
                                                                             48n(K+1) пЈҫ
                                           ОІ                                     ОІ
then with probability at least 1 вҲ’ ОІ
                                пЈұ                                       ОұвҲ’1
                                                                                     пЈј
                   9V           пЈІ 8640LV ln 48n(K+1) 9 В· 60 2вҲ’Оұ
                                                             Оұ  В· ПғR ln  Оұ
                                                                            48n(K+1) пЈҪ
                                                 ОІ                              ОІ
       xK
GapвҲҡV (eavg ) вүӨ           = max                      ,           1  ОұвҲ’1          ОұвҲ’1
                2Оі(K + 1)       пЈі       K +1           2 В· 97200 Оұ n Оұ (K + 1) Оұ пЈҫ
                  пЈ«    пЈұ            вҲҡ              пЈјпЈ¶
                       пЈІ LV ln nK Пғ V ln ОұвҲ’1
                                           Оұ  nK пЈҪ
                                ОІ               ОІ
              = O пЈӯmax            ,   ОұвҲ’1   ОұвҲ’1
                                                    пЈё.
                       пЈі     K       n Оұ K Оұ       пЈҫ

             xK
To get GapR (eavg ) вүӨ Оө with probability вүҘ 1 вҲ’ ОІ, K should be
                               пЈ«                     вҲҡ ! ОұвҲ’1
                                                           Оұ       вҲҡ пЈ¶
                                 LV      nLV   1   Пғ   V         Пғ   VпЈё
                      K = OпЈӯ         ln      ,                ln
                                  Оө       ОөОІ n       Оө             ОөОІ
that concludes the proof.

H.2    Q UASI -S TRONGLY M ONOTONE C ASE

We start with the following lemma.
Lemma H.2. Let Assumptions 6 and 8 hold for Q = B4nвҲҡV (xвҲ— ), where V вүҘ
                                    48n(K+1) P
                    36000000Оі 2 ln2             n
вҲҘx0  вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲҘ2 +                  n2
                                        ОІ
                                                i=1 вҲҘF
                                                            вҲ— 2
                                                       i (x )вҲҘ , ОҪ     = ОіВө, and 0 < Оі вүӨ
                   вҲҡ
                     n
min 6L 1
         ,           48n(K+1) ,
                                          1
                                            2 48n(K+1)
                                                                      ek lie in B4nвҲҡV (xвҲ— ) for all k =
                                                          . If xk and x
              15000L ln     ОІ        72000000Вө ln   ОІ

0, 1, . . . , K for some K вүҘ 0, then the iterates produced by DProx-clipped-SEG-shift satisfy
                              ОіВө                      XK        ОіВө
             VK+1 вүӨ exp вҲ’ (K + 1) V + 2Оі                  exp вҲ’ (K вҲ’ k) вҹЁОёk , xk вҲ’ xвҲ— вҹ©
                                 2                               2
                                                          k=0
                                   K X
                                 2 X n
                                Оі                   ОіВө
                                                                 u 2         u 2

                            +                  exp вҲ’ (K вҲ’ k) 18вҲҘОёi,k вҲҘ + 14вҲҘПүi,k вҲҘ
                                n2         i=1
                                                     2
                                     k=0
                                     K X
                                     X n   ОіВө
                            +Оі 2                                b
                                                                    вҲҘ2 + 14вҲҘПүi,k  b
                                                                                      вҲҘ2

                                   exp вҲ’ (K вҲ’ k) 18вҲҘОёi,k
                                               2
                          k=0 i=1
                               K    n
                                                              *jвҲ’1               +
                        32Оі 2 X X             ОіВө             X
                                                                      u      u
                      + 2               exp вҲ’ (K вҲ’ k)                Оёi,k , Оёj,k
                         n                       2
                              k=0 j=2                          i=1
                               K    n
                                                              *jвҲ’1               +
                        24Оі 2 X X             ОіВө             X
                                                                       u      u
                      + 2               exp вҲ’ (K вҲ’ k)                Пүi,k , Пүj,k ,                    (371)
                         n                       2
                              k=0 j=2                          i=1
                                         48n(K+1) P
                         36000000Оі 2 ln2

                                                   n
where Vk = вҲҘxk вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲҘ2 +            n 2
                                             ОІ
                                                   i=1   вҲҘehk
                                                            i вҲ’ F i (x вҲ— 2
                                                                         )вҲҘ   +  вҲҘ h
                                                                                   b k
                                                                                     i вҲ’   F i (x вҲ— 2
                                                                                                   )вҲҘ   and
      u      b           u      b
Оёk , Оёi,k , Оёi,k , Пүk , Пүi,k , Пүi,k are defined in (298), (299), and (315)-(316)


                                                        100
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Proof. From (303) with u = xвҲ— we have
                                                               1 k              1
            ek вҲ’ xвҲ— вҹ© + ОЁ(e
      xk ), x             xk ) вҲ’ ОЁ(xвҲ— )                          вҲҘx вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲҘ2 вҲ’ вҲҘxk+1 вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲҘ2

Оі вҹЁF (e                                                вүӨ
                                                               2                2
                                                                   1          2 2
                                                                                    k               1
                                                                  вҲ’ 1 вҲ’ 6Оі L вҲҘe       x вҲ’ xk вҲҘ2 вҲ’ вҲҘxk+1 вҲ’ x      ek вҲҘ2
                                                                   2                                4
                                                                                                      ek вҲ’ xвҲ— вҹ©.
                                                                  +3Оі 2 вҲҘПүk вҲҘ2 + 3Оі 2 вҲҘОёk вҲҘ2 + ОівҹЁОёk , x

Using quasi-strong monotonicity of F , the fact that вҲ’F (xвҲ— ) вҲҲ вҲӮОЁ(xвҲ— ), and convexity of ОЁ(xвҲ— ), we
derive

        xk вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲҘ 2
    2ОіВөвҲҘe                         xk ) вҲ’ F (xвҲ— ), x
                          вүӨ 2ОівҹЁF (e               ek вҲ’ xвҲ— вҹ©
                                         ek вҲ’ xвҲ— вҹ© + ОЁ(e
                                   xk ), x             xk ) вҲ’ ОЁ(xвҲ— )

                          вүӨ 2Оі вҹЁF (e
                                 вҲҘxk вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲҘ2 вҲ’ вҲҘxk+1 вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲҘ2 вҲ’ 1 вҲ’ 6Оі 2 L2 вҲҘe
                                                                                 k
                          вүӨ                                                       x вҲ’ xk вҲҘ2
                                     1
                                   вҲ’ вҲҘxk+1 вҲ’ x                                              ek вҲ’ xвҲ— вҹ©.
                                                ek вҲҘ2 + 6Оі 2 вҲҘПүk вҲҘ2 + 6Оі 2 вҲҘОёk вҲҘ2 + 2ОівҹЁОёk , x
                                     2
                xk вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲҘ2 вүҘ 21 вҲҘxk вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲҘ2 вҲ’ вҲҘe
Next, we apply вҲҘe                              xk вҲ’ xk вҲҘ2 and rearrange the terms:
                           ОіВө   k
 вҲҘxk+1 вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲҘ2                   вҲҘx вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲҘ2 вҲ’ ОіВөвҲҘe    xk вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲҘ2 вҲ’ 1 вҲ’ ОіВө вҲ’ 6Оі 2 L2 вҲҘe
                                                                                     k
                  вүӨ     1вҲ’                                                           x вҲ’ xk вҲҘ2
                            2
                                                              ek вҲ’ xвҲ— вҹ©.
                         +6Оі 2 вҲҘПүk вҲҘ2 + 6Оі 2 вҲҘОёk вҲҘ2 + 2ОівҹЁОёk , x

              ek вҲ’ xвҲ— вҹ© = 2ОівҹЁОёk , xk вҲ’ xвҲ— вҹ© + 2ОівҹЁОёk , x
Since 2ОівҹЁОёk , x                                       ek вҲ’ xk вҹ© вүӨ 2Оі 2 вҲҘОёk вҲҘ2 + 12 вҲҘe
                                                                                    xk вҲ’ xk вҲҘ2 , we have

                                 ОіВө   k                                              1
вҲҘxk+1 вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲҘ2     вүӨ       1вҲ’         вҲҘx вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲҘ2 вҲ’ ОіВөвҲҘe
                                                     xk вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲҘ2 вҲ’                      вҲ’ ОіВө вҲ’ 6Оі 2 L2 вҲҘe
                                                                                                       xk вҲ’ xk вҲҘ2
                                  2                                                  2
                          +6Оі 2 вҲҘПүk вҲҘ2 + 8Оі 2 вҲҘОёk вҲҘ2 + 2ОівҹЁОёk , xk вҲ’ xвҲ— вҹ©.                                      (372)

Now, we move on to the shifts: for all i вҲҲ [n] (for convenience, we use the new notation: hвҲ—i = Fi (xвҲ— )
for all i вҲҲ [n])
                                                  D                      E
       вҲҘehk+1  вҲ’ hвҲ—i вҲҘ2 = вҲҘe   hki вҲ’ hвҲ—i вҲҘ2 + 2ОҪ вҲҶ   Лң ki , e
                                                            hki вҲ’ hвҲ—i + ОҪ 2 вҲҘвҲҶ    Лң ki вҲҘ2
          i
                                                  D                           E
                         = вҲҘe  hki вҲ’ hвҲ—i вҲҘ2 + 2ОҪ geik вҲ’ e    hki , e hki вҲ’ hвҲ—i + ОҪ 2 вҲҘe gik вҲ’ e
                                                                                              hki вҲҘ2
                        ОҪвүӨ1                       D                           E
                         вүӨ вҲҘe  hki вҲ’ hвҲ—i вҲҘ2 + 2ОҪ geik вҲ’ e    hki , e hki вҲ’ hвҲ—i + ОҪвҲҘe   gik вҲ’ e
                                                                                             hki вҲҘ2
                                                 D                                   E
                         = вҲҘe  hki вҲ’ hвҲ—i вҲҘ2 + ОҪ geik вҲ’ e    hki , geik + ehki вҲ’ 2hвҲ—i

                          вүӨ                  hki вҲ’ hвҲ—i вҲҘ2 + ОҪвҲҘe
                                     (1 вҲ’ ОҪ)вҲҘe                gik вҲ’ hвҲ—i вҲҘ2
                          вүӨ                  hk вҲ’ hвҲ— вҲҘ2 + 2ОҪвҲҘe
                                     (1 вҲ’ ОҪ)вҲҘe i       i        g k вҲ’ Fi (xk )вҲҘ2 + 2ОҪвҲҘFi (xk ) вҲ’ hвҲ— вҲҘ2
                                                                        i                                 i
                          вүӨ                  hki вҲ’ hвҲ—i вҲҘ2 + 2ОҪвҲҘПүi,k вҲҘ2 + 2ОҪвҲҘFi (xk ) вҲ’ hвҲ—i вҲҘ2
                                     (1 вҲ’ ОҪ)вҲҘe
                          =          (1 вҲ’ ОіВө)вҲҘehk вҲ’ hвҲ— вҲҘ2 + 2ОіВөвҲҘПүi,k вҲҘ2 + 2ОіВөвҲҘFi (xk ) вҲ’ hвҲ— вҲҘ2
                                                   i       i                                          i
                          (32)
                          вүӨ                   hki вҲ’ hвҲ—i вҲҘ2 + 2ОіВөвҲҘПүi,k вҲҘ2 + 2ОіВөL2 вҲҘxk вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲҘ2
                                     (1 вҲ’ ОіВө)вҲҘe
                          вүӨ                   hki вҲ’ hвҲ—i вҲҘ2 + 2ОіВөвҲҘПүi,k вҲҘ2 + 4ОіВөL2 вҲҘe
                                     (1 вҲ’ ОіВө)вҲҘe                                   xk вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲҘ 2
                                              2   k      k 2
                                       +4ОіВөL вҲҘe
                                              x вҲ’x вҲҘ                                                           (373)

and, similarly,

          hk+1
         вҲҘb i  вҲ’ hвҲ—i вҲҘ2       вүӨ                hki вҲ’ hвҲ—i вҲҘ2 + 2ОіВөвҲҘОёi,k вҲҘ2 + 2ОіВөвҲҘFi (e
                                      (1 вҲ’ ОіВө)вҲҘb                                    xk ) вҲ’ hвҲ—i вҲҘ2
                              (32)
                              вүӨ                hki вҲ’ hвҲ—i вҲҘ2 + 2ОіВөвҲҘОёi,k вҲҘ2 + 2ОіВөL2 вҲҘe
                                      (1 вҲ’ ОіВө)вҲҘb                                   xk вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲҘ 2 .               (374)


                                                           101
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Summing up (372), (373), and (374), we derive
                          ОіВө   k
   Vk+1     вүӨ         1вҲ’       вҲҘx вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲҘ2
                           2
                                  36 В· 106 Оі 2 ln2 48n(K+1)
                                                       ОІ
                                                               Xn
                                                                        k    вҲ— 2      k    вҲ— 2

                       +(1 вҲ’ ОіВө)                                    вҲҘ h
                                                                      e
                                                                        i вҲ’ hi вҲҘ + вҲҘh
                                                                                    b
                                                                                      i вҲ’ hi вҲҘ
                                               n2              i=1

                                 216 В· 106 Оі 3 ВөL2 ln2 48n(K+1)
                                                                   !
                                                            ОІ
                       вҲ’ ОіВө вҲ’                                          xk вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲҘ2
                                                                      вҲҘe
                                                  n
                                                  144 В· 106 Оі 3 ВөL2 ln2 48n(K+1)
                                                                                  !
                           1             2 2                                ОІ
                       вҲ’      вҲ’ ОіВө вҲ’ 6Оі L вҲ’                                          xk вҲ’ xk вҲҘ2
                                                                                    вҲҘe
                           2                                      n
                                +6Оі 2 вҲҘПүk вҲҘ2 + 8Оі 2 вҲҘОёk вҲҘ2 + 2ОівҹЁОёk , xk вҲ’ xвҲ— вҹ©
                                    72 В· 106 Оі 3 Вө ln2 48n(K+1)
                                                           ОІ
                                                                n
                                                                X
                                                                    вҲҘОёi,k вҲҘ2 + вҲҘПүi,k вҲҘ2

                                +
                                               n2            i=1
                                  ОіВө
                 вүӨ             1вҲ’      Vk + 6Оі 2 вҲҘПүk вҲҘ2 + 8Оі 2 вҲҘОёk вҲҘ2 + 2ОівҹЁОёk , xk вҲ’ xвҲ— вҹ©
                                   2
                                     n
                                 Оі2 X
                                         вҲҘОёi,k вҲҘ2 + вҲҘПүi,k вҲҘ2

                                + 2
                                 n i=1
                                                                    n
             (321),(313)        ОіВө                               Оі2 X
                                        Vk + 2ОівҹЁОёk , xk вҲ’ xвҲ— вҹ© + 2         u 2         u 2

                 вүӨ         exp вҲ’                                       18вҲҘОёi,k вҲҘ + 14вҲҘПүi,k вҲҘ
                                   2                             n i=1
                                   n                                   n
                                                                         *jвҲ’1          +
                                2
                                  X
                                            b   2        b   2
                                                                 32Оі 2 X   X
                                                                                 u   u
                             +Оі        18вҲҘОёi,k вҲҘ + 14вҲҘПүi,k вҲҘ + 2                Оё ,Оё
                                  i=1
                                                                   n j=2 i=1 i,k j,k
                                      n
                                         *jвҲ’1           +
                              24Оі 2 X X u             u
                             + 2               Пү ,Пү        .
                                n j=2 i=1 i,k j,k

Unrolling the recurrence, we get the result.


Next, we proceed with the full statement of our main result for DProx-clipped-SEG-shift in the
quasi-strongly monotone case.
Theorem H.2 (Case 1 from Theorem C.2). Let Assumptions 1, 6 and 8 hold for Q = B3nвҲҡV (xвҲ— ),
                                          48n(K+1) P
                         36000000Оі 2 ln2                  n
where V вүҘ вҲҘx0 вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲҘ2 +              n2
                                               ОІ                     вҲ— 2
                                                          i=1 вҲҘFi (x )вҲҘ and
                   (                                                вҲҡ                             )
                                  1                   1                n                2 ln(BK )
   0 < Оі вүӨ min                                     ,     ,                           ,              ,     (375)
                     72 В· 106 Вө ln2 48n(K+1)
                                           ОІ
                                                     6L 15000L ln 48n(K+1) Вө(K + 1)
                                                                             ОІ
                   пЈұ                                                              пЈј
                                     2(ОұвҲ’1)              2(ОұвҲ’1)
                                                                 2
                   пЈІ               n    Оұ    (K + 1)        Оұ   Вө V               пЈҪ
     BK = max 2,                                                                                          (376)
                   пЈі 3110400 Оұ2 Пғ 2 ln 2(ОұвҲ’1)   Оұ
                                                        48n(K+1)
                                                                     ln2
                                                                         (B     ) пЈҫ
                                                             ОІ               K
                пЈ«       пЈұ                                                                             пЈјпЈ¶
                        пЈҙ
                        пЈҙ                                                                             пЈҙ
                                                                                                      пЈҙ
                        пЈҙ                                2(ОұвҲ’1)   2(ОұвҲ’1)
                                                                                                      пЈҙ
                                                                            2
                пЈ¬       пЈҙ                                                                             пЈҙ
                                                                                                      пЈҪпЈ·
                пЈ¬       пЈІ                             n     Оұ   K    Оұ    Вө   V                         пЈ·
          = O пЈ¬max 2,
                пЈ¬                                                  (                              )!    пЈ·,
                                                                                                        пЈ· (377)
                                                                           2(ОұвҲ’1)      2(ОұвҲ’1)
                        пЈҙ           2(ОұвҲ’1)                                                     2
                                                                                                      пЈҙ
                        пЈҙ      2                nK        2              n     Оұ   K      Оұ   Вө V     пЈҙ
                        пЈҙ Пғ ln                         ln max 2,
                пЈӯ       пЈҙ              Оұ                                                              пЈҙ пЈё
                                                 ОІ                                2(ОұвҲ’1)
                        пЈі                                                                             пЈҙ
                                                                                                      пЈҫ
                                                                              2
                                                                           Пғ ln Оұ          ( ОІ )
                                                                                            nK

                                       вҲҡ
              n exp(вҲ’ОіВө(1 + k/4)) V
      О»k =                                   ,                                                            (378)
                  300Оі ln 48n(K+1)
                                ОІ
         ОҪ    = ОіВө                                                                                      (379)


                                                       102
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


for some K вүҘ 1 and ОІ вҲҲ (0, 1]. Then, after K iterations of DProx-clipped-SEG-shift, the following
inequality holds with probability at least 1 вҲ’ ОІ:

                                                     ОіВө(K + 1)
                             вҲҘxK+1 вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲҘ2 вүӨ 2 exp вҲ’             V.                                   (380)
                                                         2

In particular, when Оі equals the minimum from (304), then after K iterations of DProx-clipped-
SEG-shift, we have with probability at least 1 вҲ’ ОІ that
                                  (                             !
   K+1      вҲ— 2                                       K                 ВөK
вҲҘx       вҲ’x вҲҘ      =    O max V exp вҲ’                      , V  exp   вҲ’       ,
                                                    ln2 nK
                                                         ОІ
                                                                          L
                                                                     ! 2 2(ОұвҲ’1)
                                                               вҲҡ          Пғ ln Оұ       nK
                                                                                            ln2 BK
                                                                                                   )!
                                                             Вө nK                       ОІ
                                                    V exp вҲ’             ,                            ,
                                                             L ln nK
                                                                   ОІ
                                                                               2(ОұвҲ’1)
                                                                             n Оұ K Оұ Вө2
                                                                                       2(ОұвҲ’1)


i.e., to achieve вҲҘxK вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲҘ2 вүӨ Оө with probability at least 1 вҲ’ ОІ DProx-clipped-SEG-shift needs
                  (                         !                   !
                        L          nL V          V      nL V
  K = O max            вҲҡ    + ln      ln      ln     ln    ln    ,
                         nВө        ВөОІ    Оө       Оө      ВөОІ    Оө
                                                 Оұ               Оұ !              )!
                                        1 Пғ 2 2(ОұвҲ’1)    n Пғ 2 2(ОұвҲ’1)

                             L     V                                     Оұ
                               ln     ,              ln              ln ОұвҲ’1 (BОө )
                             Вө     Оө    n Вө2 Оө          ОІ Вө2 Оө
                                                                                   (381)

iterations/oracle calls per worker, where
                                           пЈұ                                       пЈј
                                           пЈҙ
                                           пЈҙ                                       пЈҙ
                                                                                   пЈҙ
                                           пЈІ                        V              пЈҪ
                              BОө = max         2,                               Оұ
                                                                             2(ОұвҲ’1)   .
                                           пЈҙ                1       Пғ2               пЈҙ
                                           пЈҙ
                                           пЈі        Оө ln    ОІ       Вө2 Оө
                                                                                     пЈҙ
                                                                                     пЈҫ


Proof. Similar to previous results, our proof is induction-based. To formulate the statement rigorously,
we introduce probability event Ek for each k = 0, 1, . . . , K + 1 as follows: inequalities

                                                     ОіВөt
                                        Vt вүӨ 2 exp вҲ’       V                                          (382)
                                                      2
                                 rвҲ’1                             вҲҡ
                               ОіX u                   ОіВө(t вҲ’ 1)    V
                                     Оёi,tвҲ’1 вүӨ exp вҲ’                  ,                                (383)
                               n i=1                      4       2
                                 rвҲ’1                             вҲҡ
                               ОіX u                   ОіВө(t вҲ’ 1)    V
                                     Пүi,tвҲ’1 вүӨ exp вҲ’                                                   (384)
                               n i=1                      4       2

hold for t = 0, 1, . . . , k and r = 1, 2, . . . , n simultaneously. We will prove by induction that
P{Ek } вүҘ 1 вҲ’ kОІ/(K+1) for all k = 0, 1, . . . , K + 1. The base of induction follows immediately
by the definition of V . Next, we assume that the statement holds for k = T вҲ’ 1 вүӨ K, i.e.,
P{ET вҲ’1 } вүҘ 1вҲ’ (T вҲ’1)ОІ/(K+1). Let us show that it also holds for k = T , i.e., P{ET } вүҘ 1вҲ’ T ОІ/(K+1).
Similarly to the monotone case, one can show that due to our choice of the clipping level, we have that
                   et вҲҲ B4nвҲҡV (xвҲ— ) for t = 0, . . . , T вҲ’ 1. Indeed, for t = 0, 1, . . . , T вҲ’ 1 inequality
ET вҲ’1 implies xt , x


                                                       103
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


(382) gives xt вҲҲ B2вҲҡV (xвҲ— ). Next, for x
                                       et , t = 0, . . . , T вҲ’ 1 event ET вҲ’1 implies



                  xt вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲҘ
                 вҲҘe              =                     g t ) вҲ’ proxОіОЁ (xвҲ— вҲ’ ОіF (xвҲ— ))вҲҘ
                                       вҲҘ proxОіОЁ (xt вҲ’ Оіe
                                 вүӨ     вҲҘxt вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲ’ Оі(eg t вҲ’ F (xвҲ— ))вҲҘ
                                                             n                        n
                                                         1 X et                    1 X Лңt
                                 вүӨ     вҲҘxt вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲҘ + Оі            (hi вҲ’ Fi (xвҲ— )) +      вҲҶ
                                                         n i=1                     n i=1 i
                                                 v
                                                 u n                                n
                                        вҲҡ        u1 X                            Оі X Лңt
                                 вүӨ     2 V +Оі    t             t        вҲ—
                                                           вҲҘh вҲ’ Fi (x )вҲҘ +
                                                             e              2          вҲҘвҲҶi вҲҘ
                                                   n i=1 i                       n i=1
                                                       вҲҡ
                                        вҲҡ                 n          p
                                 вүӨ     2 V +            48n(K+1)
                                                                       Vt + ОіО»t
                                               6000 ln       ОІ
                                                        вҲҡ         !
                               (382)            20n + 2n             вҲҡ          вҲҡ
                                 вүӨ       2+           48n(K+1)
                                                                       V вүӨ 4n V .
                                             6000 ln       ОІ


This means that we can apply Lemma H.2: ET вҲ’1 implies


                          ОіВө        T
                                    X вҲ’1      ОіВө
            VT     вүӨ exp вҲ’ T V + 2Оі      exp вҲ’ (T вҲ’ 1 вҲ’ t) вҹЁОёt , xt вҲ’ xвҲ— вҹ©
                           2        t=0
                                               2
                                 T вҲ’1 n
                              Оі2 X X         ОіВө
                                                              u 2         u 2

                          +    2
                                        exp вҲ’ (T вҲ’ 1 вҲ’ t) 18вҲҘОёi,t вҲҘ + 14вҲҘПүi,t вҲҘ
                              n t=0 i=1       2
                                 T
                                 X вҲ’1 X
                                      n    ОіВө
                          +Оі 2                              b 2               b 2

                                      exp вҲ’ (T вҲ’ 1 вҲ’ t) 18вҲҘОёi,t вҲҘ + 14вҲҘПүi,t    вҲҘ
                             t=0 i=1
                                            2
                                 T вҲ’1 n
                                                          *jвҲ’1               +
                           32Оі 2 X X         ОіВө            X
                                                                  u      u
                          + 2           exp вҲ’ (T вҲ’ 1 вҲ’ t)        Оёi,t , Оёj,t
                            n t=0 j=2         2            i=1
                                 T вҲ’1 n
                                                          *jвҲ’1               +
                           24Оі 2 X X         ОіВө            X
                                                                   u      u
                          + 2           exp вҲ’ (T вҲ’ 1 вҲ’ t)        Пүi,t , Пүj,t .
                            n t=0 j=2         2            i=1


Before we proceed, we introduce a new notation:


                                                                   вҲҡ
                               x вҲ’ xвҲ— , if вҲҘxt вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲҘ вүӨ exp вҲ’ ОіВөt
                                t
                                                               4     2V ,
                         О·t =
                               0,       otherwise,



for all t = 0, 1, . . . , T . Random vectors {О·t }Tt=0 are bounded almost surely:



                                                       ОіВөt вҲҡ

                                         вҲҘО·t вҲҘ вүӨ exp вҲ’       2V                                (385)
                                                        4

                                                      104
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


for all t = 0, 1, . . . , T . In addition, О·t = xt вҲ’ xвҲ— follows from ET вҲ’1 for all t = 0, 1, . . . , T and,
thus, ET вҲ’1 implies


               ОіВө        T вҲ’1 n
                      2Оі X X          ОіВө
                                                     u
VT   вүӨ    exp вҲ’ T V +            exp вҲ’ (T вҲ’ 1 вҲ’ l) вҹЁОёi,l , О·l вҹ©
                2      n               2
                         l=0 i=1
                      |                 {z                   }
                                                              в‘ 
                   T
                   X вҲ’1    ОіВө
             + 2Оі     exp вҲ’ (T вҲ’ 1 вҲ’ l) вҹЁОёlb , О·l вҹ©
                            2
                  l=0
               |              {z                 }
                                       в‘Ў
                  2 T вҲ’1 X
                         n
              Оі     X         ОіВө                     u 2                u 2
             + 2         exp вҲ’ (T вҲ’ 1 вҲ’ l) 18EОҫ2,i
                                               l    вҲҘОёi,l вҲҘ + 14EОҫ1,i
                                                                  l    вҲҘПүi,l вҲҘ
              n                2
                 l=0 i=1
              |                            {z                                  }
                                                              в‘ў
                  2 T вҲ’1 X
                         n
              Оі     X         ОіВө
                                               u 2         u 2
                                                                             u 2                u 2
             + 2         exp вҲ’ (T вҲ’ 1 вҲ’ l) 18вҲҘОёi,l вҲҘ + 14вҲҘПүi,l вҲҘ вҲ’ 18EОҫ2,i
                                                                       l    вҲҘОёi,l вҲҘ вҲ’ 14EОҫ1,i
                                                                                          l    вҲҘПүi,l вҲҘ
              n                2
                 l=0 i=1
              |                                       {z                                               }
                                                                               в‘Ј
                  2 T вҲ’1 X
                         n
              Оі     X         ОіВө
                                               b 2         b 2

             + 2         exp вҲ’ (T вҲ’ 1 вҲ’ l) 18вҲҘОёi,l вҲҘ + 14вҲҘПүi,l вҲҘ
              n                2
                 l=0 i=1
              |                     {z                           }
                                                   в‘Ө
                         вҲ’1 X
                                            *jвҲ’1             +
                     2 T    n
              32Оі      X       ОіВө            X
                                                  u      u
             + 2          exp вҲ’ (T вҲ’ 1 вҲ’ l)      Оёi,l , Оёj,l
                n               2
                  l=0 j=2                    i=1
              |                   {z                         }
                                               в‘Ҙ
                         вҲ’1 X
                                            *jвҲ’1            +
                     2 T    n
              24Оі      X       ОіВө            X
                                                  u      u
             + 2          exp вҲ’ (T вҲ’ 1 вҲ’ l)      Пүi,l , Пүj,l .                                                                (386)
                n               2
                  l=0 j=2                    i=1
              |                   {z                        }
                                               в‘Ұ


To derive high-probability bounds for в‘ , в‘Ў, в‘ў, в‘Ј, в‘Ө, в‘Ҙ, в‘Ұ we need to establish several useful in-
                       u      b      u      b
equalities related to Оёi,l , Оёi,l , Пүi,l , Пүi,l . First, by definition of clipping


                                         u                     u
                                       вҲҘОёi,l вҲҘ вүӨ 2О»l ,       вҲҘПүi,l вҲҘ вүӨ 2О»l .                                          (387)


Next, we notice that ET вҲ’1 implies


      вҲҘFi (xl ) вҲ’ e
                  hli вҲҘ    вүӨ      вҲҘFi (xl ) вҲ’ Fi (xвҲ— )вҲҘ + вҲҘe
                                                           hli вҲ’ Fi (xвҲ— )вҲҘ
                                                   v
                                                   u n
                                                   uX
                          (32)
                           вүӨ      LвҲҘxl вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲҘ + t        вҲҘehli вҲ’ Fi (xвҲ— )вҲҘ2
                                                       j=1
                                                    вҲҡ
                                   p               n Vl
                           вүӨ      L Vl +
                                            6000Оі ln 48n(K+1)
                                                         ОІ
                                                                      !
                                  вҲҡ                                                       вҲҡ

                          (382)                          n                      ОіВөl               (375),(378) О»
                                                                                                                  l
                           вүӨ          2 L+                                exp вҲ’               V      вүӨ
                                             6000Оі ln 48n(K+1)
                                                          ОІ
                                                                                 4                           2


                                                       105
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


and
     xl ) вҲ’ b
вҲҘFi (e      hli вҲҘ    вүӨ           xl ) вҲ’ Fi (xвҲ— )вҲҘ + вҲҘb
                            вҲҘFi (e                   hli вҲ’ Fi (xвҲ— )вҲҘ
                                             v
                                             u n
                                             uX
                    (32)
                                 l     вҲ—
                     вүӨ        x вҲ’x вҲҘ+t
                            LвҲҘe                    вҲҘbhli вҲ’ Fi (xвҲ— )вҲҘ2
                                                 j=1
                                                                                                 вҲҡ
                                                                                                n Vl
                     вүӨ                       g l ) вҲ’ proxОіОЁ (xвҲ— вҲ’ ОіF (xвҲ— ))вҲҘ +
                            LвҲҘ proxОіОЁ (xl вҲ’ Оіe
                                                                                         6000Оі ln 48n(K+1)
                                                                                                      ОІ
                                                                           вҲҡ
                                l     вҲ—          l           вҲ—            n Vl
                     вүӨ      LвҲҘx вҲ’ x вҲ’ Оі(e
                                        g вҲ’ F (x ))вҲҘ +
                                                                  6000Оі ln 48n(K+1)
                                                                               ОІ
                                                 n                        n                    вҲҡ
                                              1 X el                   1 X Лңl               n Vl
                     вүӨ      LвҲҘxl вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲҘ + LОі        (hi вҲ’ Fi (xвҲ— )) +        вҲҶi +
                                              n i=1                    n i=1         6000Оі ln 48n(K+1)
                                                                                                     ОІ
                                                    !             v
                                                                  u n                                  n
                                         n            p           u1 X
                                                                               l вҲ’ F (xвҲ— )вҲҘ2 + LОі
                                                                                                      X
                                                                                                          Лң li вҲҘ
                     вүӨ       L+                          V l + LОі t         вҲҘeh     i                    вҲҘвҲҶ
                                 6000Оі ln 48n(K+1)                   n i=1 i                      n i=1
                                              ОІ
                                            вҲҡ       !
                                    n + LОі n          p
                     вүӨ       L+           48n(K+1)
                                                         Vl + LОіО»t
                                 6000Оі ln     ОІ
                                                вҲҡ       !
                            вҲҡ                                       ОіВөl вҲҡ

                    (382)               n + LОі n                                       (375),(378) О»
                                                                                                    l
                     вүӨ        2 L+            48n(K+1)
                                                          exp вҲ’             V + LОіО»l       вүӨ
                                    6000Оі ln                         4                             2
                                                         ОІ
for l = 0, 1, . . . , T вҲ’ 1 and i вҲҲ [n]. Therefore, one can apply Lemma B.2 and get
                                   n                                    n
                               1X b               2Оұ Пғ Оұ            1X b              2Оұ Пғ Оұ
                       Оёlb вүӨ           вҲҘОёi,l вҲҘ вүӨ ОұвҲ’1 ,      Пүlb вүӨ           вҲҘПүi,l вҲҘ вүӨ ОұвҲ’1 ,                   (388)
                               n i=1              О»l                n i=1             О»l
                             h         i                         h         i
                                     2                                   2
                       EОҫ2,i
                          l
                                u
                               Оёi,l      вүӨ 18О»2вҲ’Оұ
                                                l    Пғ Оұ , EОҫ1,i
                                                             l
                                                                    u
                                                                   Пүi,l      вүӨ 18О»2вҲ’Оұ
                                                                                    l  ПғОұ ,                   (389)
for all l = 0, 1, . . . , T вҲ’ 1 and i вҲҲ [n].

Upper bound for в‘ . To estimate this sum, we will use BernsteinвҖҷs inequality. The summands have
conditional expectations equal to zero:

         2Оі       ОіВө
                                           u       2Оі       ОіВө                D
                                                                                        u
                                                                                              E
 EОҫ2,i
   l        exp вҲ’ (T вҲ’ 1 вҲ’ l) вҹЁО·l , Оёi,l вҹ© =          exp вҲ’ (T вҲ’ 1 вҲ’ l) О·l , EОҫ2,i  l [Оёi,l ]   = 0.
         n         2                                n          2
                                                          u n
Moreover, for all l = 0, . . . , T вҲ’ 1 random vectors {Оёi,l }i=1 are independent. Thus, sequence
n                                     o T вҲ’1,n
  2Оі         ОіВө
                                   u
  n exp вҲ’ 2 (T вҲ’ 1 вҲ’ l) вҹЁО·l , Оёi,l вҹ©           is a martingale difference sequence. Next, the sum-
                                               l,i=0,1
mands are bounded:
   2Оі        ОіВө
                               u                            2Оі         ОіВө
                                                                                                              u
      exp вҲ’ (T вҲ’ 1 вҲ’ l) вҹЁО·l , Оёi,l вҹ©                     вүӨ     exp вҲ’ (T вҲ’ 1 вҲ’ l) вҲҘО·l вҲҘ В· вҲҘОёi,l                  вҲҘ
   n          2                                             n              2
                                                             вҲҡ
                                               (385),(387)  2 2V Оі exp вҲ’ ОіВө(T2 вҲ’1)
                                                                                                          ОіВөl

                                                     вүӨ                                             exp          О»l
                                                                           n                                4

                                                   (305)
                                                            exp вҲ’ ОіВөT  2      V def
                                                     =                             = c.                         (390)
                                                            100 ln 48n(K+1)
                                                                         ОІ
                                             h 2                                                 i
                                 2 def         4Оі                                         u 2
Finally, conditional variances Пғi,l  = EОҫ2,i
                                         l
                                                n 2   exp (вҲ’ОіВө(T   вҲ’  1  вҲ’  l))  вҹЁО· l , Оё i,l вҹ©     of the summands
are bounded:                            2
                    2                  4Оі                                      2        u 2
                  Пғi,l    вүӨ EОҫ2,i  l         exp   (вҲ’ОіВө(T   вҲ’  1 вҲ’  l)) вҲҘО·  l вҲҘ  В· вҲҘОё   i,l вҲҘ
                                        n2
                                8Оі 2 V exp вҲ’ОіВө T вҲ’ 1 вҲ’ 2l

                         (385)                                               u 2
                          вүӨ                         2
                                                                    EОҫ2,i
                                                                       l      вҲҘОёi,l вҲҘ .                         (391)
                                                n

                                                         106
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Applying BernsteinвҖҷs inequality (Lemma B.1) with Xi,l = 2Оі                ОіВө
                                                                                              u
                                                                 n exp вҲ’ 2 (T вҲ’ 1 вҲ’ l) вҹЁО·l , Оёi,l вҹ©, con-
                               exp(вҲ’ ОіВөT
                                       2 )V                        2
stant c defined in (390), b =       100     , G = exp(вҲ’ОіВөT      )V
                                                            48n(K+1) , we get
                                                   60000 ln     ОІ
  пЈұ                                                                     пЈј
                     ОіВөT
  пЈІ         exp вҲ’ 2 V              T
                                   XXвҲ’1  n
                                                    exp (вҲ’ОіВөT ) V     2 пЈҪ

                                                                                              b2

                                              2
P |в‘ | >                       and           Пғi,l вүӨ                            вүӨ 2 exp   вҲ’
  пЈі                100
                                     l=0i=1        60000 ln 48n(K+1) пЈҫ  ОІ
                                                                                          2G + 2cb/3
                                                                                                   ОІ
                                                                                       =                  .
                                                                                               24n(K + 1)
                                            ОІ
The above is equivalent to P{Eв‘  } вүҘ 1 вҲ’ 24n(K+1)  for
             пЈұ                                                               пЈј
                                                                       ОіВөT
             пЈІ        T
                      X вҲ’1 Xn
                                      exp (вҲ’ОіВөT ) V  2          exp  вҲ’   2  VпЈҪ
                               2
      Eв‘  = either             Пғi,l >                   or |в‘ | вүӨ                .                                  (392)
             пЈі
                         l=0 i=1     60000 ln 48n(K+1)      ОІ
                                                                      100    пЈҫ
Moreover, ET вҲ’1 implies
   T вҲ’1 X
        n                                                          T вҲ’1                     n
                                     8Оі 2 V exp (вҲ’ОіВө (T вҲ’ 1)) X
                                                                                            X
   X
            2
                    (391)                                                            ОіВөl                     u 2
           Пғi,l       вүӨ                                         exp                                  EОҫ2,i
                                                                                                       l    вҲҘОёi,l вҲҘ
                                                 n2                                   2
    l=0 i=1                                                        l=0                         i=1
                                           2                                Оұ T вҲ’1
                     (389),T вүӨK+1    144Оі V exp (вҲ’ОіВө (T вҲ’ 1)) Пғ               X                ОіВөl
                          вүӨ                                                          exp                 О»2вҲ’Оұ
                                                                                                          l
                                                  n                                             2
                                                                              l=0
                                           Оұ   2вҲ’ Оұ                     Оұ T вҲ’1
                         (378)        144Оі V      2   exp (вҲ’ОіВөT ) Пғ       X                   ОіВөlОұ
                          вүӨ                                                         exp
                                     60002вҲ’Оұ nОұвҲ’1 ln2вҲ’Оұ 48n(K+1)
                                                            ОІ    l=0
                                                                                                4
                                                 Оұ

                                                                                                ОіВөKОұ
                                     144Оі Оұ V 2вҲ’ 2 exp (вҲ’ОіВөT ) Пғ Оұ (K + 1) exp                    4
                          вүӨ
                                                60002вҲ’Оұ nОұвҲ’1 ln2вҲ’Оұ 48n(K+1)
                                                                       ОІ
                         (375)        exp (вҲ’ОіВөT ) V 2
                          вүӨ                                 .                                                     (393)
                                     60000 ln 48n(K+1)
                                                  ОІ

Upper bound for в‘Ў. Probability event ET вҲ’1 implies
                  T вҲ’1
                  X             ОіВө(T вҲ’ 1 вҲ’ l)                  (385),(388)
     в‘Ў вүӨ 2Оі            exp вҲ’                    вҲҘО·l вҲҘ В· вҲҘОёlb вҲҘ     вүӨ                           (394)
                                      2
                  l=0
                                                   T вҲ’1
                          вҲҡ

                Оұ+1     Оұ              ОіВө(T вҲ’ 1) X                 ОіВөl        1
          вүӨ 2       ОіПғ 2V exp вҲ’                            exp               ОұвҲ’1
                                           2                         4     О»l
                                                     l=0

         (378) 2Оұ+1 В· 120ОұвҲ’1 exp вҲ’ ОіВөT  2   (K + 1) exp ОіВөKОұ     4      Оі Оұ Пғ Оұ lnОұвҲ’1 48n(K+1)
                                                                                          ОІ
          вүӨ                                     ОұвҲ’1 V Оұ
                                              n         2 вҲ’1

         (375) 3 exp вҲ’ ОіВөT 2    V
          вүӨ                       .                                                            (395)
                       100
Upper bound for в‘ў. Probability event ET вҲ’1 implies

              T вҲ’1 n
        18Оі 2 X X

                             ОіВө(T вҲ’ 1 вҲ’ l)

                                                     u 2                       (393)      exp вҲ’ ОіВөT
                                                                                                 2    V
           2
                      exp  вҲ’                 EОҫ2,i
                                               l    вҲҘОёi,l вҲҘ                     вүӨ
         n        i=1
                                  2                                                              100
                   l=0
and, similarly,

            14Оі   2 T
                    X вҲ’1 X
                         n
                                     ОіВө(T вҲ’ 1 вҲ’ l)

                                                                  u 2          (393)      exp вҲ’ ОіВөT
                                                                                                 2    V
                             exp вҲ’                        EОҫ1,i
                                                            l    вҲҘПүi,l вҲҘ        вүӨ
             n2                           2                                                      100
                   l=0 i=1
that give
                                                exp вҲ’ ОіВөT
                                                       2    V
                                           в‘ўвүӨ                       .                                             (396)
                                                          50

                                                      107
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Upper bound for в‘Ј. To estimate this sum, we will use BernsteinвҖҷs inequality. The summands have
conditional expectations equal to zero:
        2Оі 2           h
                             u 2          u 2
                                                            u 2                  u 2  i
             EОҫ l ,Оҫ l  18вҲҘОё i,l вҲҘ + 14вҲҘПүi,l вҲҘ вҲ’ 18EОҫ l    вҲҘОё i,l вҲҘ вҲ’ 14EОҫ l    вҲҘПүi,l вҲҘ = 0.
         n2 1,i 2,i                                   2,i                  1,i

                                                           u n        u n
Moreover, for all l = 0, . . . , T вҲ’ 1 random vectors {Оёi,l  }i=1 , {Пүi,l }i=1 are independent. Thus, se-
      n 2                                                                      h         i           h        i oT вҲ’1,n
quence 2Оі            ОіВө
                                                u 2          u 2                   u 2                   u 2
        n 2 exp    вҲ’  2 (T   вҲ’   1 вҲ’ l)    18вҲҘОё i,l вҲҘ + 14вҲҘПүi,l вҲҘ вҲ’  18E   l
                                                                          Оҫ2,i  вҲҘОё i,l вҲҘ   вҲ’ 14E l
                                                                                                Оҫ1,i  вҲҘПүi,l вҲҘ
                                                                                                                                     l,i=0,1
is a martingale difference sequence. Next, the summands are bounded:
    2Оі 2      ОіВө
                                      u 2           u 2
                                                                      u 2                u 2
      2
         exp вҲ’ (T вҲ’ 1 вҲ’ l) 18вҲҘОёi,l      вҲҘ + 14вҲҘПүi,l    вҲҘ вҲ’ 18EОҫ2,i
                                                                l    вҲҘОёi,l вҲҘ вҲ’ 14EОҫ1,i
                                                                                   l    вҲҘПүi,l вҲҘ
    n            2
                                            (387) 256 exp вҲ’ ОіВө (T вҲ’ 1 вҲ’ l) Оі 2 О»2

                                                             2                  l
                                             вүӨ                    2
                                                                n
                                                             (378) exp     вҲ’ ОіВөT
                                                                               2  V def
                                                              вүӨ            48n(K+1)
                                                                                    = c.                                   (397)
                                                                    6 ln        ОІ

Finally, conditional variances
           4

  2 def 4Оі                                                            u 2         u 2
                                                                                                               u 2                u 2  2
Пғ
ei,l = 4 exp (вҲ’ОіВө(T вҲ’ 1 вҲ’ l)) EОҫ1,i
                                l ,Оҫ l                            18вҲҘОёi,l вҲҘ + 14вҲҘПүi,l вҲҘ вҲ’ 18EОҫ2,i
                                                                                              l               вҲҘОёi,l вҲҘ вҲ’ 14EОҫ1,i
                                                                                                                            l    вҲҘПүi,l вҲҘ
           n                        2,i



of the summands are bounded:
                          Оі 2 exp вҲ’ ОіВө

                                     2 (2T вҲ’ 1 вҲ’ l) V
               (397)
      2
    Пғ
    ei,l        вүӨ
                                 3n2 ln 48n(K+1)
                                               ОІ
                                        h                                                                  u 2  i
                                                u 2          u 2
                                                                                    u 2
                         Г— EОҫ1,i
                               l ,Оҫ l
                                   2,i
                                           18вҲҘОё i,l вҲҘ + 14вҲҘПүi,l вҲҘ  вҲ’    18E Оҫ l
                                                                              2,i
                                                                                   вҲҘОё i,l вҲҘ вҲ’ 14E  Оҫ l
                                                                                                     1,i
                                                                                                          вҲҘПүi,l вҲҘ
                         4Оі 2 exp вҲ’ ОіВө

                                          2 (2T вҲ’ 1 вҲ’ l) V
                                                                            u 2              u 2

                вүӨ                           48n(K+1)
                                                             EОҫ1,i
                                                                 l ,Оҫ l    9вҲҘОёi,l вҲҘ + 7вҲҘПүi,l  вҲҘ .                 (398)
                                      2
                                  3n ln                              2,i
                                                ОІ

Applying                BernsteinвҖҷs           inequality           (Lemma                hB.1) i with        hXi,l    i        =
2Оі 2
               вҲ’ ОіВө
                                                u 2         u 2                              u 2                 u 2
n2 exp            2 (T вҲ’ 1 вҲ’ l)             18вҲҘОёi,l вҲҘ + 14вҲҘПүi,l вҲҘ вҲ’ 18EОҫ2,i
                                                                        l                  вҲҘОёi,l вҲҘ вҲ’ 14EОҫ1,i
                                                                                                         l    вҲҘПүi,l вҲҘ    ,
                                               exp(вҲ’ ОіВөT
                                                      2 )V                  )V 2
constant c defined in (397), b =                    6      , G = exp(вҲ’ОіВөT
                                                                        48n(K+1) , we get
                                                                 216 ln              ОІ

 пЈұ                                                       пЈј
 пЈІ      exp вҲ’ ОіВөT
               2    V     T
                          X вҲ’1 X
                               n
                                        exp (вҲ’ОіВөT   ) V 2пЈҪ

                                                                        b2

                                   2
P |в‘Ј| >               and        ei,l вүӨ
                                 Пғ                         вүӨ 2 exp вҲ’
 пЈі           6                          216 ln 48n(K+1) пЈҫ
                                                l=0 i=1
                                                                     2G + 2cb/3
                                                                                    ОІ
                                                                                                            ОІ
                                                                                                   =               .
                                                                                                        24n(K + 1)
                                            ОІ
The above is equivalent to P{Eв‘Ј } вүҘ 1 вҲ’ 24n(K+1) for
                            пЈұ                                                                                 пЈј
                            пЈІ            T
                                         X вҲ’1 X
                                              n
                                                            exp (вҲ’ОіВөT ) V       2                 exp вҲ’ ОіВөT
                                                                                                         2   VпЈҪ
                                                     2
                Eв‘Ј =            either             Пғ
                                                   ei,l >                           or |в‘Ј| вүӨ                          .    (399)
                            пЈі
                                         l=0 i=1            216 ln 48n(K+1)
                                                                       ОІ
                                                                                                         6        пЈҫ

Moreover, ET вҲ’1 implies
T вҲ’1 X
     n                                                    T вҲ’1                             n
                                 4 exp вҲ’ОіВө(T вҲ’ 21 ) Оі 2 V X
                                                                                           X
X
             2
                       (398)                                                        ОіВөl                       u 2          u 2

           Пғ
           ei,l         вүӨ                                                 exp                     EОҫ1,i
                                                                                                    l ,Оҫ l   9вҲҘОёi,l вҲҘ + 7вҲҘПүi,l вҲҘ
l=0 i=1                                  3n2 ln 48n(K+1)
                                                    ОІ               l=0
                                                                                     2      i=1
                                                                                                        2,i


                       (393)      exp (вҲ’ОіВөT ) V
                        вүӨ                            .                                                                       (400)
                                 216 ln 48n(K+1)
                                            ОІ


                                                                   108
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Upper bound for в‘Ө. Probability event ET вҲ’1 implies

             (388)
                             T
                             X вҲ’1        ОіВө             22Оұ Пғ 2Оұ (378),(375) exp вҲ’ ОіВөT
                                                                                    2    V
         в‘Ө    вүӨ      32Оі 2          exp вҲ’ (T вҲ’ 1 вҲ’ l)     2ОұвҲ’2       вүӨ                     .              (401)
                                          2             О»l                        6
                             l=0


Upper bounds for в‘Ҙ and в‘Ұ. These sums require more refined analysis. We introduce new vectors:
                     пЈұ jвҲ’1                jвҲ’1                     вҲҡ
                     пЈІОі P u             Оі P u                ОіВөl    V
                 l         Оё   ,   if         Оё    вүӨ exp   вҲ’       2 , ,
                О¶j = n i=1 i,l          n
                                          i=1
                                               i,l            4                        (402)
                       0,          otherwise,
                     пЈі
                      пЈұ jвҲ’1                jвҲ’1                     вҲҡ
                      пЈІОі P u
                            Пүi,l , if nОі       Пүi,l вүӨ exp вҲ’ ОіВөl       V
                                           P u
                   l
                 Оҙj =   n                                       4    2 ,               (403)
                      пЈі i=1                i=1
                        0,           otherwise,

for all j вҲҲ [n] and l = 0, . . . , T вҲ’ 1. Then, by definition
                                               вҲҡ                         вҲҡ
                        l                 ОіВөl     V        l        ОіВөl    V
                      вҲҘО¶j вҲҘ вүӨ exp вҲ’                 , вҲҘОҙj вҲҘ вүӨ exp вҲ’                                       (404)
                                           4     2                   4    2
and
                         T вҲ’1 n
                     32Оі X X          ОіВө
           в‘Ҙ =                   exp вҲ’ (T вҲ’ 1 вҲ’ l) О¶jl , Оёj,l
                                                          u
                       n               2
                         l=0 j=2
                     |                 {z                     }
                                                 в‘ҘвҖІ
                                     вҲ’1 X                                 jвҲ’1
                                   T    n
                                                                    *                         +
                         32Оі       X               ОіВө                   ОіX u
                       +                      exp вҲ’ (T вҲ’ 1 вҲ’ l)              Оё вҲ’ О¶jl , Оёj,l
                                                                                        u
                                                                                                  ,       (405)
                          n               j=2
                                                    2                   n i=1 i,l
                                    l=0
                         T вҲ’1 n
                     24Оі X X          ОіВө
           в‘Ұ =                   exp вҲ’ (T вҲ’ 1 вҲ’ l) Оҙjl , Пүj,l
                                                          u
                       n               2
                         l=0 j=2
                     |                 {z                     }
                                                 в‘ҰвҖІ
                                     вҲ’1 X                                 jвҲ’1
                                   T    n
                                                                    *                         +
                         24Оі       X               ОіВө                   ОіX u
                       +                      exp вҲ’ (T вҲ’ 1 вҲ’ l)              Пү вҲ’ Оҙjl , Пүj,l
                                                                                        u
                                                                                                      .   (406)
                          n               j=2
                                                    2                   n i=1 i,l
                                    l=0

We also note here that ET вҲ’1 implies
          T вҲ’1 n                        jвҲ’1
                                                 *        +
      32Оі X X          ОіВө             ОіX u        l u
                  exp вҲ’ (T вҲ’ 1 вҲ’ l)         Оё вҲ’ О¶j , Оёj,l
       n      j=2
                        2             n i=1 i,l
          l=0
                                            n
                                                * jвҲ’1                     +
                                       32Оі X Оі X u             T вҲ’1 u
                                    =                   Оё   вҲ’ О¶j , Оёj,T вҲ’1 ,                              (407)
                                        n j=2 n i=1 i,T вҲ’1
          T вҲ’1 n
                                    * jвҲ’1                 +
      24Оі X X          ОіВө            ОіX
                                             u    l    u
                  exp вҲ’ (T вҲ’ 1 вҲ’ l)         Пү вҲ’ Оҙj , Пүj,l
       n                2             n i=1 i,l
          l=0 j=2
                                            n
                                                * jвҲ’1                     +
                                       24Оі X Оі X u              T вҲ’1 u
                                    =                   Пү   вҲ’ Оҙj , Пүj,T вҲ’1 .                              (408)
                                        n j=2 n i=1 i,T вҲ’1


Upper bound for в‘ҘвҖІ . To estimate this sum, we will use BernsteinвҖҷs inequality. The summands
have conditional expectations equal to zero:

        32Оі      ОіВө
                                       l u     32Оі      ОіВө               D                  E
EОҫ2,j
  l         exp вҲ’ (T вҲ’ 1 вҲ’ l) вҹЁО¶j , Оёj,l вҹ© =       exp вҲ’ (T вҲ’ 1 вҲ’ l) О¶jl , EОҫ2,j      u
                                                                                  l [Оёj,l ]   = 0.
         n          2                           n         2

                                                      109
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                          u n
Moreover, for all l = 0, . . . , T вҲ’ 1 random vectors {Оёj,l }j=1 are independent. Thus, sequence
n                                       oT вҲ’1,n
  32Оі       ОіВө
                                  l u
   n exp вҲ’ 2 (T вҲ’ 1 вҲ’ l) вҹЁО¶j , Оёj,l вҹ©           is a martingale difference sequence. Next, the sum-
                                                     l,j=0,1
mands are bounded:
  32Оі        ОіВө                                                            32Оі        ОіВө
      exp вҲ’ (T вҲ’ 1 вҲ’ l) вҹЁО¶jl , Оёj,l
                                u
                                    вҹ©                           вүӨ              exp вҲ’ (T вҲ’ 1 вҲ’ l) вҲҘО¶jl вҲҘ В· вҲҘОёj,lu
                                                                                                                 вҲҘ
   n          2                                                             n           2
                                                                             вҲҡ
                                                          (404),(387)      16 V Оі exp вҲ’ ОіВө(T2 вҲ’1)
                                                                                                          ОіВөl

                                                                вүӨ                                   exp         О»l
                                                                                       n                   4

                                                               (305)
                                                                           exp вҲ’ ОіВөT2    V def
                                                                =                48n(K+1)
                                                                                           = c.                (409)
                                                                           10 ln     ОІ
                                               h                                                i
                                  2 def          1024Оі 2                              l u 2
Finally, conditional variances Пғbj,l  = EОҫ2,j
                                            l
                                                   n 2   exp (вҲ’ОіВө(T     вҲ’ 1  вҲ’ l)) вҹЁО¶   , Оё
                                                                                      j j,l   вҹ©   of the sum-
mands are bounded:
                                     1024Оі 2

                  2                                                        l 2      u 2
                Пғ
                bj,l    вүӨ EОҫ2,j l             exp  (вҲ’ОіВө(T    вҲ’ 1 вҲ’  l)) вҲҘО¶ j вҲҘ В· вҲҘОё j,l вҲҘ
                                       n2
                              256Оі 2 V exp вҲ’ОіВө T вҲ’ 1 вҲ’ 2l

                       (404)                                               u 2
                        вүӨ                       2
                                                                   EОҫ2,j
                                                                      l   вҲҘОёj,l вҲҘ .                     (410)
                                              n
Applying BernsteinвҖҷs inequality (Lemma B.1) with Xj,l = 32Оі                      ОіВө
                                                                                                     l u
                                                                    n exp вҲ’ 2 (T вҲ’ 1 вҲ’ l) вҹЁО¶j , Оёj,l вҹ©,
                                  exp(вҲ’ ОіВөT
                                          2 )V                   )V 2
constant c defined in (409), b =       10      , G = exp(вҲ’ОіВөT48n(K+1) , we get
                                                                       600 ln   ОІ

    пЈұ                                                                           пЈј
    пЈІ            exp вҲ’ ОіВөT
                        2  V                  T
                                              X вҲ’1 X
                                                   n
                                                               exp (вҲ’ОіВөT   ) V 2пЈҪ

                                                                                                                        b2

          вҖІ                                               2
P       |в‘Ҙ | >                          and             Пғ
                                                        bj,l вүӨ                    вүӨ                    2 exp вҲ’
    пЈі                      10
                                              l=0 j=2          600 ln 48n(K+1) пЈҫОІ
                                                                                                                     2G + 2cb/3
                                                                                                           ОІ
                                                                                             =                    .
                                                                                                       24n(K + 1)
                                             ОІ
The above is equivalent to P{Eв‘ҘвҖІ } вүҘ 1 вҲ’ 24n(K+1) for
                     пЈұ                                                                               пЈј
                     пЈІ            T
                                  X вҲ’1 X
                                       n
                                                     exp (вҲ’ОіВөT ) V 2                     exp вҲ’ ОіВөT
                                                                                                2   VпЈҪ
          Eв‘ҘвҖІ =          either             Пғ 2
                                            bj,l >                          or |в‘ҘвҖІ | вүӨ                                 .    (411)
                     пЈі
                                  l=0 j=2            600 ln 48n(K+1)
                                                                ОІ
                                                                                                   10              пЈҫ

Moreover, ET вҲ’1 implies
    T вҲ’1 X
         n                                                                      T вҲ’1                    n
                                            256Оі 2 V exp (вҲ’ОіВө (T вҲ’ 1)) X
                                                                                                        X
    X
                2
                             (410)                                                               ОіВөl                    u 2
              Пғ
              bj,l              вүӨ                                        exp                                    EОҫ2,i
                                                                                                                  l    вҲҘОёi,l вҲҘ
                                                         n2                                       2
    l=0 j=2                                                                     l=0                       i=1

                                                 2                                  Оұ T вҲ’1
                         (389),T вүӨK+1       4608Оі V exp (вҲ’ОіВө (T вҲ’ 1)) Пғ               X                  ОіВөl
                                вүӨ                                                            exp                   О»2вҲ’Оұ
                                                                                                                    l
                                                         n                                                2
                                                                                       l=0
                                                 Оұ     2вҲ’ Оұ                     Оұ T вҲ’1
                             (378)          4608Оі V       2    exp (вҲ’ОіВөT ) Пғ      X  ОіВөlОұ
                                вүӨ                                               exp
                                            3002вҲ’Оұ nОұвҲ’1 ln2вҲ’Оұ 48n(K+1)
                                                                   ОІ        l=0
                                                                                      4
                                                         Оұ

                                            4608Оі Оұ V 2вҲ’ 2 exp (вҲ’ОіВөT ) Пғ Оұ (K + 1) exp ОіВөKОұ
                                                                                          4
                                вүӨ
                                                         3002вҲ’Оұ nОұвҲ’1 ln2вҲ’Оұ 48n(K+1)
                                                                               ОІ
                             (375)          exp (вҲ’ОіВөT ) V 2
                                вүӨ                                .                                                          (412)
                                            600 ln 48n(K+1)
                                                       ОІ


                                                                110
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Upper bound for в‘ҰвҖІ . To estimate this sum, we will use BernsteinвҖҷs inequality. The summands
have conditional expectations equal to zero:

        24Оі       ОіВө
                                         l    u        24Оі       ОіВө                D                E
EОҫ1,j
   l        exp вҲ’ (T вҲ’ 1 вҲ’ l) вҹЁОҙj , Пүj,l вҹ© =               exp вҲ’ (T вҲ’ 1 вҲ’ l) Оҙjl , EОҫ1,j        u
                                                                                          l [Пүj,l ]   = 0.
         n          2                                   n           2
                                                             u n
Moreover, for all l = 0, . . . , T вҲ’ 1 random vectors {Пүj,l    }j=1 are independent. Thus, sequence
n                                       o  T вҲ’1,n
  24Оі        ОіВө
                                  l  u
   n exp вҲ’ 2 (T вҲ’ 1 вҲ’ l) вҹЁОҙj , Пүj,l вҹ©              is a martingale difference sequence. Next, the sum-
                                                l,j=0,1
mands are bounded:
  24Оі        ОіВө                                                    24Оі          ОіВө
      exp вҲ’ (T вҲ’ 1 вҲ’ l) вҹЁОҙjl , Пүj,l
                                u
                                    вҹ©                      вүӨ            exp вҲ’ (T вҲ’ 1 вҲ’ l) вҲҘОҙjl вҲҘ В· вҲҘПүj,l            u
                                                                                                                       вҲҘ
   n          2                                                     n                2
                                                                      вҲҡ
                                                    (404),(387)    12 V Оі exp вҲ’ ОіВө(T2 вҲ’1)
                                                                                                            ОіВөl

                                                         вүӨ                                            exp           О»l
                                                                                    n                         4

                                                                            ОіВөT
                                                       (305)
                                                                   exp   вҲ’     2      V def
                                                         =                48n(K+1)
                                                                                           = c.                    (413)
                                                                   10 ln        ОІ
                                                      h                                                   i
                                    вҖІ 2 def             576Оі 2                                   l    u 2
Finally, conditional variances (Пғj,l   ) = EОҫ1,j l
                                                          n2 exp (вҲ’ОіВө(T вҲ’ 1 вҲ’ l)) вҹЁОҙj , Пүj,l вҹ©              of the sum-
mands are bounded:
                                           576Оі 2

                  вҖІ 2                                                                  l 2       u 2
                (Пғj,l )    вүӨ EОҫ1,j   l              exp   (вҲ’ОіВө(T     вҲ’  1  вҲ’  l))   вҲҘОҙ j вҲҘ  В· вҲҘПүj,l вҲҘ
                                             n2
                                  288Оі 2 V exp вҲ’ОіВө T вҲ’ 1 вҲ’ 2l

                          (404)                                                         u 2
                           вүӨ                            2
                                                                              EОҫ1,j
                                                                                  l      вҲҘПүj,l вҲҘ .                 (414)
                                                       n
Applying BernsteinвҖҷs inequality (Lemma B.1) with Xj,l = 24Оі                                 ОіВө
                                                                                                                l     u
                                                                            n exp вҲ’ 2 (T вҲ’ 1 вҲ’ l) вҹЁОҙj , Пүj,l вҹ©,
                                    exp(вҲ’ ОіВөT 2 )V                           2
constant c defined in (409), b =           10        , G = exp(вҲ’ОіВөT       )V
                                                                     48n(K+1) , we get
                                                              600 ln     ОІ
  пЈұ                                                                                  пЈј
  пЈІ         exp вҲ’ ОіВөT   2   V         TXвҲ’1 Xn
                                                              exp  (вҲ’ОіВөT     ) V  2пЈҪ

                                                                                                                b2

       вҖІ                                           вҖІ 2
P |в‘Ұ | >                        and             (Пғj,l ) вүӨ                                  вүӨ 2 exp вҲ’
  пЈі                 10                     j=2
                                         l=0                  600 ln 48n(K+1) пЈҫ
                                                                            ОІ
                                                                                                           2G + 2cb/3
                                                                                                         ОІ
                                                                                             =                  .
                                                                                                     24n(K + 1)
                                              ОІ
The above is equivalent to P{Eв‘ҘвҖІ } вүҘ 1 вҲ’ 24n(K+1)   for
             пЈұ                                                                     пЈј
                                                                             ОіВөT
             пЈІ        T
                      X вҲ’1 Xn
                                        exp (вҲ’ОіВөT ) V   2            exp   вҲ’   2  VпЈҪ
                                вҖІ 2                            вҖІ
     Eв‘ҰвҖІ = either             (Пғj,l ) >                   or |в‘Ұ  | вүӨ                 .                                (415)
             пЈі
                           l=0 j=2      600 ln 48n(K+1)            ОІ
                                                                            10     пЈҫ

Moreover, ET вҲ’1 implies
 T вҲ’1 X
      n                                                                    T вҲ’1                     n
                                        288Оі 2 V exp (вҲ’ОіВө (T вҲ’ 1)) X
                                                                                                    X
 X
              вҖІ 2
                           (414)                                                             ОіВөl                    u 2
            (Пғj,l )         вүӨ                                        exp                                    EОҫ2,i
                                                                                                              l    вҲҘОёi,l вҲҘ
                                                     n2                                       2
  l=0 j=2                                                                  l=0                        i=1

                                                2                               Оұ T вҲ’1
                      (389),T вүӨK+1      5184Оі V exp (вҲ’ОіВө (T вҲ’ 1)) Пғ               X                  ОіВөl
                            вүӨ                                                            exp                   О»2вҲ’Оұ
                                                                                                                l
                                                     n                                                2
                                                                                  l=0
                                                Оұ   2вҲ’ Оұ                   Оұ T вҲ’1
                           (378)        5184Оі V        2   exp (вҲ’ОіВөT ) Пғ     X   ОіВөlОұ
                            вүӨ                                               exp
                                        3002вҲ’Оұ nОұвҲ’1 ln2вҲ’Оұ 48n(K+1)
                                                               ОІ        l=0
                                                                                  4
                                                     Оұ

                                        5184Оі Оұ V 2вҲ’ 2 exp (вҲ’ОіВөT ) Пғ Оұ (K + 1) exp ОіВөKОұ
                                                                                      4
                            вүӨ
                                                      3002вҲ’Оұ nОұвҲ’1 ln2вҲ’Оұ 48n(K+1)
                                                                            ОІ
                           (375)        exp (вҲ’ОіВөT ) V 2
                            вүӨ                                  .                                                      (416)
                                        600 ln 48n(K+1)
                                                   ОІ


                                                           111
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


That is, we derive the upper bounds for в‘ , в‘Ў, в‘ў, в‘Ј, в‘Ө, в‘Ҙ, в‘Ұ. More precisely, ET вҲ’1 implies

                      (386)          ОіВө
                   VT вүӨ exp вҲ’ T V + в‘  + в‘Ў + в‘ў + в‘Ј + в‘Ө + в‘Ҙ + в‘Ұ,
                                       2
                                          n
                                              * jвҲ’1                              +
                         (405)   вҖІ   32Оі X Оі X u                   T вҲ’1 u
                     в‘Ҙ = в‘Ҙ +                           Оё       вҲ’ О¶j , Оёj,T вҲ’1 ,
                                      n j=2 n i=1 i,T вҲ’1
                                          n
                                              * jвҲ’1                               +
                        (406)   вҖІ    24Оі X Оі X u                   T вҲ’1     u
                    в‘Ұ = в‘Ұ +                            Пү       вҲ’ Оҙj , Пүj,T вҲ’1 ,
                                      n j=2 n i=1 i,T вҲ’1

                            ОіВөT                           ОіВөT                          ОіВөT
          (395) 3 exp вҲ’ 2          V       (396) exp вҲ’ 2        V         (401) exp вҲ’ 2      V
         в‘Ў вүӨ                         , в‘ў вүӨ                        , в‘Ө вүӨ                        ,
                       100                              50                             6
           T вҲ’1 Xn                                      T вҲ’1 Xn
           X              (393) exp (вҲ’ОіВөT ) V 2         X             (400) exp (вҲ’ОіВөT ) V
                     2                                             2
                    Пғi,l   вүӨ             48n(K+1)
                                                   ,             Пғ
                                                                 ei,l  вүӨ                    ,
           l=0 i=1             60000 ln       ОІ         l=0 i=1             216 ln 48n(K+1)
                                                                                       ОІ
              T вҲ’1 X
                   n                                    T вҲ’1 X
                                                             n
              X            (412) exp (вҲ’ОіВөT ) V 2        X                  (416) exp (вҲ’ОіВөT ) V 2
                          2                                          вҖІ 2
                        Пғ
                        bj,l вүӨ            48n(K+1)
                                                   ,               (Пғj,l ) вүӨ                       .
              l=0 j=2            600 ln       ОІ          l=0 j=2                 600 ln 48n(K+1)
                                                                                            ОІ


In addition, we also establish (see (392), (392), (411), (411), and our induction assumption)

                                           (T вҲ’ 1)ОІ                             ОІ
                    P{ET вҲ’1 } вүҘ 1 вҲ’                 ,    P{Eв‘  } вүҘ 1 вҲ’                  ,
                                            K +1                            24n(K + 1)
                       ОІ                                     ОІ                                   ОІ
  P{Eв‘Ј } вүҘ 1 вҲ’                ,        P{Eв‘ҘвҖІ } вүҘ 1 вҲ’                ,        P{Eв‘ҰвҖІ } вүҘ 1 вҲ’              ,
                   24n(K + 1)                            24n(K + 1)                          24n(K + 1)

where
                   пЈұ                                                                         пЈј
                                                                                      ОіВөT
                   пЈІ       T
                           X вҲ’1 X
                                n
                                            exp (вҲ’ОіВөT ) V    2              exp    вҲ’   2     VпЈҪ
                                     2
        Eв‘      =    either         Пғi,l  >          48n(K+1)
                                                                 or |в‘ | вүӨ                          ,
                   пЈі                       60000 ln                                100         пЈҫ
                           l=0 i=1                       ОІ
                   пЈұ                                                                      пЈј
                                                                                  ОіВөT
                   пЈІ       T
                           X вҲ’1 X
                                n
                                           exp (вҲ’ОіВөT ) V   2              exp   вҲ’   2      VпЈҪ
                                     2
        Eв‘Ј     =    either         Пғ
                                   ei,l  >                    or |в‘Ј|   вүӨ                       ,
                   пЈі
                           l=0 i=1         216 ln 48n(K+1)
                                                      ОІ
                                                                                 6           пЈҫ
                   пЈұ                                                                       пЈј
                   пЈІ       T
                           X вҲ’1 X
                                n
                                           exp (вҲ’ОіВөT   ) V 2               exp вҲ’ ОіВөT 2     VпЈҪ
                                     2                              вҖІ
        Eв‘ҘвҖІ    =    either         Пғ
                                   bj,l  >                    or |в‘Ҙ   | вүӨ                        ,
                   пЈі
                           l=0 j=2         600 ln 48n(K+1)
                                                      ОІ
                                                                                  10         пЈҫ
                   пЈұ                                                                          пЈј
                                                                                       ОіВөT
                   пЈІ       T
                           X вҲ’1 X
                                n
                                             exp (вҲ’ОіВөT ) V     2             exp    вҲ’    2    VпЈҪ
        Eв‘ҰвҖІ    =    either            вҖІ 2
                                   (Пғj,l ) >         48n(K+1)
                                                                 or |в‘ҰвҖІ | вүӨ                          .
                   пЈі                         600 ln                                  10          пЈҫ
                             l=0 j=2                          ОІ


Therefore, probability event ET вҲ’1 вҲ© Eв‘  вҲ© Eв‘Ј вҲ© Eв‘ҘвҖІ вҲ© Eв‘ҰвҖІ implies
                          ОіВө        1   3   1   1 1  1   1

              VT   вүӨ exp вҲ’ T V 1 +    +   +    + + +   +
                           2       100 100 50 6 6 10 10
                               |             {z            }
                                                                      вүӨ2
                                             jвҲ’1
                                  n
                                       *                                     +
                             32Оі  X        Оі X
                           +                    Оёu      вҲ’ О¶jT вҲ’1 , Оёj,T
                                                                    u
                              n j=2        n i=1 i,T вҲ’1                 вҲ’1


                                             jвҲ’1
                                   n
                                       *                                     +
                             24Оі X         ОіX u
                           +                    Пү       вҲ’ ОҙjT вҲ’1 , Пүj,T
                                                                    u
                                                                                 .                       (417)
                              n j=2        n i=1 i,T вҲ’1                 вҲ’1


                                                       112
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                  jвҲ’1                            jвҲ’1
                                                                   T вҲ’1                           T вҲ’1
To finish the proof, we need to show that nОі             u
                                                                        and nОі          u
                                                  P                              P
                                                        Оёi,T вҲ’1 = О¶j                   Пүi,T вҲ’1 = Оҙj    with high
                                                  i=1                            i=1
probability. In particular, we consider probability event E
                                                          eT вҲ’1,j defined as follows: inequalities
     rвҲ’1                                   вҲҡ             rвҲ’1                                  вҲҡ
   ОіX u                        ОіВө(T вҲ’ 1)       V       ОіX u                       ОіВө(T вҲ’ 1)        V
          Оёi,T вҲ’1 вүӨ exp вҲ’                         ,          Пүi,T вҲ’1 вүӨ exp вҲ’
   n i=1                            4         2        n i=1                           4         2

hold for r = 2, . . . , j simultaneously. We want to show that P{ET вҲ’1 вҲ© E         eT вҲ’1,j } вүҘ 1 вҲ’ (T вҲ’1)ОІ вҲ’
                                                                                                    K+1
   jОІ
8n(K+1)  for all j  =   2, . . . , n. For  j =  2 the statement is trivial since
                                                                                   вҲҡ
                         Оі u              (387)   2ОіО»T вҲ’1               ОіВө(T вҲ’ 1)     V
                           Оё1,T вҲ’1          вүӨ              вүӨ exp вҲ’                      ,
                         n                            n                      4       2
                                                                                    вҲҡ
                         Оі u              (323)   2ОіО»T вҲ’1               ОіВө(T вҲ’ 1)     V
                           Пү1,T вҲ’1          вүӨ              вүӨ exp вҲ’                      .
                         n                            n                      4       2
Next, we assume that the statement holds for some j = m вҲ’ 1 < n, i.e., P{ET вҲ’1 вҲ© EeT вҲ’1,mвҲ’1 } вүҘ
     (T вҲ’1)ОІ    (mвҲ’1)ОІ                                                       (T вҲ’1)ОІ     mОІ
1 вҲ’ K+1 вҲ’ 8n(K+1) . Our goal is to prove that P{ET вҲ’1 вҲ© ET вҲ’1,m } вүҘ 1 вҲ’ K+1 вҲ’ 8n(K+1)
                                                           e                                   .
                      mвҲ’1
First, we consider nОі
                       P u
                          Оёi,T вҲ’1 :
                         i=1
                         v
    mвҲ’1                                   2
                         u Оі 2 mвҲ’1
                         u
 Оі  X                          X
      Оёu             =   t         Оё u
 n i=1 i,T вҲ’1              n2 i=1 i,T вҲ’1
                         v                           * iвҲ’1                  +
                         u mвҲ’1                  mвҲ’1
                         u Оі2 X              2Оі X Оі X u
                     =   t       вҲҘОё u     2
                                         вҲҘ +                Оё       ,Оё u
                           n2 i=1 i,T вҲ’1      n i=1 n r=1 r,T вҲ’1 i,T вҲ’1
                         v
                         u T вҲ’1                         mвҲ’1                mвҲ’1
                                                                               * iвҲ’1               +
                         u Оі2 X
                                         ОіВө(T вҲ’ 1 вҲ’ l) X u 2 2Оі X Оі X u
                     вүӨ   t       exp вҲ’                      вҲҘОёi,l вҲҘ +                Оё     ,Оё u      .
                           n2                 2         i=1
                                                                         n i=1 n r=1 r,T вҲ’1 i,T вҲ’1
                                l=0

Similarly, we have
                       v
    mвҲ’1                                   2
                       u Оі 2 mвҲ’1
                       u
 Оі  X                        X
      Пүu             = t         Пү u
 n i=1 i,T вҲ’1            n2 i=1 i,T вҲ’1
                       v                            * iвҲ’1                 +
                       u mвҲ’1                    mвҲ’1
                       u Оі2 X                2Оі X Оі X u
                     = t           u      2
                                вҲҘПүi,T вҲ’1 вҲҘ +               Пү       ,Пү u
                         n2 i=1              n i=1 n r=1 r,T вҲ’1 i,T вҲ’1
                       v
                       u T вҲ’1                          mвҲ’1               mвҲ’1
                                                                             * iвҲ’1               +
                       u Оі2 X
                                        ОіВө(T вҲ’ 1 вҲ’ l) X u 2 2Оі X Оі X u
                     вүӨ t        exp вҲ’                      вҲҘПүi,l вҲҘ +               Пү     ,Пү u     .
                         n2                   2        i=1
                                                                       n i=1 n r=1 r,T вҲ’1 i,T вҲ’1
                                 l=0


Next, we introduce a new notation:
                       пЈұ iвҲ’1                         iвҲ’1                              вҲҡ
                                                                    вүӨ exp вҲ’ ОіВө(T4 вҲ’1) 2V ,
                       пЈІОі P u                      Оі P u
                              Оё     ,       if           Оёr,T вҲ’1
            ПҒi,T вҲ’1 = n r=1 r,T вҲ’1                 n
                                                     r=1                                           ,
                        0,                  otherwise
                       пЈі
                       пЈұ iвҲ’1                          iвҲ’1                              вҲҡ
                                                                     вүӨ exp вҲ’ ОіВө(T4 вҲ’1) 2V ,
                       пЈІОі P u                       Оі P u
                              Пү      ,       if           Пүr,T вҲ’1
             ПҒвҖІi,T вҲ’1 = n r=1 r,T вҲ’1                n
                                                      r=1
                         0,                  otherwise
                       пЈі

for i = 1, . . . , m вҲ’ 1. By definition, we have
                                           вҲҡ                                               вҲҡ
                              ОіВө(T вҲ’ 1)        V                                ОіВө(T вҲ’ 1)    V
       вҲҘПҒi,T вҲ’1 вҲҘ вүӨ exp вҲ’                        ,       вҲҘПҒвҖІi,T вҲ’1 вҲҘ вүӨ exp    вҲ’                           (418)
                                   4          2                                     4       2

                                                        113
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                               iвҲ’1                       iвҲ’1
                                    eT вҲ’1,mвҲ’1 implies ПҒi,T вҲ’1 = Оі P Оёu
for i = 1, . . . , m вҲ’ 1. Moreover, E                                          вҖІ        Оі P u
                                                                n    r,T вҲ’1 , ПҒi,T вҲ’1 = n  Пүr,T вҲ’1
                                                                              r=1                        r=1
for i = 1, . . . , m вҲ’ 1 and
                                        mвҲ’1
                                     Оі X u                       вҲҡ
                                          Оё              вүӨ           в‘ў + в‘Ј + в‘§,
                                     n i=1 i,l
                                       mвҲ’1
                                    Оі X u                        p
                                         Пү               вүӨ        в‘ў + в‘Ј + в‘§вҖІ ,
                                    n i=1 i,l
where
                           mвҲ’1                                            mвҲ’1
                    2Оі X             u                           2Оі X вҖІ
                                                                 вҖІ
                 в‘§=       ПҒi,T вҲ’1 , Оёi,T вҲ’1 ,                в‘§ =       ПҒ     , Пүu    .
                    n i=1                                        n i=1 i,T вҲ’1 i,T вҲ’1

It remains to estimate в‘§ and в‘§вҖІ .

Upper bound for в‘§. To estimate this sum, we will use BernsteinвҖҷs inequality. The summands have
conditional expectations equal to zero:

                         2Оі              u           2Оі D                     u
                                                                                      E
                EОҫT вҲ’1      вҹЁПҒi,T вҲ’1 , Оёi,T вҲ’1 вҹ©   =     ПҒ i,T вҲ’1 , E T вҲ’1
                                                                     Оҫ2,i  [Оё i,T вҲ’1 ]  = 0.
                   2,i    n                          n
                                         n
Thus, sequence 2Оі
                                u
                  n вҹЁПҒi,T вҲ’1 , Оёi,T вҲ’1 вҹ© i=1 is a martingale difference sequence. Next, the summands
are bounded:
                   2Оі             u                              2Оі                u
                      вҹЁПҒi,T вҲ’1 , Оёi,T вҲ’1 вҹ©         вүӨ                вҲҘПҒi,T вҲ’1 вҲҘ В· вҲҘОёi,T вҲ’1 вҲҘ
                   n                                             n
                                                                  вҲҡ
                                               (418),(387)       2 V Оі exp вҲ’ ОіВө(T4 вҲ’1)
                                                   вүӨ                                            О»T вҲ’1
                                                                              n
                                                 (305) exp вҲ’ ОіВө(T2 вҲ’1) V def
                                              вүӨ                                     = c.               (419)
                                                          80 ln 48n(K+1)
                                                                       ОІ
                                                         h 2                           i
                                  вҖІ       2 def            4Оі               u        2
Finally, conditional variances (b
                                Пғi,T вҲ’1 ) = EОҫ2,i  T вҲ’1
                                                           n2 вҹЁПҒi,T вҲ’1 , Оёi,T вҲ’1 вҹ©       of the summands are
bounded:
                                                2
                     вҖІ      2                   4Оі               2      u        2
                  (b
                   Пғi,T вҲ’1 )   вүӨ     E   T вҲ’1
                                        Оҫ2,i         вҲҘПҒ i,T вҲ’1 вҲҘ   В· вҲҘОё i,T вҲ’1 вҲҘ
                                                n2

                              (418)   Оі 2 V exp вҲ’ ОіВө(T2 вҲ’1)                   u
                                                                                        вҲҘ2 .

                               вүӨ                    2
                                                                   EОҫT вҲ’1 вҲҘОёi,T      вҲ’1                (420)
                                                  n                   2,i


Applying BernsteinвҖҷs inequality (Lemma B.1) with Xi = 2Оі                  u
                                                            n вҹЁПҒi,T вҲ’1 , Оёi,T вҲ’1 вҹ©, constant c defined in
                 ОіВө(T вҲ’1)
           exp(вҲ’          )V                 вҲ’1))V 2
(419), b =        80
                     2
                             , G = exp(вҲ’ОіВө(T
                                          48n(K+1) , we get
                                      38400 ln       ОІ
 пЈұ                                                                 пЈј
 пЈІ      exp вҲ’ ОіВө(T2 вҲ’1) V     n
                              X              exp (вҲ’ОіВө(T   вҲ’ 1)) V 2пЈҪ

                                                                                                                     b2

                                   вҖІ      2
P |в‘§| >                   and   (b
                                 Пғi,T вҲ’1 ) вүӨ                         вүӨ                                  2 exp вҲ’
 пЈі             80                        i=1   38400 ln 48n(K+1) пЈҫ                   ОІ
                                                                                                                  2G + 2cb/3
                                                                                                            ОІ
                                                                                                    =              .
                                                                                                        24n(K + 1)
                                              ОІ
The above is equivalent to P{Eв‘§ } вүҘ 1 вҲ’ 24n(K+1)   for
        пЈұ                                                                            пЈј
                                                                          ОіВө(T вҲ’1)
        пЈІ        Xn
                                   exp (вҲ’ОіВө(T вҲ’ 1)) V  2          exp   вҲ’     2     VпЈҪ
                        вҖІ      2
  Eв‘§ = either        (b
                      Пғi,T вҲ’1 )  >                       or |в‘§| >                      . (421)
        пЈі
                   i=1               38400 ln 48n(K+1)       ОІ
                                                                           80        пЈҫ


                                                         114
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Moreover, ET вҲ’1 implies
         n                                                       n
         X
              вҖІ       2
                              (420)     Оі 2 V exp (вҲ’ОіВө (T вҲ’ 1)) X           u         2

           (b
            Пғi,T вҲ’1 )          вүӨ                     2
                                                                      T вҲ’1 вҲҘОёi,T вҲ’1 вҲҘ
                                                                    EОҫ2,i
         i=1
                                                   n            i=1
                              (389)     18Оі 2 V exp (вҲ’ОіВө (T вҲ’ 1)) Пғ Оұ 2вҲ’Оұ
                               вүӨ                                     О»T вҲ’1
                                                       n
                                                   Оұ
                                        18Оі Оұ V 2вҲ’ 2 exp (вҲ’ОіВө(T вҲ’ 1)) Пғ Оұ

                              (378)                                             ОіВө(T вҲ’ 1)Оұ
                               вүӨ                                          exp
                                          3002вҲ’Оұ nОұвҲ’1 ln2вҲ’Оұ 48n(K+1)
                                                                 ОІ
                                                                                    4
                                                   Оұ

                            T вҲ’1вүӨK      18Оі Оұ V 2вҲ’ 2 exp (вҲ’ОіВө(T вҲ’ 1)) Пғ Оұ exp ОіВөKОұ
                                                                                 4
                               вүӨ
                                                   3002вҲ’Оұ nОұвҲ’1 ln2вҲ’Оұ 48n(K+1)
                                                                         ОІ
                              (375)     exp (вҲ’ОіВө(T вҲ’ 1)) V 2
                               вүӨ                                   .                                          (422)
                                          38400 ln 48n(K+1)
                                                       ОІ


Upper bound for в‘§вҖІ . To estimate this sum, we will use BernsteinвҖҷs inequality. The summands
have conditional expectations equal to zero:

                           2Оі вҖІ            u              2Оі D вҖІ                         u
                                                                                                 E
                EОҫT вҲ’1        вҹЁПҒi,T вҲ’1 , Пүi,T вҲ’1 вҹ© =            ПҒi,T вҲ’1 , EОҫT вҲ’1 [Пүi,T       вҲ’1 ] = 0.
                   1,i     n                               n                   1,i

                  2Оі вҖІ            u        n
Thus, sequence n вҹЁПҒi,T вҲ’1 , Пүi,T     вҲ’1 вҹ© i=1 is a martingale difference sequence. Next, the summands
are bounded:
                  2Оі вҖІ                                       2Оі вҖІ
                       вҹЁПҒ      , Пүu      вҹ©         вүӨ             вҲҘПҒ         вҲҘ В· вҲҘПүi,T u
                                                                                          вҲ’1 вҲҘ
                   n i,T вҲ’1 i,T вҲ’1                             n i,T вҲ’1
                                                                вҲҡ
                                               (418),(387)   2 V Оі exp вҲ’ ОіВө(T4 вҲ’1)
                                                   вүӨ                                              О»T вҲ’1
                                                                              n
                                                  (305)
                                                             exp вҲ’ ОіВө(T2 вҲ’1) V def
                                                   =                                         = c.               (423)
                                                                 80 ln 48n(K+1)
                                                                              ОІ
                                                               h 2                              i
                                      вҖІ       2 def             4Оі      вҖІ            u        2
Finally, conditional variances (e   Пғi,T вҲ’1 ) = EОҫ1,i    T вҲ’1
                                                                 n 2 вҹЁПҒ i,T вҲ’1   , Пү i,T вҲ’1  вҹ©    of the summands are
bounded:
                                                     2
                       вҖІ     2                        4Оі      вҖІ       2        u          2
                   (e
                    Пғi,T вҲ’1 )      вүӨ EОҫT вҲ’1                вҲҘПҒ        вҲҘ В· вҲҘПүi,T вҲ’1 вҲҘ
                                             1,i      n2 i,T вҲ’1

                                  (418)   Оі 2 V exp вҲ’ ОіВө(T2 вҲ’1)                       u           2

                                   вүӨ                                      EОҫ T вҲ’1 вҲҘПү
                                                                                         i,T  вҲ’1 вҲҘ    .         (424)
                                                        n2                   1,i


Applying BernsteinвҖҷs inequality (Lemma B.1) with Xi = 2Оі       вҖІ         u
                                                           n вҹЁПҒi,T вҲ’1 , Пүi,T вҲ’1 вҹ©, constant c defined in
                 ОіВө(T вҲ’1)
           exp(вҲ’          )V                 вҲ’1))V 2
(423), b =        80
                     2
                             , G = exp(вҲ’ОіВө(T
                                          48n(K+1) , we get
                                        38400 ln     ОІ
 пЈұ                                                                 пЈј
 пЈІ        exp вҲ’ ОіВө(T2 вҲ’1) V     n
                                X              exp (вҲ’ОіВө(T вҲ’ 1)) V 2пЈҪ

                                                                                                                    b2

P |в‘§вҖІ | >                   and   (e вҖІ
                                   Пғi,T     2
                                        вҲ’1 ) вүӨ                                                  вүӨ 2 exp вҲ’
 пЈі               80                         i=1  38400 ln 48n(K+1) пЈҫ              ОІ
                                                                                                                 2G + 2cb/3
                                                                                                          ОІ
                                                                                                =                .
                                                                                                      24n(K + 1)
                                               ОІ
The above is equivalent to P{Eв‘§вҖІ } вүҘ 1 вҲ’ 24n(K+1)   for
       пЈұ                                                                                 пЈј
                                                                              ОіВө(T вҲ’1)
       пЈІ         Xn
                                   exp (вҲ’ОіВө(T вҲ’ 1)) V   2             exp   вҲ’     2     VпЈҪ
                        вҖІ      2                                вҖІ
 Eв‘§ = either         (e
                      Пғi,T вҲ’1 )  >                        or |в‘§   | >                      . (425)
       пЈі
                    i=1              38400 ln 48n(K+1)    ОІ
                                                                               80        пЈҫ


                                                         115
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Moreover, ET вҲ’1 implies
         n                                                                      n
         X
              вҖІ       2
                                  (424)        Оі 2 V exp (вҲ’ОіВө (T вҲ’ 1)) X           u          2

           (e
            Пғi,T вҲ’1 )               вүӨ                       2
                                                                             T вҲ’1 вҲҘОё
                                                                           EОҫ2,i     i,T вҲ’1 вҲҘ
         i=1
                                                          n            i=1
                                  (389)        18Оі 2 V exp (вҲ’ОіВө (T вҲ’ 1)) Пғ Оұ 2вҲ’Оұ
                                    вүӨ                                       О»T вҲ’1
                                                              n
                                                          Оұ
                                               18Оі Оұ V 2вҲ’ 2 exp (вҲ’ОіВө(T вҲ’ 1)) Пғ Оұ

                                  (378)                                                ОіВө(T вҲ’ 1)Оұ
                                    вүӨ                                            exp
                                                 3002вҲ’Оұ nОұвҲ’1 ln2вҲ’Оұ 48n(K+1)
                                                                        ОІ
                                                                                           4
                                                          Оұ

                             T вҲ’1вүӨK            18Оі Оұ V 2вҲ’ 2 exp (вҲ’ОіВө(T вҲ’ 1)) Пғ Оұ exp ОіВөKОұ
                                                                                        4
                                    вүӨ
                                                        3002вҲ’Оұ nОұвҲ’1 ln2вҲ’Оұ 48n(K+1)
                                                                              ОІ
                                  (375)        exp (вҲ’ОіВө(T вҲ’ 1)) V 2
                                    вүӨ                                       .                                  (426)
                                                38400 ln 48n(K+1)
                                                             ОІ


Putting all together we get that ET вҲ’1 вҲ© E
                                         eT вҲ’1,mвҲ’1 implies

                                                                                                              ОіВөT
 Оі
   mвҲ’1
   X           вҲҡ                                    Оі
                                                       mвҲ’1
                                                       X                 p                      (396) exp   вҲ’   2   V
      Оёu      вүӨ в‘ў + в‘Ј + в‘§,                               Пүu             вүӨ в‘ў + в‘Ј + в‘§вҖІ ,         в‘ў вүӨ                    ,
 n i=1 i,T вҲ’1                                       n i=1 i,T вҲ’1                                             50
           T вҲ’1 X
                n                                            mвҲ’1
           X
                        2
                            (400)   exp (вҲ’ОіВөT ) V            X
                                                                       вҖІ      2     exp (вҲ’ОіВө(T вҲ’ 1)) V 2
                      Пғ
                      ei,l вүӨ                   48n(K+1)
                                                        ,           (b
                                                                     Пғi,T вҲ’1 ) вүӨ                           ,
           l=0 i=1                  216 ln         ОІ          i=1                    38400 ln 48n(K+1)
                                                                                                  ОІ
                                        mвҲ’1
                                        X
                                                 вҖІ      2    exp (вҲ’ОіВө(T вҲ’ 1)) V 2
                                              (e
                                               Пғi,T вҲ’1 ) вүӨ                             .
                                        i=1                   38400 ln 48n(K+1)
                                                                           ОІ

In addition, we also establish (see (399), (421), (425) and our induction assumption)

                            eT вҲ’1,mвҲ’1 } вүҘ 1 вҲ’ (T вҲ’ 1)ОІ вҲ’ (m вҲ’ 1)ОІ ,
                  P{ET вҲ’1 вҲ© E
                                               K +1      8n(K + 1)
                    ОІ                            ОІ                         ОІ
   P{Eв‘Ј } вүҘ 1 вҲ’            , P{Eв‘§ } вүҘ 1 вҲ’              , P{Eв‘§вҖІ } вүҘ 1 вҲ’
                24n(K + 1)                  24n(K + 1)                 24n(K + 1)
where
               пЈұ                                                                                пЈј
               пЈІ            T
                            X вҲ’1 X
                                 n
                                                   exp (вҲ’ОіВөT ) V    2               exp вҲ’ ОіВөT
                                                                                           2   VпЈҪ
                                            2
  Eв‘Ј     =         either                 Пғ
                                          ei,l >                        or |в‘Ј| вүӨ                       ,
               пЈі
                            l=0 i=1                216 ln 48n(K+1)
                                                              ОІ
                                                                                           6       пЈҫ
               пЈұ                                                                          пЈј
               пЈІ    Xn
                                     exp (вҲ’ОіВө(T   вҲ’  1)) V 2            exp вҲ’ ОіВө(T2 вҲ’1) V пЈҪ
                           вҖІ      2
  Eв‘§     =   either     (b
                         Пғi,T вҲ’1 ) >                         or |в‘§| >                         ,
           пЈі
                    i=1                38400 ln 48n(K+1)
                                                    ОІ
                                                                                 80         пЈҫ
           пЈұ                                                                                пЈј
                                                                                 ОіВө(T вҲ’1)
           пЈІ        Xn
                                     exp (вҲ’ОіВө(T вҲ’ 1)) V    2             exp   вҲ’     2     VпЈҪ
  Eв‘§вҖІ    =   either     (e вҖІ
                         Пғi,T     2
                              вҲ’1 ) >            48n(K+1)
                                                             or |в‘§вҖІ | >                         .
           пЈі
                            i=1        38400 ln                                   80        пЈҫ
                                                                        ОІ


Therefore, probability event ET вҲ’1 вҲ© E
                                     emвҲ’1 вҲ© Eв‘Ј вҲ© Eв‘§ вҲ© Eв‘§вҖІ implies
                                                                           вҲҡ
          mвҲ’1
                              ОіВө(T вҲ’ 1) вҲҡ                exp вҲ’ ОіВө(T4 вҲ’1)     V
                                            r
        Оі X u                                  1  1  1
              Оёi,T вҲ’1 вүӨ exp вҲ’             V      + +   вүӨ                       ,
        n i=1                     4           50 6 80              2
                                                                           вҲҡ
                                                                 ОіВө(T вҲ’1)
          mвҲ’1
                              ОіВө(T вҲ’ 1) вҲҡ                exp   вҲ’             V
                                            r
        Оі X
               u                               1  1  1              4
              Пүi,T вҲ’1 вүӨ exp вҲ’             V      + +   вүӨ                       .
        n i=1                     4           50 6 80              2


                                                             116
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


This implies E
             eT вҲ’1,m and

              P{ET вҲ’1 вҲ© E
                        eT вҲ’1,m }                eT вҲ’1,mвҲ’1 вҲ© Eв‘Ј вҲ© Eв‘§ вҲ© Eв‘§вҖІ }
                                     вүҘ P{ET вҲ’1 вҲ© E
                                            n                                      o
                                     = 1 вҲ’ P ET вҲ’1 вҲ© EeT вҲ’1,mвҲ’1 вҲӘ E в‘Ј вҲӘ E в‘§ вҲӘ E в‘§вҖІ

                                               (T вҲ’ 1)ОІ      mОІ
                                     вүҘ 1вҲ’               вҲ’           .
                                                K +1      8n(K + 1)
Therefore, for all m = 2, . . . , n the statement holds and, in particular, P{ET вҲ’1 вҲ© E
                                                                                      eT вҲ’1,n } вүҘ
      (T вҲ’1)ОІ       ОІ
1 вҲ’ K+1 вҲ’ 8(K+1) , i.e., (383) and (384) hold. Taking into account (417), we conclude that
ET вҲ’1 вҲ© E  eT вҲ’1,n вҲ© Eв‘  вҲ© Eв‘Ј вҲ© Eв‘ҘвҖІ вҲ© Eв‘ҰвҖІ вҲ© Eв‘§ implies
                                                     ОіВө
                                        VT вүӨ 2 exp вҲ’ T V
                                                       2
that is equivalent to (382) for t = T . Moreover,
                             n                                           o
            P {ET } вүҘ P ET вҲ’1 вҲ© E        eT вҲ’1,n вҲ© Eв‘  вҲ© Eв‘Ј вҲ© Eв‘ҘвҖІ вҲ© Eв‘ҰвҖІ
                                  n                                       o
                       = 1 вҲ’ P ET вҲ’1 вҲ© E     en вҲӘ E в‘  вҲӘ E в‘Ј вҲӘ E в‘ҘвҖІ вҲӘ E в‘ҰвҖІ

                                 (T вҲ’ 1)ОІ      ОІ             ОІ           TОІ
                       =    1вҲ’            вҲ’          вҲ’4В·            =1вҲ’      .
                                  K +1      8(K + 1)     24n(K + 1)     K +1

In other words, we showed that P{Ek } вүҘ 1 вҲ’ kОІ/(K+1) for all k = 0, 1, . . . , K + 1. For k = K + 1
we have that with probability at least 1 вҲ’ ОІ

                                                          ОіВө(K + 1)
                      вҲҘxK+1 вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲҘ2 вүӨ VK+1 вүӨ 2 exp вҲ’                       V.
                                                                2

Finally, if
                       (                                        вҲҡ                             )
                                     1            1                n               2 ln(BK )
         Оі    = min                            ,     ,                          ,               ,
                     72 В· 106 Вө ln2 48n(K+1)
                                         ОІ
                                                 6L 15000L ln 48n(K+1) Вө(K + 1)
                                                                         ОІ
                    пЈұ                                                        пЈј
                                    2(ОұвҲ’1)           2(ОұвҲ’1)
                    пЈІ              n Оұ (K + 1) Оұ Вө2 V                        пЈҪ
      BK      = max 2,
                    пЈі 3110400 Оұ2 Пғ 2 ln 2(ОұвҲ’1)
                                            Оұ
                                                    48n(K+1)
                                                                ln2 (BK ) пЈҫ
                                                         ОІ
                  пЈ«     пЈұ                                                                         пЈјпЈ¶
                        пЈҙ
                        пЈҙ                                                                         пЈҙ
                                                                                                  пЈҙ
                        пЈҙ                            2(ОұвҲ’1)   2(ОұвҲ’1)
                                                                                                  пЈҙ
                                                                        2
                  пЈ¬     пЈҙ                                                                         пЈҪпЈ·
                                                                                                  пЈҙ
                  пЈ¬     пЈІ                         n     Оұ   K    Оұ   Вө    V                        пЈ·
              = OпЈ¬  max    2,                                  (                              )!   пЈ·
                  пЈ¬                                                    2(ОұвҲ’1)     2(ОұвҲ’1)           пЈ·
                        пЈҙ           2(ОұвҲ’1)                                                 2V
                                                                                                  пЈҙ
                        пЈҙ       2 ln Оұ      nK        2              n    Оұ   K      Оұ   Вө        пЈҙ
                              Пғ                    ln     max    2,
                  пЈӯ     пЈҙ                                                                         пЈҙпЈё
                                             ОІ                               2(ОұвҲ’1)
                        пЈҙ
                        пЈі                                                                         пЈҙ
                                                                                                  пЈҫ
                                                                       Пғ 2 ln Оұ       ( ОІ )
                                                                                       nK


then with probability at least 1 вҲ’ ОІ

                                  ОіВө(K + 1)
вҲҘxK+1 вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲҘ2 вүӨ 2 exp вҲ’                       V
                                      2
                                 (                                   !
                                                      K +1             Вө(K + 1)
                    = 2V max exp вҲ’                          , exp вҲ’                 ,
                                   144 В· 106 ln2 48n(K+1)
                                                     ОІ
                                                                          12L
                                                                  вҲҡ                !       )
                                                                 Вө n(K + 1)              1
                                                     exp вҲ’                            ,
                                                             30000L ln 48n(K+1)
                                                                              ОІ
                                                                                        BK
                            (                 !
                                        K                 ВөK
                    = O max V exp вҲ’ 2 nK , V exp вҲ’                ,
                                     ln ОІ                   L
                                                         ! 2 2(ОұвҲ’1)
                                                   вҲҡ         Пғ ln Оұ        nK
                                                                                 ln2 BK
                                                                                         )!
                                                  Вө nK                       ОІ
                                     V exp вҲ’              ,                                 .
                                                 L ln nK
                                                       ОІ
                                                                   2(ОұвҲ’1)
                                                                 n Оұ K Оұ Вө2
                                                                            2(ОұвҲ’1)


                                                   117
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


To get вҲҘxK+1 вҲ’ xвҲ— вҲҘ2 вүӨ Оө with probability вүҘ 1 вҲ’ ОІ, K should be
               (                           !                       !
                     L          nL V              V       nL V
  K = O max         вҲҡ    + ln      ln         ln      ln      ln    ,
                      nВө        ВөОІ      Оө          Оө      ВөОІ     Оө
                                                 Оұ                  Оұ !              )!
                                      1 Пғ 2 2(ОұвҲ’1)        n Пғ 2 2(ОұвҲ’1)

                         L      V                                           Оұ
                           ln       ,                 ln                ln ОұвҲ’1 (BОө )   ,
                         Вө      Оө     n Вө2 Оө              ОІ Вө2 Оө

where                                пЈұ                                    пЈј
                                     пЈҙ
                                     пЈҙ                                    пЈҙ
                                                                          пЈҙ
                                     пЈІ                     V              пЈҪ
                          BОө = max       2,                            Оұ
                                                                    2(ОұвҲ’1)   .
                                     пЈҙ                1    Пғ2               пЈҙ
                                     пЈҙ
                                     пЈі        Оө ln    ОІ    Вө2 Оө
                                                                            пЈҙ
                                                                            пЈҫ


                                                 118
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


I           N UMERICAL E XPERIMENTS
In this section we provide numerical experiments for the following simple problem:
                                                                                                     min f (x),                                                                                              (427)
                                                                                                   xвҲҲBr (xМӮ)

where a radius r = 1, a central point xМӮ = (3, 3, . . . , 3)вҠӨ вҲҲ R10 , and f (x) = 21 вҲҘxвҲҘ2 , fОҫ (x) =
1     2                                                                                3
2 вҲҘxвҲҘ + вҹЁОҫ, xвҹ©, where Оҫ comes from the symmetric Levy Оұ-stable distribution Оұ = 2 . We use the
                                  0          e                               вҠӨ
following parameters: Оі = 0.001, x = xМӮ + r вҲҘeвҲҘ , where e = (1, 1, . . . , 1) . We tried three values
of О»: 0.1, 0.01 and 0.001.
                                       = 0.1                                                                   = 0.01                                                              = 0.001
                 100                           Prox-clipped-SGD                          100                            Prox-clipped-SGD                       100                           Prox-clipped-SGD
                                               Prox-clipped-SGD-shift                                                   Prox-clipped-SGD-shift                                               Prox-clipped-SGD-shift
             10 2
                                               Prox-clipped-SGD-star
                                                                                        10 2                            Prox-clipped-SGD-star                 10 2                           Prox-clipped-SGD-star
                                                                                                                                                              10 4
 f(x0) f(x * )
 f(xk) f(x * )


                                                                                        10 4
                                                                        f(x0) f(x * )


                                                                                                                                                 f(x0) f(x * )
                                                                        f(xk) f(x * )


                                                                                                                                                 f(xk) f(x * )
             10 4                                                                                                                                             10 6
                                                                                        10 6
             10 6                                                                                                                                             10 8
                                                                                        10 8                                                                 10 10
             10 8                                                                   10 10                                                                    10 12
                       0   100000 200000 300000 400000 500000                                  0    100000 200000 300000 400000 500000                               0   100000 200000 300000 400000 500000
                               Number of iterations                                                     Number of iterations                                                 Number of iterations

Figure 1: Comparison between performances of Prox-clipped-SGD, Prox-clipped-SGD-star,
Prox-clipped-SGD-shift in solving problem (427) with fixed clipping level for each of them О» вҲҲ
{0.1, 0.01, 0.001}.

In our numerical experiments (see Figure 1), we observe that the naДұМҲve Prox-clipped-SGD converges
slower than Prox-clipped-SGD-star and Prox-clipped-SGD-shift. Moreover, when the clipping
level is small Prox-clipped-SGD converges extremely slow, while Prox-clipped-SGD-shifts takes
some time to learn the shift and then converges to much better accuracy. We also see that the smaller
clipping level is, the better accuracy Prox-clipped-SGD-star achieves. For Prox-clipped-SGD-shift
we observe the same phenomenon when we reduce О» from 0.1 to 0.01 . We expect the improvement
in the accuracy even further if we decrease the stepsizes Оі and ОҪ .


                                                                                                          119
