Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


G ROWING T INY N ETWORKS : S POTTING E XPRESSIV-
ITY B OTTLENECKS AND F IXING T HEM O PTIMALLY

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT

         Machine learning tasks are generally formulated as optimization problems, where
         one searches for an optimal function within a certain functional space. In practice,
         parameterized functional spaces are considered, in order to be able to perform
         gradient descent. Typically, a neural network architecture is chosen and fixed,
         and its parameters (connection weights) are optimized, yielding an architecture-
         dependent result. This way of proceeding however forces the evolution of the
         function during training to lie within the realm of what is expressible with the
         chosen architecture, and prevents any optimization across architectures. Costly
         architectural hyper-parameter optimization is often performed to compensate for
         this. Instead, we propose to adapt the architecture on the fly during training.
         We show that the information about desirable architectural changes, due to ex-
         pressivity bottlenecks when attempting to follow the functional gradient, can be
         extracted from backpropagation. To do this, we propose a mathematical definition
         of expressivity bottlenecks, which enables us to detect, quantify and solve them
         while training, by adding suitable neurons when and where needed. Thus, while
         the standard approach requires large networks, in terms of number of neurons per
         layer, for expressivity and optimization reasons, we are able to start with very
         small neural networks and let them grow appropriately. As a proof of concept,
         we show results on the CIFAR dataset, matching large neural network accuracy,
         with competitive training time, while removing the need for standard architectural
         hyper-parameter search.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Issues with the fixed-architecture paradigm. Universal approximation theorems such as (Hornik
et al., 1989; Cybenko, 1989) are historically among the first theoretical results obtained on neural
networks, stating the family of neural networks with arbitrary width as a good candidate for a param-
eterized space of functions to be used in machine learning. However the current common practice
in neural network training consists in choosing a fixed architecture, and training it, without any pos-
sible architecture modification meanwhile. This inconveniently prevents the direct application of
these universal approximation theorems, as expressivity bottlenecks that might arise in a given layer
during training will not be able to be fixed. There are two approaches to circumvent this in daily prac-
tice. Either one chooses a (very) large width, to be sure to avoid expressivity and optimization issues
(Hanin & Rolnick, 2019b; Raghu et al., 2017), to the cost of extra computational power consump-
tion for training and applying such big models; to mitigate this cost, model reduction techniques
are often used afterwards, using pruning, tensor factorization, quantization (Louizos et al., 2017)
or distillation (Hinton et al., 2015). Or one tries different architectures and keeps the most suitable
one (in terms of performance-size compromise for instance), which multiplies the computational
burden by the number of trials. This latter approach relates to the Auto-DeepLearning field (Liu
et al., 2020), where different exploration strategies over the space of architecture hyper-parameters
(among other ones) have been tested, including reinforcement learning (Baker et al., 2017; Zoph &
Le, 2016), Bayesian optimization techniques (Mendoza et al., 2016), and evolutionary approaches
(Miller et al., 1989; Stanley et al., 2009; Miikkulainen et al., 2017; Bennet et al., 2021), that all
rely on random tries and consequently take time for exploration. Within that line, Net2Net (Chen
et al., 2015), AdaptNet (Yang et al., 2018) and MorphNet (Gordon et al., 2018) propose different
strategies to explore possible variations of a given architecture, possibly guided by model size con-


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


straints. Instead, we aim at providing a way to locate precisely expressivity bottlenecks in a trained
network, which might speed up neural architecture search significantly. Moreover, based on such
observations, we aim at modifying the architecture on the fly during training, in a single run (no
re-training), using first-order derivatives only, while avoiding neuron redundancy. Related work on
architecture adaptation while training includes probabilistic edges (Liu et al., 2019) or sparsifying
priors (Wolinski et al., 2020). Yet the training is done on the largest architecture allowed, which is
resource-consuming. On the opposite we aim at starting from the simplest architecture possible.

Optimization properties. An important reason for common practice to choose wide architectures
is the associated optimization properties: sufficiently larger networks are proved theoretically and
shown empirically to be better optimized than small ones (Jacot et al., 2018). Typically, small net-
works exhibit issues with spurious local minima, while wide ones find good nearly-global minima.
One of our goals is to train small networks without suffering from such optimization difficulties.

Neural architecture growth. A related line of work consists in growing networks neuron by neu-
ron, by iteratively estimating the best possible neurons to add, according to a certain criterion. For
instance, approaches such as (Wu et al., 2019) or Firefly (Wu et al., 2020) aim at escaping local
minima by adding neurons that minimize the loss under neighborhood constraints. These neurons
are found by gradient descent or by solving quadratic problems involving second-order derivatives.
Other approaches (Causse et al., 2019; Bashtova et al., 2022), including GradMax (Evci et al., 2022),
seek to minimize the loss as fast as possible and involve another quadratic problem. However the
neurons added by these approaches are possibly redundant with existing neurons, especially if one
does not wait for training convergence to a local minimum (which is time consuming) before adding
neurons, therefore producing larger-than-needed architectures.

Redundancy. To our knowledge, the only approach tackling redundancy in neural architecture
growth adds random neurons that are orthogonal in some sense to the ones already present (Maile
et al., 2022). More precisely, the new neurons are picked within the kernel (preimage of {0}) of an
application describing already existing neurons. Two such applications are proposed, respectively
the matrix of fan-in weights and the pre-activation matrix, yielding two different notions of orthog-
onality. The latter formulation is close to the one of GradMax, in that both study first-order loss
variations and use the same pre-activation matrix, with an important difference though: GradMax
optimally decreases the loss without caring about redundancy, while the other one avoids redun-
dancy but picks random directions instead of optimal ones. In this paper we bridge the gap between
these two approaches, picking optimal directions that avoid redundancy in the pre-activation space.

Notions of expressivity. Several concepts of expressivity or complexity exist in the Machine
Learning literature, ranging from Vapnik-Chervonenkis dimension (Vapnik & Chervonenkis, 1971)
and Rademacher complexity (Koltchinskii, 2001) to the number of pieces in a piecewise affine func-
tion (as networks with ReLU activations are) (Serra et al., 2018; Hanin & Rolnick, 2019a). Bottle-
necks have been also studied from the point of view of Information Theory, through mutual infor-
mation between the activities of different layers (Tishby & Zaslavsky, 2015; Dai et al., 2018); this
quantity is difficult to estimate though. Also relevant and from Information Theory, the Minimum
Description Length paradigm and Kolmogorov complexity (Kolmogorov, 1965; Li et al., 2008) en-
able to define trade-offs between performance and model complexity.
In this article, we aim at measuring lacks of expressivity as the difference between what the back-
propagation asks for and what can be done by a small parameter update (such as a gradient step),
that is, between the desired variation for each activation in each layer (for each sample) and the best
one that can be realized by a parameter update. Intuitively, differences arise when a layer does not
have sufficient expressive power to realize the desired variation. Our main contributions are that we:

       • take a functional analysis viewpoint over gradient descent on neural networks, suggesting
         to attempt to follow the functional gradient. We optimize not only the weights of the
         current architecture, but also the architecture itself on the fly, in order to progressively move
         towards more suitable parameterized functional spaces. This removes the optimization
         issues (local minima) that are due to thin architectures;
       • properly define and quantify the notion of expressivity bottlenecks, globally at the neural
         network output as well as at each layer, and this in an easily computable way. This allows
         to localize expressivity bottlenecks in a neural network;


                                                    2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


       • mathematically define the best possible neurons to add to a given layer to decrease lacks of
         expressivity as a quadratic problem; compute them and their associated expressivity gain;
       • automatically adapt the architecture to the task at hand by making it grow where needed,
         and this in a single run, in competitive computational complexity with respect to classically
         training a large model just once. To remove any need for layer width hyper-optimization,
         one could define a target accuracy and stop adding neurons when it is reached.


2     M AIN CONCEPTS

2.1   N OTATIONS
                                     p  d
Let F be a functional space,       i → R ), and a loss function L : F → R defined on it, of the
                        h e.g. L2 (R
form L(f ) = E(x,y)∼D ℓ(f (x), y) , where ℓ is the per-sample loss, assumed to be differentiable,
and where D is the sample distribution, from which the dataset {(x1 , y1 ), ..., (xN , yN )} is sampled,
with xi ∈ Rp and yi ∈ Rd .
For the sake of simplicity we consider a feedforward neural network fθ : Rp → Rd with L hidden
layers, each of which consisting of an affine layer with weights Wl followed by a differentiable
activation function σl which satisfies σl (0) = 0. The network parameters are then θ := (Wl )l=1...L .
The network iteratively computes:

                                x
                   b0 (x) =
                                1
                  
                  al (x) =     Wl bl−1 (x)

     ∀l ∈ [1, L],                 σl (al (x))
                  bl (x) =
                                       1
                   fθ (x) = σL (aL (x))                               Figure 1: Notations

To any vector-valued function noted t(x) and any batch of inputs X := [x1 , ..., xn ], we as-
sociate the concatenated matrix T (X) := (t(x1 ) ... t(xn )) ∈ R|t(.)|×n . The matrices of
pre-activation and post-activation activities at layer l over a minibatch X are thus respectively:
Al (X) = (al (x1 ) ... al (xn )) and Bl (X) = (bl (x1 ) ... bl (xn )).
NB: convolutions can also be considered, with appropriate representations (cf matrix bcl (x) in 10).

2.2   A PPROACH

Functional gradient descent. We take a functional perspective on the use of neural networks.
Ideally in a machine learning task, one would search for a function f : Rp → Rd that minimizes the
loss L by gradient descent: ∂f∂t = −∇f L(f ) for some metric on the functional space F (typically,
L2 (Rp → Rd )), where ∇f denotes the functional gradient and t denotes the evolution time of the
gradient descent. The descent direction vgoal := −∇f L(f ) is a function of the same type as f and
whose value at x is easily computable as vgoal (x) = − (∇f L(f )) (x) = −∇u ℓ(u, y(x)) u=f (x)
(see Appendix A.1 for more details). This direction vgoal is the best infinitesimal variation in F to
add to f to decrease the loss L.

Parametric gradient descent reminder. However in practice, to represent functions and to
compute gradients, the infinite-dimensioned functional space F has to be replaced with a finite-
dimensioned parametric space of functions, which is usually done by choosing a particular neural
network architecture A with weights θ ∈ ΘA . The associated parametric search space FA then
consists of all possible functions fθ that can be represented with such a network for any parameter
value θ. Under standard weak assumptions (see Appendix A.2), the gradient descent is of the form:
                           ∂θ                            h               i
                               = −∇θ L(fθ ) = − E         ∇θ ℓ(fθ (x), y) .
                            ∂t                   (x,y)∼D


                                                   3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Using the chain rule, these parameter updates yield a functional evolution :
                                                              "                     #
                           ∂fθ     ∂fθ ∂θ        ∂fθ             ∂fθ T
                vGD :=          =            =           E            (x) vgoal (x)
                            ∂t      ∂θ ∂t        ∂θ (x,y)∼D ∂θ
which significantly differs from the original functional gradient descent. We will aim to augment the
neural network architecture so that parametric gradient descents can get closer to the functional one.

Optimal move direction. We name TAfθ , or just
TA , the tangent space of FA at fθ , that is, the set of
all possible infinitesimal variations around fθ under
small parameter variations:

                     ∂fθ
          TAfθ :=          δθ s.t. δθ ∈ ΘA
                      ∂θ
This linear space is a first-order approximation of the
neighborhood of fθ within FA . The direction vGD
obtained above by gradient descent is actually not
the best one to consider within TA . Indeed, the best
move v ∗ would be the orthogonal projection of the
desired direction vgoal := −∇fθ L(fθ ) onto TA . This
projection is what a (generalization of the notion of)
natural gradient would compute (Ollivier, 2017).               Figure 2: Expressivity bottleneck

Indeed, the parameter variation δθ∗ associated to the functional variation v ∗ = ∂f      ∗
                                                                                   ∂θ δθ is the gradi-
                                                                                     θ

       TA
ent −∇θ L(fθ ) of L◦fθ w.r.t. parameters θ when considering the L2 metric on functional variations
∥ ∂f
  ∂θ δθ∥L2 (TA ) , not to be confused with the usual gradient ∇θ L(fθ ), based on the L2 metric on pa-
     θ


rameter variations ∥δθ∥L2 (R|ΘA | ) . This can be seen in a proximal formulation as:

                                                                             1
                  v ∗ = arg min ∥v − vgoal ∥2 = arg min Df L(f )(v) + ∥v∥2                         (1)
                           v∈TA                      v∈TA                    2
where D is the directional derivative (see details in Appendix A.3), or equivalently as:
                                                    (                                )
                                      2                                            2
                     ∂fθ                                               1 ∂fθ
   ∗
δθ = arg min              δθ − vgoal    = arg min Dθ L(fθ )(δθ) +              δθ      =: −∇TθA L(fθ ) .
         δθ∈ΘA       ∂θ                      δθ∈ΘA                     2 ∂θ

Lack of expressivity. When vgoal does not belong to the reachable subspace TA , there is a lack of
expressivity, that is, the parametric space A is not rich enough to follow the ideal functional gradient
descent. This happens frequently with small neural networks (see Appendix A.4 for an example).
The expressivity bottleneck is then quantified as the distance ∥v ∗ − vgoal ∥ between the functional
gradient vgoal and the optimal functional move v ∗ given the architecture A (in the sense of Eq. 1).

2.3   G ENERALIZING TO ALL LAYERS

Ideal updates. The same reasoning can be applied to the pre-activations al at each layer l, seen
as functions al : x ∈ Rp 7→ al (x) ∈ Rdl defined over the input space of the neural network.
The optimal parameter update for a given layer l then follows the projection of the desired update
−∇al L(fθ ) of the pre-activation functions al onto the linear subspace TAal of pre-activation varia-
tions that are possible with the architecture, as we will detail now.
                                                                                           l
Given an sample (x, y) ∈ D, standard backpropagation already iteratively computes vgoal        (x) :=
− (∇al L(fθ )) (x) = − ∇u ℓ (σL (WL σL−1 (WL−1 ... σl (u))), y)|u=al (x) , which is the derivative
of the loss ℓ(fθ (x), y) with respect to the pre-activations u = al (x) of each layer. This is usually
performed in order to compute the gradients w.r.t. model parameters Wl , as ∇Wl ℓ(fθ (x), y) =
∂al (x)
 ∂Wl ∇al ℓ(fθ (x), y).
 l
vgoal (x) := − (∇al L(fθ )) (x) indicates the direction in which one would like to change the layer
pre-activations al (x) in order to decrease the loss at point x. However, given a minibatch of points
(xi ), most of the time no parameter move δθ is able to induce this progression for each xi simulta-
neously, because the θ-parameterized family of functions al is not expressive enough.


                                                    4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Activity update resulting from a parameter change. Given a subset of parameters θ̃ (such as
the ones specific to a layer: θ̃ = Wl ), and an incrementalP
                                                           direction δ θ̃ to update these parameters
(e.g. the one resulting from a gradient descent: δ θ̃ = −η (x,y)∈minibatch ∇θ̃ ℓ(fθ (x), y) for some
learning rate η), the impact of the parameter update δ θ̃ on the pre-activations al at layer l at order 1
                              ∂al (x)
in δ θ̃ is v l (xi , δ θ̃) :=         δ θ̃.
                                ∂ θ̃
                                                                       l
Note: given a learning rate η, in the sequel we will rather consider vgoal (x) := −η∇al L(fθ )(x).

3     E XPRESSIVITY BOTTLENECKS
We now quantify expressivity bottlenecks at any layer l as the distance between the desired activity
        l
update vgoal (.) and the best realizable one v l (.) (cf Figure 2):
Definition 3.1 (Lack of expressivity). For a neural network fθ and a minibatch of points
X = {(xi , yi )}ni=1 , we define the lack of expressivity at layer l as how far the desired
                     l       l            l
activity update Vgoal    = (vgoal (x1 ), vgoal (x2 ), ...) is from the closest possible activity update
  l      l       l
V = (v (x1 ), v (x2 ), ...) realizable by a parameter change δθ:
                            n
                         1X l                             2        1                          2
         Ψl := mina                             l
                                  v (xi ) − vgoal  (xi ) = min        V l (X, δθ) − Vgoal
                                                                                      l
                                                                                          (X) Tr    (2)
               v l ∈TA l n                                      δθ n
                           i=1

where ||.|| stands for the L2 norm, ||.||Tr for the Frobenius norm, and V l (X, δθ) is the activity
update resulting from parameter change δθ as defined in previous section. In the two following parts
we fix the minibatch X and simplify notations accordingly by removing the dependency on X.

3.1   B EST MOVE WITHOUT MODIFYING THE ARCHITECTURE OF THE NETWORK

Let δWl∗ be the solution of 2 when the parameter variation δθ is restricted to involve only layer
l parameters, i.e. Wl . This move is sub-optimal in that it does not result from an update of all
architecture parameters but only of the current layer ones:
                                                1                    2
                              δWl∗ = arg min      V l (δWl ) − Vgoal
                                                                 l
                                                                     Tr
                                                                                                     (3)
                                          δWl   n
Proposition 3.1. The solution of Problem (3) is:
                                          1 l        1
                                δWl∗ =     V B T ( Bl−1 Bl−1
                                                         T
                                                             )+
                                          n goal l−1 n
where P + denotes the generalized inverse of matrix P .

This update δWl∗ is not equivalent to the usual gradient descent update, whose form is δWlGD ∝
  l
Vgoal  T
      Bl−1 . In fact the associated activity variation, δWl∗ Bl−1 , is the projection of Vgoal
                                                                                             l
                                                                                                 on the
post-activation matrix of layer l − 1, that is to say onto the span of all possible post-activation
directions, through the projector n1 Bl−1
                                      T
                                          ( n1 Bl−1 Bl−1
                                                     T
                                                         )+ Bl−1 . To increase expressivity if needed,
we will aim at increasing this span with the most useful directions to close the gap between this best
update and the desired one. Note that the update δWl∗ consists of a standard gradient (Vgoal   l   T
                                                                                                 Bl−1 )
and of a (kind of) natural gradient only for the last part (projector), as we consider metrics in the
pre-activation space.

3.2   R EDUCING EXPRESSIVITY BOTTLENECK BY MODIFYING THE ARCHITECTURE
                                 l
To get as close as possible to Vgoal and to increase the expressive power of the current neural network,
we modify each layer of its structure. At layer l − 1, we add K neurons n1 , ..., nK with input
weights α1 , ..., αk and output weights ω1 , ..., ωK (cf  Figure 3). We have the following expansions
                       T             T
by concatenation : Wl−1    ← Wl−1         α1 ... αK and Wl ← (Wl ω1 ... ωK ).
                                                K                                        K
We note this architecture modification θ ← θ ⊕ θ↔ where ⊕ is the concatenation sign and θ↔ :=
          K
(αk , ωk )k=1 are the K added neurons.


                                                   5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                             Figure 4: Sum of functional moves
Figure 3: Adding one neuron at layer l in cyan
(K = 1), with connections in cyan. Here, α ∈ R5
and ω ∈ R3 .


The added neurons could be chosen randomly, as in usual neural network initialization, but this
would not yield any guarantee regarding the impact on the system loss. Another possibility would be
to set either input weights (αk )K                           K
                                  k=1 or output weights (ωk )k=1 to 0, so that the function fθ (.) would
not be modified, while its gradient w.r.t. θ would be enriched from the new parameters. Another
option is to solve a optimization problem as in the previous section with the modified structure
             K                                                             K
θ ← θ ⊕ θ↔      and jointly search for both the optimal new parameters θ↔    and the optimal variation
δWl of the old ones:
                                                                          2
                                    arg min V l (δWl ⊕ θ↔
                                                        K       l
                                                          ) − Vgoal Tr
                                                                                                           (4)
                                     K , δW
                                    θ↔     l



As shown in figure 4, the displacement V l at layer l is actually a sum of the moves induced by the
                                                             K
neurons already present (δWl ) and by the added neurons (θ↔    ), our problem rewrites as :
                                                                               2
                              arg min V l (θ↔
                                            K
                                              ) + V l (δWl ) − Vgoal l                                     (5)
                                K , δW
                               θ↔     l
                                                                               Tr
                    PK
with v l (x, θ↔
              K
                ) := j=1 ωk (bl−2 (x)T αk ) (See A.5). We choose δWl as the best move of already-
existing parameters as defined in Proposition 3.1 and we note Vgoall
                                                                     proj
                                                                               l
                                                                          := Vgoal − V l (δWl ∗ ). We
are looking for the solution K ∗ , θ↔
                                    K∗

                                         of the optimization problem :
                                                                     2
                                    arg min V l (θ↔
                                                  K       l
                                                    ) − Vgoal proj
                                                                          .                                (6)
                                          K
                                      K, θ↔                          Tr

This quadratic optimization problem can be solved thanks to the low-rank matrix approximation the-
                                                                        T
orem (Eckart & Young, 1936), using matrices N := n1 Bl−2 Vgoal l
                                                                  proj
                                                                          and S := n1 Bl−2 Bl−2
                                                                                            T
                                                                                                . As
                                                                T               − 12
                                                                                         √   −1 T
S is semi-positive definite, let its truncated SVD be S = U ΣU , and define S        := U Σ U ,
with the convention that the inverse of 0 eigenvalues is 0. Finally, consider the truncated SVD of
           1      PR                                                      1
matrix S − 2 N = k=1 λk uk vkT , where R is the rank of the matrix S − 2 N . Then:

Proposition 3.2. The solution of Problem (6) is:
     • optimal number of neurons: K ∗ = R
                                                      p         1     p
     • their optimal weights: (α∗k , ωk∗ ) = sign(λk ) |λk |S − 2 uk , |λk |vk for k = 1, ..., R.

                                                                             K,∗
Moreover for any number of neurons K ⩽ R, and associated weights θ↔              , the expressivity gain
and the first order in η of the loss improvement due to the addition of these K neurons are equal and
can be quantified very simply as a function of the singular values λk :
                        K                                                           K
                        X                                                     σl′ (0) X 2
     Ψlθ⊕θK,∗ = Ψlθ −         λ2k      and     L(fθ⊕θ↔
                                                     K,∗ ) = L(fθ ) +
                                                                                                 K,∗ 2
                                                                                       λk + o(||θ↔  || )
           ↔                                                                     η
                        k=1                                                         k=1


                                                     6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Proposition 3.3. If S is positive definite, then solving (5) is equivalent to taking ωk = N αk and
finding the K first eigenvectors αk associated to the K largest eigenvalues λ of the generalized
eigenvalue problem :
                                         N N T αk = λSαk
Corollary 1. For all integers m, m′ such that m + m′ ⩽ R, at order one in η, adding m + m′
neurons simultaneously according to the previous method is equivalent to adding m neurons then
m′ neurons by applying successively the previous method twice.

Note: Problems (5) and (6) are generally not equivalent, though similar (cf C.4).
                                                                 l
Note 2: Minimizing the distance (4), ie the distance between Vgoal   and V l , is equivalent to minimiz-
                                l
ing the loss L at order one in V :
                                                    ′
                                                   σl−1 (0) D l          E
                            L(fθ⊕θ↔K ) ≈ L(fθ ) −            Vgoal , V l                             (7)
                                                      ηn                  Tr

The family {V l+1 ((αk , ωk ))}K                                                              K,∗
                                k=1 of pre-activity variations induced by adding the neurons θ↔ is
orthogonal for the trace scalar product. We could say that the added neurons are orthogonal to each
other (and to the already-present ones) in that sense. Interestingly, the GradMax method (Evci et al.,
2022) also aims at minimizing the loss 7, but without avoiding redundancy (see Appendix B.1 for
more details).

Addition of new neurons. In practice before adding new neurons (α, ω), we multiply       √ them
                                                                                              √ by
an amplitude factor γ found by a simple line search (see Appendix D.4), i.e. we add ( γα, γω).
The addition of each neuron k has an impact on the loss of the order of γλ2k provided γ is small.
This performance gain could be used in a selection criterion realizing a trade-off with computational
complexity. A selection based on statistical significance of singular values can also be performed
(Appendix D.3). The full algorithm and its complexity are detailed in Appendices D.5 and D.6.

4   A BOUT GREEDY GROWTH SUFFICIENCY
One might wonder whether a greedy approach on layer growth might get stuck in a non-optimal
state. We derive the following series of propositions in this regard. Since in this work we add
neurons layer per layer independently, we study here the case of a single hidden layer network, to
spot potential layer growth issues. For the sake of simplicity, we consider the task of least square
regression towards an explicit continuous target f ∗ , defined on a compact set. That is, we aim at
minimizing the loss:                     X
                                     inf     ∥f (x) − f ∗ (x)∥2
                                       f
                                           x∈D
where f (x) is the output of the neural network and D is the training set.
Proposition 4.1 (Greedy completion of an existing network). If f is not f ∗ yet, then there exists a
set of neurons to add to the hidden layer such that the new function f ′ will have a lower loss than f .

One can even choose the added neurons such that the loss is arbitrarily well minimized. Furthermore:
Proposition 4.2 (Greedy completion by one single neuron). If f is not f ∗ yet, there exists a neuron
to add to the hidden layer such that the new function f ′ will have a lower loss than f .

As a consequence, there exists no situation where one would need to add many neurons simulta-
neously to decrease the loss: it is always feasible with a single neuron. One can express a lower
bound on how much the loss has improved (for the best such neuron), but it is not a very good
bound without further assumptions on f . Furthermore, finding the optimal neuron to add is actually
NP-hard (Bach, 2017), so we will not necessarily search for the optimal one.
Proposition 4.3 (Greedy completion by one infinitesimal neuron). The neuron in the previous
proposition can be chosen to have arbitrarily small input weights.

This detail is important in that our approach is based on the tangent space of the function f and thus
manipulates infinitesimal quantities. Our optimization problem indeed relies on the linearization of
the activation function by requiring the added neuron to have infinitely small input weights, to make
the problem easier to solve. This proposition confirms that such neuron exists indeed.


                                                   7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Correlations and higher orders. Note that, as a matter of fact, our approach exploits linear cor-
relations between inputs of a layer and desired output variations. It might happen that the loss is
not minimized yet but there is no such correlation to exploit anymore. In that case the optimization
problem (6) will not find neurons to add. Yet following Prop. 4.3 there does exist a neuron with
arbitrarily small input weights that can reduce the loss. This paradox can be explained by pushing
further the Taylor expansion of that neuron output in terms of weight amplitude (single factor ε on
all of its input weights), for instance σ(εα · x) ≃ σ(0) + σ ′ (0)εα · x + 21 σ ′′ (0)ε2 (α · x)2 + O(ε3 ).
Though the linear term α · x might be uncorrelated over the dataset with desired output variation,
i.e. Ex∼D [α · x] = 0, the quadratic term (α · x)2 , or higher-order ones otherwise, might be corre-
lated. Finding neurons with such higher-order correlations can be done by increasing accordingly
the power of (α · x) in the optimization problem (5). Note that one could consider other function
bases than the polynomials from Taylor expansion. In all cases, one does not need to solve such
problems exactly but just to find an approximate solution, i.e. a neuron improving the loss.

Adding random neurons. Another possibility to suggest additional neurons, when expressivity
bottlenecks are detected but no correlation (up to order p) can be exploited anymore, is to add random
neurons. The first p order Taylor expansions will show 0 correlation with desired output variation,
hence no loss improvement nor worsening, but the correlation of the p+1-th order will be non-0, with
probability 1, in the spirit of random projections. Furthermore, in the spirit of common neural net-
work training practice, one could consider brute force combinatorics by adding many random neu-
rons and hoping some will be close enough to the desired direction (Frankle & Carbin, 2018). The
difference with usual training is that we would perform such computationally-costly searches only
when and where relevant, exploiting all simple information first (linear correlations in each layer).

5    R ESULTS
We evaluate our method, called TINY, on the CIFAR-10 dataset (Krizhevsky et al., 2009). We start
with an architecture of two blocks consisting of 2 convolutions and 1 MaxPooling each, followed
by two fully-connected layers, using the the selu activation function. The training criterion is the
cross-entropy loss. We increase the size of the network on the fly (during training), with a batch size
of 500 for training, see D.2. More experiments can be found in Appendix E.
In Figure 5, the TINY method is compared to GradMax (GM) (Evci et al., 2022) We imitate this
method by skipping the projection step of the desired update on the current architecture. The Left and
Right plot respectively correspond to the plots of the accuracy acc0 on validation set after adding all
the neurons, and the accuracy acc∞ at the end of training. On the x-axis, we measure the complexity
of each model as the number of basic operations performed during test.
At a fixed complexity, before and after the final training, our method out-performs GradMax be-
cause of the redundancy of that procedure. While GradMax neurons align with the gradient when
expressivity bottlenecks can be mostly solved by the current architecture, we add new directions
and decrease the expressivity bottleneck as defined in (2) by projecting the desired update. In the
GradMax paper, to avoid redundancy, neurons can be added only once the gradient of the current
structure vanishes to 0. Our method allows to skip this waiting by projecting the desired update on
the current structure using (3).
In Figure 6 we compare our results with a baseline (FS) where the final TINY architecture is re-
trained from start with a new set of weights, initialized with Xavier Normal distribution and trained
until convergence. The Figure shows the evolution of train/test accuracy for the TINY and from
scratch (FS) methods. No new neurons are added after 4000 steps in TINY. It is possible to achieve
100% accuracy on training dataset, thus overfitting the data, meaning that TINY could effectively
bypass any expressivity bottleneck, and this with fewer parameters than (Zhang et al., 2017)’s theo-
rem. While usual methods have to train until convergence different architectures to find the optimal
one, our method achieves this result in a single run.

6    L IMITATIONS
At a given layer, our method reduces expressivity bottlenecks, unless the required information has
been lost in previous layers. This situation might arise e.g. with very thin, deep neural networks


                                                    8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


with ReLU activations. In such a case, the lack of information flow might prevent any update. This
limitation however disappears once new layers or skip connections can be added to the architecture.
In Appendix E.3 we are thus able to train a ResNet-18 model on CIFAR-100.

7   C ONCLUSION
We have properly defined lacks of expressivity, and their minimization has allowed us to optimize
the architecture on the fly, to better follow the functional gradient, enabling architecture growth,
and escaping optimization issues usually associated to layer thinness. Work in progress includes the
extension to layer addition in order to fully automatically develop architectures, a statistical test to
assess the significance of estimated neurons to add, and a strategy for neuron addition based on a
compromise between performance gain and added computational complexity.


Figure 5: Experiments on CIFAR Dataset: accuracies (Left) acc0 , (Right) acc∞ on test set against
the complexity for GM and Our method. The starting architecture Ninit has the structure of 3
neurons per convolutional layers and 5 neurons per linear layer which is of complexity 2 × 105 .

Algorithm 1: Algorithm to plot Figure 5.
for each method [Ours, GradMax] do
    Start from a given small neural network NN ;
    for j in nbpass do
        for each layer l do
             Compute the first three neurons to add at layer l ;
                 // with our method the above also yields δWl∗ as a by-product;
             Select among them the ones with significant singular value (Appendix D.3);
             Compute the amplitude factor γ for the new neurons (Appendix D.4) ;
             Add the neurons if γ > 0;
             Update the architecture with the best update δWl∗ at l+1 (only for our method)
        end
    end
    Get accuracy acc0 of NN ;
    Train NN for 15 epochs ;
    Get final accuracy acc∞ of NN ;
end


         Figure 6: Evolution of the train/test accuracy wrt gradient steps for TINY and FS.

                                                   9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Francis Bach. Breaking the curse of dimensionality with convex neural networks. The Journal of
  Machine Learning Research, 18(1):629–681, 2017.

Bowen Baker, Otkrist Gupta, Nikhil Naik, and Ramesh Raskar. Designing neural network archi-
  tectures using reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2017. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=S1c2cvqee.

Kateryna Bashtova, Mathieu Causse, Cameron James, Florent Masmoudi, Mohamed Masmoudi,
  Houcine Turki, and Joshua Wolff. Application of the topological gradient to parsimonious neural
  networks. In Computational Sciences and Artificial Intelligence in Industry, pp. 47–61. Springer,
  2022.

Pauline Bennet, Carola Doerr, Antoine Moreau, Jeremy Rapin, Fabien Teytaud, and Olivier Teytaud.
  Nevergrad: black-box optimization platform. ACM SIGEVOlution, 14(1):8–15, 2021.

Mathieu Causse, Cameron James, Mohamed Slim Masmoudi, and Houcine Turki. Parsimonious
 neural networks. In Cesar Conference, 2019. URL https://www.cesar-conference.
 org/wp-content/uploads/2019/10/s5_p1_21_1330.pdf.

Tianqi Chen, Ian Goodfellow, and Jonathon Shlens. Net2net: Accelerating learning via knowledge
  transfer. arXiv preprint arXiv:1511.05641, 2015.

G. Cybenko. Approximation by superpositions of a sigmoidal function. Mathematics of control,
  signals and systems, 2(4):303–314, 1989.

Bin Dai, Chen Zhu, Baining Guo, and David Wipf. Compressing neural networks using the varia-
  tional information bottleneck. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 1135–1144.
  PMLR, 2018.

Carl Eckart and Gale Young. The approximation of one matrix by another of lower rank. Psy-
  chometrika, 1(3):211–218, September 1936. ISSN 1860-0980. doi: 10.1007/BF02288367. URL
  https://doi.org/10.1007/BF02288367.

Utku Evci, Bart van Merrienboer, Thomas Unterthiner, Fabian Pedregosa, and Max Vladymyrov.
  Gradmax: Growing neural networks using gradient information. In International Conference on
  Learning Representations, 2022. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=qjN4h_
  wwUO.

Harley Flanders. Differentiation under the integral sign. The American Mathematical Monthly, 80
  (6):615–627, 1973. ISSN 00029890, 19300972. URL http://www.jstor.org/stable/
  2319163.

Jonathan Frankle and Michael Carbin. The lottery ticket hypothesis: Training pruned neural net-
  works. CoRR, abs/1803.03635, 2018. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1803.03635.

Ariel Gordon, Elad Eban, Ofir Nachum, Bo Chen, Hao Wu, Tien-Ju Yang, and Edward Choi. Mor-
  phnet: Fast & simple resource-constrained structure learning of deep networks. In Proceedings
  of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 1586–1595, 2018.

Boris Hanin and David Rolnick. Complexity of linear regions in deep networks. In Kamalika
  Chaudhuri and Ruslan Salakhutdinov (eds.), Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on
  Machine Learning, volume 97 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 2596–2604.
  PMLR, 09–15 Jun 2019a. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v97/hanin19a.
  html.

Boris Hanin and David Rolnick. Deep relu networks have surprisingly few activation pat-
  terns. In H. Wallach, H. Larochelle, A. Beygelzimer, F. d'Alché-Buc, E. Fox, and R. Gar-
  nett (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 32. Curran Asso-
  ciates, Inc., 2019b. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2019/file/
  9766527f2b5d3e95d4a733fcfb77bd7e-Paper.pdf.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Geoffrey Hinton, Oriol Vinyals, and Jeff Dean. Distilling the knowledge in a neural network. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1503.02531, 2015.
K. Hornik, M. Stinchcombe, and H. White. Multilayer feedforward networks are universal approxi-
  mators. Neural Networks, 2(5):359–366, 1989.
Arthur Jacot, Franck Gabriel, and Clement Hongler. Neural tangent kernel: Convergence and
  generalization in neural networks. In S. Bengio, H. Wallach, H. Larochelle, K. Grauman,
  N. Cesa-Bianchi, and R. Garnett (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  volume 31. Curran Associates, Inc., 2018. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/
  paper/2018/file/5a4be1fa34e62bb8a6ec6b91d2462f5a-Paper.pdf.
Andrei N Kolmogorov. Three approaches to the quantitative definition ofinformation’. Problems of
  information transmission, 1(1):1–7, 1965.
Vladimir Koltchinskii. Rademacher penalties and structural risk minimization. IEEE Transactions
  on Information Theory, 47(5):1902–1914, 2001.
Alex Krizhevsky, Geoffrey Hinton, et al. Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images.
  Master’s thesis, Toronto, ON, Canada, 2009.
Ming Li, Paul Vitányi, et al. An introduction to Kolmogorov complexity and its applications, vol-
 ume 3. Springer, 2008.
Hanxiao Liu, Karen Simonyan, and Yiming Yang. DARTS: Differentiable architecture search. In
  International Conference on Learning Representations, 2019. URL https://openreview.
  net/forum?id=S1eYHoC5FX.
Zhengying Liu, Zhen Xu, Shangeth Rajaa, Meysam Madadi, Julio CS Jacques Junior, Sergio Es-
  calera, Adrien Pavao, Sebastien Treguer, Wei-Wei Tu, and Isabelle Guyon. Towards automated
  deep learning: Analysis of the autodl challenge series 2019. In NeurIPS 2019 Competition and
  Demonstration Track, pp. 242–252. PMLR, 2020.
Christos Louizos, Karen Ullrich, and Max Welling. Bayesian compression for deep learning. Ad-
  vances in neural information processing systems, 30, 2017.
Kaitlin Maile, Emmanuel Rachelson, Hervé Luga, and Dennis George Wilson. When, where, and
  how to add new neurons to ANNs. In First Conference on Automated Machine Learning (Main
  Track), 2022. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=SWOg-arIg9.
Hector Mendoza, Aaron Klein, Matthias Feurer, Jost Tobias Springenberg, and Frank Hutter. To-
  wards automatically-tuned neural networks. In Frank Hutter, Lars Kotthoff, and Joaquin Van-
  schoren (eds.), Proceedings of the Workshop on Automatic Machine Learning, volume 64 of Pro-
  ceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 58–65, New York, New York, USA, 24 Jun 2016.
  PMLR. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v64/mendoza_towards_2016.
  html.
Risto Miikkulainen, Jason Zhi Liang, Elliot Meyerson, Aditya Rawal, Daniel Fink, Olivier Francon,
  Bala Raju, Hormoz Shahrzad, Arshak Navruzyan, Nigel Duffy, and Babak Hodjat. Evolving deep
  neural networks. CoRR, abs/1703.00548, 2017. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1703.
  00548.
Geoffrey F. Miller, Peter M. Todd, and Shailesh U. Hegde. Designing neural networks using genetic
  algorithms. In ICGA, 1989.
Yann Ollivier. True asymptotic natural gradient optimization, 2017.
Allan Pinkus. Approximation theory of the mlp model in neural networks. ACTA NUMERICA, 8:
  143–195, 1999.
Maithra Raghu, Ben Poole, Jon Kleinberg, Surya Ganguli, and Jascha Sohl-Dickstein. On the
 expressive power of deep neural networks. In Doina Precup and Yee Whye Teh (eds.), Pro-
 ceedings of the 34th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 70 of Proceed-
 ings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 2847–2854. PMLR, 06–11 Aug 2017. URL https:
 //proceedings.mlr.press/v70/raghu17a.html.


                                               11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Thiago Serra, Christian Tjandraatmadja, and Srikumar Ramalingam. Bounding and counting linear
  regions of deep neural networks. In Jennifer Dy and Andreas Krause (eds.), Proceedings of
  the 35th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 80 of Proceedings of Machine
  Learning Research, pp. 4558–4566. PMLR, 10–15 Jul 2018. URL https://proceedings.
  mlr.press/v80/serra18b.html.
Kenneth O Stanley, David B D’Ambrosio, and Jason Gauci. A hypercube-based encoding for evolv-
  ing large-scale neural networks. Artificial life, 15(2):185–212, 2009.
Naftali Tishby and Noga Zaslavsky. Deep learning and the information bottleneck princi-
  ple. CoRR, abs/1503.02406, 2015. URL http://dblp.uni-trier.de/db/journals/
  corr/corr1503.html#TishbyZ15.
V. N. Vapnik and A. Ya. Chervonenkis. On the uniform convergence of relative frequencies of
  events to their probabilities. Theory of Probability and its Applications, 16(2):264–280, 1971.
  doi: 10.1137/1116025. URL http://link.aip.org/link/?TPR/16/264/1.
P. Wolinski, G. Charpiat, and O. Ollivier. Asymmetrical scaling layers for stable network pruning.
   OpenReview Archive, 2020.
Lemeng Wu, Dilin Wang, and Qiang Liu. Splitting steepest descent for growing neural archi-
  tectures. In H. Wallach, H. Larochelle, A. Beygelzimer, F. d'Alché-Buc, E. Fox, and R. Gar-
  nett (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 32. Curran Asso-
  ciates, Inc., 2019. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2019/file/
  3a01fc0853ebeba94fde4d1cc6fb842a-Paper.pdf.
Lemeng Wu, Bo Liu, Peter Stone, and Qiang Liu. Firefly neural architecture descent: a general
  approach for growing neural networks. In H. Larochelle, M. Ranzato, R. Hadsell, M.F. Bal-
  can, and H. Lin (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 33, pp.
  22373–22383. Curran Associates, Inc., 2020. URL https://proceedings.neurips.
  cc/paper/2020/file/fdbe012e2e11314b96402b32c0df26b7-Paper.pdf.
Tien-Ju Yang, Andrew Howard, Bo Chen, Xiao Zhang, Alec Go, Mark Sandler, Vivienne Sze, and
  Hartwig Adam. Netadapt: Platform-aware neural network adaptation for mobile applications. In
  Proceedings of the European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV), pp. 285–300, 2018.
Chiyuan Zhang, Samy Bengio, Moritz Hardt, Benjamin Recht, and Oriol Vinyals. Understanding
  deep learning requires rethinking generalization. In International Conference on Learning Rep-
  resentations, 2017. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=Sy8gdB9xx.
Barret Zoph and Quoc V. Le. Neural architecture search with reinforcement learning, 2016. URL
  http://arxiv.org/abs/1611.01578. cite arxiv:1611.01578.


                                               12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


We provide additional details, following the same order as the sections in the paper.

A     T HEORETICAL DETAILS FOR PART 2
A.1   F UNCTIONAL GRADIENT

The functional loss L is a functional that takes as input a function f ∈ F and outputs a real score:
                                                           h           i
                       L : f ∈ F 7→ L(f ) =          E      ℓ(f (x), y) ∈ R .
                                                  (x,y)∼D

The function space F can typically be chosen to be L2 (Rp → Rd ), which is a Hilbert space. The
directional derivative (or Gateaux derivative, or Fréchet derivative) of functional L at function f in
direction v is defined as:
                                                    L(f + εv) − L(f )
                                 DL(f )(v) = lim
                                               ε→0           ε
if it exists. Here v denotes any function in the Hilbert space F and stands for the direction in which
we would like to update f , following an infinitesimal step (of size ε), resulting in a function f + εv.
If this directional derivative exists in all possible directions v ∈ F and moreover is continuous in v,
then the Riesz representation theorem implies that there exists a unique direction v ∗ ∈ F such that:
                                     ∀v ∈ F, DL(f )(v) = ⟨v ∗ , v⟩ .
This direction v ∗ is named the gradient of the functional L at function f and is denoted by ∇f L(f ).
Note that while the inner product ⟨, ⟩ considered is usually the L2 one, it is possible to consider other
ones, such as Sobolev ones (e.g., H 1 ). The gradient ∇f L(F ) depends on the chosen inner product
and should consequently rather be denoted by ∇fL2 L(f ) for instance.
Note that continuous functions from Rp to Rd , as well as C ∞ functions, are dense in L2 (Rp → Rd ).
                                                                               h           i
Let us now study properties specific to our loss design: L(f ) = E(x,y)∼D ℓ(f (x), y) . Assuming
sufficient ℓ-loss differentiability and integrability, we get, for any function update direction v ∈ F
and infinitesimal step size ε ∈ R:
                                                  h                                   i
                  L(f + εv) − L(f ) =        E      ℓ(f (x) + εv(x), y) − ℓ(f (x), y)
                                          (x,y)∼D
                                   h                                             i
                       =     E      ∇u ℓ(u, y) u=f (x) · εv(x) + O(ε2 ∥v(x)∥2 )
                         (x,y)∼D
using the usual gradient of function ℓ at point (u = f (x), y) w.r.t. its first argument u, with the
standard Euclidean dot product · in Rp . Then the directional derivative is:
                         h                           i           h      h                   i       i
  DL(f )(v) =       E     ∇u ℓ(u, y) u=f (x) · v(x) = E              E    ∇u ℓ(u, y) u=f (x) · v(x)
                (x,y)∼D                                   x∼D y∼D|x
                                                                          h           i
and thus the functional gradient for the inner product ⟨v, v ′ ⟩E := Ex∼D v(x)·v ′ (x) is the function:
                                                     h                    i
                            ∇fE L(f ) : x 7→ E         ∇u ℓ(u, y) u=f (x)
                                              y∼D|x
which simplifies into:
                                ∇fE L(f ) : x 7→ ∇u ℓ(u, y(x)) u=f (x)
if there is no ambiguity in the dataset, i.e. if for each x there is a unique y(x).
Note that by considering the L2 (Rp → Rd ) inner product v · v ′ instead, one would respectively
                                                                R
get:                                                       h                    i
                        ∇fL2 L(f ) : x 7→ pD (x) E           ∇u ℓ(u, y) u=f (x)
                                                  y∼D|x
and
                           ∇fL2 L(f ) : x 7→ pD (x) ∇u ℓ(u, y(x)) u=f (x)
instead, where pD (x) is the density of the dataset distribution at point x. In practice one estimates
such gradients using a minibatch of samples (x, y), obtained by picking uniformly at random within
a finite dataset, and thus the formulas for the two inner products coincide (up to a constant factor).


                                                   13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.2   D IFFERENTIATION UNDER THE INTEGRAL SIGN

Let X be an open subset of R, and Ω be a measure space. Suppose f : X × Ω →
                                                                          − R satisfies the
following conditions:

       • f (x, ω) is a Lebesgue-integrable function of ω for each x ∈ X.
       • For almost all ω ∈ Ω , the partial derivative fx of f according to x exists for all x ∈ X.
       • There is an integrable function θ : Ω →− R such that |fx (x, ω)| ≤ θ(ω) for all x ∈ X and
         almost every ω ∈ Ω.

Then, for all x ∈ X,               Z                Z
                                 d
                                      f (x, ω) dω =    fx (x, ω) dω
                                dx Ω                 Ω
See proof and details :Flanders (1973).

A.3   G RADIENTS AND PROXIMAL POINT OF VIEW

Gradients with respect to standard variables such as vectors are defined the same way as functional
gradients above: given a sufficiently smooth loss Le : θ ∈ ΘA 7→ L(θ)  e    = L(fθ ) ∈ R, and an inner
product · in the space ΘA of parameters θ, the gradient ∇θ L(θ) is the unique vector τ ∈ ΘA such
                                                               e
that:
                                 ∀δθ ∈ ΘA , τ · δθ = Dθ L(θ)(δθ)
                                                              e
where Dθ L(θ)(δθ)
           e        is the directional derivative of Le at point θ in the direction δθ, defined as in the
previous section. This gradient depends on the inner product chosen, which can be highlighted by
the following property. The opposite −∇θ L(θ)
                                            e of the gradient is the unique solution of the problem:

                                                             1      2
                                arg min Dθ L(θ)(δθ)
                                               e          + ∥δθ∥P
                                  δθ∈ΘA                      2
where ∥ ∥P is the norm associated to the chosen inner product. Changing the inner product ob-
viously changes the way candidate directions δθ are penalized, leading to different gradients. This
proximal formulation can be obtained as follows. For any δθ, its distance to the gradient descent
direction is:                       2
                                                                                 2
                                                2
                  δθ − −∇θ L(θ)
                             e         = ∥δθ∥ + 2 δθ · ∇θ L(θ)
                                                             e + ∇θ L(θ)   e

                                    1      2
                             =2       ∥δθ∥ + Dθ L(θ)(δθ) + K
                                                   e
                                    2
where K does not depend on δθ. For the above to hold, the inner product used has to be the one
from which the norm is derived. By minimizing this expression with respect to δθ, one obtains the
desired property.
In our case of study, for the norm over the space ΘA of parameter variations, we consider a norm of
in the space of associated functional variations, i.e.:
                                                        ∂fθ
                                        ∥δθ∥P :=            δθ
                                                        ∂θ
which makes more sense from a physical point of view, as it is more intrinsic to the task to solve and
depends as little as possible on the parameterization (i.e. on the architecture chosen). This results
in a functional move that is the projection of the functional one to the set of possible moves given
the architecture. On the opposite, the standard gradient (using Euclidean parameter norm ∥δθ∥ in
parameter space) yields a functional move obtained not only by projecting the functional gradient
                                                T
but also by multiplying it by a matrix ∂f θ ∂fθ
                                       ∂θ ∂θ      which can be seen as a strong architecture bias over
optimization directions.
We consider here that the loss L to be minimized is the real loss that the user wants to optimize,
possibly including regularizers to avoid overfitting, and since the architecture is evolving during
training, possibly to architectures far from usual manual design and never tested before, one cannot


                                                   14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


assume architecture bias to be desirable. We aim at getting rid of it in order to follow the functional
gradient descent as closely as possible.
Searching for

                    ∗                                             1
                                                    2
                  v = arg min ∥v − vgoal ∥ = arg min Df L(f )(v) + ∥v∥2
                       v∈TA                   v∈TA                2

or equivalently for:
                                                            (                                     )
                                      2                                                       2
                   ∂fθ                                              1 ∂fθ
δθ   ∗
         = arg min     δθ − vgoal         = arg min Dθ L(fθ )(δθ) +       δθ                             =: −∇TθA L(fθ )
            δθ∈ΘA  ∂θ                        δθ∈ΘA                  2 ∂θ

then appears as a natural goal.


A.4       E XAMPLE OF EXPRESSIVITY BOTTLENECK

Example. Suppose one tries to estimate the function y =
                                                                                    6       target
ftrue (x) = 2 sin(x) + x with a linear model fpredict (x) = ax + b.                         prediction
Consider (a, b) = (1, 0) and the square loss L . For the dataset                    5
of inputs (x0 , x1 , x2 , x3 ) = (0, π2 , π, 3π
                                              2 ), there exists no param-           4
eter update (δa, δb) that would improve prediction at x0 , x1 , x2
                                                                                    3


                                                                                y
and x3 simultaneously, as the space of linear functions {f : x →
ax+b | a, b ∈ R} is not expressive enough. To improve the pre-                      2
diction at x0 , x1 , x2 and x3 , one should look for another, more ex-              1
pressive functional space such that for i = 0, 1, 2, 3 the functional               0
update ∆f (xi ) := f t+1 (xi ) − f t (xi ) goes into the same direction                 0         2          4   6
                                                                                                         x
as the functional gradient vgoal (xi ) := −∇f (xi ) L(f (xi ), yi ) =
−2(f (xi ) − yi ) where yi = ftrue (xi ).                                       Figure 7: Linear interpolation


A.5       P ROBLEM FORMULATION AND CHOICE OF PRE - ACTIVITIES

There are several ways to design the problem of adding neurons, which we discuss now, in order to
explain our choice of the pre-activities to express expressivity bottlenecks.
                                              K
Suppose one wishes to add K neurons θ↔           := (αk , ωk )K
                                                              k=1 to layer l − 1, which impacts the
activities al at the next layer, in order to improve its expressivity. These neurons could be chosen
to have only nul weights, or nul input weights αk and non-nul output weights ωk , or the opposite,
or both non-nul weights. Searching for the best neurons to add for each of these cases will produce
different optimization problems.
                                                             K
Let us remind first that adding such K neurons with weights θ↔ := (αk , ωk )K
                                                                            k=1 changes the
activities al of the (next) layer by

                                                    K
                                                    X
                                    δal =                 ωk σ(bl−2 (x)T αk )                                        (8)
                                                    k=1


Small weights approximation Under the hypothesis of small input weights αk , the activity vari-
ation 8 can be approximated by:

                                                    K
                                                    X
                                          σ ′ (0)         ωk bl−2 (x)T αk
                                                    k=1


at first order in ∥αk ∥. We will drop the constant σ ′ (0) in the sequel.


                                                           15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


This quantity is linear both in αk and ωk , therefore the first-order parameter-induced activity varia-
tions are easy to compute:
                                                                            K
                                      ∂al (x)                               X
            v l (x, (αk )K
                         k=1 ) =                               (αk )K
                                                                    k=1 =         ωk bl−2 (x)T αk
                                   ∂( (αk )K
                                           k=1 ) |(αk )K
                                                      k=1 =0                k=1
                                                                            K
                                      ∂al (x)                               X
             v (x, (ωk )K
              l
                        k=1 ) =                                (ωk )K
                                                                    k=1 =         ωk bl−2 (x)T αk
                                   ∂( (ωk )K
                                           k=1 ) |(ωk )K
                                                      k=1 =0                k=1
so with a slight abuse of notation we have:
                                                    K
                                                    X
                                    v l (x, θ↔
                                             K
                                               )=         ωk bl−2 (x)T αk
                                                    k=1
Note also that technically the quantity above is first-order in αk and in ωk but second-order in the
                K
joint variable θ↔ = (αk , ωk ).

Adding neurons with 0 weights (both input and output weights). In that case, one increases
the number of neurons in the layer, but without changing the function (since only nul quantities are
added) and also without changing the gradient with respect to the parameters, thus not improving
expressivity. Indeed, the added quantity (Eq. 8) involves 0 × 0 multiplications, and consequently the
derivative ∂a l (x)
            ∂θ K    K
                         w.r.t. these new parameters, that is, bl−2 (x)T αk w.r.t. ωk and ωk bl−2 (x)T
               ↔      θ↔ =0
w.r.t. ak is 0, as both ak and ωk are 0.

Adding neurons with non-0 input weights and 0 output weights or the opposite. In these cases,
the addition of neurons will not change the function (because of multiplications by 0), but just the
gradient. One of the 2 gradients (w.r.t. ak or w.r.t ωk ) will be non-0, as the variable that is 0 has
non-0 derivatives.
The question is then how to pick the best non-0 variable, (ak or ωk ) such that the added gradient
will be the most useful. The problem can then be formulated similarly as what is done in the paper.

Adding neurons with small yet non-0 weights. In this case, both the function and its gradient
will change when adding the neurons. Fortunately, Proposition 3.2 states that the best neurons to add
in terms of expressivity (to get the gradient closer to the variation desired by the backpropagation)
are also the best neurons to add to decrease the loss, i.e. the function change they will imply goes
into the right direction.
                                                                                            al
For each family (ωk )K                                                            K
                     k=1 , the tangent space in al restricted to the family (αk )k=1 , ie TA :=
                                                |bl−2 (x)| K
{ ∂(α∂a

      k)
        l
        K
              K
                   (.)(αk )K          K
                            k=1 |(αk )k=1 ∈ R                } varies with the family (ωk )K
                                                                                           k=1 , ie
       k=1 |(αk )
                    k=1 =0
TAal := TAal ((ωk )K
                   k=1 ). Optimizing w.r.t. the ωk is equivalent to search for the best tangent space
for the αk , while symmetrically optimizing w.r.t. the αk is equivalent to find the best projection on
the tangent space defined by the ωk .

Pre-activities vs. post-activities. The space of pre-activities al is a natural space for this frame-
work, as they are formed with linear operations and we compute first-order variation quantities.
Considering the space of post-activities bl = σ(al ) is also possible, though computing variations
will be more complex. Indeed, without first-order approximation, the obtained problem is not man-
ageable, because of the non-linear activation function σ added in front of all quantities (while in the
case of pre-activations, quantity 8 is linear in ωk and thus does not require approximation in ωk ,
which allow considering large ωk ), and, with first-order approximation, it would add the derivative
of the activation function, taken at various locations σ ′ (al ) (while in the previous case the derivatives
of the activation function were always taken at 0).

A.6    A DDING CONVOLUTIONAL NEURONS

To add a convolutional neuron at layer l − 1, one should add a kernel at layer l − 1 and expand one
dimension to all the kernels in layer l to match the new dimension of the post-activity.


                                                     16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


              Figure 8: Changing the tangent space with different values of (ωk )K
                                                                                 k=1 .


      Figure 9: Adding one convolutional neuron at layer one for a input with tree channels.


B     T HEORETICAL COMPARISON WITH OTHER APPROACHES

B.1   G RAD M AX METHOD

Using the notation of the paper Evci et al. (2022) : zl (x) := al (x) and hl (x) := bl (x). We have
     ∂L
that ∂zl
         (x) := vgoal l (x). When adding K neurons at layer l, fan-in weights {αl }kj=1 are initialized
to zeros and fan-out weights are initialized as the solution of the following optimization problem :
                                             X                 T
       (ω1∗ , ..., ωK
                    ∗
                      ) := Ω∗ = arg max ||                  l+1
                                                 bl−2 (xi )vgoal (xi )Ω||2F    s.t. ||Ω||2F < c
                                   Ω         i
                                                l+1      T
                            := arg max ||Bl−2 Vgoal Ω||2F                      s.t. ||Ω||2F < c
                                  Ω

                            := arg max Tr ΩT Ñ T Ñ Ω                         s.t. ||Ω||2F < c

                                   Ω



                                                    17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


While our method is equivalent to the following optimisation problem :
                                    X
 (ω1∗ , ..., ωK
              ∗
                ) = Ω∗ = arg max ||    bl−2 (xi )vgoal l+1
                                                       proj
                                                           T
                                                             (xi )Ω||2F          s.t. ||Bl−1 Ω||2F < c
                             Ω        i

                      = arg max ||Bl−2 Vgoal lproj
                                               T
                                                   Ω||2F                         s.t. ||Bl−1 Ω||2F < c
                             Ω
                                               1            1                                       1
                      = arg max Tr Ω̃T S − 2 N T N S − 2 Ω̃              s.t. ||Ω̃||2F < c, Ω̃ := S 2 Ω

                             Ω̂
                      = arg max Tr ΩS −1 N T N S −1 Ω                                  s.t. ||Ω||2F < c̃

                             Ω



One can note three differences between those optimization problems:

       • First, the matrix Ñ is not defined using the projection of the desired update Vgoal l+1
                                                                                              proj
                                                                                                   . As
         a consequence, GradMax does not take into account redundancy, and on the opposite will
         actually try to add new neurons that are as redundant as possible with the part of the goal
         update that is already feasible with already-existing neurons.
       • Second, the constraint lies in the weight space for GradMax method while it lies in the pre-
         activation space in our case. The difference is that GradMax relies on the Euclidean metric
         in the space of parameters, which arguably offers less meaning that the Euclidean metric in
         the space of activities. Essentially this is the same difference as between the standard L2
         gradient w.r.t. parameters and the natural gradient, which takes care of parameter redun-
         dancy and measures all quantities in the output space in order to be independent from the
         parameterization. In practice we do observe that the ”natural” gradient direction improves
         the loss better than the usual L2 gradient.
       • Third, our fan-in weights are not set to 0 but directly to their optimal values (at first order).

B.2   NORTH P REACTIVATION

In paper Maile et al. (2022), fan-out weights are initialized to 0 while fan-in weights are initialized
as αi = S −1 Bl−1 VZ   T
                          r where ri is a random vector and VZl ∈ M(|Ker(Bl−1
                         l i
                                                                                     T
                                                                                        )|, |bl−1 (x)|)
is a matrix consisting of the orthogonal vectors of the kernel of pre-activations Bl , i.e
{z | BlT z = 0}. In our paper fan-in weights are initialized as αi = S −1 Bl−1 Vgoal Tproj vi =
                                                                                      1
S −1 Bl−1 Vgoal T VZl VZ
                       T
                          v , where the vi are right eigenvectors of the matrix S − 2 N .
                         l i

The main difference is thus that we use the backpropagation to find the best vi or ri directly, while
the NORTH approach tries random directions ri to explore the space of possible neuron additions.


C     P ROOFS OF PART 3 AND 4

C.1   P ROPOSITION 3.1

Denoting by δWl + the generalized (pseudo-)inverse of δWl , we have:

                1              1            +          1             1            +
      δWl∗ =      Vgoal l Bl−1
                           T           T
                                 Bl−1 Bl−1    and V0l = Vgoal l Bl−1
                                                                 T           T
                                                                       Bl−1 Bl−1    Bl−1
                n              n                       n             n


Proof
Consider the function
                                  g(δWl ) = ||Vgoal l − δWl Bl−1 ||2Tr                                  (9)


                                                   18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


then:
            g(δWl + H) = ||Vgoal l − δWl Bl−1 − HBl−1 ||2Tr
                         = g(δWl ) − 2⟨Vgoal l − δWl Bl−1 , HBl−1 ⟩Tr + o(||H||)
                                                                 T
                         = g(δWl ) − 2 Tr Vgoal l − δWl Bl−1 HBl−1 + o(||H||)

                                                                      T
                         = g(δWl ) − 2 Tr Bl−1 Vgoal l − δWl Bl−1 H + o(||H||)
                         = g(δWl ) − 2⟨ Vgoal l − δWl Bl−1 Bl−1
                                                              T
                                                                   , H⟩Tr + o(||H||)

By identification ∇δWl g(δWl ) = 2 Vgoal l − δWl Bl−1 Bl−1
                                                        T
                                                             , and thus:

                       ∇δWl g(δWl ) = 0 =⇒ Vgoal l Bl−1
                                                    T               T
                                                        = δWl Bl−1 Bl−1
Using the definition of the generalized inverse of M + , we get:
                                       1                 1             +
                                  δWl∗ =  Vgoal l Bl−1
                                                   T              T
                                                            Bl−1 Bl−1
                                       n                 n
as one solution. For convolutional layers, considering 2D images of size p, using index i = 1, ..., n
for the samples, and index k = 1, ..., ch for the out-channels, and considering the convolutional
kernel size to be (2, 2), then :
                                         b1,k          b2,k    . bp,k
                                                                      
                                           i             i          i
                                      bp+1,k        bp+2,k    . b2p,k
                               bki = 
                                                                       
                                         i             i           i                           (10)
                                           .             .    .     . 
                                                                                       2
                                               p(p−1)+1,k
                                           bi                        .          .    bpi ,k
                  1,1
                           b2,1       bp+1,1     bp+2,1       b1,2       b2,2       bp+1,2    bp+2,2   b1,3
                                                                                                                
                  bi        i          i          i            i          i          i         i        i     .
           Bic = b2,1
                   i       b3,1
                            i         bp+2,1
                                       i         bp+3,1
                                                  i           b2,2
                                                               i         b3,2
                                                                          i         bp+2,2
                                                                                     i        bp+3,2
                                                                                               i       b2,3
                                                                                                        i     .
                    .        .           .          .           .          .           .         .       .    .
Then the function to minimize is
                                       g(δWl ) = ||Vgoal l − B c δWl ||2Tr
where B c := (B1c     ... Bnc ).


C.2     P ROPOSITION 3.2
                                                T
We define the matrices N := n1 Bl−2 Vgoal lproj and S := n1 Bl−2 Bl−2T
                                                                         . Let us denote its SVD
                              1      √   −1                                                1
by S = U ΣU T , and note S − 2 := U Σ U T and consider the SVD of the matrix S − 2 N =
PR           T
  k=1 λk uk vk with λ1 ≥ ... ≥ λR ≥ 0, where R is the rank of the matrix N . Then:

Proposition C.1 (3.2). The solution of (5) can be written as:

        • optimal number of neurons: K ∗ = R
                                                          √       1     √
        • their optimal weights: (α∗k , ωk∗ ) = (sign(λk ) λk S − 2 uk , λk vk ) for k = 1, ..., R.
                                                                              K,∗
Moreover for any number of neurons K ⩽ R, and associated scaled weights θ↔        , the expressivity
gain and the first order in η of the loss improvement due to the addition of these K neurons are
equal and can be quantified very simply as a function of the eigenvalues λk :
                                                  K
                                                  X
                         Ψlθ⊕θK,∗ = Ψlθ −               λ2k
                                  ↔
                                                  k=1
                                                                         K
                                                          σl′ (0) X 2        K,∗ 2
                         L(fθ⊕θ↔
                               K,∗ ) = L(fθ ) +                    λk + o(||θ↔  || )
                                                             η
                                                                     k=1


                                                          19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Proof
We first compute the proof for a linear layer.
The optimal neurons n1 , ..., nK are defined by ni := (αi , ωi ) and are the solution of the optimiza-
tion problem :
                                                          l
                                                        Vgoal
                                                                proj
                                                z       }|     {
                                                  l                                            2
                              arg min           Vgoal − δWl Bl−1 −ΩAT Bl−2                     Tr
                                 K
                          δWl ,δθl−1↔l



                      where Ω := (ω1            ... ωK ) and A := (α1                     ... αK )
This is equivalent to :
                                                          l
                                                        Vgoal
                                                                proj
                                          z       }|     {
                                            l                                             2
                                  arg min Vgoal − δWl Bl−1 −CBl−2                         Tr
                                                                                                                 (11)
                                  C=ΩAT



        ∗    +                          +                                                T
P C T = S +N . Taking K = rank(S N ) and a family (αk , ωk )1,...,R such that ΩA =
Then
  k ωk αk = S N is a optimal solution. But what if we decide to only add K < R neurons ?


          n1                               o         n 2D                         E    1                 o
arg min      ||Vgoal lproj − V l (θ↔
                                   K
                                     )||2Tr = arg min −   Vgoal lproj , V l (θ↔
                                                                              K
                                                                                )     + ||V l (θ↔
                                                                                                K
                                                                                                  )||2Tr
   K
  θ↔       n                                     K
                                                θ↔      n                          Tr  n
                                                                       1
                                                = arg min                g(θK )
                                                          K
                                                         θ↔            n ↔
We note
                       n
          1    K     2 XX
            g(θ↔ )=−      vgoal lproj (xi )T αTk bl−2 (xi ) ωk
          n          n i
                                    k
                                                      K n
                                                    1 XX  T
                                                +         αk bl−2 (xi ) ωkT ωj αTj bl−2 (xi )
                                                    n   ik,j
                          K
                          X                n
                                         1 X
                   = −2           αTk            bl−2 (xi )vgoal lproj (xi )T ωk
                                        n   i
                              k
                                                    K
                                                    X                            n
                                                                               1 X
                                                +         ωkT ωj αTk                  bl−2 (xi )bl−2 (xi )T αj
                                                                              n   i
                                                    k,j
                          K
                          X                      K
                                                 X
                   = −2           αTk N ωk +            ωkT ωj αTk Sαj
                              k                   k,j
                                T
with N := n1 Bl−2   Vgoal lproj and S := n1 Bl−2 Bl−2T
                                                        .
                                               1      √          1     √ −1
Consider the SVD of S = U ΣU      T
                                    . Define S 2 := U ΣU and S − 2 := U Σ U T .
                                1        R
Consider also the SVD of S − 2 N = r=1 λr vr eTr .
                                       P
                   1T
Note also γk := S 2 αk . Then :
                              K
                                                                          1
                              X                         X
                          −         αTk N ωk = −                γkT S − 2 N ωk
                              k=1                         k
                                                               XX
                                                = − Tr                        λr γkT vr eTr ωk
                                                                   k      r


                                                                20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Using the linearity of the Trace and that Tr(AB) = Tr(BA), we have :
              K
              X                        XX
          −         αTk N ωk = − Tr                      λr ωk γkT vr eTr
              k=1                           k      r
                                       X                      X
                            = − Tr               ωk γkT             λr vr eTr
                                            k                   r
                                 DX                     X                   E
                            =−             γk ωkT ,             λr vr eTr             with ⟨A, B⟩Tr = Tr(AT B)
                                                                                Tr
                                      k                   r



For the second sum :
                XK                  X
                   ωkT ωj αTk Sαj =    ωkT ωj γjT γk
                    k,j                      k,j
                                                  X
                                          = Tr                  (ωkT ωj )γjT γk
                                                        k,j
                                                    X
                                          = Tr(                γk ωkT ωj γjT
                                                        k,j
                                                 X                                              q
                                          = ||          ωk γkT ||2Tr with ||A||Tr =                 Tr(AT A)
                                                   k
                                                 X
                                          = ||          γk ωkT ||2Tr
                                                   k
Then we have :
                                                                                                K                2
                         1                                     X
                 arg min g(α, ω) =    arg min       S −1/2 N −   γk ωkT
                  K,θ↔  n          K,α=S −1/2 T
                                                γ,ω                                             k=1              Tr
The solution of such problems is given by the paper Eckart & Young (1936), by choosing K =
                   PK              PK
rank(S −1/2 N ) and k=1 γk ωkT = r=1 λr vr eTr . Choosing K = R is thus the best option.
                  PR                  PR
Thus we have that k ωk αTk = S −1/2 k λk γk ωkT = S −1 N .
We now consider the matrix S −1/2 N . The minimization also yields the following properties at the
optimum:
                              for k ̸= j, ⟨γk ωkT , γj ωjT ⟩Tr = 0
                                    K
                                    X                               R
                                                                    X
                     ||S −1/2 N −         γk ωkT ||2Tr =                    λ2r
                                    k=1                          r=K+1
                                                                                            K
                                                                                            X
                                                              = ||S −1/2 N ||2Tr − ||             γk ωkT ||2Tr
                                                                                            k=1



Furthermore :
    1                               1                            1
                                                                       X                    1
      ||Vgoal lproj − V (θ↔  )||Tr = ||Vgoal lproj ||2Tr + ||S − 2 N −
                          K,∗ 2
                                                                         γk ωkT ||2 − ||S − 2 N ||2Tr
    n                               n
                                                                                            k
                                            R
                                            X                    1                             1
                                     =                 λ2r +       ||Vgoal lproj ||2Tr − ||S − 2 N ||2Tr
                                                                 n
                                          r=K+1
                                            K
                                            X                   1
                                     =−                λ2r +      ||Vgoal lproj ||2Tr
                                            r=1
                                                                n


                                                                21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


We note Vgoal lproj (δWl∗ ) := Vgoal lproj . Suppose that Bl−1 and Bl−2 are orthogonal for the trace
scalar product, then when adding the new neurons, the impact on the global loss is :
                                 n
                              1X                       γ 1 ′ D l K,∗                  E
          L(fθ⊕θ↔
                K) =                L(fθ (xi ), yi ) −    σl (0) V (θ↔ ), Vgoal lproj     + o(1)
                              n i=1                    ηn                              Tr


We also have the following property :
                  n1                                        o
        arg min           ||Vgoal lproj − V l (θ↔
                                                K
                                                  )||2Tr
           K
          θ↔          n
                                               n1                                        o
        = arg min             arg min                   ||Vgoal lproj − V l (θ↔
                                                                              K
                                                                                )||2Tr
              H≥0       K ,||V l (θ K )|| =H
                       θ↔          ↔     Tr
                                                    n
                                            2D n                         E      1              o
        = arg min             arg min         Vgoal lproj (, V l+1 (θ↔
                                                    −                K
                                                                       )              K
                                                                             + ||VK (θ↔ )||2Tr
            H≥0 θ↔K ,||V l (θ K )|| =H
                             ↔     Tr
                                            n                             Tr    n
                                        n 2D                           E      1    o
        = arg min      arg min            −   Vgoal lproj , V l+1 (θ↔
                                                                    K
                                                                      )     + H2
            H≥0 θ↔K ,||V l (θ K )|| =H
                             ↔     Tr
                                            n                            Tr   n
                                         n    D                             E     1 o
        = arg min       arg min            − H Vgoal lproj , V l+1 (θl↔
                                                                     K
                                                                        )∗      + H2
            H≥0 θ↔K ,||V l (θ K )∗ || =1
                                     Tr
                                                                             Tr   2
                                   l↔


           K ∗
with V l (θ↔ ) the solution of the second arg min (ie for H = 1).
Then the norm minimizing the first argmin is given by :
                                         D                       E
                                   H ∗ = Vgoal lproj , V l (θ↔
                                                             K ∗
                                                               )
                                                                                   Tr



Furthermore
                       n1                                        K
                                                           o    X          1
               min     ||Vgoal lproj − V l+1 (θl↔l
                                               K
                                                     )||2Tr = −     λ2r + ||Vgoal lproj ||2Tr
                K
               θl↔l  n                                          r=1
                                                                           n
                    n1                                 o      1   2     1
               min     ||Vgoal lproj − V l (θl↔l
                                             K
                                                 )||2Tr = − H ∗ + ||Vgoal lproj ||2Tr
                 K
                θ↔   n                                        n         n
                                                             v
                                                             u  K
                            D                         E      uX           √
                =⇒ H ∗ = Vgoal lproj , V l (θ↔  K ∗
                                                   )        =t     λ2r × n
                                                                  Tr
                                                                            r=1

               V  l     K,∗
                      (θ↔   ) = H ∗ V l (θ↔
                                          K ∗
                                            )
               D                          E                D                        E
                 V l (θ↔
                       K,∗
                           ), Vgoal lproj           = H ∗ × Vgoal lproj , V l (θ↔
                                                                                K ∗
                                                                                  )                = H ∗2
                                               Tr                                             Tr

                                                                               1             PK
                                                      of ||S − 2 N −
where the last equality isD given by the optimisation E                            T 2
                                                                           k=1 uk ωk ||Tr . So minimiz-
                                l         ∗     l K ∗                            l K
ing the scalar product − Vgoal proj (δWl ), V (θ↔ )          for fixed norm of V (θ↔ ) is equivalent to
                                                          Tr
minimizing the norm ||Vgoal lproj (δWl∗ ) − V l (θ↔
                                                  K
                                                    )||2Tr .

                                             n                              K
                                          1X                      1        X
                          L(fθ⊕θ↔
                                K) =            L(fθ (xi ), yi ) − σl′ (0)     λ2k + o(1)
                                          n i=1                   η        r=1

For convolutional layers, the same reasoning can be applied. Consider one adds one convolution
layer, ie K = 1. Use Bic defined in the first proof and Tj the linear application selecting the


                                                                22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


activities for the j−pixel , then one has to minimize the expression :
                                      channels examples
                                  out X          X preactivity
                                                        X size
                    1
                 g(θ↔ )=                                                                     T
                                                                                           (ωm Tj B c α − Vgoal ij,m )2
                                       m                   i               j=1
                                  XXX
                          =                                  T
                                                           (ωm Tj Bic α)2 − 2ωm
                                                                              T
                                                                                Tj Bic αVgoal ij,m + C
                                  m        i       j=1
                                  XXX
                          =                                    T
                                                           Tr(ωm Tj Bic α)2 − 2ωm
                                                                                T
                                                                                  Tj Bic αVgoal ij,m + C
                                  m        i       j=1
                                  XXX
                          =                                Tr(Tj Bic αωm
                                                                       T 2     T
                                                                         ) − 2ωm Tj Bic αVgoal ij,m + C
                                  m        i       j=1

for some constant C. We have the property that ⟨TjT , Bic αωm     T 2
                                                                   ⟩Tr = Tr(Tj Bic αωm     T 2
                                                                                            ) =
      c    T 2
||Tj Bi αωm ||Tr . Ignoring the constant C:
                X                X          X                         X
         1
      g(θ↔  )=       Tr(ωm αT         Bic T   TjT Tj Bic αωm
                                                           T
                                                             ) − 2ωmT
                                                                        Tj Bic Vgoal ij,m α
                  m                                i                   j                                              i,j
                 X             X                    X                                                         X
             =        α   T
                                       Bic T                   Tj TjT Bic                T
                                                                                       αωm        T
                                                                                           ωm − 2ωm                  Tj Bic Vgoal ij,m α
                  m                i                   j                                                       i,j
                       X                   X                                                        X        X
             = αT                 Bic T             Tj TjT Bic αω T ω − 2                                T
                                                                                                        ωm         Tj 1Tfull Vgoal i 1j,m Bic α
                          i                    j                                                    m        i,j
                                           X                   X
                  T           T                         T
             = α Sω ω − 2                              ωm              Fim Bic α
                                               m                   i
             = αT Sω T ω − 2ωN α
          j−1+⌊j/(p−1)⌋                                                                        
              z }| {
           0 . 0                              1               0       .       .       . .
                                                                                         
          j−1+⌊j/(p−1)⌋                                                                  
           z }| {                                                                        
           0 . 0                              0               1       .       .       . .
                                                                                         
with Tj = j−1+⌊j/(p−1)⌋                       31
                                                                                           for a kernel size equal to (2, 2).
           z }| {                     z }| {                                             
                                                                                         
           0 . 0                      0 . 0                   1       0       .       . .
                                                                                         
          j−1+⌊j/(p−1)⌋                       31                                         
              z }| {                   z }| {
              0 . 0                    0 . 0                   0       1       0 .          .

C.3     P ROPOSITION AND REMARK 3.3
                                                                               1       1
Suppose S is semi definite, we note S = S 2 S 2 . Solving (7) is equivalent to find the K first
eigenvectors αk associated to the K largest eigenvalues λ of the generalized eigenvalue problem :
                                                               N N T αk = λSαk

Proof
This is equivalent to maximizing the following generalized Rayleigh quotient (which is solvable by
the LOBPCG technique):
                                                    αT N N T α
                                           α∗ = max
                                                x       αT Sα
                                                                1           1
                                                         pT S − 2 N N T S − 2 p
                                           p∗ = max
                                               p=S 1/2 α          pT p
                                                                                            1
                                           p∗ = max ||N T S − 2 p||
                                                           ||p||=1
                                                                   1
                                           α∗ = S − 2 p∗


                                                                                   23
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                               1         PR                      − 12          1   PR
Considering the SVD of S − 2 N =                      T
                                           r=1 λr er fr , then S      N N T S− 2 =       2     T
                                                                                    r=1 λr fr fr ,
                        T                T
because j ̸= i =⇒ ei ej = 0 and fi fj = 0. Hence maximizing the first quantity is equivalent
                            1
to p∗k = fk , then αk = S − 2 ek . The same reasoning is used to find ωk .

We prove second corollary 3.2 by induction. For m = m′ = 1 :

                   al (x)t+1 = al (x)t + V (θ↔
                                             1,∗
                                                 , x)γ + o(γ)
               vgoal l,t+1 (x) = vgoal l,t (x) + ∇al (x) L(fθ (x), y)T v(θ↔
                                                                          1,∗
                                                                              , x)γ + o(γ)

Adding the second neuron we obtain the minimization problem:

                             arg min ||Vgoal l,t − V l (α2 , ω2 )||Tr + o(1)
                              α2 ,ω2


C.4   A BOUT EQUIVALENCE OF QUADRATIC PROBLEMS

Problems 6 and 5 are generally not equivalent, but might be very close, depending on layer sizes and
number of samples. The difference between the two problems is that in one case one minimizes the
quadratic quantity:
                                                                      2
                                   V l (θ↔
                                         K
                                           ) + V l (δWl ) − Vgoal l
                                                                      Tr
                  K
w.r.t. δWl and θ↔    jointly, while in the other case the problem is first minimized w.r.t. δWl and
             K
then w.r.t. θ↔ . The latter process, being greedy, might thus provide a solution that is not as optimal
as the joint optimization.
We chose this two-step process as it intuitively relates to the spirit of improving upon a standard
gradient descent: we aim at adding neurons that complement what the other ones have already done.
This choice is debatable and one could solve the joint problem instead, with the same techniques.
The topic of this section is to check how close the two problems are. To study this further, note that
                                             PK
V l (δWl ) = δWl Bl−1 while V l (θ↔   K
                                        ) = k=1 ωk Bl−2 T
                                                           αk . The rank of Bl−1 is min(nS , nl−1 )
where nS is the number of samples and nl−1 the number of neurons (post-activities) in layer l − 1,
while the rank of Bl−2 is min(nS , nl−2 ) where nl−2 is the number of neurons (post-activities) in
layer l − 2. Note also that the number of degrees of freedom in the optimization variables δWl and
 K
θ↔   = (ωk , αk ) is much larger than these ranks.

Small sample case. If the number nS of samples is lower than the number of neurons nl−1 and
nl−2 (which is potentially problematic, see Section D.1), then it is possible to find suitable variables
           K
δWl and θ↔   to form any desired V l (δWl ) and V l (θ↔
                                                      K
                                                        ). In particular, if nS ⩽ nl−1 ⩽ nl−2 , one
             l K               l     l
can choose V (θ↔ ) to be Vgoal − V (δWl ) and thus cancel any effect due to the greedy process in
two steps. The two problems are then equivalent.

Large sample case. On the opposite, if the number of samples is very large (compared to the
number of neurons nl−1 and nl−2 ), then the lines of matrices Bl−1 and Bl−2 become asymptotically
uncorrelated, under the assumption of their independence (which is debatable, depending on the
type of layers and activation functions). Thus the optimization directions available to V l (δWl ) and
V l (θ↔
      K
        ) become orthogonal, and proceeding greedily does not affect the result, the two problems
are asymptotically equivalent.
In the general case, matrices Bl−1 and Bl−2 are not independent, though not fully correlated, and
the number of samples (in the minibatch) is typically larger than the number of neurons; the prob-
lems are then different.
Note that technically the ranks could be lower, in the improbable case where some neurons are
perfectly redundant, or, e.g., if some samples yield exactly the same activities.


                                                   24
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C.5     S ECTION Theory behind Greedy Growth WITH PROOFS

One might wonder whether a greedy approach on layer growth might get stuck in a non-optimal
state. We derive the following series of propositions in this regard. Since in this work we add
neurons layer per layer independently, we study here the case of a single hidden layer network, to
spot potential layer growth issues. For the sake of simplicity, we consider the task of least square
regression towards an explicit continuous target f ∗ , defined on a compact set. That is, we aim at
minimizing the loss:                     X
                                     inf     ∥f (x) − f ∗ (x)∥2
                                        f
                                             x∈D
where f (x) is the output of the neural network and D is the training set.
Proposition C.2 (Greedy completion of an existing network). If f is not f ∗ yet, there exists a set of
neurons to add to the hidden layer such that the new function f ′ will have a lower loss than f .

One can even choose the added neurons such that the loss is arbitrarily well minimized.

Proof. The classic universal approximation theorem about neural networks with one hidden layer
Pinkus (1999) states that for any continuous function g defined on a compact set ω, for any desired
precision γ, and for any activation function σ provided it is not a polynomial, then there exists a
neural network gb with one hidden layer (possibly quite large when γ is small) and with this activation
function σ, such that
                                      ∀x, ∥g(x) − g ∗ (x)∥ ⩽ γ

We apply this theorem to the case where g ∗ = f ∗ − f , which is continuous as f ∗ is continuous, and
f is a shallow neural network and as such is a composition of linear functions and of the function σ,
that we will suppose to be continuous for the sake of simplicity. We will suppose that f is real-valued
for the sake of simplicity as well, but the result is trivially extendable to vector-valued functions (just
                                                                                           1    ∗
                       R obtained for each output independently). We choose γ = 10 ∥f − f ∥L2 ,
concatenate the networks
                    1
where ⟨a| b⟩L2 = |ω| x∈ω a(x) b(x) dx. This way we obtain a one-hidden-layer neural network g
with activation function σ such that:
                                  ∀x ∈ ω, −γ ⩽ g(x) − g ∗ (x) ⩽ γ
                               ∀x ∈ ω, g(x) = f ∗ (x) − f (x) + a(x)
with ∀x ∈ ω, |a(x)| ⩽ γ.
Then:
                             ∀x ∈ ω, f ∗ (x) − (f (x) + g(x)) = −a(x)
                                                                   2
                               ∀x ∈ ω, (f ∗ (x) − h(x)) = a2 (x)                               (12)
with h being the function corresponding to a neural network consisting in concatenating the hidden
layer neurons of f and g, and consequently summing their outputs.
                                                        2
                                            ∥f ∗ − h∥L2 = ∥a∥2L2
                                             2        1
                                 ∥f ∗ − h∥L2 ⩽ γ 2 =     ∥f ∗ − f ∥2L2
                                                    100
and consequently the loss is reduced indeed (by a factor of 100 in this construction).
Theq same   holds in expectation or sum over a training set,                      by choosing γ         =
 1   1                  ∗
        P                    2
10  |D|   x∈D ∥f (x) − f (x)∥ , as Equation (12) then yields:

                  X                     2
                                                 X                 1 X ∗              2
                        (f ∗ (x) − h(x)) =             a2 (x) ⩽       (f (x) − f (x))
                                                                  100
                  x∈D                            x∈D                   x∈D

which proves the proposition as stated.
For more general losses, one can consider order-1 (linear) developpment of the loss and ask for a
network g that is close to (the opposite of) the gradient of the loss.



                                                        25
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Proof of the additional remark. The proof in Pinkus (1999) relies on the existence of real values cn
such that the n-th order derivatives σ (n) (cn ) are not 0. Then, by considering appropriate values
arbitrarily close to cn , one can approximate the n-th derivative of σ at cn and consequently the poly-
nomial cn of order n. This standard proof then concludes by density of polynomials in continuous
functions.
Provided the activation function σ is not a polynomial, these values cn can actually be chosen ar-
bitrarily, in particular arbitrarily close to 0. This corresponds to choosing neuron input weights
arbitrarily close to 0.
Proposition C.3 (Greedy completion by one single neuron). If f is not f ∗ yet, there exists a neuron
to add to the hidden layer such that the new function f ′ will have a lower loss than f .

Proof. From the previous proposition, there exists a finite set of neurons to add such that the loss will
be decreased. In this particular setting of L2 regression, or for more general losses if considering
small function moves, this means that the function represented by this set of neurons has a strictly
negative component over the gradient g of the loss (g = 2(f ∗ − f ) in the case of the L2 regression).
That is, denoting by ai σ(Wi · x) these N neurons:
                                   N
                                   X
                                         ai σ(wi · x) g L2 = K < 0
                                   i=1
i.e.
                                  N
                                  X
                                         ⟨ai σ(wi · x)| g⟩L2 = K < 0
                                   i=1

Now, by contradiction, if there existed no neuron i among these ones such that
                                                             1
                                    ⟨ai σ(wi · x) | g⟩L2 ⩽ K
                                                             N
then we would have:
                                                                 1
                             ∀i ∈ [1, N ], ⟨ai σ(wi · x)| g⟩L2 > K
                                                                 N
                                    XN
                                         ⟨ai σ(wi · x)| g⟩L2 > K
                                     i=1
hence a contradiction. Then necessarily at least one of the N neurons satisfies
                                                           1
                                  ⟨ai σ(wi · x)| g⟩L2 ⩽ K < 0
                                                          N
and thus decreases the loss when added to the hidden layer of the neural network representing f .
Moreover this decrease is at least N1 of the loss decrease resulting from the addition of all neurons.



As a consequence, our greedy approach will not get stuck in a situation where one would need to
add many neurons simultaneously to decrease the loss: it is always feasible by a single neuron. On
can express a lower bound on how much the loss has improved (for the best such neuron), but it not
a very good one without further assumptions on f .
Proposition C.4 (Greedy completion by one infinitesimal neuron). The neuron in the previous
proposition can be chosen to have arbitrarily small input weights.

Proof. This is straightforward, as, following a previous remark, the neurons found to collectively
decrease the loss can be supposed to all have arbitrarily small input weights.

This detail is important in that our approach is based on the tangent space of the function f and con-
sequently manipulates infinitesimal quantities. Though we perform line search in a second step and
consequently add non-infinitesimal neurons, our first optimization problem relies on the lineariza-
tion of the activation function by requiring the added neuron to have infinitely small input weights,
without which it would be much harder to solve. This proposition confirms that such neuron does
exist indeed.


                                                   26
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D     T ECHNICAL DETAILS
D.1   VARIANCE OF THE ESTIMATOR AND BATCHSIZE FOR ESTIMATION

In this section we study the variance of the matrices δWl ∗ and S −1/2 N computed using a minibatch
of n samples, seeing the samples as random variables, and the matrices computed as estimators of the
true matrices one would obtain by considering the full distribution of samples. Those two matrices
are the solutions of the multiple linear regression problems defined in (9) and in (11), as we are
trying to regress the desired update noted Y onto the span of the activities noted X. We suppose we
have the following setting :
                            Y ∼ AX + ε, ε ∼ N (0, σ 2 ), E[ε|X] = 0
where the (Xi , Yi ) are i.i.d. and A is the oracle for δWl ∗ or matrix S −1/2 N . If Y is multidimen-
sional, the the total variance of our estimator can be seen as the sum of the variances of the estimator
on each dimension of Y .
We now suppose that Y ∈ R . The estimator Â := (XXT )−1 XYT has variance var(Â) =
σ 2 (XXT )−1 . If n is large, and if matrix n1 XXT → Q, with Q non singular, then, asymptotically,
                           −1
we have Â ∼ N (A, σ 2 Qn ), which is equivalent to (Â − A) nσ Q1/2 ∼ N (0, I). Then ||(Â −
                                                               p
                                                                        h                  i
A) nσ Q1/2 ||2 ∼ χ2 (k) where k is the dimension of X. It follows that E ||(Â − A)Q1/2 ||2 = kσ
    p
                                                                                               n
                 T                                                   kσ
and as Q1/2 Q1/2 is positive definite, we conclude that var(Â) ⩽ nλmin (Q) .

In practice and to keep the variance of our estimators stable during architecture growth, for the
estimation of the best neuron to add we use batch size
                                                 (SW )2
                                            n∝           ,
                                                   P
with the notations defined in Figure 10, since the matrices we estimate have side size SW and that
each input sample contains P values, i.e. P quantities that each play the role of X here.

D.2   BATCH SIZE FOR LEARNING

Batchsize, learning rate and number of neurons are known to be related. As our architecture grows
with time, we need to adapt the training batchsize as well.
The batch size is set to bt=0 = 500 at the beginning of each experiment, and it is scheduled to
increase as the square root of the complexity of the model (ie number of additions in a test). If at
time t the network
                q has complexity Ct parameters, then at time t + 1 the training batch size is equal
to bt+1 = bt × CCt+1 t
                       .

D.3   S IGNIFICANCE OF THE EIGENVALUES .
                                                            1
Using the SVD on matrix B = U DQT , we have: S − 2 N = U Id rk(D) QT Vgoal . Thus the λk
are the square roots of the eigenvalues of the matrix N T S −1 N = Vgoal T QId rk(D) QT Vgoal , which
is similar to the covariance matrix of the desired update. To avoid adding neurons that are non
significant, we evaluate which amplitude those eigenvalues would have under the hypothesis (H0 )
that Vgoal ∼ N (0, Σ) is uncorrelated with the projection matrix QId rk(D) QT (i.e. what values are
obtained when estimating eigenvalues that are actually 0).
Remark that under the hypothesis H0 , the eigenvalues of covariance matrix Vgoal T Vgoal follow the
Marchenko-Pastur distribution, which is known in closed form. This enables to set a threshold on
eigenvalues based on statistical significance.
Unfortunately regarding the distribution of the eigenvalues of Vgoal T QId rk(D) QT Vgoal , getting
closed-form expression is trickier, so we numerically estimate a threshold λ2− by generating
                                                            QId rk(D) QT Vgauss . Conversely, if

vgauss (X) ∼ N (0, Σ) and considering λ2− := λmax Vgauss T

the sample size required for reasonably estimating an eigenvalue λk exceeds the dataset size, as-
sociated neurons necessarily overfit, and could be chosen not to be added. The overfit risk in this


                                                  27
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


addition step is thus controlled. However, standard gradient descent performed afterwards cancels
such guarantees.


D.4   A MPLITUDE FACTOR


Once the neurons defined in Proposition 3.2 have been computed, they are added with an amplitude
factor to the current architecture, i.e. α ←
                                           − ε1 α and ω ← − ε2 ω, with εi real factors. Those factors
have to be chosen such that the optimization process stays smooth, in the sense that the gradient of
each parameter keeps being smooth. Otherwise the current learning rates defined by the optimizer
are no longer correct and the system can get unstable. In the work of Maile et al. (2022); Evci et al.
(2022) the amplitude of the new  √ neurons
                                        √   are set to an arbitrary constant 10−4 . In our paper we
normalize α, ω, such that ||v l ( εα, εω, X)|| = ε||al (X)|| then a line search is performed in ε.
We processed with this pseudo code :

Algorithm 2: AmplitudeFactor
Data: (αk , ωk )m
                k=1
Result: amplitude factor ε to be applied to α and ω
Take a minibatch X of sizeP 500;
ε∗ = arg minε=2−k , k∈N                  √
                             x∈X ℓ(fθ⊕( εα∗
                                                √ ∗ (x), y(x))
                                             k , εωk )k


Note that it is also possible to perform line searches to estimate the best amplitude factors at each
neuron addition. This improves the loss much faster, however it also yields later training instabilities
(due to the need of different learning rates), that yet have to be solved, which is why we do not
present this approach variation here. Interestingly this allows training a neural network without
gradient descent (i.e. no parameter update, using just backpropagation).


D.5   F ULL ALGORITHM


In this section we decribe in detail the pseudo code of the main paper (Algorithm 1). In its copy
below (Algorithm 3), we have replaced the references by the name of the functions used to compute
each non-trivial step.
The function NewNeurons(l, Sp), in Algorithm 4, computes the new neurons defined at Propo-
sition 3.2 for layer l. The argument Sp = T rue, for Spurious, changes the desired up-
date into a random variable (useful to estimate statistical relevance). The function call
NewNeurons(l, Sp = T rue) computes a sample of neurons and eigenvalues ({λN             k }k ) that
one would have obtained if neuron were not to add. The maximum eigenvalues max(λN               k )


                                                  28
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


is the threshold on the eigenvalues from the function call NewNeurons(l, Sp = F alse).
Algorithm 3: Algorithm to plot Figure 5.
for each method [Ours, GradMax] do
    Start from a given small neural network NN ;
    for j in nbpass do
        for each layer l do
             A, Λ, Ω = NewNeurons(layer, method = method);
                  // with our method the above also yields δWl∗ as a by-product;
                  N
              , Λ , = NewNeurons(layer, method = method, Sp = T rue );
             λ− = max(diag(ΛN ));
             A, Λ, Ω ←  − A[:, : λ− ], Λ[: λ− , : λ− ], Ω[: λ−, :];
             if len(A) > 0 then
                  γ =AmplitudeFactor(A, Ω);
                  if γ > 0 then√       √
                      A, Ω ←− γA, γΩ;
                      Add the neurons A, Ω;
                  end
             end
             if method == Our then
                  Update the architecture with the best update δWl∗ at l+1
             end
        end
    end
    Get accuracy acc0 of NN ;
    Train NN for 15 epochs with Adam(lr = 1e-4) ;
    Get final accuracy acc∞ of NN ;
end

Algorithm 4: NewNeurons                       Algorithm 5: MatrixSN
Data: l, method = Our, Sp = F alse            Data: p1 , p2 (layer indexes), δWl =
Result: Best neurons at l                             None, Sp = False
if method = Our then                          Result: Construct matrices S and N
    δWl = BestUpdate(l + 1);                  if not(Sp) then
else                                                                                  )2
                                                  Take a minibatch X of size ∝ (SW  P ;
    δWl = N one
                                                  Propagate and backpropagate X;
end                                                                           ∂Ltot
S, N = MatrixSN(l − 1, l + 1, δWl =               Compute Vgoal at p2 , ie − ∂A  p2
                                                                                    ;
  δWl , Sp = Sp);                                 if δWl ̸= None then
Compute the SVD of S := U ΣU T ;                       Vgoal − = δWl Bp1
Compute the SVD of                                end
    √ −1                                      else
  U Σ U N := AΛΩ;
Use the columns of A, the ligns of Ω              Vgoal = E, E ∼ N (0, I)
  and the diagonal of Λ to construct the      end
  new neurons of Prop. 3.2;                   S, N−2 = Bp1 Bp1 T , Bp1 Vgoal T ;

                                              Algorithm 6: BestUpdate
                                              Data: l, index of a layer
                                              Result: Best update at l
                                                                               )2
                                              Take a minibatch X of size ∝ (SW
                                                                             P    ;
                                              Compute (S, N) with the function
                                               S N(l, l);
                                              δWl = N T S −1 ;


                                                 29
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D.6   C OMPUTATIONAL COMPLEXITY

We estimate here the computational complexity of the above algorithm for architecture growth.

Theoretical estimate. We use the following notations:

       • number of layers: L
       • layer width, or number of kernels if convolutions: W (assuming for simplicity that all
         layers have same width or kernels)
       • number of pixels in the image: P (P = 1 for fully-connected)
       • kernel filter size: S (S = 1 if fully-connected)
       • minibatch size used for standard gradient descent: M
       • minibatch size used for new neuron estimation: M ′
       • minibatch size used in the line-search to estimate amplitude factor: M ′′
       • number of classical gradients steps performed between 2 addition tentatives: T


                  Figure 10: Notation and size for convolutional and linear layers

Complexity, estimated as the number of basic operations, cumulated over all calls of the functions:

       • of the standard training part: T M LW 2 SP
       • of the computation of matrices of interest (function MatrixSN): LM ′ (SW )2 P
       • of SVD computations (function NewNeurons): L(SW )3
       • of line-searches (function AmplitudeFactor): L2 M ′′ W 2 SP
       • of weight updates (function BestUpdate): LSW

The relative added complexity w.r.t. the standard training part is thus:
               M ′ S / T M + S 2 W / T M P + M ′′ L / T M + 1 / W T M P.

SVD cost is negligible. The relative cost of the SVD w.r.t. the standard training part is
S 2 W / T M P . In the fully-connected network case, S = 1, P = 1, and the relative cost of the
SVD is then W/T M . It is then negligible, as layer width W is usually much smaller than T M ,
which is typically 10 × 100 for instance. In the convolutional case, S = 9 for 3 × 3 kernels, and
P ≈ 1000 for CIFAR, P ≈ 100000 for ImageNet, so the SVD cost is negligible as long as layer
width W << 10000 or 1 000 000 respectively. So one needs no worrying about SVD cost.
Likewise, the update of existing weights using the “optimal move” (already computed as a by-
product) is computationally negligible, and the relative cost of the line searches is limited as long as
the network is not extremely deep (L < T M/M ”).
On the opposite, the estimation of the matrices (to which SVD is applied) can be more ressource
demanding. The factor M ′ S/T M can be large if the minibatch size M ′ needs to be large for
                                                                                            ′
                                                                                     p for M to
statistical significance reasons. One can show that an upper bound to the value required
                                                         2
ensure estimator precision (see Appendix D.1) is (SW ) /P . In that case, if W > T M P/S 3 ,
these matrix estimations will get costly. In the fully-connected network case, this means W >


                                                  30
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



√                                                                                   p
  T M ≈ 30 for T = 10 and M = 100. In the convolutional case, this means W > T M P/S 3 ≈
30 for CIFAR and ≈ 300 for ImageNet. We are working on finer variance estimation and on other
types of estimators to decrease M ′ and consequently this cost. Actually (SW )2 /P is just an upper
bound on the value required for M ′ , which might be much lower, depending on the rank of computed
matrices.

In practice. In practice the cost of a full training with our architecture growth approach is similar
(sometimes a bit faster, sometimes a bit slower) than a standard gradient descent training using
the final architecture from scratch. This is great as the right comparison should take into account
the number of different architectures to try in the classical neural architecture search approach.
Therefore we get layer width hyper-optimization for free.


E     A DDITIONAL EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS AND REMARKS

E.1     MNIST

In this section we work with feed forward networks with two hidden layers. We note by [a, b] such
network with a neurons on the first hidden layer and b neurons on the second one. The experiments
of this section are performed on 7 CPU. We use the optimizer SGD(lr = 1e − 4) and a constant
batch of size 100 (we do not apply method in D.2). The training criterion is the cross-entropy loss.

E.1.1    R ANDOM VS O PTIMIZATION
When performing the quadratic optimization (6), we obtain the optimal direction for (α∗k , ωk∗ )R
                                                                                                k=1 .
It is also possible to generate randomly the new neurons and compute the amplitude factors. This
second option have the benefit of being less time consuming, but it would project the desired di-
rection on those random vectors and would affect the accuracy score compared to optimal solution
defined in 3.1.

                                                                           0.94
                       0.8                                                 0.92
                                                                           0.90
                       0.6
            acc_test


                                                                acc_test


                                                                           0.88
                       0.4                                                 0.86

                       0.2                                                 0.84
                             0   100 200 300 400 500 600 700                      2.5   5.0   7.5 10.0 12.5 15.0 17.5 20.0
                                         minibatch                                                 time (sec)

                    8000                                                   8000

                    6000                                                   6000                                 our method
        loss_test


                                                               loss_test


                                                                                                                init model
                    4000                                                   4000                                 alea neurons

                    2000                                                   2000

                             0   100 200 300 400 500 600 700                      0           5       10        15        20
                                         minibatch                                                 time (sec)

Figure 11: Experiment performed 5 times on the MNIST dataset : a starting model in black [1, 1]
is initialized according to normal Kaiming, then is duplicated to give the red and the green model.
The structure of the red model is modified by our method to reach the structure [110, 51] while the
green model is extended with random neurons. Then all models are trained for 30 seconds. The
white space for the red model corresponds to the quadratic optimisation and the computation of the
amplitude factor while for the green model it corresponds only to the computation of the amplitude
factor.



                                                           31
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E.1.2    C OMPARISON WITH BIG MODEL

On figure 12, we plot mean and standard deviation for the same experiement repeated 5 times. We
start with a network of size [1, 1] and we increase its architecture by applying our method six times.
Each increase of architecture is followed by a training period of 0.5 seconds. Once the network has
reached its final structure of [110, 51] it is trained for a limited time of 25 seconds. We compared
our performance with a huge network of size [1000, 1000] which is trained with all its neurons
from scratch. Compared to the big model our TINY network converge faster in time because its
architecture is smaller, converge slower in epochs because it is less expressive.


Figure 12: All graphics represent the values for accuracy on test of the same experiment but from a
different perspective. Left : after partitioning computational time on intervals of size 0.1 seconds, we
compute a linear interpolation for the accuracy value. Middle : the accuracy value against number of
epochs, where the time needed to compute the optimal neurons is not noticeable. Right : accuracy
against computational time, where durations due to Cholesky decompositions and their happening
instants are averaged over experiments, for better visualisation purposes.


E.1.3    C OMPARISON WITH THE SAME STRUCTURE RETRAINED FROM SCRATCH

In figure 13 we compare our method with a neural network retrained from scratch with the same
architecture. The protocol is the same as defined in section E.1.2.


Figure 13: Same description as 12 but for different architecture and that the architecture of the
classical training matches the architecture of our method.



E.2     CIFAR-10

In this section we work with convolutional network forward networks with an architecture of two
blocks consisting of 2 convolutions and 1 MaxPooling each, followed by two fully-connected layers,
using the selu activation function. The training criterion is the cross-entropy loss. We increase the
size of the network on the fly (during training), with a batch size of 500 for training using D.2 on 1
GPU.


                                                  32
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E.2.1     A BOUT NUMBER OF NEURONS AND OVERFITTING
In Figure 14, 100% accuracy is achieved on training dataset, thus fully overfitting the data, which
proves that TINY can effectively bypass any expressivity bottleneck. Interestingly, this is done
with fewer parameters than the theorem in Zhang et al. (2017), which mentions 2n + d parameters
to overfit a classification problem with n samples of dimension d. This TINY architecture has
about twice fewer parameters, due to generalization across samples, the labels in the CIFAR-10
classification task being not random. It should also be noted that the TINY architecture tends to
overfit less than the same final model retrained with all neurons from the beginning (FS), or at
least, never more, which suggests that optimization and generalization abilities are not necessarily
functions of neural network width anymore if one leaves the standard fixed-architecture training
paradigm.


Figure 14: Experiment on CIFAR-10 dataset : Evolution of the train/test accuracy wrt gradient steps
for TINY and FS


E.3     R ES N ET 18 ON CIFAR-100

In this section we compare TINY to GradMax, on CIFAR-100 with the ResNet-18 architecure. For
this particular architecture, the size of a convolutional layer l may be increase if no skip connection
feeds the output of the layer l + 1, see Figure 17.
For both methods we start with the architecture shown in Table 1, initialized with Kaiming Normal.
Every 0.1 epoch of standard training with Adam(batchsize = 100, lr = 1e − 3), we add neurons
where it is the most needed by:

        1. computing the 5 best new neurons (αk , ωk )5k=1 and their amplitude factor γ for each layer
        2. evaluating the gain of loss associated to each potential addition
        3. adding the neurons where the decrease of loss is the largest.

The performances of the models are registered at each gradient step during standard training and
after each attempt of architecture increase, while the complexity of the model (as number of basic
operation performed at test time) is only evaluated after each addition trial. Figure 15 plots the per-
formance of both methods and the computational cost of models at step t, averaged over three runs.
After 2300 steps the performance of TINY is higher than GradMax’ one (+2%) but its complexity
is much lower (a third less). This dramatic difference can be explained by the fact that TINY avoids
redundancy when adding neurons, while GradMax does not.
The accuracies reached in this experiment are far from the state of the art on this dataset, but one
has to keep in mind that we performed no optimization hyper-parameter tuning and that we did


                                                  33
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 Figure 15: Accuracy and time complexity of ResNet-18 model for TINY and GradMax methods.


  Figure 16: Accuracy and time complexity of ResNet-18 model for one run with TINY method.


not use techniques such as batch-norm, drop-out or data augmentation, which are necessary for
convolutional models to go beyond 30-40% accuracy. Additional Figure 16 with twice more training
steps shows that with our approach the network keeps learning afterwards (reaching 32% accuracy
on test). Note that the number of parameters is very low compared to traditional architectures, for
example the model of Figure 16 has 119 866 parameters at step = 4025. The final architecture
obtained is shown in Table 1. We see that neurons were mostly added to first layers.


                                                34
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 17: ResNet blocks: in green, the convolutions of the current structure; in cyan, the added
convolutions.


                                               35
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 1: Initial architecture in the experiments of Figure 15 and 16, and final architecture at the end
of training in Figure 16. Numbers in color indicate where TINY was allowed to add neurons (middle
of ResNet blocks).

                                                ResNet18
  Layer name     Output size       Initial layers (kernel=(3,3), padd.=1)   Final layers (end of Fig 16)
                                   h          i                             h         i
  Conv 1         32 × 32 × 8        3 × 3, 8                                  3 × 3, 8
                                   "          #"          #                 "           #"           #
                                     3 × 3, 8 3 × 3, 1                         3 × 3, 8    3 × 3, 91
  Conv 2         32 × 32
                                    3 × 3, 1 3 × 3, 8                           3 × 3, 91   3 × 3, 8
                                   "        #"       #                      "            #"          #
                                    3 × 3, 8 3 × 3, 1                           3 × 3, 8   3 × 3, 76
  Conv 3         16 × 16 × 8
                                     3 × 3, 1 3 × 3, 8                        3 × 3, 76    3 × 3, 8
                                   h          i                             h          i
  Conv 4         16 × 16 × 8        3 × 3, 16                                3 × 3, 16
                                   "           #"          #                "           #"          #
                                     3 × 3, 16    3 × 3, 1                    3 × 3, 16 3 × 3, 41
  Conv 5         16 × 16 × 16
                                     3 × 3, 1   3 × 3, 16                       3 × 3, 41   3 × 3, 16
                                   "          #"          #                 "             #"          #
                                    3 × 3, 16    3 × 3, 1                       3 × 3, 16    3 × 3, 11
  Conv 6         8 × 8 × 16
                                      3 × 3, 1   3 × 3, 16                    3 × 3, 11 3 × 3, 16
                                   h           i                            h          i
  Conv 7         8 × 8 × 32         3 × 3, 32                                3 × 3, 32
                                   "           #"          #                "           #"          #
                                     3 × 3, 32    3 × 3, 1                    3 × 3, 32    3 × 3, 6
  Conv 8         8 × 8 × 32
                                     3 × 3, 1   3 × 3, 32                       3 × 3, 6    3 × 3, 32
                                   "          #"          #                 "             #"          #
                                    3 × 3, 32    3 × 3, 1                       3 × 3, 32    3 × 3, 3
  Conv 9         4 × 4 × 32
                                      3 × 3, 1   3 × 3, 32                      3 × 3, 3       3 × 3, 32
                                   h           i                            h              i
  Conv 10        4 × 4 × 64         3 × 3, 64                                3 × 3, 64
                                   "           #"          #                "           #"          #
                                     3 × 3, 64    3 × 3, 1                    3 × 3, 64    3 × 3, 1
  Conv 11        4 × 4 × 64
                                     3 × 3, 1   3 × 3, 64                       3 × 3, 1    3 × 3, 64
                                   "          #"          #                 "             #"          #
                                    3 × 3, 64    3 × 3, 1                       3 × 3, 64    3 × 3, 1
  Conv 12        2 × 2 × 64
                                     3 × 3, 1     3 × 3, 64                     3 × 3, 1       3 × 3, 64
  FC 1           100               256 × 100                                256 × 100
  FC 2           100               100 × 100                                256 × 100
  FC 3           100               100 × 100                                100 × 100
  SoftMax        100


                                                   36
