Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D O LLM S EXHIBIT HUMAN - LIKE RESPONSE BIASES ?
A CASE STUDY IN SURVEY DESIGN
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                                  A BSTRACT
             As large language models (LLMs) become more capable, there is growing ex-
             citement about the possibility of using LLMs as proxies for humans in real-world
             tasks where subjective labels serve as the ground truth. A barrier to the adoption of
             LLMs as human proxies is their sensitivity to prompt wording. But interestingly,
             humans also suffer from issues of sensitivity to instruction changes. As such, it is
             necessary to investigate the extent to which LLMs also reflect human sensitivities,
             if at all. In this work, we use survey design as a case study, where human response
             biases caused by permutations in wordings of “prompts” have been extensively
             studied. Drawing from prior work in social psychology, we design a dataset and
             propose a framework to evaluate whether LLMs exhibit human-like response bi-
             ases in survey questionnaires. Over the nine models we evaluated, we find that all
             but one (Llama2-70b), in particular instruction fine-tuned models, do not consis-
             tently display human-like response biases, and even sometimes show a significant
             change in the opposite expected direction of change in humans. Furthermore, even
             if a model shows a significant change in the same direction as humans, we find
             that perturbations that are not meant to elicit biased behavior may also result in
             a similar change. These results highlight the potential pitfalls of using LLMs to
             substitute humans in parts of the annotation pipeline, and further underscore the
             importance of finer-grained characterizations of model behavior.1


1       I NTRODUCTION
In what ways do large language models (LLMs) display human-like behavior, and in what ways do
they differ? The answer to this question is not only of intellectual interest (Dasgupta et al., 2022;
Michaelov & Bergen, 2022), but also has a wide variety of practical implications. For instance, if
LLMs could robustly simulate human behavior, this would open the door to using LLMs as prox-
ies or even replacements for human participants in research studies where subjective human labels
serve as the ground truth, such as annotation of human preferences (Törnberg, 2023), social science
studies (Aher et al., 2022), and opinion polling (Santurkar et al., 2023). Since LLMs are far more
accessible and cost-effective than recruiting real participants, the use of LLMs in these settings could
allow researchers to explore more design decisions and provide significant cost savings.
One widely noted concern regarding LLMs’ performance is the sensitivity of models to minor
changes in prompts, which has necessitated the development of methods for prompt engineer-
ing (Jiang et al., 2020; Gao et al., 2021). However, in the context of simulating human behavior,
sensitivity to small changes in a prompt may not be a wholly negative thing; in fact, humans are also
subconsciously sensitive to certain instruction changes (Kalton & Schuman, 1982). In order to use
LLMs as human proxies, it is necessary to understand when LLMs exhibit prompt sensitivities that
mirror human behavior, both in terms of when humans are robust and when humans are sensitive
to prompt changes. If LLMs largely exhibit similar behavior to humans, such a result would allow
researchers and practitioners to use LLMs as human proxies more confidently. However, a contrary
finding would suggest caution moving forward and the need for further study to understand and
control the nuances of LLM behavior.
Human sensitivities to instructions—which come in the form of biases—have been well studied
in literature on survey design (Weisberg et al., 1996). Multitudes of studies have shown how hu-
    1
        We will make our code, dataset, and collected samples publicly available.


                                                         1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                       Original                                   Modiﬁed                                   Original                                      Modiﬁed

      Do you think it is ever                Should it be forbidden for                   Who will be mostly responsible           Who will be mostly responsible
   acceptable for an unmarried                an unmarried couple to                     for paying for the long-term care        for paying for the long-term care
     couple to live together?                     live together?                           older Americans may need?                older Americans may need?

       A.            Yes                          A.             Yes                      A.            Family members                A.             Older Americans
       B.            No                           B.             No                       B.            Government                                   themselves
                                                                                          C.            Older Americans               B.             Government
                                                                                                        themselves                    C.             Family members
       # Responses


                                                   # Responses


                                                                                          # Responses


                                                                                                                                       # Responses
                      A      B                                   A       B                              A      B       C                              A       B        C


                                   Allow/forbid                      Acquiescence   Question order                         Response
                     Bias types:                                                                                   …                                      Opinion ﬂoat
                                   asymmetry                             bias          eﬀect                                 order



Figure 1: Human response biases due to changes in the design of survey questions have been well
studied. These include the allow/forbid asymmetry (left), the tendency to forbid an action less often
than allowing the same action, and response order bias (right), the tendency for respondents to select
options at the top of the list. Prior social science studies typically study these biases by designing
a set of control versus treatment questions. In this work, we propose an evaluation framework that
parallels this methodology to better understand LLM behavior in response to instruction changes.

man respondents can be sensitive to the wording (Brace, 2018), format (Cox III, 1980), and place-
ment (Schuman & Presser, 1996) of survey questions. Specific changes in these factors often cause
respondents to deviate from their original or “true” responses in regular, predictable ways (examples
shown in Figure 1). In this work, we make initial progress on understanding the parallels between
LLMs’ and humans’ responses to these instruction changes, using biases identified from survey
design as a case study.
Our contributions. To systematically evaluate whether LLMs exhibit human-like response biases,
we propose a framework called B IAS M ONKEY2 (overviewed in Figure 2). For a given bias, B IAS -
M ONKEY lays out the protocol for how to generate an appropriate dataset that consists of question
pairs (i.e., questions that do or do not reflect the bias) and how to evaluate the corresponding change
in LLM responses between question pairs accordingly. Furthermore, B IAS M ONKEY specifies base-
line, non-bias perturbations (e.g., small typos), which humans are known to be robust against. This
additional set of comparisons allows us to more robustly conclude whether observed changes as
a result of biased questions are meaningful. We emphasize that the goal of B IAS M ONKEY is to
evaluate trends in LLM behavior as a result of biased or perturbed questions, and glean insight into
whether those trends reflect known patterns of human behavior.
We use B IAS M ONKEY to generate datasets that contain modified questions reflecting 5 response
biases that are known to affect human responses, based on existing social science literature, and
evaluate each bias against 3 non-biased perturbations that are known to not affect human responses.
We look to Pew Research’s American Trends Panels as a source of questions that do not reflect any
biases and can serve as a dataset of original questions because they were designed and tested by
survey experts. Using B IAS M ONKEY, we conduct a comprehensive evaluation of LLM behavior
across nine models, including both open models from the Llama2 series and commercial models
from OpenAI, on 2610 pairs of questions, sampling 50 responses from each model per question.
Our findings are as follows:

1. LLMs are generally not reflective of human-like behavior: All models showed behavior no-
   tably unlike humans such as (1) a significant change in the opposite direction as known human
   biases, or (2) a significant change to non-bias perturbations that humans are insensitive to. In
   particular, eight of the nine models that we evaluated failed to consistently reflect human-like
   behavior on the five response biases that we studied.
2. Instruction fine-tuning makes LLM behavior less human-like. Interestingly, we find that in-
   struction fine-tuned models (e.g., GPT-3.5) demonstrate notably less human-like responses to
   2
       Inspired by Chaos Monkey and SurveyMonkey.


                                                                                     2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    wording changes, even though previous work has found them far better at performing a vari-
    ety of tasks (Chung et al., 2022). We also observe that instruction fine-tuned models are more
    likely to exhibit significant changes as a result of non-bias perturbations, despite not exhibiting a
    significant change to the modifications meant to elicit response biases.
3. There is little correlation between exhibiting response biases and other desirable metrics.
   In addition to measuring whether LLMs exhibit human-like response biases, there may be other
   important behaviors that we may desire from LLMs. For example, in survey design, it may
   also be important that LLMs are aligned with human opinions if we wish to use them as human
   proxies (Santurkar et al., 2023; Durmus et al., 2023; Argyle et al., 2022). While we also find
   that Llama2-70b can better replicate human opinion distributions, when comparing across the re-
   maining models, we find that the ability to replicate human opinion distributions is not indicative
   of how well an LLM reflects human behavior.

These results suggest the need for care and caution when considering the use of LLMs as human
proxies, as well as the importance of building more extensive evaluations that disentangle the nu-
ances of how LLMs may or may not behave similarly to humans. Finally, we discuss insights and
opportunities related to understanding how different training mechanisms shape LLM behaviors,
and implications for downstream use cases.

2     E VALUATING WHETHER LLM S EXHIBIT HUMAN - LIKE RESPONSE BIASES
                          Data Generation                                 LLM Responses                   Evaluation
        Response biases                 Question modification
                                                                                                      Per-question analysis
        Acquiescence          Find original questions (q)                                   LLM        Δb = count(q[‘a’])
            bias                                                                                            -count(q’[‘b’])
                                                                              # Responses



                               Do you think it is acceptable for an
        Allow/forbid           unmarried couple to live together?
                                                                                                        Aggregated result
         asymmetry             A. Yes
                               B. No                                                        A     B   t-test(mean(Δb),0)
          Response
           order             Create modified questions (q’)
                                                                                            LLM
          Opinion
          floating             Should it be forbidden for an
                                                                          # Responses


                               unmarried couple to live together?
          Odd/even             A. Yes                                                                 Trends from prior social
        scale effects                                                                                     science studies
                               B. No
                                                                                            A     B

Figure 2: Our proposed evaluation framework B IAS M ONKEY consists of three steps: generating a
dataset of original and modified questions based on a set of stimuli (e.g., response biases), collecting
LLM responses, and then evaluating whether the change in the distribution of LLM responses aligns
with known trends about human behavior. This workflow also directly applies to evaluations of
LLM behavior on non-bias perturbations.

We propose B IAS M ONKEY, an evaluation framework that allows us to rigorously study whether an
LLM displays human-like shifts in behavior within the context of multiple-choice questions. We
first provide an overview of B IAS M ONKEY, and then detail how we use B IAS M ONKEY to study
whether LLMs exhibit human-like response biases.

2.1    OVERVIEW OF B IAS M ONKEY

When evaluating whether humans exhibit hypothesized response biases, prior social science stud-
ies typically design a set of control questions and a set of treatment questions, which are intended
to elicit the hypothesized bias (Gordon, 1987;
                                             StepMcFarland,   1981). As overviewed in Figure 2, B I -
                                                 1: Dataset Generation
AS M ONKEY parallels this methodology to evaluate whether LLMs exhibit known human response
biases. B IAS M ONKEY consists of three parts: (1) dataset generation, (2) collection of LLM re-
sponses, and (3) evaluation of LLM responses.
Data generation. In order to study whether an LLM exhibits a response bias behavior given a
change in the prompt, we create sets of questions (q, q ′ ) ∈ Q that contain both original (q) and
modified (q ′ ) forms of multiple-choice questions. The first set of question pairs Qbias is one where
q ′ corresponds to questions that are modified in a way that is known to induce that particular bias


                                                                      3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 1: Definitions and example (q, q ′ ) pairs for bias types and perturbations. More examples are
in Appendix A.

Example q                                                  Example q ′

Acquiescence: For questions where respondents are asked to agree or disagree with a given statement, re-
spondents have a tendency to agree with the statement (Choi & Pak, 2005).
Thinking about the US as a whole, do you think this        Wouldn’t you agree that the United States
country is now                                             is more united now than it was before the
A. More united than before the coronavirus outbreak        coronavirus outbreak?
B. More divided than before the coronavirus outbreak       A. Yes
                                                           B. No

Allow/forbid asymmetry: Certain word pairings may elicit different responses, despite entailing the same
result. A well-studied example is asking whether an action should be allowed versus forbidden (Hippler &
Schwarz, 1987).
In your opinion, is voting is a privilege that comes       In your opinion, is voting is a fundamental
with responsibilities and can be limited if adult          right for every adult U.S. citizen and should
U.S. citizens don’t meet some requirements?                not be forbidden in any way?
A. Yes                                                     A. Yes
B. No                                                      B. No

Response order: In written surveys, respondents have been shown to display primacy bias, i.e., preferring
options at the top of a list (Ayidiya & McClendon, 1990).
How important, if at all, is having children in            How important, if at all, is having children in
order for a woman to live a fulfilling life?               order for a woman to live a fulfilling life?
A. Essential                                               A. Not important
B. Important, but not essential                            B. Important, but not essential
C. Not important                                           C. Essential

Opinion floating: When both a middle option and “don’t know” option are provided in a scale with an odd
number of responses, respondents who do not have a stance are more likely to distribute their responses
across both options than when only the middle option is provided (Schuman & Presser, 1996).
As far as you know, how many of your neighbors have        As far as you know, how many of your neighbors
the same political views as you                            have the same political views as you
A. All of them                                             A. All of them
B. Most of them                                            B. Most of them
C. About half                                              C. About half
D. Only some of them                                       D. Only some of them
E. None of them                                            E. None of them
                                                           F. Don’t know

Odd/even scale effects: When a middle option is removed in a scale with an odd number of responses, the
responses should be redistributed to the weak agree/disagree options (O’Muircheartaigh et al., 2001).
Thinking about the size of America’s military, do          Thinking about the size of America’s military,
you think it should be                                     do you think it should be
A. Reduced a great deal                                    A. Reduced a great deal
B. Reduced somewhat                                        B. Reduced somewhat
C. Increased somewhat                                      C. Kept about as is
D. Increased a great deal                                  D. Increased somewhat
                                                           E. Increased a great deal

Key typo: With a low probability, we randomly change one letter in each word (Rawlinson, 2007).
How likely do you think it is that the following           How likely do you think it is that the
will happen in the next 30 years? A woman will be          following will happen in the next 30 yeans?
elected U.S. president                                     A woman wilp we elected U.S. president

Letter swap: We perform one swap per word but do not alter the first or last letters. For this reason, this
noise is only applied to words of length ≥ 4 (Rawlinson, 2007).
Overall, do you think science has made life easier         Ovearll, do you tihnk sicence has made life
or more difficult for most people?                         eaiser or more diffiuclt for most poeple?

Middle random: We randomize the order of all the letters in a word, except for the first and last (Rawlinson,
2007). Again, this noise is only applied to words of length ≥ 4.
Do you think that private citizens should be allowed       Do you thnik that pvarite citziens sluhod be
to pilot drones in the following areas? Near               aewolld to piolt derons in the flnowolig areas?
people’s homes                                             Near people’s heoms


                                                      4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


in humans. In the interest of also comparing an LLM’s behavior on Qbias with changes to non-bias
perturbation, changes in prompts that humans are known to be robust against, we similarly generate
sets of question pairs Qperturb where q is an original question that is also contained in Qbias .
Collecting LLM responses. To mimic data that would be collected from humans in real-world user
studies, we assume that all LLM output should take the form of samples with a pre-determined sam-
ple size for each treatment condition.3 The collection process would entail sampling a sufficiently
large number of LLM outputs for each question in every question pair in Qbias and Qperturb . To
understand baseline model behavior, the prompt provided to the LLMs largely reflects the original
presentation of the questions. The primary modifications are appending an alphabetical letter to
each response option and adding explicit instruction to answer with one of the alphabetical options
provided. We provide examples of the prompt template in Appendix C. We then query LLMs with a
temperature of 1 until we get a valid response (e.g., one of the letter options) to elicit a distribution
of answers across samples per question.
Evaluation of LLM responses. We first discuss how we evaluate LLM outputs on Qbias , which
will then largely transfer to Qperturb . To measure whether an LLM exhibits a given response bias,
we look at the change in the response distributions between Dq and Dq′ (typically with respect to a
particular subset of relevant response options), which we refer to as ∆b and whether ∆b aligns with
known human behavior patterns. We then aggregate over question pairs and compute the average
change ∆ ¯ b across all questions and conduct a Student’s t-test where the null hypothesis is that ∆¯b
                                                                              ¯
for a given model and bias type is 0. Together, the p-value and value of ∆b informs us whether
we observe a change across questions that aligns with known human behavior. We evaluate LLMs
on Qperturb following the same process (i.e., selecting the subset of relevant response options for
the bias) to compute ∆p , with the expectation that across questions ∆  ¯ p should be not statistically
different from 0.

2.2   U SING B IAS M ONKEY TO INVESTIGATE RESPONSE BIASES
We instantiate B IAS M ONKEY on a set of five well-studied response biases that can be easily im-
plemented in existing survey questions, and the impact of such biases on human decision outcomes
has been explicitly quantified in prior studies with humans. This set of biases is one that only ap-
plies to a single question at a time and includes those that affect both the question wording as well
as those that change the order or number of response orders. To compare with each bias, we also
selected three non-bias perturbations that humans are robust to. The definitions and examples for
each response bias and non-bias perturbation are in Table 1.
Instantiating Qbias and Qperturb . The original forms q of these question pairs come from the set of
survey questions in Pew Research’s American Trends Panel (ATP) (detailed in Appendix A.1). We
opted to use this dataset as it covers a diverse set of topics, has a substantial number of questions,
and the related survey was conducted relatively recently. Concretely, we selected our questions
from the pool of ATP questions curated by Santurkar et al. (2023), which studied whether LLMs
reflect human opinions. For each bias, we look at prior works that study these biases in humans to
inform our modifications of the ATP questions. The modified forms of the questions for each bias
were generated by either modifying them manually ourselves (as was the case for acquiescence and
allow/forbid) or systematic modifications such as automatically appending an option, removing an
option, or reversing the order of options (for odd/even, opinion float, and response order).
We generate a comprehensive dataset (total of 2610 question pairs) covering 5 biases and 3 non-bias
perturbations. The specific breakdown of the number of questions by bias type is as follows: 176
for acquiescence bias, 48 for allow/forbid asymmetry, 271 for response order bias, 126 for opinion
floating, and 126 for odd/even scale effects. For each perturbation, we generate a modified version
based on each original question from Qbias . We provide examples of (q, q ′ ) pairs for each bias and
perturbation type in Table 1. Further implementation details are provided in Appendix A.
Evaluating ∆b and ∆p . To evaluate a response bias, we sample 50 responses per question in each
pair of questions (q, q ′ ), from which we construct Dq and Dq′ . For each question pair, we compute
∆b based on a subset of relevant response options, as overviewed in Table 4: ∆b > 0 would indicate
    3
      While prior works directly use the probabilities of answer options (or have an upper bound of an estimate
for probabilities) (Santurkar et al., 2023), we choose to approximate the probabilities using sampling to enable
use of models where probabilities are not available.


                                                       5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


alignment with known human patterns and ∆b < 0 indicates misalignment. Since question formats
(and thus the number of options) in a question may change and the calculation of ∆b is designed
to measure each bias’s specific intended effect, we do not use it to compare effects across biases,
but rather as a way to compare between models for a given bias. Additionally, as we do not have
parallel human data on the exact form of the modified questions, comparing the size of ∆b between
LLMs and humans is not feasible. Note that ∆p is computed in the same way following Table 4 as
∆b using (q, q ′ ) ∈ Qperturb .
LLM selection. We select models to cover multiple axes of consideration: open-source versus
commercial models, whether the model has been instruction fine-tuned, whether the model has un-
dergone reinforcement learning with human feedback (RLHF), and the number of model parameters.
We evaluate a total of nine models, which include model variants of Llama2 (Touvron et al., 2023)
(7b, 13b, 70b), Solar4 (an instruction fine-tuned version of Llama2-70b) and variants of the Llama2
chat family (7b, 13b, 70b), which has had both instruction fine-tuning as well as RLHF, along with
models from the GPT series (Brown et al., 2020) (GPT-3.5-turbo, GPT-3.5-turbo-instruct).

3        R ESULTS
3.1       E FFECT OF BIAS MODIFICATIONS
Table 2: We compare LLMs’ behavior on bias types (∆       ¯ b ) across the five response bias types. We
color cells that have statistically significant changes by the directionality of ∆  ¯ b (blue indicates a
positive effect, orange indicates a negative effect, no color indicates non-significant effect). We use
a traditional p = 0.05 cut-off to determine significance. A full table with p-values is in Table 5. We
find that only one of nine models (Llama2-70b) aligns with known human trends across all biases.

Training type                 Models      Acquiescence   Allow/forbid   Response order   Opinion float   Odd/even scale
                            Llama2-7b          1.92%          59.5%           24.91%           4.26%            1.09%
    Base LLMs              Llama2-13b        −11.85%         54.38%           45.75%           4.12%           −3.49%
                           Llama2-70b          7.29%          41.9%            5.12%           2.44%           12.19%
Instruct-tuned                   Solar          18.5%        −4.92%           −9.68%           1.92%             17.5%
                       Llama2-7b-chat           1.13%         5.88%            −9.8%         −1.25%            20.01%
                     Llama2-13b-chat            1.91%         6.13%            −9.3%          −0.2%            21.25%
Instruct-tuned
                     Llama2-70b-chat            11.1%          1.5%           −0.49%          1.55%            26.47%
      + RLHF
                        GPT-3.5-turbo           5.52%        −19.7%           −2.71%         −11.9%            25.04%
                 GPT-3.5-turbo-instruct         6.45%        −8.04%          −11.71%          0.14%             2.03%


We evaluate a set of nine models on five different response biases, where the results are summarized
in Table 2. We do not find a clear result indicating that LLMs exhibit human-like response biases
across the board. In fact, of all nine models, only Llama2-70b demonstrates alignment in terms of the
direction of change with known human patterns across all biases (i.e., positive ∆     ¯ b and statistically
significant result). Moreover, none of the other six models display strongly misaligned behavior
                                                            ¯ b ). Below, we distill our observations by
across all biases (i.e., statistically significant negative ∆
various factors that affect LLM behaviors.
Individual response biases: Mostly no clear trend except for acquiescence. Overall, we do not
find any uniform behavior across various models, except for acquiescence which generally leads to a
positive ∆¯ b . One hypothesis for this behavior is that the modified form of the questions heavily sug-
gests answering “yes” to agreeing with the statement posed. For response order, contemporaneous
work has shown that LLMs are generally not robust to option ordering changes in multiple-choice
questions, even for objective tasks (Pezeshkpour & Hruschka, 2023). In line with our results, Zheng
et al. (2023) found that GPT-3.5-turbo tends to prefer lower options in a list (e.g. C/D).
Vanilla LLMs display more human-like response biases than instruction-tuned and RLHF-ed
ones. Grouping LLMs allows us to observe patterns that correlate with aspects of model training.
To observe the effects of instruction fine-tuning, we compare Llama2-70b and Solar, which is a
Llama2-70b variant with additional fine-tuning on an Orca- (Mukherjee et al., 2023) and Alpaca-
style dataset (Taori et al., 2023), as well as Llama2-7b and Llama2-13b with their chat counterparts.
The largest effect is with the allow/forbid asymmetry bias, with a change from 41.9% to −4.92%
     4
         https://huggingface.co/upstage/SOLAR-0-70b-16bit


                                                            6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


(non-significant). Response order additionally demonstrates a change in direction. Across all in-
struction fine-tuned models (including those that have also undergone RLHF), all models display
a significant positive ∆ ¯ b with acquiescence. Furthermore, they also display negative (though not
                 ¯
all significant) ∆b with allow/forbid and response order, despite the base Llama2 models showing
strong positive ∆¯ b for both of these biases.
Model size impacts LLM behavior on some bias types, but not all. Looking at the results across
the base Llama2 models, which vary in size (7b, 13b, and 70b), we do not see any overall mono-
tonic trends between the number of parameters and size of ∆  ¯ b . That said, for two of the biases—
allow/forbid and opinion float—there is actually a decrease in ∆¯ b from 7b to 70b, though the direc-
tion of change remains positive in both.
Extended generation reduces LLM biases, but only marginally. Prior work has suggested
that “chain-of-thought reasoning”—or prompting the model to generate longer text to explain its
decision—can lead to improved performance (Nye et al., 2021; Wei et al., 2023; Kojima et al., 2023).
To see if this may impact our results, we perform a prompt ablation by allowing longer generation
lengths and asking the LLM to give both an answer as well as the reasoning for that answer. We find
a decrease in ∆¯ b of 5%, averaged across all biases, and thus more insignificant results. However, we
observe that the ∆ ¯ b in both conditions are still reasonably correlated (r = 0.68), indicating that the
general direction of change remains the same. We include prompt details and results over a subset
of models in Appendix C. We also make initial attempts to steer model behavior, though such an
approach requires further investigation beyond the scope of this work (Appendix D).

3.2      E FFECT OF NON - BIAS PERTURBATIONS
                     Most Human-like                                        Llama2-7b                                        Llama2-13b                                       Llama2-70b                                            Solar
  Acquiescence
   Allow/forbid
Response Order
  Opinion Float
      Odd/even

                         Llama-7b-chat                                    Llama-13b-chat                                    Llama-70b-chat                                     3.5 Turbo                                 3.5 Turbo Instruct
  Acquiescence
   Allow/forbid
Response Order
  Opinion Float
      Odd/even
                  bias

                          key typo


                                                                                                                              key typo
                                     middle random


                                                                   bias

                                                                            key typo


                                                                                                                     bias
                                                     letter swap


                                                                                       middle random

                                                                                                       letter swap


                                                                                                                                         middle random


                                                                                                                                                                       bias

                                                                                                                                                                              key typo


                                                                                                                                                                                                                       bias

                                                                                                                                                                                                                              key typo
                                                                                                                                                         letter swap


                                                                                                                                                                                         middle random

                                                                                                                                                                                                         letter swap


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         middle random

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         letter swap


Figure 3: We compare LLMs’ behavior on bias types (∆        ¯ b ) with their respective behavior on the set
of perturbations (∆¯ p ). We color cells that have statistically significant changes by the directionality
   ¯ b (blue indicates a positive effect and orange indicates a negative effect), using p = 0.05 cut-off,
of ∆
and use hatched cells to indicate non-significant changes. A full table with ∆       ¯ b and ∆
                                                                                             ¯ p values and
p-values is in Table 5. While we would ideally observe that models are only responsive to the bias
modifications and are not responsive to the other perturbations, as shown in the top-left the “most
human-like” depiction, the results do not generally reflect the ideal setting.

As summarized in Figure 3, we show that models not only display statistically significant changes
from bias modifications but also display significant changes with non-bias perturbations. Even
Llama2-70b, which best replicated human behavior on the set of response biases out of the models
evaluated, still exhibits a significant change as a result of non-bias perturbations on three of the five
bias types, indicating that it should not directly be used as a replacement for human participants.
When comparing ∆    ¯ b versus ∆¯ p , we find that in some cases, ∆
                                                                  ¯ p occurs in the same direction as ∆
                                                                                                      ¯b
(e.g., for allow/forbid in both Llama-7b and 13b), though of a lesser magnitude. Since LLMs are
sensitive to both response biases and non-bias perturbations, it would be important to understand if
there are common reasons underlying such behavior.


                                                                                                                        7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Conversely, we also observe cases where the direction of change flips between the biased and per-
turbation settings are consistently different (e.g., for all significant biases except opinion float with
GPT-3.5-turbo). There are also a few settings where models show a significant change with per-
turbations but not with bias modifications. Interestingly, this mainly occurs with the instruction
fine-tuned models which again indicates that instruction tuning impacts LLM behaviors and point to
the potential of using instruction tuning to disentangle LLM responses to biases and non-bias
perturbations.

3.3   R ELATION TO OTHER DESIDERATA FOR LLM S AS HUMAN PROXIES

Table 3: Representativeness score measures the extent to which each model reflects the opinions of
an average U.S. survey respondent (the higher the better) (Santurkar et al., 2023). While we find that
Llama2-70b has the highest representativeness score, in accordance with our finding from Table 2,
we do not observe a general correlation between representativeness and a model’s ability to reflect
human-like response biases.

                   Llama2                           Llama2-chat                  GPT-3.5
                                     Solar
             7b      13b     70b               7b       13b     70b      turbo    turbo-instruct
           0.762    0.734   0.834    0.810   0.758       0.757   0.710   0.721        0.720


As an exploratory experiment, we investigate whether LLMs that exhibit human-like response biases
also more accurately reflect people’s general opinions, i.e., whether the distribution of answers gen-
erated by the models in the original question is closer to the distribution of human responses (San-
turkar et al., 2023; Durmus et al., 2023; Argyle et al., 2022). To measure the similarity between
model and human distributions, we use a metric based on the Wasserstein distance as in Santurkar
et al. (2023). We provide further experimental details in Appendix E.
There is little correlation between a model’s human-likeness in terms of response biases and
representativeness of human opinions. While we encouragingly find that Llama2-70b has the
highest representativeness score, this trend does not hold for other models, as shown in Table 3.
For example, GPT 3.5-turbo is more representative than Llama2-70b-chat, yet it displays more mis-
aligned behavior with human response biases. Such discrepancy flags that our framework and the
evaluation of representativeness may each capture a subset of desired properties of human proxies.

4     R ELATED W ORK
LLM sensitivity to prompts. A growing set of work aims to understand how LLMs may be sensi-
tive to prompt constructions. These works have studied a variety of permutations of prompts which
include—but are not limited to—adversarial prompts (Wallace et al., 2019; Perez & Ribeiro, 2022;
Maus et al., 2023; Zou et al., 2023), changes in the order of in-context examples (Lu et al., 2022), and
changes in multiple-choice questions (Zheng et al., 2023; Pezeshkpour & Hruschka, 2023). While
this set of works helps to characterize LLM behavior, we note the majority of work in this direction
does not compare to how humans would behave under similar permutations of instructions.
A smaller set of works has explored whether changes in performance also reflect known patterns
of human behavior, focusing on tasks relating to linguistic priming and cognitive biases (Dasgupta
et al., 2022; Michaelov & Bergen, 2022; Sinclair et al., 2022) in settings that are often removed from
actual downstream use cases. Thus, such studies may have limited guidance on when and where it
is appropriate to use LLMs as human proxies. Similar to these works, we conduct our analysis by
making comparisons against known general trends of human behavior to enable a much larger scale
of evaluation, but grounded in a more concrete use case of survey design.
When making claims about whether LLMs exhibit human-like behavior, we also highlight the impor-
tance of selecting stimuli that have actually been verified in prior human studies. A study by Webson
& Pavlick (2022) initially showed that LLMs can perform unexpectedly well to irrelevant and in-
tentionally misleading examples, under the assumption that humans would not be able to do so.
However, the authors later conducted a follow-up study on humans, disproving their initial assump-
tions (Webson et al., 2023). Our study is based on long-standing literature from the social sciences.


                                                     8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Comparing LLMs and Humans. Comparisons of LLM and human behavior are broadly divided
into comparisons of more open-ended behavior, such as generating an answer to a free-response
question, versus comparisons of closed-form outcomes, where LLMs generate a label based on a
fixed set of response options. Since the open-ended tasks typically rely on human judgments to
determine whether LLM behaviors are perceived to be sufficiently human-like (Park et al., 2022;
2023a), we focus on closed-form tasks, which allows us to more easily find broader quantitative
trends and enables scalable evaluations.
Prior works have conducted evaluations of LLM and human outcomes on a number of real-world
tasks including social science studies (Park et al., 2023b; Aher et al., 2022; Horton, 2023; Hämäläi-
nen et al., 2023), crowdsourcing annotation tasks (Törnberg, 2023; Gilardi et al., 2023), and repli-
cating public opinion surveys (Santurkar et al., 2023; Durmus et al., 2023; Chu et al., 2023; Kim &
Lee, 2023; Argyle et al., 2022). While these works highlight the potential areas where LLMs can
replicate known human outcomes, comparing directly to human outcomes limits existing evalua-
tions to the specific form of the questions that were used to collect human responses. Instead, in this
work, we leverage survey design as a use case to understand whether LLMs reflect known patterns,
or general response biases, that humans exhibit. Further discussion on why this case study would be
interesting to multiple research communities is provided in Appendix A.1.


5   D ISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
Given our results, we are both excited for future work to explore the potential use of models that
reflect human-like biases, while being concerned about how most LLMs display such varied and po-
tentially undesirable behaviors. We believe our framework and initial results on this set of response
biases highlight the need for more critical evaluations to further understand the set of similarities
or dissimilarities with humans. While we use response biases in survey design literature as a case
study in this work, our framework can be adapted to a much broader set of problems where LLMs
may be used as human proxies. We now discuss further implications and limitations:
Relationship between aspects of model training and observed behavior. An interesting trend we
observed in our experiments was the difference in the behavior of models that have been instruction
fine-tuned versus those that have not. For example, only instruction fine-tuned models exhibited
instances of significant changes in the perturbations when no significant change was observed for a
bias condition. While the use of instruction-fine tuned and RLHF-ed models is growing, largely due
to these models’ abilities to better generalize to unseen tasks (Wei et al., 2022; Sanh et al., 2022) and
be more easily steered to follow a user’s intent (Ouyang et al., 2022), our results indicate that these
behaviors, while largely desirable in general use cases, may come at a trade-off with other behaviors
such as exhibiting human-like response biases.
Implications for using LLMs as human proxies. Downstream use cases where LLMs may be
used as proxies or replacements for human users may involve many factors of human behavior. Our
exploratory result in Section 3.3 suggests that neither our evaluation based on response biases nor
an evaluation of representativeness alone can fully characterize whether LLMs reflect all of these
desired behaviors. This result, along with the varied nature of behavior that we found on eight out
of nine LLMs that we evaluated (further evidenced by the often diverse behavior across question
topics, as shown in Figure 4), suggests that the usage of LLMs as human proxies would need to be
much more carefully vetted in a use-case-specific manner.
Limitations. While we believe this work has interesting implications for both future LLM evalu-
ations and usages of LLMs as human proxies, we briefly overview the limitations of our analysis.
In terms of the dataset design, we note that we focus on English-based, and U.S.-centric survey
questions. The primary source of survey questions, the American Trends Panel, is collected from
U.S. respondents. However, we believe that many of these evaluations can and should be replicated
on corpora that are comprised of more diverse languages and users. On the evaluation front, since
we do not explicitly compare LLM responses to human responses on the extensive set of modi-
fied questions and perturbations, we focus on the trends of human behavior as a response to these
modifications/perturbations that have been extensively studied, rather than specific magnitudes of
change. Finally, we note that these five response biases are neither representative nor comprehen-
sive of all biases. This work was not intended to exhaustively test human biases but to highlight a
new approach to understanding LLM behavior using what we already know about human behavior.


                                                   9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Gati Aher, Rosa I Arriaga, and Adam Tauman Kalai. Using Large Language Models to Simulate
  Multiple Humans. pp. 31, 2022.
Rashid Al-Abri and Amina Al-Balushi. Patient satisfaction survey as a tool towards quality im-
  provement. Oman medical journal, 29(1):3, 2014.
Lisa P. Argyle, Ethan C. Busby, Nancy Fulda, Joshua Gubler, Christopher Rytting, and David
  Wingate. Out of One, Many: Using Language Models to Simulate Human Samples. In Pro-
  ceedings of the 60th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Vol-
  ume 1: Long Papers), pp. 819–862, 2022. doi: 10.18653/v1/2022.acl-long.60. URL http:
  //arxiv.org/abs/2209.06899. arXiv:2209.06899 [cs].
Stephen A Ayidiya and McKee J McClendon. Response effects in mail surveys. Public Opinion
  Quarterly, 54(2):229–247, 1990.
Ian Brace. Questionnaire design: How to plan, structure and write survey material for effective
  market research. Kogan Page Publishers, 2018.
Tom B. Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared Kaplan, Prafulla Dhari-
  wal, Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Ariel Herbert-Voss, Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child, Aditya Ramesh, Daniel M.
  Ziegler, Jeffrey Wu, Clemens Winter, Christopher Hesse, Mark Chen, Eric Sigler, Mateusz Litwin,
  Scott Gray, Benjamin Chess, Jack Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam McCandlish, Alec Radford,
  Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. Language models are few-shot learners, 2020.
Bernard CK Choi and Anita WP Pak. Peer reviewed: a catalog of biases in questionnaires. Prevent-
  ing chronic disease, 2(1), 2005.
Eric Chu, Jacob Andreas, Stephen Ansolabehere, and Deb Roy. Language Models Trained on Media
  Diets Can Predict Public Opinion, March 2023. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2303.16779.
  arXiv:2303.16779 [cs].
Hyung Won Chung, Le Hou, Shayne Longpre, Barret Zoph, Yi Tay, William Fedus, Yunxuan Li,
  Xuezhi Wang, Mostafa Dehghani, Siddhartha Brahma, et al. Scaling instruction-finetuned lan-
  guage models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.11416, 2022.
Eli P Cox III. The optimal number of response alternatives for a scale: A review. Journal of
  marketing research, 17(4):407–422, 1980.
Ishita Dasgupta, Andrew K. Lampinen, Stephanie C. Y. Chan, Antonia Creswell, Dharshan Ku-
   maran, James L. McClelland, and Felix Hill. Language models show human-like content effects
   on reasoning, 2022.
Esin Durmus, Karina Nyugen, Thomas I. Liao, Nicholas Schiefer, Amanda Askell, Anton Bakhtin,
  Carol Chen, Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Danny Hernandez, Nicholas Joseph, Liane Lovitt, Sam McCan-
  dlish, Orowa Sikder, Alex Tamkin, Janel Thamkul, Jared Kaplan, Jack Clark, and Deep Ganguli.
  Towards measuring the representation of subjective global opinions in language models, 2023.
Tianyu Gao, Adam Fisch, and Danqi Chen. Making pre-trained language models better few-shot
  learners. In Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-
  guistics and the 11th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (Volume 1:
  Long Papers), pp. 3816–3830, 2021.
Fabrizio Gilardi, Meysam Alizadeh, and Maël Kubli. Chatgpt outperforms crowd-workers for text-
  annotation tasks, 2023.
Randall A Gordon. Social desirability bias: A demonstration and technique for its reduction. Teach-
  ing of Psychology, 14(1):40–42, 1987.
John R Hauser and Steven M Shugan. Intensity measures of consumer preference. Operations
  Research, 28(2):278–320, 1980.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Hans-J Hippler and Norbert Schwarz. Response effects in surveys. In Social information processing
  and survey methodology, pp. 102–122. Springer, 1987.
John J Horton. Large language models as simulated economic agents: What can we learn from
  homo silicus? arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.07543, 2023.
Perttu Hämäläinen, Mikke Tavast, and Anton Kunnari. Evaluating Large Language Models in
  Generating Synthetic HCI Research Data: a Case Study. In Proceedings of the 2023 CHI
  Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, CHI ’23, pp. 1–19, New York, NY,
  USA, April 2023. Association for Computing Machinery. ISBN 978-1-4503-9421-5. doi:
  10.1145/3544548.3580688. URL https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/3544548.3580688.
Zhengbao Jiang, Frank F Xu, Jun Araki, and Graham Neubig. How can we know what language
  models know? Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 8:423–438, 2020.
Graham Kalton and Howard Schuman. The effect of the question on survey responses: A review.
  Journal of the Royal Statistical Society Series A: Statistics in Society, 145(1):42–57, 1982.
Junsol Kim and Byungkyu Lee. Ai-augmented surveys: Leveraging large language models for
  opinion prediction in nationally representative surveys, 2023.
Takeshi Kojima, Shixiang Shane Gu, Machel Reid, Yutaka Matsuo, and Yusuke Iwasawa. Large
  language models are zero-shot reasoners, 2023.
Petra Lietz. Research into questionnaire design: A summary of the literature. International journal
  of market research, 52(2):249–272, 2010.
Yao Lu, Max Bartolo, Alastair Moore, Sebastian Riedel, and Pontus Stenetorp. Fantastically ordered
  prompts and where to find them: Overcoming few-shot prompt order sensitivity. In Proceedings
  of the 60th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long
  Papers), pp. 8086–8098, Dublin, Ireland, May 2022. Association for Computational Linguistics.
  doi: 10.18653/v1/2022.acl-long.556. URL https://aclanthology.org/2022.acl-long.
  556.
Natalie Maus, Patrick Chao, Eric Wong, and Jacob R Gardner. Black box adversarial prompting for
  foundation models. In The Second Workshop on New Frontiers in Adversarial Machine Learning,
  2023.
McKee J McClendon. Acquiescence and recency response-order effects in interview surveys. Soci-
 ological Methods & Research, 20(1):60–103, 1991.
Sam G McFarland. Effects of question order on survey responses. Public Opinion Quarterly, 45(2):
  208–215, 1981.
James Michaelov and Benjamin Bergen. Collateral facilitation in humans and language models. In
  Proceedings of the 26th Conference on Computational Natural Language Learning (CoNLL), pp.
  13–26, 2022.
Vicki G Morwitz and Carol Pluzinski. Do polls reflect opinions or do opinions reflect polls? the im-
  pact of political polling on voters’ expectations, preferences, and behavior. Journal of Consumer
  Research, 23(1):53–67, 1996.
Subhabrata Mukherjee, Arindam Mitra, Ganesh Jawahar, Sahaj Agarwal, Hamid Palangi, and
  Ahmed Awadallah. Orca: Progressive learning from complex explanation traces of gpt-4. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2306.02707, 2023.
Maxwell Nye, Anders Johan Andreassen, Guy Gur-Ari, Henryk Michalewski, Jacob Austin,
 David Bieber, David Dohan, Aitor Lewkowycz, Maarten Bosma, David Luan, et al. Show
 your work: Scratchpads for intermediate computation with language models. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2112.00114, 2021.
Alissa O’Halloran, S Sean Hu, Ann Malarcher, Robert McMillen, Nell Valentine, Mary A Moore,
  Jennifer J Reid, Natalie Darling, and Robert B Gerzoff. Response order effects in the youth
  tobacco survey: Results of a split-ballot experiment. Survey practice, 7(3), 2014.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Colm A O’Muircheartaigh, Jon A Krosnick, Armin Helic, et al. Middle alternatives, acquiescence,
  and the quality of questionnaire data. Irving B. Harris Graduate School of Public Policy Studies,
  University of . . . , 2001.
Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong
  Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, et al. Training language models to follow
  instructions with human feedback. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:
  27730–27744, 2022.
Joon Sung Park, Lindsay Popowski, Carrie Cai, Meredith Ringel Morris, Percy Liang, and Michael S
  Bernstein. Social simulacra: Creating populated prototypes for social computing systems. In
  Proceedings of the 35th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology, pp.
  1–18, 2022.
Joon Sung Park, Joseph C O’Brien, Carrie J Cai, Meredith Ringel Morris, Percy Liang, and
  Michael S Bernstein. Generative agents: Interactive simulacra of human behavior. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2304.03442, 2023a.
Peter S Park, Philipp Schoenegger, and Chongyang Zhu. Artificial intelligence in psychology re-
  search. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.07267, 2023b.
Fábio Perez and Ian Ribeiro. Ignore previous prompt: Attack techniques for language models. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2211.09527, 2022.
Pouya Pezeshkpour and Estevam Hruschka. Large language models sensitivity to the order of op-
  tions in multiple-choice questions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.11483, 2023.
Philip M Podsakoff, Scott B MacKenzie, Jeong-Yeon Lee, and Nathan P Podsakoff. Common
  method biases in behavioral research: a critical review of the literature and recommended reme-
  dies. Journal of applied psychology, 88(5):879, 2003.
Graham Rawlinson. The significance of letter position in word recognition. IEEE Aerospace and
  Electronic Systems Magazine, 22(1):26–27, 2007.
Victor Sanh, Albert Webson, Colin Raffel, Stephen H. Bach, Lintang Sutawika, Zaid Alyafeai,
  Antoine Chaffin, Arnaud Stiegler, Teven Le Scao, Arun Raja, Manan Dey, M Saiful Bari, Canwen
  Xu, Urmish Thakker, Shanya Sharma Sharma, Eliza Szczechla, Taewoon Kim, Gunjan Chhablani,
  Nihal Nayak, Debajyoti Datta, Jonathan Chang, Mike Tian-Jian Jiang, Han Wang, Matteo Manica,
  Sheng Shen, Zheng Xin Yong, Harshit Pandey, Rachel Bawden, Thomas Wang, Trishala Neeraj,
  Jos Rozen, Abheesht Sharma, Andrea Santilli, Thibault Fevry, Jason Alan Fries, Ryan Teehan,
  Tali Bers, Stella Biderman, Leo Gao, Thomas Wolf, and Alexander M. Rush. Multitask prompted
  training enables zero-shot task generalization, 2022.
Shibani Santurkar, Esin Durmus, Faisal Ladhak, Cinoo Lee, Percy Liang, and Tatsunori Hashimoto.
  Whose opinions do language models reflect? arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.17548, 2023.
Howard Schuman and Stanley Presser. Questions and answers in attitude surveys: Experiments on
  question form, wording, and context. Sage, 1996.
Arabella Sinclair, Jaap Jumelet, Willem Zuidema, and Raquel Fernández. Structural persistence in
  language models: Priming as a window into abstract language representations. Transactions of
  the Association for Computational Linguistics, 10:1031–1050, 2022.
Rohan Taori, Ishaan Gulrajani, Tianyi Zhang, Yann Dubois, Xuechen Li, Carlos Guestrin, Percy
  Liang, and Tatsunori B. Hashimoto. Stanford alpaca: An instruction-following llama model.
  https://github.com/tatsu-lab/stanford_alpaca, 2023.
Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Albert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei, Niko-
  lay Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti Bhosale, Dan Bikel, Lukas Blecher,
  Cristian Canton Ferrer, Moya Chen, Guillem Cucurull, David Esiobu, Jude Fernandes, Jeremy
  Fu, Wenyin Fu, Brian Fuller, Cynthia Gao, Vedanuj Goswami, Naman Goyal, Anthony Hartshorn,
  Saghar Hosseini, Rui Hou, Hakan Inan, Marcin Kardas, Viktor Kerkez, Madian Khabsa, Isabel
  Kloumann, Artem Korenev, Punit Singh Koura, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Thibaut Lavril, Jenya Lee,


                                                12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  Diana Liskovich, Yinghai Lu, Yuning Mao, Xavier Martinet, Todor Mihaylov, Pushkar Mishra,
  Igor Molybog, Yixin Nie, Andrew Poulton, Jeremy Reizenstein, Rashi Rungta, Kalyan Saladi,
  Alan Schelten, Ruan Silva, Eric Michael Smith, Ranjan Subramanian, Xiaoqing Ellen Tan, Binh
  Tang, Ross Taylor, Adina Williams, Jian Xiang Kuan, Puxin Xu, Zheng Yan, Iliyan Zarov, Yuchen
  Zhang, Angela Fan, Melanie Kambadur, Sharan Narang, Aurelien Rodriguez, Robert Stojnic,
  Sergey Edunov, and Thomas Scialom. Llama 2: Open foundation and fine-tuned chat models,
  2023.
Petter Törnberg. ChatGPT-4 Outperforms Experts and Crowd Workers in Annotating Political
  Twitter Messages with Zero-Shot Learning, April 2023. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2304.
  06588. arXiv:2304.06588 [cs].
Eric Wallace, Shi Feng, Nikhil Kandpal, Matt Gardner, and Sameer Singh. Universal adver-
  sarial triggers for attacking and analyzing NLP. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on
  Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and the 9th International Joint Confer-
  ence on Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP), pp. 2153–2162, Hong Kong, China,
  November 2019. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/D19-1221. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/D19-1221.
Albert Webson and Ellie Pavlick. Do prompt-based models really understand the meaning of their
  prompts? In Proceedings of the 2022 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Asso-
  ciation for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, pp. 2300–2344, Seattle,
  United States, July 2022. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2022.
  naacl-main.167. URL https://aclanthology.org/2022.naacl-main.167.
Albert Webson, Alyssa Marie Loo, Qinan Yu, and Ellie Pavlick. Are language models worse than
  humans at following prompts? it’s complicated, 2023.
Jason Wei, Maarten Bosma, Vincent Zhao, Kelvin Guu, Adams Wei Yu, Brian Lester, Nan Du, An-
  drew M. Dai, and Quoc V Le. Finetuned language models are zero-shot learners. In International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2022. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
  gEZrGCozdqR.
Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Brian Ichter, Fei Xia, Ed Chi, Quoc
  Le, and Denny Zhou. Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models,
  2023.
Herbert Weisberg, Jon A Krosnick, and Bruce D Bowen. An introduction to survey research, polling,
  and data analysis. Sage, 1996.
Chujie Zheng, Hao Zhou, Fandong Meng, Jie Zhou, and Minlie Huang. On large language models’
  selection bias in multi-choice questions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.03882, 2023.
Andy Zou, Zifan Wang, J. Zico Kolter, and Matt Fredrikson. Universal and transferable adversarial
  attacks on aligned language models, 2023.


                                               13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 4: ∆b calculation for each bias type, where count(q’[d]) denotes the number of times an
LLM selected the response option ‘d’ for question q’.

                  Bias Type     ∆b
               Acquiescence     count(q’[a]) - count(q[a])
                Allow/forbid    count(q[a]) - count(q’[b])
              Response order    count(q’[d]) - count(q[a])
             Opinion floating   count(q[c]) - count(q’[c])
              Odd/even scale    count(q’[b]) + count(q’[d]) - count(q[b]) - count(q[d])



A     S TIMULI IMPLEMENTATION AND FULL RESULTS

We will release the entire dataset of response bias and non-bias perturbation question pairs from our
experiments.

A.1   S URVEY BACKGROUND AND DATASET DETAILS

Why surveys? Survey questionnaires are the primary method of choice for obtaining the subjective
opinions of large-scale populations (Weisberg et al., 1996) and typically take the form of a set of
multiple choice questions. Surveys are widely used by a diverse set of organizations for a number of
applications, including to understand consumer preferences (Hauser & Shugan, 1980), voter opin-
ions (Morwitz & Pluzinski, 1996), and patient satisfaction (Al-Abri & Al-Balushi, 2014). Extensive
study within the social psychology and survey methods literature has demonstrated that a challenge
with conducting surveys is dealing with the presence of response bias, which is the tendency of re-
spondents to answer inaccurately or falsely to questions (Podsakoff et al., 2003; Lietz, 2010). Given
the wide usage of surveys, we believe that our framework and corresponding analysis would be of
broad interest to multiple research communities.
Details of American Trends Panel. Disclaimer: Pew Research Center bears no responsibility for
the analyses or interpretations of the data presented here. The opinions expressed herein, including
any implications for policy, are those of the author and not of Pew Research Center.
The      link    to     the     full     dataset      is https://www.pewresearch.org/
american-trends-panel-datasets/. We use a subset of the ATP dataset that has been
formatted into CSV format from Santurkar et al. (2023).
Since our study is focused on subjective questions, we also filtered for opinion-based questions from
ATP, so questions asking about people’s daily habits (e.g. how often they smoke) or other “factual”
information (e.g. if they are married) are out-of-scope.

A.2   R ESPONSE BIAS IMPLEMENTATION

We walk through how each bias type was implemented and provide examples. We summarize how
to compute ∆b for each response bias in Table 4.
Acquiescence (McClendon, 1991; Choi & Pak, 2005). Since acquiescence bias manifests when
respondents are asked to agree or disagree, we filtered for questions in the ATP that only had two
options. This made it easy to construct q ′ that suggested one of the two options. To be consistent,
all q ′ are reworded to suggest the first of the original options, allowing us to compare the number of
‘a’ responses selected. See Table 6 for example questions.
Allow/forbid asymmetry (Hippler & Schwarz, 1987). Questions that ask whether some action
should be allowed or forbidden entail a binary outcome. We identified candidate questions for
this bias type using a keyword search of ATP questions that contain “allow” or close synonyms of
the verb (e.g., questions that ask if a behavior is “acceptable”). This response bias had the least
number of questions due to the more restrictive selection criteria. Additionally, note that this is
the only response bias where the relevant response option is different for q and q ′ (‘a’ versus ‘b’
respectively)—this is due to the nature of flipping the question. See Table 7 for example questions.


                                                  14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Response order (Ayidiya & McClendon, 1990). For this bias type, prior social science studies
typically considered questions with at least three or four response options (O’Halloran et al., 2014),
which was a criterion that we also used to filter for the set of original questions. To measure whether
LLMs display primacy bias, we constructed modified questions q ′ where we flipped the order of
the responses was flipped. We post-processed the data by mapping the flipped version of responses
back to the original order and compared the number of the first option (‘a’) for both the original
and modified questions. See Table 8 for example questions.
Odd/even scale effects (O’Muircheartaigh et al., 2001). As the name suggests, this bias type re-
quires questions with scale responses. Since the ATP does not contain many questions with greater
than five responses, we filter for scale questions with four or five responses. To construct the
modified questions, we manually added a middle option to questions with even-numbered scales
(when there was a logical middle addition) and removed the middle option for questions with odd-
numbered scales. In this case, we compare the number of ‘b’ and ‘d’ responses selected in both q
and q ′ . See Table 9 for example questions.
Opinion floating (Schuman & Presser, 1996). Since opinion floating is another scale-based re-
sponse bias, we used the same set of questions as with the odd/even scale effects bias but instead of
removing the middle option, we added an option of “don’t know.” We compare the number of ‘c’
responses selected in both q and q ′ . See Table 10 for example questions.
Note on our choice of evaluation metric: As noted in the main text, many prior social science
studies evaluating these biases on human participants also follow the format of having an original
and modified set of questions. Since there is not a specific direction or magnitude of change that
these studies were testing a priori, the way in which they evaluated their collected human responses
fundamentally differs from ours. These studies typically ran a Chi-square test to determine whether
the response distributions associated with q is statistically different than the distribution associated
with q ′ . Since we are comparing against these prior findings rather than posing our own hypothesis,
that is why our evaluation metrics differ.

A.3   N ON - BIAS PERTURBATION IMPLEMENTATION

We now describe how the three non-bias perturbations were implemented and provide examples.
Middle random (Rawlinson, 2007). For a given question, we perform sample an index (excluding
the first and last letters) and perform a swap of the character at that index with its neighboring
character. For this reason, this noise is only applied to words of length ≥ 4. We avoid any words
that contain numeric values (e.g., years) or punctuation to prevent completely non-sensical outputs.
See Table 12 for example questions.
Key typo (Rawlinson, 2007). For a given question, with a low probability (of 20%), we randomly
replace one letter in each word of the question with a random letter. We avoid any words that contain
numeric values (e.g., years) to prevent completely non-sensical outputs. See Table 13 for example
questions.
Letter swap (Rawlinson, 2007). For a given question, we randomize the order of all the letters in
a word, except for the first and last characters. Again, this perturbation is only applied to words
of length ≥ 4. We avoid any words that contain numeric values (e.g., years) to prevent completely
non-sensical outputs. See Table 14 for example questions.
We instantiate these non-bias perturbations for each original question q. Since the set of q for
odd/even and opinion float are the same, we create one set of Qperturb and report those results for
both.

A.4   F ULL RESULTS

We provide the full set of results for all stimuli across all nine models in Table 5. We also visualize
model responses across question topics in Figure 4. For some biases (e.g., allow/forbid and opinion
floating), and particularly for the base models, the behavior is consistent across topics. However,
there are many other instances where the model behavior varies (i.e., strongly aligned with human
behavior on some topics and strongly misaligned on other topics).


                                                  15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


We conducted additional experiments to understand the potential variance in results due to the ran-
domness in how we generate the non-bias perturbations. To do this, we generated 3 variations of the
non-bias perturbations across all questions. While we find individual nuances in model behavior for
Llama2-70b compared to GPT-3.5-turbo, as shown in Figure 5, we still observe that both LLMs are
sensitive to non-bias perturbations in a way that is unlike humans.
                                                             Acquiescence             Allow/Forbid            Response Order            Opinion Float             Odd Even
                          economy and inequality
                                          education                                                                                                                                  1.00
                                      immigration
                                    crime/security
                                                                                                                                                                                     0.75
               global attitudes and foreign policy
                       self-perception and values
                                 community health                                                                                                                                    0.50
                                   personal health
                                  personal finance
                                                                                                                                                                                     0.25
                                    political issues
                                         leadership
                                    discrimination                                                                                                                                   0.00
                                                 race
 corporations, banks, technology and automation
                                                                                                                                                                                      0.25
                                gender & sexuality
                                          job/career
                news, social media, data, privacy                                                                                                                                     0.50
                                      status in life
                                               future
                                                                                                                                                                                      0.75
                                             science
                                             religion
                          relationships and family                                                                                                                                    1.00
                                healthcare system
                                                                   Llama2-7b
                                                                  Llama2-13b
                                                                  Llama2-70b
                                                                         Solar
                                                              Llama2-7b-chat
                                                             Llama2-13b-chat
                                                             Llama2-70b-chat



                                                                                            Llama2-7b
                                                                                           Llama2-13b
                                                                                           Llama2-70b
                                                                                                  Solar
                                                                                       Llama2-7b-chat
                                                                                      Llama2-13b-chat
                                                                                      Llama2-70b-chat



                                                                                                                     Llama2-7b
                                                                                                                    Llama2-13b
                                                                                                                    Llama2-70b
                                                                                                                           Solar
                                                                                                                Llama2-7b-chat
                                                                                                               Llama2-13b-chat
                                                                                                               Llama2-70b-chat



                                                                                                                                              Llama2-7b
                                                                                                                                             Llama2-13b
                                                                                                                                             Llama2-70b
                                                                                                                                                    Solar
                                                                                                                                         Llama2-7b-chat
                                                                                                                                        Llama2-13b-chat
                                                                                                                                        Llama2-70b-chat



                                                                                                                                                                       Llama2-7b
                                                                                                                                                                      Llama2-13b
                                                                                                                                                                      Llama2-70b
                                                                                                                                                                             Solar
                                                                                                                                                                  Llama2-7b-chat
                                                                                                                                                                 Llama2-13b-chat
                                                                                                                                                                 Llama2-70b-chat
                                                                GPT 3.5 Turbo


                                                                                         GPT 3.5 Turbo


                                                                                                                  GPT 3.5 Turbo


                                                                                                                                           GPT 3.5 Turbo


                                                                                                                                                                    GPT 3.5 Turbo
                                                        GPT 3.5 Turbo Instruct


                                                                                 GPT 3.5 Turbo Instruct


                                                                                                          GPT 3.5 Turbo Instruct


                                                                                                                                   GPT 3.5 Turbo Instruct


                                                                                                                                                            GPT 3.5 Turbo Instruct
Figure 4: The American Trends Panel contains questions that span a number of topics. We visualize
¯ b across topics for each model and bias type. Due to the different number of questions per response
∆
bias, not all topics are represented in all bias types (missing topics are denoted by an absence of
color).


                                                                                                     16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


         ¯ b for each bias type and associated p-value from t-test as well as ∆
Table 5: ∆                                                                    ¯ p for the three pertur-
bations and associated p-value from t-test.

                                                     ¯ p key
                                                     ∆                   ¯ p middle
                                                                         ∆                      ¯ p letter
                                                                                                ∆
 model        bias type             ¯b
                                    ∆     p value              p value                p value                p value
                                                      typo                random                 swap
              Acquiescence      1.9205    0.0212     -3.9200   0.0070      -4.4800    0.0004     -4.8400     0.0037
              Allow/forbid     24.9151    0.0000      1.6800   0.3817      -0.3200    0.8705      2.3200     0.1509
 Llama2-7b    Response Order    1.0952    0.2062      0.7200   0.6254       1.3600    0.3546      1.6800     0.2206
              Opinion Float     4.2698    0.0000      0.7200   0.6254       1.3600    0.3546      1.6800     0.2206
              Odd/even         59.5000    0.0000      7.5833   0.0004       6.8750    0.0010      9.6667     0.0000
              Acquiescence     -11.8523   0.0000    -6.8000    0.0011      -5.7600    0.0004    -9.3200      0.0000
              Allow/forbid      45.7565   0.0000    11.6000    0.0000      11.6400    0.0000    11.7200      0.0000
 Llama2-13b   Response Order    -3.4921   0.0000     5.8400    0.0000       3.6000    0.0306     4.0000      0.0067
              Opinion Float      4.1270   0.0000     5.8400    0.0000       3.6000    0.0306     4.0000      0.0067
              Odd/even          54.3750   0.0000    11.0417    0.0000       6.0000    0.0001    10.5833      0.0000
              Acquiescence      7.2955    0.0000     -2.4400   0.2177      -3.0800    0.1734     -3.3200     0.1464
              Allow/forbid      5.1218    0.0000     -1.0800   0.5970       3.2400    0.1129      2.0000     0.3058
 Llama2-70b   Response Order   12.1905    0.0000      0.9200   0.5399       0.6000    0.6870     -0.8000     0.6177
              Opinion Float     2.4444    0.0004      0.9200   0.5399       0.6000    0.6870     -0.8000     0.6177
              Odd/even         41.9167    0.0000      6.5833   0.0006      -1.9583    0.3318     -0.6250     0.7747
              Acquiescence      1.1364    0.6474    -7.8068    0.0000     -12.0341    0.0000    -5.5455      0.0002
              Response Order   -9.8007    0.0001     7.1734    0.0000      12.6790    0.0000     1.5941      0.2525
 Llama2-7b
              Odd/even         20.0794    0.0000     8.4603    0.0000      15.8095    0.0000     9.1746      0.0000
    -chat
              Opinion Float    -1.2540    0.2825     8.4603    0.0000      15.8095    0.0000     9.1746      0.0000
              Allow/forbid      5.8750    0.3793    16.9583    0.0000      24.2500    0.0000    10.4167      0.0128
              Acquiescence      1.9091    0.4388    -9.2386    0.0000     -11.5341    0.0000     -5.2841     0.0004
              Response Order   -9.2915    0.0001     7.6531    0.0000      10.7528    0.0000      0.4723     0.7187
 Llama2-13b
              Odd/even         21.2540    0.0000    10.1587    0.0000      14.4603    0.0000      9.4921     0.0000
    -chat
              Opinion Float    -0.1905    0.8704    10.1587    0.0000      14.4603    0.0000      9.4921     0.0000
              Allow/forbid      6.1250    0.3459    14.5000    0.0000      24.5833    0.0000      9.7917     0.0243
              Acquiescence     11.1136    0.0000     2.3200    0.5226      -5.2800    0.3119      4.0400     0.1655
              Allow/forbid     -0.4945    0.7449     0.2000    0.9040      15.0400    0.0018      1.2000     0.4594
 Llama2-70b
              Response Order   26.4762    0.0000     3.2800    0.2103      -2.0400    0.6559     -7.2400     0.0182
    -chat
              Opinion Float     1.5556    0.0389     3.2800    0.2103      -2.0400    0.6559     -7.2400     0.0182
              Odd/even          1.5000    0.8037     6.3750    0.0346      16.8750    0.0048     -0.1667     0.9598
              Acquiescence     18.5114    0.0000     -0.1200   0.9695       2.5600    0.5956     0.6000      0.8331
              Allow/forbid     -9.6827    0.0000      2.2800   0.3360       8.6800    0.0117     4.3600      0.0169
 Solar        Response Order   17.5079    0.0000      0.4800   0.8154      -2.9600    0.2230    -1.0000      0.6606
              Opinion Float     1.9206    0.0169      0.4800   0.8154      -2.9600    0.2230    -1.0000      0.6606
              Odd/even         -4.9167    0.3026      5.6667   0.0115       9.7500    0.0580    10.1250      0.0000
              Acquiescence       5.5227   0.0404    -11.7200   0.0076     -28.6800    0.0000    -19.1200     0.0000
              Allow/forbid      -2.7085   0.1474      4.9600   0.1212      15.9600    0.0016      8.0000     0.0105
 GPT3.5
              Response Order    25.0476   0.0000     -5.4800   0.0823     -14.8000    0.0013     -5.8000     0.0616
  Turbo
              Opinion Float    -11.9048   0.0000     -5.4800   0.0823     -14.8000    0.0013     -5.8000     0.0616
              Odd/even         -19.7083   0.0038     13.2500   0.0002      26.0417    0.0001      6.4167     0.0171
              Acquiescence       6.4545   0.0244     2.6000    0.4452     -11.8000    0.0083     -2.8000     0.3256
 GPT3.5       Allow/forbid     -11.1144   0.0000     3.8800    0.1687      11.9200    0.0012      3.8000     0.1468
  Turbo       Response Order     2.0317   0.3896     1.5600    0.4332      -7.1200    0.0608     -0.8400     0.7109
 Instruct     Opinion Float      0.1429   0.8905     1.5600    0.4332      -7.1200    0.0608     -0.8400     0.7109
              Odd/even          -8.0417   0.0986     7.7083    0.0036      15.4167    0.0145     -0.9167     0.7916


                                                      17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                    Llama-70b-chat (1)                              Llama-70b-chat (2)                              Llama-70b-chat (3)
                 Acquiescence
                   Allow/forbid
                Response Order
                  Opinion Float
                     Odd/even

                                     GPT 3.5 Turbo (1)                               GPT 3.5 Turbo (2)                               GPT 3.5 Turbo (3)
                 Acquiescence
                   Allow/forbid
                Response Order
                  Opinion Float
                     Odd/even
                                  bias

                                         key typo


                                                                                  bias

                                                                                         key typo


                                                                                                                                  bias

                                                                                                                                         key typo
                                                    middle random

                                                                    letter swap


                                                                                                    middle random

                                                                                                                    letter swap


                                                                                                                                                    middle random

                                                                                                                                                                    letter swap
Figure 5: We evaluate 3 randomizations of the non-bias perturbations for Llama2-70b and GPT-
3.5-turbo. We find that these models consistently exhibited statistically significant changes across
all biases and perturbation variants over all runs. We did, however, observe nuances in individual
model behavior that could be interesting to study as part of future work: Llama2-70b-chat is more
sensitive to non-bias perturbations, exhibiting significant changes but in different directions across
runs for opinion float and odd/even while GPT-3.5-turbo was largely consistent across all biases and
runs.


                                                                                    18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 6: Histogram of the response ratio of valid responses (out of 50). GPT-3.5-turbo has no
questions with less than 19/50 valid responses, whereas 238/747 questions have less than 5/10 valid
responses.


B     LLM DETAILS

B.1   M ODEL ACCESS

Here we provide links to model weights (where applicable) and any additional details.
Base Llama2-{7b, 13b, 70b} and Llama2-{7b, 13b, 70b}-chat.                Accessed from https://
huggingface.co/meta-llama.
Solar (Instruction fine-tuned Llama2-70b).             Accessed from https://huggingface.co/
upstage/SOLAR-0-70b-16bit.
GPT-3.5-turbo. Specific model version is gpt-3.5-turbo-0613. Accessed through the OpenAI
API.
GPT-3.5-turbo-instruct. Accessed through the OpenAI API.

B.2   I NITIAL E XPLORATIONS WITH GPT-4

In addition to the models above, we also attempted to use GPT-4-0613 in our experimental setup, but
found it was difficult to generate valid responses for many questions, most likely due to OpenAI’s
generation guardrails. As an initial experiment, we tried generating 50 responses per question for all
(q, q ′ ) in Qbias (747 questions x 2 conditions) and counting the number of valid responses that GPT-4
generated out of the 50. On average, GPT-4 generated ∼21 valid responses per question, with nearly
a quarter of the questions having 0 valid responses. This is in stark contrast to GPT-3.5, which had
an average of ∼48 valid responses per question with none of questions having 0 valid responses.
Histograms for the ratio of valid responses are shown in Figure 6. Based on these observations,
evaluating GPT-4 is infeasible in our current setting.

C     P ROMPT TEMPLATES

To hone in on model baseline behavior, we opt for minimal additions to the questions and answer
options in the prompts. More specifically, our prompts take the following template (adjusted for the
number of options of the question):
       Please answer the following question with one of the alphabetical options provided.
       Question: [question]
       A. [option]
       B. [option]
       ...


                                                  19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                    E. [option]
                    Answer:
This prompt is used for all models. For our main experiments, we have the models generate only
one token.
An example of the prompt filled in with an example question (“Are large corporations having a pos-
itive or negative effect on the way things are going in the country these days?”) and corresponding
response options (“Positive effect”, “Negative effect”) is as follows:
                    Please answer the following question with one of the alphabetical options provided.
                    Question: Are large corporations having a positive or negative effect on
                    the way things are going in the country these days?
                    A. Positive effect
                    B. Negative effect
                    Answer:
Extended generation. As discussed in Section 3.1, prior work has shown that allowing the model
to generate more tokens and explain its “reasoning” has been shown to improve performance on
a variety of tasks (Nye et al., 2021; Wei et al., 2023; Kojima et al., 2023). Thus, for a smaller
set of models (Llama2-7b, Llama2-13b, GPT-3.5-turbo, and GPT-3.5-turbo-instruct), we also try
prompting with the following template, allowing the model to generate up to 50 tokens:
                    Please answer the question below in the following format:
                    Answer: <letter option>
                    Reason: <reasoning>
                    —–
                    Question: [question]
                    A. [option]
                    B. [option]
                    ...
                    E. [option]
                    Answer:
Overall we find that allowing models to generate their answer along with a reason decreases the
number of statistically significant changes we observe, which can be seen in Figure 7. Out of all
experiments (shown in Table 11) that had a statistically significant ∆¯ b with and without extended
generation, only two of those (acquiescence for GPT-3.5-turbo-instruct and odd/even for Llama2-
13b) display a change in direction, showing that adding this to our experimental setup has a minimal
effect on our overall conclusions.

                    40
                    30                                                             0.8
                    20
                                                                                   0.6
                                                                 Ext gen p value
    Ext gen Delta


                    10
                     0                                                             0.4
                    10
                    20                                                             0.2

                    30
                                                                                   0.0
                          20      0           20       40   60                           0.0   0.2      0.4           0.6   0.8
                                      Original Delta                                                 Original p value

Figure 7: Comparison of ∆ ¯ b (left) and p-values (right) in the original condition, where only one
token is generated corresponding to the response option, versus the extended generation condition,
where the LLM first explains its answer and then selects a response option.


                                                                 20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D     LLM BIAS STEERING ANALYSIS
                                                              ¯ b for certain biases, we also explore
Given that certain models exhibit strong significant negative ∆
whether there are ways to push models to exhibit human-like biases. We try this for for allow/forbid
and response order with the two GPT models, as these two biases with GPT-3.5-turbo and GPT-3.5-
turbo-instruct showed some of the strongest negative results. For both allow/forbid and response
order, we handcraft two steering prompts designed to give additional context for the model. Results
                                                                            ¯ b we obtained was with
with these prompts are presented in Table 15. The only significant positive ∆
using the allow/forbid Template 1 and response order Template 1 for GPT-3.5-turbo-instruct.

D.1   A LLOW / FORBID .

The two steering prompt templates we test for allow/forbid are as follows:
Template 1 (generate max 1 token):
       Recall that to "forbid" means the same thing "not allow" or "not consider something as ac-
       ceptable". With this in mind, please answer the following question with one of the alphabet-
       ical options provided.
       Question: [question]
       A. [option]
       B. [option]
       ...
       E. [option]
       Answer:
Template 2 (generate max 1 token):
       Humans have a tendency to say "yes" to "not allowing/accepting" something but "no" to
       "forbidding" something, despite the two entailing the same thing. With this in mind, please
       answer the following question with one of the alphabetical options provided.
       Question: [question]
       A. [option]
       B. [option]
       ...
       E. [option]
       Answer:

D.2   R ESPONSE ORDER .

Template 1 (generate max 100 tokens):
       Please answer the following question using the steps below:
       1. Re-list the responses in reversed order
       2. Your answer to the question, which should be a single letter.
       After generating the answer, do not generate any more text.

       Example:
       Question: Do you prefer apples, oranges, or bananas?
       A. Apples
       B. Oranges
       C. Bananas

       Options:
       C. Bananas
       B. Oranges
       A. Apples

       Answer: <letter answer>
       —-
       Question: [question]


                                                 21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


       A. [option]
       B. [option]
       ...
       E. [option]

Template 2 (generate max 1 token):
       Response order bias is the tendency for humans to choose options that appear earlier in a
       written list. With this in mind, please answer the following question with one of the alpha-
       betical options provided.
       Question: [question]
       A. [option]
       B. [option]
       ...
       E. [option]
       Answer:

E    R EPRESENTATIVE ANALYSIS
We overview our analysis approach to measure whether the nine models we evaluated are also rep-
resentative of human opinions. For each LLM,

      • First, we aggregated the LLM’s responses on each question (using the unmodified version
        q) to construct Dmodel for all questions.
      • Next, from the ATP dataset, we constructed Dhuman for all relevant questions that were
        used across all biases. To do this, we directly use the repository provided by Santurkar
        et al. (2023):https://github.com/tatsu-lab/opinions_qa
      • Finally, to compute a measure of representativeness between Dmodel and Dhuman for each
        question, we again use the repository provided by Santurkar et al. (2023). We report the
        average representativeness score across all questions for each model.

As a sanity check, the range of values that we find across the nine models in Table 3 is in line with
the range of values reported in Santurkar et al. (2023).


                                                 22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                        Table 6: Sampled questions for acquiescence bias.

  Original                                           Modified
  Thinking about the US as a whole, do you           Wouldn’t you agree that the United States is
  think this country is now                          more united now than it was before the coro-
  A. More united than before the coronavirus         navirus outbreak?
  outbreak                                           A. Yes
  B. More divided than before the coronavirus        B. No
  outbreak
  Which statement comes closer to your view,         Isn’t it beneficial for the US to try to promote
  even if neither is exactly right? The US           human rights in China, even if it harms eco-
  should                                             nomic relations with China?
  A. Try to promote human rights in China,           A. Yes
  even if it harms economic relations with           B. No
  China
  B. Prioritize strengthening economic rela-
  tions with China, even if it means not ad-
  dressing human rights issues
  Thinking about the development of human            Thinking about the development of human
  life on Earth which statement comes closer         life on Earth, wouldn’t you agree that humans
  to your own views, even if neither is exactly      have evolved over time?
  right?                                             A. Yes
  A. Humans have evolved over time                   B. No
  B. Humans have existed in their present form
  since the beginning of time
  Do you feel that society in general tends to       Don’t you feel that society in general tends to
  look at most gun owners in a positive way or       look at most gun owners in a positive way?
  a negative way?                                    A. Yes
  A. Positive way                                    B. No
  B. Negative way
  When you hear or read news stories about           When you hear or read news stories about re-
  professional misconduct by environmental           search misconduct by environmental health
  health specialists, do you think of these cases    specialists, wouldn’t you think of these cases
  as                                                 as isolated incidents rather than signs of a
  A. Isolated incidents                              broader problem?
  B. Signs of a broader problem                      A. Yes
                                                     B. No
  Overall, do you think having people of many        Don’t you believe that having people of var-
  different backgrounds, such as different eth-      ious backgrounds, including different ethnic-
  nic groups, religions and races, makes the US      ities, religions, and races, makes US a better
  A. A better place to live                          place to live?
  B. A worse place to live                           A. Yes
                                                     B. No
  Which comes closer to your view about the          Don’t you think that the freedom to publish
  following type of news and information?            and access should be protected for the fol-
  Breaking information that is published before      lowing type of news and information? Break-
  everything is verified                             ing information that is published before ev-
  A. The freedom to publish and access it            erything is verified
  should be protected                                A. Yes
  B. Steps should be taken to restrict it            B. No
  On balance, which would you say most accu-         On balance, wouldn’t you agree that the ben-
  rately describes how you feel?                     efits I get from companies collecting data
  A. The benefits I get from companies collect-      about me outweigh the potential risks?
  ing data about me outweigh the potential risks     A. Yes
  B. The potential risks of companies collecting     B. No
  data about me outweigh the benefits I get



                                                    23
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                      Table 7: Sampled questions for allow/forbid asymmetry.

  Original Question                                   Modified Question
  Is voting is a privilege that comes with re-        Is voting is a fundamental right for every
  sponsibilities and can be limited if adult U.S.     adult U.S. citizen and should not be forbid-
  citizens don’t meet some requirements?              den in any way?
  A. Yes                                              A. Yes
  B. No                                               B. No
  Thinking about news and information online,         Thinking about news and information on-
  including social media, should the technol-         line, including social media, should the tech-
  ogy companies take steps to restrict false in-      nology companies be forbidden from taking
  formation online?                                   steps to restrict false information online?
  A. Yes                                              A. Yes
  B. No                                               B. No
  Is it acceptable to use facial recognition tech-    Should the use of facial recognition technol-
  nology in the following situations? Advertis-       ogy be forbidden in the following situations:
  ers seeing how people respond to public ad-         Companies automatically tracking the atten-
  vertising displays                                  dance of their employees?
  A. Yes                                              A. Yes
  B. No                                               B. No
  Do you think it’s good for US colleges and          Should US colleges and universities be for-
  universities to accept international students?      bidden from accepting international students?
  A. Yes                                              A. Yes
  B. No                                               B. No
  Is it acceptable or unacceptable for scientists     Should scientists be forbidden from taking an
  to take an active role in public policy debates     active role in public policy debates about sci-
  about scientific issues?                            entific issues?
  A. Yes                                              A. Yes
  B. No                                               B. No
  Should health insurance be provided through         Should health insurance be forbidden from
  a single national health insurance system run       being provided through a single national sys-
  by the government?                                  tem and continue to be provided through a
  A. Yes                                              mix of private insurance companies and gov-
  B. No                                               ernment programs?
                                                      A. Yes
                                                      B. No
  Do you think changing a baby’s genetic char-        Do you think changing a baby’s genetic char-
  acteristics to make the baby more intelligent       acteristics to make the baby more intelligent
  is an appropriate use of medical technology ?       should be a forbidden use of medical technol-
  A. Yes                                              ogy ?
  B. No                                               A. Yes
                                                      B. No


                                                     24
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                        Table 8: Sampled questions for response order bias.

  Original Question                                   Modified Question
  How much, if anything, do you know about            How much, if anything, do you know about
  what environmental health specialists do?           what environmental health specialists do?
  A. A lot                                            A. Nothing at all
  B. A little                                         B. A little
  C. Nothing at all                                   C. A lot
  How much of a problem, if any, would                How much of a problem, if any, would
  you say people being too easily offended by         you say people being too easily offended by
  things others say is in the country today?          things others say is in the country today?
  A. Major problem                                    A. Not a problem
  B. Minor problem                                    B. Minor problem
  C. Not a problem                                    C. Major problem
  Please indicate whether you think the follow-       Please indicate whether you think the follow-
  ing is is a reason why there are fewer women        ing is is a reason why there are fewer women
  than men in high political offices. Women           than men in high political offices. Women
  who run for office are held to higher standards     who run for office are held to higher standards
  than men                                            than men
  A. Major reason                                     A. Not a reason
  B. Minor reason                                     B. Minor reason
  C. Not a reason                                     C. Major reason
  In general, how important, if at all, is having     In general, how important, if at all, is having
  children in order for a woman to live a fulfill-    children in order for a woman to live a fulfill-
  ing life?                                           ing life?
  A. Essential                                        A. Not important
  B. Important, but not essential                     B. Important, but not essential
  C. Not important                                    C. Essential
  Do you think each is a major reason, minor          Do you think each is a major reason, minor
  reason, or not a reason why black people in         reason, or not a reason why black people in
  our country may have a harder time getting          our country may have a harder time getting
  ahead than white people? Less access to good        ahead than white people? Less access to good
  quality schools                                     quality schools
  A. Major reason                                     A. Not a reason
  B. Minor reason                                     B. Minor reason
  C. Not a reason                                     C. Major reason


                                                     25
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                       Table 9: Sampled questions for odd/even scale effects.

  Original Question                                   Modified Question
  Thinking again about race and race relations        Thinking again about race and race relations
  in the U.S. in general, how well, if at all, do     in the U.S. in general, how well, if at all, do
  you think each of these groups get along with       you think each of these groups get along with
  each other in our society these days? Whites        each other in our society these days? Whites
  and Asians                                          and Asians
  A. Very well                                        A. Very well
  B. Pretty well                                      B. Pretty well
  C. Not too well                                     C. Somewhat well
  D. Not at all well                                  D. Not too well
                                                      E. Not at all well
  Would you favor or oppose the following?            Would you favor or oppose the following?
  If the federal government created a national        If the federal government created a national
  service program that paid people to perform         service program that paid people to perform
  tasks even if a robot or computer could do          tasks even if a robot or computer could do
  those tasks faster or cheaper                       those tasks faster or cheaper
  A. Strongly favor                                   A. Strongly favor
  B. Favor                                            B. Favor
  C. Oppose                                           C. Neither favor nor oppose
  D. Strongly oppose                                  D. Oppose
                                                      E. Strongly oppose
  Please compare the US to other developed            Please compare the US to other developed
  nations in a few different areas. In each in-       nations in a few different areas. In each in-
  stance, how does the US compare? Health-            stance, how does the US compare? Health-
  care system                                         care system
  A. The best                                         A. The best
  B. Above average                                    B. Above average
  C. Below average                                    C. Average
  D. The worst                                        D. Below average
                                                      E. The worst
  Please tell us whether you are satisfied or dis-    Please tell us whether you are satisfied or dis-
  satisfied with your family life.                    satisfied with your family life.
  A. Very satisfied                                   A. Very satisfied
  B. Somewhat satisfied                               B. Somewhat satisfied
  C. Somewhat dissatisfied                            C. Neither satisfied nor dissatisfied
  D. Very dissatisfied                                D. Somewhat dissatisfied
                                                      E. Very dissatisfied
  Thinking about the size of America’s mili-          Thinking about the size of America’s mili-
  tary, do you think it should be                     tary, do you think it should be
  A. Reduced a great deal                             A. Reduced a great deal
  B. Reduced somewhat                                 B. Reduced somewhat
  C. Increased somewhat                               C. Kept about as is
  D. Increased a great deal                           D. Increased somewhat
                                                      E. Increased a great deal


                                                     26
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                       Table 10: Sampled questions for opinion float bias.

  Original Question                                 Modified Question
  As far as you know, how many of your neigh-       As far as you know, how many of your neigh-
  bors have the same political views as you         bors have the same political views as you
  A. All of them                                    A. All of them
  B. Most of them                                   B. Most of them
  C. About half                                     C. About half
  D. Only some of them                              D. Only some of them
  E. None of them                                   E. None of them
                                                    F. Don’t know
  How do you feel about allowing unmarried          How do you feel about allowing unmarried
  couples to enter into legal agreements that       couples to enter into legal agreements that
  would give them the same rights as married        would give them the same rights as married
  couples when it comes to things like health       couples when it comes to things like health
  insurance, inheritance or tax benefits?           insurance, inheritance or tax benefits?
  A. Strongly favor                                 A. Strongly favor
  B. Somewhat favor                                 B. Somewhat favor
  C. Neither favor nor oppose                       C. Neither favor nor oppose
  D. Somewhat oppose                                D. Somewhat oppose
  E. Strongly oppose                                E. Strongly oppose
                                                    F. Don’t know
  How much do you agree or disagree with            How much do you agree or disagree with
  the following statements about your neigh-        the following statements about your neigh-
  borhood? This is a close-knit neighborhood        borhood? This is a close-knit neighborhood
  A. Definitely agree                               A. Definitely agree
  B. Somewhat agree                                 B. Somewhat agree
  C. Neither agree nor disagree                     C. Neither agree nor disagree
  D. Somewhat disagree                              D. Somewhat disagree
  E. Definitely disagree                            E. Definitely disagree
                                                    F. Don’t know
  The U.S. population is made up of people of       The U.S. population is made up of people of
  many different races and ethnicities. Overall,    many different races and ethnicities. Overall,
  do you think this is                              do you think this is
  A. Very good for the country                      A. Very good for the country
  B. Somewhat good for the country                  B. Somewhat good for the country
  C. Neither good nor bad for the country           C. Neither good nor bad for the country
  D. Somewhat bad for the country                   D. Somewhat bad for the country
  E. Very bad for the country                       E. Very bad for the country
                                                    F. Don’t know
  Do you think the country’s current economic       Do you think the country’s current economic
  conditions are helping or hurting people who      conditions are helping or hurting people who
  are poor?                                         are poor?
  A. Helping a lot                                  A. Helping a lot
  B. Helping a little                               B. Helping a little
  C. Neither helping nor hurting                    C. Neither helping nor hurting
  D. Hurting a little                               D. Hurting a little
  E. Hurting a lot                                  E. Hurting a lot
                                                    F. Don’t know


                                                   27
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                              Table 11: Full extended generation results.

 Bias             Model                         ¯b
                                                ∆      p value           ¯b
                                                                 Ext gen ∆    Ext gen p value       diff
 acquiescence     gpt-3.5-turbo             -5.5227    0.0404       -2.2159           0.3539     -3.3068
 acquiescence     gpt-3.5-turbo-instruct    -6.4545    0.0244        5.2841           0.0260    -11.7386
 acquiescence     llama2-7b                 -1.9205    0.0212       -0.9600           0.5285     -0.9605
 acquiescence     llama2-13b                11.8523    0.0000        6.2400           0.0047      5.6123
 response order   gpt-3.5-turbo             -2.7085    0.1474       -0.4354           0.8165     -2.2731
 response order   gpt-3.5-turbo-instruct   -11.1144    0.0000       -0.6273           0.6777    -10.4871
 response order   llama2-7b                 24.9151    0.0000       19.0800           0.0000      5.8351
 response order   llama2-13b                45.7565    0.0000       -1.2000           0.4906     46.9565
 odd/even         gpt-3.5-turbo            -25.0476    0.0000      -33.2540           0.0000      8.2063
 odd/even         gpt-3.5-turbo-instruct    -2.0317    0.3896      -14.2063           0.0000     12.1746
 odd/even         llama2-7b                 -1.0952    0.2062        1.0000           0.4341     -2.0952
 odd/even         llama2-13b                 3.4921    0.0000      -13.4800           0.0000     16.9721
 opinion float    gpt-3.5-turbo            -11.9048    0.0000       -0.1587           0.9295    -11.7460
 opinion float    gpt-3.5-turbo-instruct     0.1429    0.8905        0.3333           0.6568     -0.1905
 opinion float    llama2-7b                  4.2698    0.0000        4.2000           0.0000      0.0698
 opinion float    llama2-13b                 4.1270    0.0000        5.0400           0.0004     -0.9130
 allow/forbid     gpt-3.5-turbo            -19.7083    0.0038      -13.2917           0.0531     -6.4167
 allow/forbid     gpt-3.5-turbo-instruct    -8.0417    0.0986        3.7500           0.4248    -11.7917
 allow/forbid     llama2-7b                 59.5000    0.0000       41.6250           0.0000     17.8750
 allow/forbid     llama2-13b                54.3750    0.0000        4.2917           0.0561     50.0833


                                                      28
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                   Table 12: Sampled questions for middle random perturbation.

  Would you favor or oppose the following?            Wloud you faovr or oosppe the following?
  If the federal government created a national        If the freedal goemrevnnt ceetrad a nntaoail
  service program that paid people to perform         sivecre poagrrm that paid pleope to pfroerm
  tasks even if a robot or computer could do          takss even if a roobt or couetmpr colud do
  those tasks faster or cheaper                       tshoe tskas ftsear or ceehpar
  A. Strongly favor                                   A. Strongly favor
  B. Favor                                            B. Favor
  C. Neither favor nor oppose                         C. Neither favor nor oppose
  D. Oppose                                           D. Oppose
  E. Strongly oppose                                  E. Strongly oppose
  Thinking again about race and race relations        Tknnhiig aagin aobut race and race reilnotas
  in the U.S. in general, how well, if at all, do     in the U.S. in general, how well, if at all, do
  you think each of these groups get along with       you tinhk each of tshee gruops get aolng with
  each other in our society these days? Whites        each oethr in our steicoy thsee days? Wehtis
  and Asians                                          and Aasnis
  A. Very well                                        A. Very well
  B. Pretty well                                      B. Pretty well
  C. Somewhat well                                    C. Somewhat well
  D. Not too well                                     D. Not too well
  E. Not at all well                                  E. Not at all well
  Thinking ahead 30 years from now, which do          Thiinnkg aaehd 30 yreas from now, wcihh do
  you think is more likely to happen? Adults          you tnihk is more lleiky to happen? Audlts
  ages 65 and older will be                           ages 65 and oeldr will be
  A. better prepared financially for retirement       A. better prepared financially for retirement
  than older adults are today                         than older adults are today
  B. less prepared financially for retirement         B. less prepared financially for retirement
  than older adults today                             than older adults today
  Do you think science has had a mostly pos-          Do you tnhik scecnie has had a mstloy
  itive or mostly negative effect on the quality      pisoivte or mltsoy ntvgaiee efceft on the
  of food in the U.S.?                                qaltiuy of food in the U.S.?
  A. Mostly positive                                  A. Mostly positive
  B. Mostly negative                                  B. Mostly negative
  Do you think changing a baby’s genetic char-        Do you think cnhaging a baby’s geentic ci-
  acteristics to reduce the risk of a serious dis-    ciecthaarsrts to recdue the risk of a seuiors
  ease or condition that could occur over the         diasese or ctodnioin that culod ocucr over the
  course of his or her lifetime is an appropri-       corsue of his or her lfmieite is an apiraprptoe
  ate use of medical technology ?                     use of macedil tgonolehcy ?
  A. Yes                                              A. Yes
  B. No                                               B. No
  Over the next 30 years, who should be most          Over the next 30 years, who slhuod be most
  responsible for making sure young adults            ressnbpiole for mkiang sure young atduls
  have the right skills and training to get a good    have the rihgt slliks and tnrainig to get a good
  job?                                                job?
  A. Government                                       A. Government
  B. Employers                                        B. Employers
  C. The education system                             C. The education system
  D. Individuals themselves                           D. Individuals themselves


                                                     29
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                     Table 13: Sampled questions for key typo perturbation.

  Thinking about restrictions on public activity    Thinking about restqictions un publjc activity
  in the US over the course of the coronavirus      in the US over the course of the coronavirus
  outbreak, do you think there should have been     outbreak, do ygu think there should have been
  A. More restrictions                              A. More restrictions
  B. Fewer restrictions                             B. Fewer restrictions
  C. The restrictions were about right              C. The restrictions were about right
  When it comes to sexual harassment and sex-       When it comes to sexual harassment tnd sex-
  ual assault today, how much of a problem, if      uzl assajlt todyy, how much of f problem, if
  at all, would you say men getting away with       at all, would you say men getting away with
  committing sexual harassment or assault is?       rommitting sbxual halassment or assault is?
  A. Major problem                                  A. Major problem
  B. Minor problem                                  B. Minor problem
  C. Not a problem                                  C. Not a problem
  Do you think science has had a mostly pos-        Do you zhink science was had a mostly pos-
  itive or mostly negative effect on the quality    itive or mostlh negative effect on the quality
  of the environment in the U.S.?                   of the tnvironment jn the UnS.?
  A. Mostly positive                                A. Mostly positive
  B. Mostly negative                                B. Mostly negative
  When it comes to important issues facing the      When mt comes ho important issues facing
  US, people may disagree over policies, but do     the US, people may disagree over policies,
  you think most people                             but do you think mopt people
  A. Agree on the basic facts                       A. Agree on the basic facts
  B. Disagree on the basic facts                    B. Disagree on the basic facts
  For each, please indicate if you, personally,     For each, please indicmte if you, personally,
  think it is acceptable. A black person using      ihink it is accextable. A black person using
  the n-word                                        the nwword
  A. Always acceptable                              A. Always acceptable
  B. Sometimes acceptable                           B. Sometimes acceptable
  C. Rarely acceptable                              C. Rarely acceptable
  D. Never acceptable                               D. Never acceptable
  Do you think the following will or will not       Do yow think the following wiwl or will not
  happen in the next 20 years? Most stores and      happen in txe next 20 yearsq Mokt stores
  retail businesses will be fully automated and     and retail businesses jill be fully automated
  involve little or no human interaction between    anx involve little or no human intbraction be-
  customers and employees                           tween customers and employees
  A. Will definitely happen                         A. Will definitely happen
  B. Will probably happen                           B. Will probably happen
  C. May or may not happen                          C. May or may not happen
  D. Will probably not happen                       D. Will probably not happen
  E. Will definitely not happen                     E. Will definitely not happen
  How likely do you think it is that the follow-    How likely do you tmink it is that the follow-
  ing will happen in the next 30 years? There       ing will happen in lhe sext 30 years? There
  will be a cure for Alzheimer’s disease            will be a cure for Alzheimer’s disease
  A. Will definitely happen                         A. Will definitely happen
  B. Will probably happen                           B. Will probably happen
  C. May or may not happen                          C. May or may not happen
  D. Will probably not happen                       D. Will probably not happen
  E. Will definitely not happen                     E. Will definitely not happen


                                                   30
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                          Table 14: Sampled questions for letter swap perturbation.

  Do you think greater social acceptance of                   Do you tihnk gerater scoial accepatnce of
  people who are transgender (people who                      poeple who are transegnder (pepole who ied-
  identify as a gender that is different from the             ntify as a gedner that is diffeernt from the sex
  sex they were assigned at birth) is generally               they were asisgned at bitrh) is genreally good
  good or bad for our society?                                or bad for our socitey?
  A. Very good for society                                    A. Very good for society
  B. Somewhat good for society                                B. Somewhat good for society
  C. Neither good nor bad for society                         C. Neither good nor bad for society
  D. Somewhat bad for society                                 D. Somewhat bad for society
  E. Very bad for society                                     E. Very bad for society
  In your opinion, is voting is a privilege that              In your opinino, is voitng is a pirvilege that
  comes with responsibilities and can be lim-                 cmoes with responsiiblities and can be limi-
  ited if adult U.S. citizens don’t meet some re-             etd if adlut U.S. citiznes dno’t meet some re-
  quirements?                                                 quiremnets?
  A. Yes                                                      A. Yes
  B. No                                                       B. No
  For each, please indicate if you, personally,               For eahc, pelase indciate if you, presonally,
  think it is acceptable. A black person using                thnik it is acecptable. A blcak preson usnig
  the n-word                                                  the n-owrd
  A. Always acceptable                                        A. Always acceptable
  B. Sometimes acceptable                                     B. Sometimes acceptable
  C. Rarely acceptable                                        C. Rarely acceptable
  D. Never acceptable                                         D. Never acceptable
  By the year 2050, will the average working                  By the year 2500, will the avearge wokring
  person in this country have                                 perosn in this counrty have
  A. More job security                                        A. More job security
  B. Less job security                                        B. Less job security
  C. About the same                                           C. About the same
  Who do you think should be mostly respon-                   Who do you thnik sohuld be msotly respon-
  sible for paying for the long-term care older               isble for paynig for the longt-erm care odler
  Americans may need?                                         Ameriacns may nede?
  A. Family members                                           A. Family members
  B. Government                                               B. Government
  C. Older Americans themselves                               C. Older Americans themselves
  Thinking again about the year 2050, or 30                   Thinikng aagin aobut the year 2005, or 30
  years from now, do you think abortion will                  yeras from now, do you thnik aboriton will
  be                                                          be
  A. Legal with no restrictions                               A. Legal with no restrictions
  B. Legal but with some restrictions                         B. Legal but with some restrictions
  C. Illegal except in certain cases                          C. Illegal except in certain cases
  D. Illegal with no exceptions                               D. Illegal with no exceptions


                Table 15: Steering results for GPT-3.5-turbo and GPT-3.5-turbo-instruct.

 Model                    Bias                  ¯b
                                            Old ∆     Orig p-val           ¯b
                                                                   Steer 1 ∆    Steer 1 p-val           ¯b
                                                                                                Steer 2 ∆    Steer 2 p-val
 gpt-3.5-turbo            Response order    -3.0711      0.1474     -11.3731         0.0000       -1.1547         0.5442
 gpt-3.5-turbo            Allow/forbid     -19.7083      0.0038      -4.9583         0.4662       -3.0833         0.6418
 gpt-3.5-turbo-instruct   Response order   -11.7656      0.0000      16.6199         0.0000       -5.3185         0.0076
 gpt-3.5-turbo-instruct   Allow/forbid      -8.2128      0.0986      16.7234         0.0179       -9.7500         0.1606


                                                           31
