Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C ASTOR : C AUSAL T EMPORAL R EGIME S TRUCTURE
L EARNING

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                           A BSTRACT

         The task of uncovering causal relationships among multivariate time series data
         stands as an essential and challenging objective that cuts across a broad array of
         disciplines ranging from climate science to healthcare. Such data entails linear or
         non-linear relationships, and usually follow multiple a priori unknown regimes.
         Existing causal discovery methods can infer summary causal graphs from
         heterogeneous data with known regimes, but they fall short in comprehensively
         learning both regimes and the corresponding causal graph. In this paper, we
         introduce CASTOR, a novel framework designed to learn causal relationships in
         multivariate time series data composed of various regimes, each governed by a
         distinct causal graph. Through the maximization of a score function via the EM
         algorithm, CASTOR infers the number of regimes and learns linear or non-linear
         causal relationships in each regime. We demonstrate the robust convergence
         properties of CASTOR, specifically highlighting its proficiency in accurately
         identifying unique regimes. Empirical evidence, garnered from exhaustive
         synthetic experiments and two real-world benchmarks, confirm CASTOR’s
         superior performance in causal discovery compared to baseline methods. By
         learning a full temporal causal graph for each regime, CASTOR establishes itself
         as a distinctly interpretable method for causal discovery from multivariate time
         series composed of various regimes.


1   I NTRODUCTION

Multivariate Time Series (MTS) is a very common type of data in a wide variety of fields. Uncover-
ing the causal relationships among MTS variables and understanding how they evolve over time is
crucial in numerous fields, such as climate science and health care. Although randomized controlled
trials are widely recognized as the definitive method for determining causal relationships (Hariton &
Locascio, 2018; McCoy, 2017), they often present challenges in terms of cost, ethics, or feasibility.
Consequently, a multitude of causal discovery approaches now focus on extracting causality from
observational data sources (Löwe et al., 2022; Bussmann et al., 2021; Pamfil et al., 2020; Moraffah
et al., 2021; Runge, 2018; Wu et al., 2020).
Yet, the task of temporal causal discovery can be challenging. Firstly, the causal relationships be-
tween variables in the real-world context can manifest in either linear or non-linear forms. Secondly,
certain causal effects may be instantaneous, making the differentiation between cause and effect par-
ticularly challenging. Various research works, such as those introducing models like DYNOTEARS
(Pamfil et al., 2020) and Rhino (Gong et al., 2022), have aimed to address these challenges. Never-
theless, a prevalent assumption in many existing methods is that time series observations originate
from a single ”domain/regime” governed by one causal graph. This assumption is often inadequate
in real-world scenarios, such as Electroencephalographic (EEG) time series in epilepsy settings
(Tang et al., 2021; Rahmani et al., 2023). In these cases, recordings exhibit several unknown regimes
(non-seizure, pre-seizure, and seizure), each lasting at least a few seconds, and may reoccur multiple
times during the recording. In such scenarios, the unknown regimes originate from different causal
models on the same set of variables, each one is described by a different temporal causal graph.
Previous works have approached the challenge of learning causal graphs from MTS with different
regimes. In particular, CD-NOD, developed by Huang et al. (2020), tackles time series with various


                                                  1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


regimes by detecting the variables with changing causal modules. While CD-NOD provides a sum-
mary graph capturing behavioral changes across regimes, it falls short in inferring individual causal
graphs. The overall summary graph does not effectively highlight changes between regimes. It’s
crucial to emphasize that assessing the full temporal causal graph per regime yields more accurate
results than relying on the summary graph. Another relevant work dealing with MTS composed
of multiple regimes is RPCMCI (Saggioro et al., 2020). In this approach, Saggioro et al. (2020)
learn a temporal graph for each regime. However, they focus initially on inferring only time-lagged
relationships and require prior knowledge of the number of regimes and transitions between them.
Overall, most of the existing methods make certain assumptions that may limit their applicability,
such as a prior knowledge of the number of regimes, prior information about regime indices, which
are often not readily available.
We introduce CASTOR (Figure 2), a framework designed to learn both linear and nonlinear tem-
poral causal relationships from multivariate time series (MTS) composed of multiple regimes (each
regime corresponds to MTS block), without necessitating prior knowledge of regime indexes or the
total number of regimes involved. Using a predetermined window for index initialization (Figure 3),
CASTOR maximizes a score function via EM algorithm to infer the number of regimes and learns
linear or non-linear causal relationships inherent in each regime. To the best of our awareness, our
framework represents an unprecedented initiative in the time series landscape for the simultaneous
learning of causal graphs, regime numbers, and regime indices. Our key contributions include:

       • In this paper, we introduce CASTOR, a score based method for temporal causal structure
         learning tailored for multivariate time series composed of various regimes.
       • CASTOR employs the EM algorithm in conjunction with the NOTEARS (Zheng et al.,
         2020) penalization method to deduce regime partitions and infer causal graphs.
       • Building upon the intuition of LIN (Liu & Kuang, 2023), we demonstrate that regime
         indices can indeed be recovered and the underlying causal structure is identifiable.
       • We conduct extensive synthetic experiments with ablation studies to demonstrate the ad-
         vantages of CASTOR and its robustness across different settings. Additionally, we demon-
         strate its performance compared to baselines in real-world discovery benchmarks.

2   F RAMEWORK
Consider the multivariate time series (MTS) (Xt )t∈T = (Xti )i∈V,t∈T where |V| = d number
of components of MTS (Xt )t∈T and T is time index set. The MTS (Xt )t∈T is aligned with a
temporal causal graph elucidating its generative process. Each component of the MTS at time t is
represented by a singular node within the graph G, leading us to define G as follows:

Definition 1 (Temporal Causal Graph, Assaad et al. (2022)) G = (V, E) is the temporal causal
graph associated with the MTS (Xt )t∈T is a DAG and the set of vertices in that graph consists of
the set of components X 1 , . . . , X d at each time t ∈ N. The edges E of the graph are defined as
                      i
follows: variables Xt−τ   and Xtj are connected by a lag-specific directed link Xt−τ   i
                                                                                           → Xtj in G
pointing forward in time if and only if X i at time t − τ causes X j at time t with a time lag of τ > 0
for i = j and with a time lag of τ ≥ 0 for i ̸= j.

In the rest of our paper, we use the same notation introduced by Gong et al. (2022), where
PaiG (< t) refers to the parents of node i in G at previous time (lagged parents) and PaiG (t) to
the parents at the current time t (instantaneous parents). This notation emphasizes that CASTOR
learns a complete temporal causal graph for each regime, allowing for differentiation between
time-lagged and instantaneous links. To clarify our notation, if X i at time t − τ causes X j at
time t with a time lag of τ > 0, we have an edge Xt−τ    i
                                                              → Xtj and X i ∈ PajG (< t) and if
τ = 0, we have an edge Xti → Xtj and X i ∈ PajG (t).
Structural Equation Models (SEMs). Schölkopf et al. (2021) For a MTS (Xt )t∈T , the associated
SEM for a given temporal causal graph, denoted as G for additive noise models (ANMs):
                                Xti = gi PaiG (< t), PaiG (t) + ϵit ,

                                                                                              (1)
where gi is a deterministic function and ϵ are mutually independent noise variables. SEM describes
the causal relationships between MTS components given a causal graph G. For the same MTS and


                                                  2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


by assuming causal Markov property (Definition 4 in the Appendix C), we can further define a
causal graphical model (CGM) by a distribution p as follows:
                                           d
                                           Y
                                                 p Xti | PaiG (< t), PaiG (t) ,

                            p (Xt | G) =                                                               (2)
                                           i=1

with p (Xt | G), called observational distribution,  capturing the joint probability between Xti the
components of Xt , and p Xti | PaiG (< t), PaiG (t) , refering to the conditional distribution of Xti
given parents of Xti in the temporal causal graph G.
A MTS can exhibit a single regime (as assumed in prior works like Rhino (Gong et al., 2022) and
DYNOTEARS (Pamfil et al., 2020)) or multiple regimes, as in our approach. Each regime can be
seen as a MTS block with a minimum duration, denoted as ζ. Regimes occur sequentially, with the
condition that a second regime can only commence after a duration of at least ζ from the initiation
of the preceding regime. This modeling is particularly relevant in contexts such as epilepsy, where
EEG recordings may encompass distinct regimes (e.g., non-seizure, pre-seizure, and seizure), each
lasting at least a few seconds.

Definition 2 (MTS with multiple regimes) We say that MTS (Xt )t∈T = (Xti )i∈V,t≤T is composed
of K disjoint regimes if it exists a unique time partition E = (Eu )u∈{1,...,K} , such that: ∩Ku=1 Eu =
∅, T = ∪Ku=1 uE  and ∀u   ∈  {1, ..., K}, the MTS (X   )
                                                     t t∈Eu  is stationary and associated  with a unique
temporal causal graph G u .

Notably, the regime v (where v = u + 1) begins at least ζ samples after the start of regime u
and also persists for a minimum of ζ samples. Additionally, if regime u reoccurs in the MTS, its
duration in the second appearance is also no less than ζ samples. All the indices corresponding to
the first and second appearances of this regime are stored in Eu .
It is crucial to note that G u are regime-dependent, meaning that graphs vary across different regimes
i.e, G u ̸= G v . In the rest of our paper, we note G = (G u )u∈{1,...,K} the set of temporal causal graph
associated with a MTS (Xt )t∈T composed of K regimes. Within each regime u, the temporal
causal graph G u , can be represented by a collection of adjacency matrices, collectively denoted as
Guτ∈[|0:L|] with a fixed maximum lag L < ζ. In simpler terms, if Xt−τ      i
                                                                               → Xtj , then the coefficient
    u                                                u
[Gτ ]ij ̸= 0; otherwise, it is 0. When τ = 0, G0 signifies instantaneous links within the temporal
causal graph G u .
We now propose a novel functional form for SEM that incorporates linear or non-linear relations,
instantaneous links and multiple regimes:

                     ∀u ∈ {1, ..., K}, ∀t ∈ Eu : Xti = giu PaiG u (< t), PaiG u (t) + ϵit ,

                                                                                                        (3)

where giu is a general differentiable linear or non-linear function and ϵit ∼ N (0, 1), follows to a
normal distribution. By assuming causal Markov property, we can define the associated CGM:
                                                            d
                                                            Y
           ∀u ∈ {1, ..., K}, ∀t ∈ Eu : p (Xt | G u ) =            p Xti | PaiG u (< t), PaiG u (t) ,

                                                                                                       (4)
                                                            i=1

As mentioned earlier, in certain real-world scenarios, MTS consist of K unknown regimes and
cannot typically be represented by a single DAG. A new formulation of the distribution p describing
the CGM in such scenarios is as follows:
                                              K
                                              X
                                  p (Xt ) =         1Eu (t) · p (Xt | G u ) ,                          (5)
                                              u=1

where p (Xt | G u ) is specified in Equation (4), while 1Eu (t) denotes the indicator function, defined
as 1Eu (t) = 1 if t ∈ Eu and 0 otherwise.
Previous works assume prior knowledge of time partition E or report a summary causal graph
(Huang et al., 2020), falling short of elucidating the full temporal causal graph. In the next sec-
tion we will present CASTOR an optimization based method for temporal causal structure learning
tailored for MTS with multiple regimes.


                                                       3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


3     CASTOR: C AUSAL TEMPORAL REGIME STRUCTURE LEARNING
In this section, we present a novel approach designed to learn the set of temporal causal graphs
G = (G u )u∈{1,...,K} associated with MTS (Xt )t∈T composed of multiple regimes, the total number
of regimes K, and the associated regime indexes E = (Eu )u∈{1,...,K} . Sections 3.1 and 3.2 present
solutions tailored to both linear and nonlinear contexts, respectively.

3.1     C ASTOR FOR LINEAR CAUSAL RELATIONSHIPS

We first consider the case where the causal relationships between the components are linear. Based
on Eq (3), the SEM can then be articulated as follows: ∀u ∈ {1, ..., K}, ∀t ∈ Eu : Xt = Xt Gu0 +
PL             u
  τ =1 Xt−τ Gτ + ϵt . From the causal Markov assumption (4) in the Appendix C and using Eq (5)
we have :
                                          |T |     K
                                        X          X
                         log p X0:|T | =       log    1Eu (t) · p (Xt | G u ) ,                (6)
                                            t=0        u=1
Our objective is to learn simultaneously K, E = (Eu )u∈{1,...,K} and G u = Guτ∈[|0:L|] , ∀u ∈

{1, ..., K} that maximise the log p X0:|T | defined in Eq (6). Estimating the aforementioned
parameters (K, E and G u , ∀u ∈ {1, ..., K}) is challenging as the regime indices remain un-
known. The presence of the sum within the log terms in Eq (6) renders the log likeli-
hood intractable. The Expectation-Maximization (EM) algorithm (Dempster et al., 1977) is
well-suited to address such problems; it introduces new variables γt,u to model regime  par-
ticipation, thereby transforming
                                      the log likelihood
                                                         to the following form: log p X0:|T | =
P|T | PK                                      u
   t=0    u=1 γt,u log 1Eu (t) · p (Xt | G ) .The term within the logarithm may equal zero, lead-
ing to divergence in our log-likelihood. To address this issue, we employ the soft-max function
                exp(αu,1 t+αu,0 )
πt,u (α) = PK exp(α                   as introduced by Samé et al. (2011). The log-likelihood is then
               u=1       u,1 t+αu,0 )
                                         P|T | PK
expressed as follows: log p X0:|T | = t=0 u=1 γt,u log πt,u (α) · p (Xt | G u ) .Also learning
the temporal causal graphs G = (G u )u∈{1,...,K} , concurrently entails the estimation of the regime
distribution p (Xt | G u ). In line with the definition of CGM in Equation (2), we model CASTOR’s
joint density of the uth regime by:
                                           d
                                           Y
                            f u (Xt ) :=         fiu PaiG u (< t), PaiG u (t) ,

                                                                                                   (7)
                                           i=1

where f u is a distribution family. It is important to highlight that while f u can, in theory, be any
distribution, in this particular study, we focus on Gaussian noise, used by many works and for
which they showed the identifiability of causal graphs for one regime (Huang et al., 2020; Peters &
Bühlmann, 2014). As a result, our distribution f u will be a normal distribution.

3.1.1    M AXIMIZATION STEP : G RAPH LEARNING
To learn the regime indexes E = (Eu )u∈{1,...,K} and the number of regimes K, CASTOR initially
divides the MTS into Nw > K equal time windows in the initialisation step, where each window
represents one regime. CASTOR uses this initialisation and the formulation (7) to estimate the
temporal causal graphs by maximising the following equation:
                     Nw X|T |
                 1 X
            sup               γt,u log πt,u (α)f u (Xt ) − λ|G u |, s.t., Gu0 is a DAG,
            θ,α |T | u=1 t=0
                   (              PNw P|T |                                                        (8)
                      maxα |T1 | u=1             γt,u log (πt,u (α))
             ⇐⇒               1
                                 PNw P t=1
                      supθ |T | u=1 t∈Eu log f u (Xt ) − λ|G u |, s.t., Gu0 is a DAG,

where θ stands for ∀u ∈ {1, ..., K} : Gu[|0:L|] , |G u | is the number of edges in the temporal causal
graph of regime u. The first term is the averaged log-likelihood over data, the second is a penalty
term with positive small coefficient λ that controls the sparsity constraint. We impose an acyclicity


                                                      4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


constraint solely on the adjacency matrix Gu0 of instantaneous links, as the other adjacency matrices
Gu[|1:L|] are inherently acyclic by definition, because these matrices establish links between variables
at time t and their time-lagged parents at time t − τ . From the Eq (8), We can note S, the score
function of CASTOR as follows:
                                       Nw X
                                   1 X
                S(G, E) := sup              log f u (Xt ) − λ|G u |, s.t Gu0 is a DAG,                 (9)
                              θ   |T | u=1
                                           t∈Eu

To address the optimization challenge that incorporates the acyclicity constraints, we employ an
augmented Lagrangian method Zheng et al. (2018); Pamfil et al. (2020); Brouillard et al. (2020);
Liu & Kuang (2023). Our Eq (9) can be succinctly written as:
          Nw X|T |                        L
                                                       ! 2
      1 X                           u
                                        X
                                                     u                ρ        2
 min               γt,u Xt − Xt G0 +         Xt−τ Gτ       +λ|G u |+ h (Gu0 ) +αh (Gu0 ) , (10)
  θ |T |                                                              2
         u=1 t=1                        τ =1                     F

where α, ρ characterize the strength of the DAG penalty. The function h(G) = tr eG⊙G −
d corresponds to the acyclicity constraints proposed in Zheng et al. (2018) (⊙ is the Hadamard
product).

3.1.2    E XPECTATION STEP : R EGIME LEARNING
After this initial step of learning the graphs with Nw equal windows, our method alternates between
updating regime indexes E = (Eu )u∈{1,...,Nw } , during the expectation phase (E-step), and inferring
the temporal causal graphs Gu[|0:L|] during the maximisation phase (M-step). In the expectation step,
CASTOR updates the probability γt,u , that refers to the probability of Xt belonging to regime u,
using the following equation (derivation details in Appendix B):
                                             πt,u (α)f u (Xt )
                                     γt,u = PNw                                                       (11)
                                                          j
                                             j=1 πt,j (α)f (Xt )

In the E-step, for each time sample t, CASTOR assigns a value of 1 to the most probable regime u
(with the highest γt,u ), and 0 to others. Additionally, CASTOR filters out regimes with insufficient
samples (fewer than ζ, the minimum regime duration, defined as a hyper-parameter). Discarded
regime samples are then reassigned to the nearest regime in terms of probability in the subsequent
iteration (if Xt belongs to the discarded regime u, then it will be allocated to regime v with the
highest γt,v ). Figure 3 illustrates the regime learning process.

3.2     CASTOR FOR NON - LINEAR CAUSAL RELATION

We now describe our approach to discerning non-linear causal relationships from MTS, starting with
the case K = 1 for ease of description. Subsequently, we will outline how this methodology extends
to address MTS with multiple regimes.    In this setting, the SEM is the same as the one expressed in
Eq (1): Xti = gi PaiG (< t), PaiG (t) + ϵit , where gi represents a differentiable function that carries
the non linearity property for the causal relationships and ϵit ∼ N (0, 1). The associated CGM is
defined similarly to Eq (2).
Our objective is to recover the temporal causal graph G = G[|0:L|] , which is equivalent to estimate
                                                        Qd
the true distribution defined in Eq (2): p (Xt | G) = i=1 p Xti | PaiG (< t), PaiG (t) . We employ

Neural Networks (NN) to accommodate the non-linearity introduced in our problem formulation,
similarly to what is done in Brouillard et al. (2020); Liu & Kuang (2023), while utilizing NOTEARS
(Zheng et al., 2018) constraints to enforce acyclicity for the graph modeling instantaneous links. The
NN is used to estimate the parameters of our distribution, defined as1 :
                                           d
                                           Y
                                                 fi PaiG u (< t), PaiG u (t) ,

                              f (Xt ) :=                                                              (12)
                                           i=1

    1
      Our work builds upon the foundational ideas presented in Zheng’s work (Zheng et al. (2020)) on causal
discovery in non-linear iid data.


                                                      5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


with f a normal distribution family. The parameters of the distribution, are determined by a neu-
ral networks NN based on variables’ parents’ value. For each time step t, we aggregate all time-
lagged variables to form a single time lag vector, denoted as Xtlag = [Xt−1 | · · · |Xt−L ], which
encompasses the lagged data. We employ Xt and Xtlag as inputs for different neural networks
 NNi , ∀i ∈ {1, ..., d}, with the objective of estimating the parameters of the distributions fi . Math-
ematically,
            our Neural Networks
                                     are formulated as follows: ∀i ∈ {1, ..., d} : NNi (Xt , Xtlag ) =
ψi ϕi (Xt ), ϕlag lag
              i (Xt )) , where ψi are neural networks composed of locally connected layers in-

troduced by Zheng et al. (2020) and activation functions ϕi , ϕlag
                                                               i (i ∈ {1, ..., d}) composed of linear
layers and sigmoid activation functions. The locally connected layers help to encode the variable
dependencies in the first layer. Let Θi and Θlag                                                      lag
                                              i represent the parameters of the first layer for ϕi , ϕi
respectively. For a given node i, the instantaneous and time-lagged interactions with another node
j can be succinctly captured by examining the norms of the corresponding columns j in the weight
matrices of the initial layers such that: [G0 ]ij = ∥Θi (column j)∥2 , [Gτ ]ij = Θlag i (column j) .
                                                                                                       2
As we know the matrix Θlag i  ∈ Rd×dL , recovering lag matrices by the above equation requires a
reshape formulation, we keep the notation above for simplicity. The objective is thus to learn Θi and
Θlag
  i that will encode the causal relationships by maximizing the following score function:
                                           |T |
                                       1 X
                       S(G) := sup              f (Xt ) − λ|G|, s.t G0 is a DAG,                    (13)
                                  θ   |T | t=1
Given a loss function L such as least squares, maximising Eq (13) is equivalent to:
                 |T | d
             1 XX                                                ρ       2
        min              L(Xti , ψi ϕi (Xt ), ϕlag lag
                                               i (Xt ) ) + λ|G| + h (G0 ) + αh (G0 )
                                                                                                    (14)
        θ,G |T |                                                 2
                 t=1 i=1
where θ are the neural networks parameters and G is a notation of Gτ ∈[|0:L|] . For the acyclicity con-
                                                              2
straint, we add the augmented Lagrangian term ρ2 h (G0 ) + αh (G0 ) to our optimization problem.
Similarly to the linear case, CASTOR for non linear case uses the EM algorithm that alternates
between distribution parameters learning (these parameters include the causal graphs) and regime
learning. The sole change between the linear and non-linear scenarios resides in the methodology
employed for estimating the distribution parameters. In the linear instance, we have demonstrated
that the parameters are directly linked to the temporal causal graphs through the adjacency matrices.
Conversely, in the non-linear scenario, we leverage Neural Networks (NNs) to estimate the distri-
bution parameters. Hence, the Maximisation step of the EM algorithm, specifically tailored for the
non-linear case, is as follows:
            Nw X |T | d
         1 X                                                                       ρ        2
                         γt,u L(Xti , ψiu ϕui (Xt ), ϕu,lag
                     X                                         lag
   min                                                i     (X t   )  ) + λ|G u | + h (Gu0 ) + αh (Gu0 )
   θ,G |T |                                                                        2
            u=1 t=1 i=1
                                                                                                     (15)
where θ summarises all the network parameters and G = (G u )u∈{0,...,K} . The formulations of
the E-step and regime adjustment remains the same as in the linear case. Algorithm (1) outlines
our CASTOR model for both linear and nonlinear causal relationships. It details the process for
updating parameters at each iteration and employs a minimum regime duration ζ to eliminate
unnecessary regimes, thereby determining the optimal number of regimes.

Algorithm 1 CASTOR algorithm
    procedure CASTOR(X, W, L, Niter , ζ)                                ▷ X ∈ RT ×d ,W : window size
       while iter ≤ Niter do u
                       π (α)f (Xt )
           γt,u ← PNwt,uπ (α)f j (X                                                     ▷ E step 11
                      j=1 t,j       t)
                           PK P|T |
           α ← arg minα u=1 t=1 γt,u log (πt,u (α))                                     ▷ M step, 8
           G ← argmin of Eq 10 or 15                                                        ▷ M step
             P|T |
           if t γt,u ≤ ζ then
               ∀t : γt,u ← 0                                            ▷ Cancel the regime u
       return γ, G


                                                   6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


4     T HEORETICAL GUARANTEES
In this section, we present the theoretical underpinnings that ensure the robustness of CAS-
TOR as a causal discovery method for time series data encompassing multiple regimes. Specif-
ically, we provide guarantees on two fronts: the unambiguous identification of regime indices,
and the accurate inference of causal relationships. Together, these guarantees confirm the abil-
ity of CASTOR to uniquely discern causal relations across time series with varying regimes.
CASTOR learns the temporal causal graphs by optimizing a score function (Eq (9): S(G, E) =
          PNu P
supθ |T1 | u=1                 u                u
                    t∈Eu log f (Xt ) − λ|G |) during the M-step. However, the score function also
depends on a time index partition E, which CASTOR learns in the expectation step. Consequently,
the convergence of CASTOR and its capability to accurately discern the true regime partition, as
well as construct appropriate temporal causal graphs, are contingent upon effectively optimizing
the score function until it attains its optimal value. Let G ∗ be the set of ground truth causal graphs
i.e G ∗ = (G ∗,u )u∈{1,...,K} = (G∗,u                ∗
                                     [|0:L|] )u and E the correct partition based on regime index. The
following theorem summarizes our main theoretical contribution.

Theorem 1 We assume that each regime has enough data and the penalty coefficients in Equa-
tion (15) are sufficiently small, and all the assumption 1, 2,3,4,5,6,7 hold (Appendix C for
precise statements)), we have for any estimation (Ĝ, Ê) : S (G ∗ , E ∗ ) > S(Ĝ, Ê), if ∃u ∈
{1, ..., K} s.t Gˆu disagrees with G ∗,u on instantaneous or/and time lagged link, or any regime
Êu ∈ Ê is close to none of the true regimes in the sense of Kullback–Leibler divergence.

Proof. Details of the proof in the Appendix C.1.
The theorem indicates that inaccuracies in identifying causal structures or real regimes yield a sub-
optimal estimation score. By optimizing according to Equation (9) we will asymptotically identify
the actual regimes and recover true causal graphs, leading to the subsequent corollary.

Corollary 1.1 Given the conditions stated in Theorem 1, if the score proposed in Equation (9) is
optimized, then samples in each regime would approach one of the true regimes asymptotically in
the sense of Kullback-Leibler divergence and the causal structure of each regime is identifiable.

5     E XPERIMENTS
5.1   S YNTHETIC DATA

                                     K=2                   K=3                 K=4
      d    Method            Type    SHD      F1           SHD     F1          SHD      F1
                             Inst    26       18.2±3.8     39      11.0±6.4    59       9.70±1.8
           VARLINGAM
                             Lag     16       10.4±7.8     28      5.01±1.4    33       5.10±3.1
      10
                             Inst    -        -            -       -           -        -
           RPCMCI
                             Lag     38       42.3±11.1    41      18.8±2.5    -        -
                             Inst    0        100±0        1       97.3±2.5    1        99.3±0.9
           CASTOR
                             Lag     0        100±0        0       100±0       2        98.0±1.4
                             Inst.   134      8.40±1.2     202     9.83±0.9    248      10.9±3.1
           VARLINGAM
                             Lag     102      1.2±0.1      137     1.13±0.8    225      1.43±0.6
      40
                             Inst.   -        -            -       -           -        -
           RPCMCI
                             Lag     155      42.1±3.5     321     18.4±14     -        -
                             Inst.   2        98.3±1.7     9       98.2±1.2    7        98.3±0.4
           CASTOR
                             Lag     0        100±0.0      1       99.8±0.2    2        98.9±0.9

Table 1: F1 and SHD Scores by Models and Settings: d indicates number of nodes, K refers to the
number of regimes, and ’Type’ refers to the causal links as either instantaneous or time-lagged.
We perform extensive experiments to evaluate the performance of our method, CASTOR, in
both linear and non-linear causal relationships. For groundtruth graph generation, we employ the
Barabási-Albert (Barabási & Albert, 1999) model with a degree of 4 to establish instantaneous links,


                                                   7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


while we utilize the Erdős–Rényi (Newman, 2018) random graph model with degrees ranging from
1 to 2 for time-lagged relationships. We focus on scenarios with a single time lag L = 1, although
additional experiments involving multiple lags are detailed in the Appendix. The duration of each
regime is chosen randomly from the set {300, 400, 500, 600}. Each experiment (combination
choice of K and d) was repeated three times under multiple settings, all combinations yield to more
than 60 different datasets.
Linear Relationships. We examine varying numbers of nodes, specifically {5, 10, 20, 40}, and
generated time series with different regime counts {2, 3, 4, 5}. Our model’s performance is bench-
marked against multiple baselines, namely RPCMCI (Saggioro et al., 2020) and VARLINGAM
(Hyvärinen et al., 2010) and the results are presented in Table 1. RPCMCI represents the sole
baseline tailored to address a similar setting. RPCMCI necessitates specific parameters, including
the number of regimes and the maximum number of transitions, and with this input, it only
infers time-lagged relations. Even with this detailed information, RPCMCI struggles to achieve
convergence, particularly in settings with more than 3 different regimes. In contrast, CASTOR does
not only surpass RPCMCI in performance but also converges consistently, correctly identifying
the number of regimes and recovering both the regime indices and the underlying causal graphs
of each regime. We can notice that CASTOR successively infers the regime indexes and learns
as well the instantaneous links (more than 95% F1 score in different settings) as well as time
lagged relations (more than 97% in almost all the settings). When we compare CASTOR with
VARLINGAM (which performs causal discovery method for MTS data which can model both
lagged and instantaneous links), the former also demonstrates markedly superior performance. To
provide context, we manually partition our generated data into discrete regimes to facilitate the
evaluation of VARLINGAM. We then executed VARLINGAM on each segmented regime, syn-
thesized the graphs, and compared these composite structures against their true counterparts. Even
when executing VARLINGAM separately on each regime, CASTOR still surpasses VARLINGAM,
all without access to any prior information, such as the number of regimes or the indices of the
regimes. Additional results that confirm the above results are in the Appendix D.
Non-linear Relationships.         For non-linear relationships, the functions giu defined in Eq (3)
include random weights generated from a uniform distribution over the interval ]0,2], coupled
with activation functions selected randomly from the set {Tanh, LeakyReLU, ReLU}. In
this case, we compare our model against various baseline models, namely DYNOTEARS (Pamfil
et al., 2020) and VARLINGAM (Hyvärinen et al., 2010) and conducted experiments with different
numbers of regimes {2, 3, 4} and nodes{10, 20}. We can see from Figure (1) that both CASTOR
and DYNOTEARS exhibit superior performance to VARLINGAM. It is important to outline that
DYNOTEARS and VARLINGAM are each applied to individual regimes separately; neither is
designed to learn or infer the number or indices of regimes. CASTOR demonstrates comparable
performance to DYNOTEARS in modeling time-lagged relations for non-linear scenarios while
learning also the regime indexes. It also succeeds in identifying instantaneous links. DYNOTEARS
achieves inferior results in identifying instantaneous links due to his formulation that takes into
consideration only linear relationships. This is much clearer in high dimensions due to the
increasing complexity of the problem. Additional experiments are available in Appendix D, and
show the same trends as explained above.


  Figure 1: F1 by Models and Settings, Inst means instantaneous links and lag time-lagged ones.

                                                8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


5.2       W EB ACTIVITY DATASET

We now evaluate2 CASTOR on two stacked
IT monitoring time series, each comprising
                                                   Model              F1 Reg1 F1 Reg 2 Reg Acc
1106 timestamps and 7 nodes, sourced from
            3
EasyVista . These series capture activity PWGC                        53.8      20.0       -
metrics from a web server. We compared VARLINGAM 66.7                           0          -
our method with PWGC (Granger Causal- CASTOR                          18.2      28.5       100
ity (Granger, 1969)) and VARLINGAM
(Hyvärinen et al., 2010). As it is evident
                                                   Table 2: F1 Scores across Two IT Datasets: ’Reg’
from Table 2, CASTOR proficiently identifies
                                                   indicates regime and ’Reg Acc’ refers to regime
the exact number of regimes and regime
                                                   identification accuracy.
indices. It is pertinent to note that PWGC and
VARLINGAM are not inherently designed to
infer regime indices, we evaluate both models separately on each regime. On regime 2, CASTOR
outperforms PWGC and VARLINGAM in learning causal relationships. While VARLINGAM
exhibits superior results compared to CASTOR in regime 1, it is not designed to learn the causal
graph and the indices. Also, given that our data pertains to IT monitoring, the likelihood of the
presence of instantaneous links is relatively low, which could account for the good performance of
VARLINGAM and PWGC that models only time-lagged links.

6       R ELATED WORKS
Causal structure learning from time series. Assaad et al. (2022) offer an extensive survey
of methods for learning temporal causal relationships. Most notably, Granger causality is the
primary approach used for causal discovery from time series (Amornbunchornvej et al., 2019; Wu
et al., 2020; Löwe et al., 2022; Bussmann et al., 2021; Xu et al., 2019). However, it is unable
to accommodate instantaneous effects. DYNOTEARS (Pamfil et al., 2020), on the other hand,
leverages the acyclicity constraint established by Zheng et al. (2018) to continuously relax the
DAG and differentiably learn instantaneous and time lagged structures. However, DYNOTEARS is
still limited to linear functional forms. TiMINo (Peters et al., 2013) provides a general theoretical
framework for temporal causal discovery with functional causal models and also a practical
algorithm that learns casual relationships that can be non linear. However, the aforementioned
methods assume that MTS are composed of a single regime.
Causal structure learning from heterogeneous data. Several studies have sought to tackle the
challenge of causal discovery in heterogeneous data (Huang et al., 2020; Saeed et al., 2020; Zhou
et al., 2022; Günther et al., 2023; Saggioro et al., 2020). Remarkably, Huang et al. (2020) address
heterogeneous time series by modulating causal relationships through a regime index. While
it provides a summary graph highlighting behavioral changes across regimes, they cannot infer
individual causal graphs neither the exact number of regime. Meanwhile, LIN (Liu & Kuang, 2023)
investigates the problem of causal structure learning from MTS with interventional data but in the
absence of domain (observational or interventional) data. LIN cannot learn different graphs: it
learns the indices of different domains and one causal graph (represents the instantaneous links) per
MTS. Finally, Saggioro et al. (2020) assume knowledge of the number of regimes and propose the
inference of only time-lagged links. Furthermore, they evaluate their algorithm on graphs with a
limited number of nodes.

7       C ONCLUSION
The task of inferring temporal causal graphs from observational time series is essential in numerous
fields. It involves modeling linear and non-linear relationships and identifying multiple regimes,
often without prior knowledge of regime indices. We introduce CASTOR, a new score-based with
proven convergence properties, preventing the need for prior knowledge of regimes. Our method
demonstrates superior performance in handling both linear and non-linear relationships across mul-
tiple regimes in synthetic and real datasets.
    2
        Our evaluation methodology aligns with the approach outlined in Assaad et al. (2022)
    3
        https://github.com/ckassaad/causal_discovery_for_time_series


                                                      9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Chainarong Amornbunchornvej, Elena Zheleva, and Tanya Y Berger-Wolf. Variable-lag granger
  causality for time series analysis. In IEEE International Conference on Data Science and Ad-
  vanced Analytics (DSAA), 2019.
Charles K Assaad, Emilie Devijver, and Eric Gaussier. Survey and evaluation of causal discovery
  methods for time series. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, 73:767–819, 2022.
Albert-László Barabási and Réka Albert. Emergence of scaling in random networks. Science, 286
  (5439):509–512, 1999.
Philippe Brouillard, Sébastien Lachapelle, Alexandre Lacoste, Simon Lacoste-Julien, and Alexan-
  dre Drouin. Differentiable causal discovery from interventional data. In Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 33:21865–21877, 2020.
Bart Bussmann, Jannes Nys, and Steven Latré. Neural additive vector autoregression models for
  causal discovery in time series. In Discovery Science, 2021.
Arthur P Dempster, Nan M Laird, and Donald B Rubin. Maximum likelihood from incomplete data
  via the em algorithm. Journal of the royal statistical society: series B (methodological), 39(1):
  1–22, 1977.
Wenbo Gong, Joel Jennings, Cheng Zhang, and Nick Pawlowski. Rhino: Deep causal temporal
 relationship learning with history-dependent noise. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.14706, 2022.
Clive WJ Granger. Investigating causal relations by econometric models and cross-spectral methods.
  Econometrica: journal of the Econometric Society, pp. 424–438, 1969.
Wiebke Günther, Urmi Ninad, and Jakob Runge. Causal discovery for time series from multiple
 datasets with latent contexts. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.12896, 2023.
Eduardo Hariton and Joseph J Locascio. Randomised controlled trials—the gold standard for effec-
  tiveness research. BJOG: an international journal of obstetrics and gynaecology, 125(13):1716,
  2018.
Biwei Huang, Kun Zhang, Jiji Zhang, Joseph Ramsey, Ruben Sanchez-Romero, Clark Glymour,
  and Bernhard Schölkopf. Causal discovery from heterogeneous/nonstationary data. Journal of
  Machine Learning Research, 21(1), 2020.
Aapo Hyvärinen, Kun Zhang, Shohei Shimizu, and Patrik O Hoyer. Estimation of a structural vector
  autoregression model using non-gaussianity. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 11(5), 2010.
Saurabh Khanna and Vincent YF Tan. Economy statistical recurrent units for inferring nonlinear
  granger causality. arXiv preprint arXiv:1911.09879, 2019.
Chenxi Liu and Kun Kuang. Causal structure learning for latent intervened non-stationary data. In
  International Conference on Machine Learning, 2023.
Sindy Löwe, David Madras, Richard Zemel, and Max Welling. Amortized causal discovery: Learn-
  ing to infer causal graphs from time-series data. In Conference on Causal Learning and Reason-
  ing, 2022.
C Eric McCoy. Understanding the intention-to-treat principle in randomized controlled trials. West-
  ern Journal of Emergency Medicine, 18(6):1075, 2017.
Raha Moraffah, Paras Sheth, Mansooreh Karami, Anchit Bhattacharya, Qianru Wang, Anique Tahir,
  Adrienne Raglin, and Huan Liu. Causal inference for time series analysis: Problems, methods
  and evaluation. Knowledge and Information Systems, 63:3041–3085, 2021.
Mark Newman. Networks. Oxford university press, 2018.
Roxana Pamfil, Nisara Sriwattanaworachai, Shaan Desai, Philip Pilgerstorfer, Konstantinos Geor-
  gatzis, Paul Beaumont, and Bryon Aragam. Dynotears: Structure learning from time-series data.
  In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, 2020.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Jonas Peters and Peter Bühlmann. Identifiability of gaussian structural equation models with equal
  error variances. Biometrika, 101(1):219–228, 2014.
Jonas Peters, Joris Mooij, Dominik Janzing, and Bernhard Schölkopf. Identifiability of causal graphs
  using functional models. arXiv preprint arXiv:1202.3757, 2012.
Jonas Peters, Dominik Janzing, and Bernhard Schölkopf. Causal inference on time series using
  restricted structural equation models. In Advances in neural information processing systems,
  2013.
Jonas Peters, Dominik Janzing, and Bernhard Schölkopf. Elements of causal inference: foundations
  and learning algorithms. The MIT Press, 2017.
Abdellah Rahmani, Arun Venkitaraman, and Pascal Frossard. A meta-gnn approach to personalized
  seizure detection and classification. In IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and
  Signal Processing (ICASSP), 2023.
Jakob Runge. Causal network reconstruction from time series: From theoretical assumptions to
  practical estimation. Chaos: An Interdisciplinary Journal of Nonlinear Science, 28(7), 2018.
Basil Saeed, Snigdha Panigrahi, and Caroline Uhler. Causal structure discovery from distributions
  arising from mixtures of dags. In In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2020.
Elena Saggioro, Jana de Wiljes, Marlene Kretschmer, and Jakob Runge. Reconstructing regime-
  dependent causal relationships from observational time series. Chaos: An Interdisciplinary Jour-
  nal of Nonlinear Science, 30(11), 2020.
Allou Samé, Faicel Chamroukhi, Gérard Govaert, and Patrice Aknin. Model-based clustering and
  segmentation of time series with changes in regime. In Advances in Data Analysis and Classifi-
  cation, 5:301–321, 2011.
Bernhard Schölkopf, Francesco Locatello, Stefan Bauer, Nan Rosemary Ke, Nal Kalchbrenner,
  Anirudh Goyal, and Yoshua Bengio. Towards causal representation learning 2021. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2102.11107, 2021.
Stephen M Smith, Karla L Miller, Gholamreza Salimi-Khorshidi, Matthew Webster, Christian F
  Beckmann, Thomas E Nichols, Joseph D Ramsey, and Mark W Woolrich. Network modelling
  methods for fmri. Neuroimage, 54(2):875–891, 2011.
Siyi Tang, Jared A Dunnmon, Khaled Saab, Xuan Zhang, Qianying Huang, Florian Dubost, Daniel L
  Rubin, and Christopher Lee-Messer. Self-supervised graph neural networks for improved elec-
  troencephalographic seizure analysis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.08336, 2021.
Tailin Wu, Thomas Breuel, Michael Skuhersky, and Jan Kautz. Discovering nonlinear relations with
  minimum predictive information regularization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2001.01885, 2020.
Chenxiao Xu, Hao Huang, and Shinjae Yoo. Scalable causal graph learning through a deep neural
  network. In ACM international conference on information and knowledge management, 2019.
Xun Zheng, Bryon Aragam, Pradeep K Ravikumar, and Eric P Xing. Dags with no tears: Continuous
  optimization for structure learning. In Advances in neural information processing systems, 2018.
Xun Zheng, Chen Dan, Bryon Aragam, Pradeep Ravikumar, and Eric Xing. Learning sparse non-
  parametric dags. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, 2020.
Fangting Zhou, Kejun He, and Yang Ni. Causal discovery with heterogeneous observational data.
  In Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, 2022.
Ciyou Zhu, Richard H Byrd, Peihuang Lu, and Jorge Nocedal. Algorithm 778: L-bfgs-b: Fortran
  subroutines for large-scale bound-constrained optimization. ACM Transactions on mathematical
  software (TOMS), 1997.


                                                 11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A     I LLUSTRATIVE FIGURES OF CASTOR FRAMEWORK
CASTOR represents a causal discovery framework tailored for Multivariate Time Series (MTS),
characterized by diverse regimes. In essence, CASTOR operates under the assumption that each
MTS may be intricately composed of various unidentified regimes. Each regimes can be treated as
an independent MTS. Additionally, it is crucial to note that the number of lags always remains below
the minimum length of the regimes.
Figure (2) illustrates a MTS on its left side comprising three variables and two unknown distinct
regimes. Each regime possesses its temporal DAG, with one lag attributed to each in this demon-
strative scenario.
Upon receiving the MTS as input, CASTOR engages in the process of discerning the number of
regimes, determining the indexes associated with each regime (indicating their commencement and
conclusion), and inferring the temporal DAGs. The resultant DAGs facilitate the straightforward
reconstruction of summary graphs encapsulating the entire MTS (CD-NOD output).

                                                                                 E1∗                         E2∗

                                                              1



                                                        Xt
                                                              0
      2                                                      −1
      1
Xt


      0                                                           0          1             2        3        4           5         6
     −1                                   CASTOR                                                    t
          0   1   2   3       4   5   6            t−1            G1∗              t                             t−1              G2∗        t
                          t                            2                               2                             2
                                                   X                              X                              X                           X2

                                              X1             X3         X1                     X3       X1                   X3         X1        X3



Figure 2: Overview of CASTOR. The dashed edges refer to the time lagged links, the normal arrows
represent the instantaneous links.

To elucidate the intricacies of the regime learning process, Figure (3) delineates the step-by-step
procedure followed by CASTOR in determining the number of regimes and their corresponding
indexes. The process commences with CASTOR partitioning the Multivariate Time Series (MTS)
into equal windows. In the initial iteration, the length of each regime equals the window size, a
user-specified hyperparameter.
Subsequently, CASTOR embarks on learning a temporal DAG for each regime. This involves solv-
ing an optimization problem, as outlined in Eq(10) for the linear case and Eq(15) for the non-linear
scenario. Following graph acquisition, CASTOR updates the regime indexes utilizing Eq(11). No-
tably, CASTOR employs a filtering mechanism to eliminate regimes characterized by an insufficient
number of samples. In practical terms, any regime with fewer samples than a defined hyperparame-
ter, denoted as ζ (representing the minimum regime duration), is discarded.
In the event of regime elimination, samples from the discarded regimes are reallocated to the nearest
regime in terms of probability. Specifically, if the discarded regime is denoted as u, the sample Xt
will be assigned to regime v in the subsequent iteration, where v is the regime with the highest γt,v .


                                                    1


                              Figure 3: CASTOR’s regime learning procedure


                                                   12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B     E XPECTATION -M AXIMIZATION DERIVATION
In this section, we shall elucidate the computational details surrounding the resolution of our op-
timization problem. Specifically, we will provide clarity on the various equations introduced in
Section 3, namely, Eq (8, 10, 11, 15).
E-step. We model regime participation through a binary latent variable zt ∈ RNw ; Xt belongs to
regime u ⇒ zt,u = 1.

                       γt,u = p zt,u = 1 | Xt , Gu{0:L}

                                   p (zt,u = 1) p Xt | zt,u = 1, Gu{0:L}
                             =P
                                                                                               (16)
                                  Nw                                  j
                                  j=1 p (zt,j = 1) p Xt | zt,j = 1, G{0:L}

                                 πt,u (α)f u (Xt )
                              = PNw
                                              j
                                 j=1 πt,j (α)f (Xt )

M-step. Having estimated probabilities γt,u in the E-step, we can now maximise the expected
posterior distribution given the MTS (Xt )t∈T and we have:
                    Nw X|T |
                 1 X
              sup            γt,u log πt,u (α)f u (Xt ) − λ|G u |, s.t Gu0 is a DAG,
           θ,α |T | u=1 t=0
                  (              PNw P|T |                                                          (17)
                     maxα |T1 | u=1         t=1 γt,u ln (πt,u (α))
            ⇐⇒                     Nw P
                     supθ |T1 | u=1                   u             u          u
                                P
                                           t∈Eu log f (Xt ) − λ|G |, s.t G0 is a DAG,
                                    PL
We know f u (Xt ) = N Xt Gu0 + τ =1 Xt−τ Guτ , I , hence:

                Nw X
             1 X
 ⇐⇒ sup                   log f u (Xt ) − λ|G u |, s.t Gu0 is a DAG,
         θ |T | u=1 t∈E
                        u

                 N                               L
                                                                ! 2
                  w
             1 XX                         u
                                               X
                                                              u
  ⇐⇒ min                    X t − X t G0 +           Xt−τ Gτ          + λ|G u |, s.t Gu0 is a DAG
         θ |T |
                u=1 t∈Eu                       τ =1               F
                 Nw X|T |                             L
                                                                   ! 2
             1  X
                                              u
                                                    X
                                                                 u
  ⇐⇒ min                  γt,u Xt − Xt G0 +              Xt−τ Gτ          + λ|G u |, s.t Gu0 is a DAG
         θ |T |
                u=1 t=1                             τ =1               F
                 N   |T |                             L
                                                                   ! 2
                  w
             1 XX                                   X                                  ρ         2
  ⇐⇒ min                  γt,u Xt − Xt Gu0 +             Xt−τ Guτ         + λ|G u | + h (Gu0 ) + αh (Gu0 ) ,
         θ |T |                                                                        2
                u=1 t=1                             τ =1               F
                                                                                                      (18)
The only difference between the linear and the non linear cases is how we estimate the mean of
the normal distribution f u for every regime u.  As we mentioned in section         3.2,
                                                                                        we estimate these
means using NNs and we have fiu (Xt ) = N ψiu ϕui (Xt ), ϕu,lag     i    (X lag
                                                                            t   )  , 1 , Hence, our M-step
for non-linear CASTOR:
             Nw X|T | d
         1 X                                                                       ρ        2
                         γt,u L(Xti , ψiu ϕui (Xt ), ϕu,lag
                     X                                         lag
    min                                               i     (Xt    )  ) + λ|G u | + h (Gu0 ) + αh (Gu0 )
    θ,G |T |                                                                       2
             u=1 t=1 i=1
                                                                                                     (19)


                                                   13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C    R EGIME AND CAUSAL GRAPHS IDENTIFIABILITY
In this section, we concentrate on establishing the identifiability of regimes and causal graphs
within the CASTOR framework. Before diving into the details, let us set and clarify the required
assumptions.


Definition 3 (Causal Stationarity Runge (2018)). The time series (that has one regime) process
(Xt )t∈T with a graph G is called causally stationary over a time index set T if and only if for all
        i
links Xt−τ → Xtj in the graph
                          i
                               ⊥ Xtj | X<t \ Xt−τ
                                               i
                        Xt−τ  ̸⊥                       holds for all t ∈ T


This elucidates the inherent characteristics of the time-series data generation mechanism, thereby
validating the choice of the auto-regressive model. In our setting, we generalize Causal Stationarity
as follows:

Assumption 1 (Causal Stationarity for time series with multiple regimes). The time series process
(Xt )t∈T comprise multiple regimes K, where K is the number of regime, we note Eu = {t|γt,u =
1} the set of time indexes where the regime u is active, and T = ∪u Eu . (Xt )t∈T with a graph
{G u }u∈{1,...,K} is called causally stationary over a time index set T if and only if for all u ∈
{1, ..., K}, (Xt )t∈Eu is causal stationary with graph G u for time index set Eu .

Definition 4 (Causal Markov Property, Peters et al. (2017)). Given a DAG G and a joint distribution
p, this distribution is said to satisfy causal Markov property w.r.t. the DAG G if each variable is
independent of its non-descendants given its parents.

This is a common assumptions for the distribution induced by an SEM. With this assumption, one
can deduce conditional independence between variables from the graph.

Assumption 2 (Causal Markov Property for multiple regimes). Given a set of DAGs (G u )u∈{1,...,K}
and a set of joint distribution (p(·|G u ))u∈{1,...,K} , we say that this set of distributions satisfies causal
Markov property w.r.t. the set of DAGs (G u )u∈{1,...,K} if for every u: p(·|G u ) satisfy causal Markov
property w.r.t the DAG G u .

Definition 5 (Causal Minimality, Gong et al. (2022)). Consider a distribution p and a DAG G, we
say this distribution satisfies causal minimality w.r.t. G if it is Markovian w.r.t. G but not to any
proper subgraph of G.

Assumption 3 (Causal Minimality for multiple regimes). Given a set of DAGs (G u )u∈{1,...,K} and
a set of joint distribution (p(·|G u ))u∈{1,...,K} , we say that this set of distributions satisfies causal
minimality w.r.t. the set of DAGs (G u )u∈{1,...,K} if for every u: p(·|G u ) satisfy causal minimality
w.r.t the DAG G u .

Assumption 4 (Causal Sufficiency). A set of observed variables V is causally sufficient for a pro-
cess Xt if and only if in the process every common cause of any two or more variables in V is in V
or has the same value for all units in the population.

This assumption implies there are no latent confounders present in the time-series data.

Assumption 5 (Well-defined Density). We assume the joint likelihood induced by the CASTOR
SEM (Eq. (3)) is absolutely continuous w.r.t. a Lebesgue or counting measure and ∀u :
|log p (Xt∈Eu ; G u )| < ∞ for all possible G u .

This presumption ensures that the resulting distribution possesses a well-defined probability density
function. It is also necessary for Markov factorization property.

Assumption 6 (CASTOR in DAG space). We assume the CASTOR framework can only return the
solutions from DAG space.


                                                      14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Definition 6 (Source model Gong et al. (2022)) For any MTS defined as follows:


                                Xti = fi,t PaiG (< t), PaiG (t) + ϵit

                                                                                                  (20)


A source model characterizes the initial conditions:


                                       Xsi = fi,s PaiG + ϵis

                                                                                                  (21)



for s ∈ [0, S], where S is the length for the initial conditions and PaiG contains the parents for node
i. We define ps (X0:S ) as the induced joint distribution for the initial conditions.


Assumption 7 (CASTOR initial condition). We assume that the initial conditions are known and
source model is identifiable.



C.1   P ROOF OF THEOREM 1


Assuming the aforementioned assumptions we want to prove the theorem 1.
  We consider G = (G u )u∈{1,..,Nw } , E = ∪N   u=1 Eu where Nw is the number of window, G =
                                                  w                                              ∗
   ∗,u                                                            ∗     K     ∗                 ∗
(G )u∈{1,..,K} , K is the exact number of true regimes and E = ∪u=1 Eu . We denote Ec Eℓ the
set of time indexes that is shared between regime c of our model estimation and the true regime ℓ
               |E ∗ |                |E E ∗ |
and qℓ∗ := Tℓ , qc := |ETc | , qcℓ := cT ℓ . Our objective is to prove that for any estimation (Ĝ, Ê)
: if ∃u ∈ {1, ..., K} s.t. Gˆu disagree with G ∗,u on instantaneous or/and time lagged link, or any
regime Êu ∈ Ê is close to none of the true regimes in the sense of Kullback–Leibler divergence:
S (G ∗ , E ∗ ) > S(Ĝ, Ê).
We have by Eq (9)



                                              N
                                              u X
                                          1 X
                         S(G, E) := sup           log f u (Xt ) − λ|G u |,
                                      θ,G T u=1   t∈Eu


                                                               Qd
where λ is the sparsity penalty coefficient and f u (Xt ) := j=1 fiu PaiG u (< t), PaiG u (t) with


fiu PaiG u (< t), PaiG u (t) the function used to describe the distribution family in Eq (7).

We will structure the proof as follows:


       • Prove that if the score is optimized, then all the estimated regimes will be pure (have only
         elements of the same true regime).


       • Prove that, when the regimes are pure and Nw = K, we have S (G ∗ , E ∗ ) > S(Ĝ, Ê)
         for any estimation Ĝ where ∃u ∈ {1, ..., K} s.t Gˆu disagrees with G ∗,u on instantaneous
         or/and time lagged link.


                                                  15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C.1.1    O PTIMIZING THE SCORE WILL LEAD TO PURE REGIMES

Ignoring penalty terms, we have:


                           Nw X
                              K
                           X                  1            X
−S(G, E) = − sup                     qcℓ                             [log f c (Xt )]
                       θ                    Ee Eℓ∗
                           c=1 ℓ=1                     t∈Ee Eℓ∗

                           Nw X
                           X  K
         → − sup                     qcℓ E            [log f c ]
                       ϕ c=1               Xt ∼p
                             ℓ=1
                           Nw X
                              K
                                                      " d                                              #
                           X                           X
                                                                log fic PaiG c (< t), PaiG c (t)

         = − sup                     qcℓ E
                       θ                   Xt ∼p
                           c=1 ℓ=1                     i=1
                           Nw X
                           X  K X
                                d
         = − sup                            qcℓ
                       θ   c=1 ℓ=1 i=1
                                                                                                                                               
                               p Xti | PaiG ∗,ℓ (< t), PaiG ∗,ℓ (t)
           E − log                                                                          + log p Xti | PaiG ∗,ℓ (< t), PaiG ∗,ℓ (t)         
                                      fic PaiG c (< t), PaiG c (t)

         Xt ∼p

                           Nw X
                           X  K X
                                d
         = − sup                            qcℓ
                       θ   c=1 ℓ=1 i=1
                   h
           E           − DKL p Xti | PaiG ∗,ℓ (< t), PaiG ∗,ℓ (t)                              ∥fic PaiG c (< t), PaiG c (t)
         Xt ∼p
                                                                              i
         − H p Xti | PaiG ∗,ℓ (< t), PaiG ∗,ℓ (t)
                           Nw X
                              K X
                                d                           h
                           X                                                                                                                                  i
         = − sup                            qcℓ E               −DKL p Xti | PaiG ∗,ℓ (< t), PaiG ∗,ℓ (t)                   ∥fic PaiG c (< t), PaiG c (t)
                       θ                          Xt ∼p
                           c=1 ℓ=1 i=1
                       Nc X
                       X  K X
                            d                          h                                                           i
         − sup                        qcℓ E                −H p Xti | PaiG ∗,ℓ (< t), PaiG ∗,ℓ (t)
               θ                              Xt ∼p
                       c=1 ℓ=1 i=1
                   Nw X
                      K X
                        d                             h
                   X                                                                                                                                    i
         = inf                        qcℓ E               DKL p Xti | PaiG ∗,ℓ (< t), PaiG ∗,ℓ (t)                    ∥fic PaiG c (< t), PaiG c (t)
               θ                            Xt ∼p
                   c=1 ℓ=1 j=1
             Nw X
             X  K X
                  d                               h                                                         i
         +                      qcℓ E             H p Xti | PaiG ∗,ℓ (< t), PaiG ∗,ℓ (t)
                                     Xt ∼p
             c=1 ℓ=1 j=1
                   Nw X
                      K X
                        d                             h
                   X                                                                                                                                  i
         = inf                        qcℓ E               DKL p Xti | PaiG ∗,ℓ (< t), PaiG ∗,ℓ (t)                    ∥fic PaiG c (< t), PaiG c (t)
               θ                            Xt ∼p
                   c=1 ℓ=1 i=1
                              Nc
             K X
               d
                                          !
             X                X                        h                                                        i
         +                          qcℓ           E        H p Xti | PaiG ∗,ℓ (< t), PaiG ∗,ℓ (t)
                                              Xt ∼p
             ℓ=1 i=1          c=1
                   Nw X
                      K X
                        d                             h
                   X                                                                                                                                  i
         = inf                        qcℓ E               DKL p Xti | PaiG ∗,ℓ (< t), PaiG ∗,ℓ (t)                    ∥fic PaiG c (< t), PaiG c (t)
               θ                            Xt ∼p
                   c=1 ℓ=1 i=1
             K X
             X d                      h                                                               i
         +                  qℓ∗ E          H p Xti | PaiG ∗,ℓ (< t), PaiG ∗,ℓ (t)
                              Xt ∼p
             ℓ=1 i=1
                                                                                                                                                      (22)
 Note that θ could be the parameters of the neural networks used in Eq (15) for non linear causal
relationship or θ = (G u )u∈{1,..,Nw } for linear case Eq 10.
For the score of ground truth (ignoring penalty terms):


                             K X
                             X d                          h                                                        i
 −S (G ∗ , E ∗ ) → 0 +                     qℓ∗ E            H p Xti | PaiG ∗,ℓ (< t), PaiG ∗,ℓ (t)                     ( by Assumption 5 5)           (23)
                                              Xt ∼p
                              ℓ=1 i=1



                                                                                    16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Combining Equation (22) and Equation (23) , we have (considering penalty terms):
                                              Nw X
                                              X  K X
                                                   d
  S (G ∗ , E ∗ ) − S(G, E) = inf                               qcℓ
                                      θ
                                              c=1 ℓ=1 i=1
                                                h                                                                                                    i
                                       E            DKL p Xti | PaiG ∗,ℓ (< t), PaiG ∗,ℓ (t)                       ∥fic PaiG c (< t), PaiG c (t)         (24)
                                     Xt ∼p
                                                   Nw               K
                                                                                   !
                                                   X                X
                                      +λ                 |G c | −         G ∗,ℓ
                                                   c=1              ℓ=1
 The first term in Equation (24) is the score term, others are penalty term.
In the following lines, our goal is to demonstrate that optimizing the score term ensures that all
identified regimes will accurately match the real regimes. In other words, each estimated regime
will be a true representation of an actual one. Additionally, by shifting samples from less significant
regimes (regimes with few samples) to the most similar significant regimes, our variable Nw will
eventually stabilize at the value of K. To do this, we will proceed by contradiction:
Suppose the score term in Eq (24) is optimized and there exists a regime e that is not pure, i.e.,
there exist a, b ∈ [K] with a ̸= b but qea > 0 and qeb > 0. Since they are different distributions
for two different regimes with two     different causal graphs, there exists   i ∈ {1, ..., d} such that
p Xti | PaiG ∗,a (< t), PaiG ∗,a (t) ̸= p Xti | PaiG ∗,b (< t), PaiG ∗,b (t) . Then the score term in
Equation (24) has the following lower bound:
               K X
                 d                        h
               X                                                                                                                               i
        inf                 qeℓ E             DKL p Xti | PaiG ∗,ℓ (< t), PaiG ∗,ℓ (t)                        ∥fie PaiG e (< t), PaiG e (t)
           θ                     Xt ∼p
               ℓ=1 i=1
               n
     ≥ inf qea E

                                  DKL p Xti | PaiG ∗,a (< t), PaiG ∗,a (t)

                                                                                                     ∥fie PaiG e (< t), PaiG e (t)
                                                                                                                                                         (25)
           θ          Xt ∼p
                            h                                                                                                        i o
        + qeb E                 DKL p Xti | PaiG ∗,b (< t), PaiG ∗,b (t)                            ∥fie PaiG e (< t), PaiG e (t)
                    Xt ∼p

As we assumed that the score term in Eq (24) is optimized, it means that:
               Nw X
                  K X
                    d                          h
               X                                                                                                                                     i
  0 = inf                        qcℓ E             DKL p Xti | PaiG ∗,ℓ (< t), PaiG ∗,ℓ (t)                        ∥fic PaiG c (< t), PaiG c (t)
        θ                            Xt ∼p
               c=1 ℓ=1 i=1
                    K X
                      d                        h
                    X                                                                                                                            i
   ⇒ 0 = inf                     qeℓ E             DKL p Xti | PaiG ∗,ℓ (< t), PaiG ∗,ℓ (t)                        ∥fie PaiG e (< t), PaiG e (t)
                θ                    Xt ∼p
                    ℓ=1 i=1                                                                                                                              (26)
            DKL  p  Xti |  PaiG ∗,a (< t), PaiG ∗,a (t)   ∥fie PaiG e (< t), PaiG e (t)  = 0
       (
   ⇒
            DKL p Xti | PaiG ∗,b (< t), PaiG ∗,b (t) ∥fie PaiG e (< t), PaiG e (t) = 0


   ⇒ ∀i ∈ {1, ..., d} : p Xti | PaiG ∗,a (< t), PaiG ∗,a (t)                                = p Xti | PaiG ∗,b (< t), PaiG ∗,b (t)


 and the last line, Eq (26), is a contradiction because the two distributions represent two different
regimes with two different graphs. Hence, if the score term of Eq (24) is optimized all the estimated
regimes will be pure.
First case: If we matched the samples of less significant regimes to the wrong regimes, the regime
is not pure and then the score term is not optimized (contradiction).
Second case: If we eliminate a lot of regimes such that Nw ≤ K − 1, at least one of our estimated
regimes will not be pure and this contradicts the assumption of optimized score term (same
reasoning).
Based on this reasoning, optimizing the score term of Equation 24 will ensure convergence to the
true number of regimes and also every regime will be pure.


C.1.2       I N CASE OF EDGE DISAGREEMENT S (G ∗ , E ∗ ) > S(Ĝ, Ê)

Now we will show that Eq (24 )is positive, if ∃u ∈ {1, ..., K} s.t Gˆu disagrees with G ∗,u on instan-
taneous or/and time lagged link.
To simplify the notation, we denote by p(u) the distribution p(.|G u ) the optimal distribution that de-
scribes the cgm of regime u. We assume that each estimated regime Êc (c ∈ {1, . . . , Nw } , Nw ≥ K)
contains samples from same true regime. Then Equation (24) has lower bound:
                                        PK
                                   inf θ ℓ=1 qℓ∗ E DKL p(ℓ) ∥f ℓ

                                                  Xt ∼p                                            (27)
                                                 PK
                              ≥ (minℓ qℓ∗ ) inf θ ℓ=1 DKL p(ℓ) ∥f ℓ



                                                                                   17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Equation (27) is positive if and only if η(G) is positive.
                                                XK
                                   η(G) := inf      DKL p(ℓ) ∥f ℓ                                    (28)
                                              θ
                                                  ℓ=1
Let assume that ∃r ∈∈ {1, ..., K} s.t Gˆr disagrees with G ∗,r on instantaneous or/and time lagged
link. We follow the same intuition as Gong et al. (2022); Peters et al. (2013; 2017):

      DKL p(r) ∥f r
                            ∗
       h          i   |Er |                h   h                                       ii            (29)
                      X
   =DKL p(r)
         s   ∥f r
                s   +       Ep(r) (X0:t−1 ) DKL p(r) (Xt | X0:t−1 ) ∥f r (Xt | X0:t−1 )
                        t=S+1
Based on Assumption 7, we know that the source model is known, which leads to the following
result:
                         Er∗ |
                        |X
                                              h   h                                        ii
                (r) r
Eq (29) ⇐⇒ DKL p ∥f =          Ep(r) (X0:t−1 ) DKL p(r) (Xt | X0:t−1 ) ∥f r (Xt | X0:t−1 )
                                  t=S+1
                                                                                                     (30)
We will show that DKL p(r) ∥f r is positive in two cases:


       • Disagreement on lagged parents only. This means that for all t ∈ [S + 1, T ], the
         instantaneous connections at t for Gˆr and G ∗,r are the same, and ∃t ∈ [S + 1, T ] and i ∈
                                  Xi                    Xi
         {1, ..., d} such that PaG ∗,r
                                    t
                                       (< t) ̸= PaGˆrt (< t). We can use a similar argument as the
         theorem 1 in Peters et al. (2013). Without loss of generality, we assume under Gˆr , we have
           j
         Xt−τ     → Xti and there is no connections between them under G ∗,r . Thus, from Markov
         conditions, we have                                     n            o
                                                                 i
                                       j                          j
                                Xti ⊥
                                    ⊥ Xt−τ | X0:t−1 ∪ NDX    i
                                                        t \ Xt , Xt−τ
                                   i
         under G ∗,r , where NDX t   are the non-descendants of node Xti at some time t. However,
         from the causal minimality and Proposition 6.16 in Peters et al. (2017), we have
                                                                  i
                                                                      n            o
                                          j                                     j
                                Xti ̸⊥
                                     ⊥ Xt−τ    | X0:t−1 ∪ NDX  t    \   Xt
                                                                          i
                                                                            , Xt−τ

                 ˆ
                                              (r)                     r

                  r
         under G , and we have DKL p (Xt | X0:t−1 ) ∥f (Xt | X0:t−1 ) ̸= 0. Hence,
         DKL p(r) ∥f r ̸= 0


       • Disagreement on instantaneous parents. In this Section we will use two different results
         one for the linear and the other one for the non linear case.
            – Linear case. For this case, we will use Theorem 1 in Peters & Bühlmann (2014). In
              this theorem, the author confirms that the graph is identifiable for linear models with
              Gaussian additive noise, if for each j ∈ {1, . . . , d}, the weights of the causal relations
              βjk ̸= 0 for all k ∈ PAGj 0 . For our instantaneous links, we have all the weights of
              the parents are non null. Hence, the instantaneous links are identifiable. Otherwise if
              DKL p(r) ∥f r ̸= 0
            – Non linear case. Using Theorem 2 from Peters et al. (2012), we can notice that
              our instantaneous links are Identifiable Functional Model Class, (B, F)-IFMOC, they
              belongs exactly to the 3rd class of Lemma 3 in Peters et al. (2012): nonlinear ANMs:
              F3 = {f (X, n) = ϕ(X) + n} B3 = {(ϕ, X, N ) not lin., Gauss,  Gauss }\B̃3 . Hence
              our instantaneous links are identifiable, otherwise, DKL p(r) ∥f r ̸= 0.

Based on the above reasoning, we can show that if ∃r ∈∈ {1, ..., K} s.t., Gˆr disagree with G ∗,r on
instantaneous or/and time lagged links, DKL p(r) ∥f r ̸= 0.
Thus, η(G) > 0. Then as we assume in Theorem 1 that λ is sufficient small would implies Equation
(26) is positive.                                             n                         o
If |Gˆr | ≥ |G ∗,r | then clearly Eq 26 is positive. Let G+ := Gˆr ∈ G||Gˆr | < |G ∗,r | . To make
sure that we have S (G ∗ , E ∗ ) − S(G, E) > 0 for all G ∈ G+ , we need to pick λ sufficiently small.
Choosing 0 < λ < minG∈G+ PNw |G cη(G)                      is sufficient.
                                 ( c=1 |− K         ∗,ℓ |
                                                         )
                                           P
                                             ℓ=1 |G


                                                    18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D       F URTHER EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
D.1     S YNTHETIC DATA

We employ the Erdos–Rényi (ER) (Newman, 2018) model with mean degrees of 1 or 2 to generate
lagged graphs, and the Barabasi–Albert (BA) (Barabási & Albert, 1999) model with mean degrees
4 for instantaneous graphs. The maximum number of lags, L, is set at 1 or 2. We experiment
with varying numbers of nodes {5, 10, 20, 40} and different numbers of regimes {2, 3, 4, 5}, each
representing diverse causal graphs. The length of each regime is randomly sampled from the set
{300, 400, 500, 600}.

        • Linear case. Data is generated as follows:
                                                                     L
                                                                     X
                        ∀u ∈ {1, ..., K}, ∀t ∈ Eu : Xt = Xt Gu0 +           Xt−τ Guτ + ϵt ,
                                                                     τ =1

          with Gu0 is adjacency matrix of the generated graph by BA model, ∀τ ∈ {1, .., L} : Guτ
          are the adjacency of the time lagged graphs generated by ER and ϵt ∼ N (0, I), follows to
          a normal distribution.
        • Non-linear case. The formulation used to generated the data is:
                       ∀u ∈ {1, ..., K}, ∀t ∈ Eu : Xti = giu PaiG u (< t), PaiG u (t) + ϵit ,


          where giu is a general differentiable linear/non-linear function and ϵit ∼ N (0, 1), follows a
          normal distribution. The function giu is a random combination between a linear transfor-
          mation and a randomly chosen function from the set: {Tanh, LeakyReLU, ReLU}.

D.2     BASELINES

All used benchmarks for the synthetic experiments are run by using publicly available libraries:
VARLINGAM (Hyvärinen et al., 2010) is implemenented in the lingam4 python package.
RPCMCI (Saggioro et al., 2020) is implemented in Tigramite5 and DYNOTEARS (Pamfil et al.,
2020) on causalnex6 package. We fine tuned the parameters to achieve the optimal graph for
each model.
For CASTOR, an edge threshold of 0.4 is selected. In the linear scenario, we establish ζ = 100
as the minimum regime duration, while in the non-linear context, ζ is set at 200. To demonstrate
the model’s robustness to the choice of the window size, we train CASTOR using diverse window
sizes, specifically w = 200 or w = 300. For the sparsity coefficient, we use λ = 0.05. In order to
optimise our M-step, we use L-BFGS-B algorithm (Zhu et al., 1997).

D.3     N ESTIM BRAIN CONNECTIVITY

                              Model              F1 FMRI      Reg Acc
                              PWGC               66.7         -
                              VARLINGAM          47.6         -
                              CASTOR             66.5         80
Table 3: F1 Scores for FMRI data, ’Reg’ indicates regime and ’Reg Acc’ refers to regime identifi-
cation accuracy.
Finally we test the efficacy of CASTOR on FMRI imaging dataset Nestim (Smith et al., 2011), a
resource commonly utilized as a benchmark in the field of temporal causal discovery (Löwe et al.
(2022); Khanna & Tan (2019); Assaad et al. (2022)). Each time series in the dataset simulates the
neural signals for an individual human subject, encompassing d = 5 distinct nodes. Notably, the
majority of time series in the Nestim dataset have the same summary causal graph. In order to create
    4
      https://lingam.readthedocs.io/en/latest/
    5
      https://jakobrunge.github.io/tigramite/
    6
      https://causalnex.readthedocs.io/en/latest/


                                                   19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


MTS with multiple regimes, we generated additional synthetic data using the generative process
outlined in the previous section 5.1. Our choice of baseline models aligns with those utilized in the
IT monitoring data evaluation, as detailed in Section 6.2. Table 3 shows that CASTOR successfully
infers exact number of regimes and it succeeds to detect 80% of the real FMRI data. Even if
the regime accuracy is 80%, CASTOR shows robustness and versatility in identifying complex
temporal relationships within this type of data by achieving similar results to the baselines that have
access to the true regime indices.

D.4   F URTHER EXPERIMENTS : L INEAR CASE


                                K=2                     K=3                     K=4
d     Method            Type    SHD     F1              SHD     F1              SHD     F1
                        Inst.   7       22.9±5.6        13      18.4±3.6        14      24.1±6.5
      VARLINGAM
                        Lag     9       8.01±12         14      15.9±4.2        14      8.20±6.5
5
                        Inst.   -       -               -       -               -       -
      RPCMCI
                        Lag     -       -               -       -               -       -
                        Inst.   0       100±0.0         0       100±0.0         2       97.3±1.9
      CASTOR
                        Lag     0       100±0.0         0       100±0.0         1       97.2±2.0
                        Inst    62      8.83 ± 1.7      90      10.3 ± 2.4      121     14.0 ± 2.4
      VARLINGAM
                        Lag     48      2.96 ± 0.2      61      1.66 ± 1.24     93      2.30 ± 0.7
20
                        Inst    -       -               -       -               -       -
      RPCMCI
                        Lag     67      46.6 ± 9.14     178     14.1±2.3        -       -
                        Inst    3       97.0±2.7        28      88.1±6.2        4       98.3±1.4
      CASTOR
                        Lag     0       100±0           9       89.9± 5.1       1       99.7±0.4

Table 4: F1 and SHD Scores by Models and Settings: d indicates number of nodes, K refers to the
number of regimes, and ’Type’ refers to the causal links as either instantaneous or time-lagged.


                                K=5
d     Method            Type    SHD     F1
                        Inst.   59      11.7±2.3
      VARLINGAM
                        Lag     51      4.69±2.4
10
                        Inst.   -       -
      RPCMCI
                        Lag     -       -
                        Inst.   4       98.4±1.4
      CASTOR
                        Lag     1       97.1±1.4

Table 5: F1 and SHD Scores by Models and Settings: d indicates number of nodes, K refers to the
number of regimes, and ’Type’ refers to the causal links as either instantaneous or time-lagged.


In this section, we present additional results using linear synthetic data with varying numbers of
nodes, specifically {5, 20}, and diverse numbers of regimes {2, 3, 4, 5}. Our model’s performance
is compared against RPCMCI (Saggioro et al., 2020) and VARLINGAM (Hyvärinen et al., 2010),
and the results are displayed in Table 4, 5. CASTOR not only outperforms RPCMCI but con-
sistently converges, accurately identifying the number of regimes and recovering both the regime
indices and their respective underlying causal graphs. In scenarios with 5 different regimes, where
RPCMCI fails to converge, CASTOR infers the true number of regimes, their partitions, and effi-
ciently learns the causal graphs, achieving more than a 98% F1 score. Furthermore, in comparison
to VARLINGAM (a method capable of modeling both lagged and instantaneous links in MTS data),
CASTOR demonstrates markedly superior performance.
Figure 4 displays a comparison between the graphs estimated by CASTOR and the ground truth
graphs. CASTOR effectively learns the causal graphs and the distinct regime partitions. In figure 5
we test CASTOR on data with L = 2 lags, hence CASTOR needs to estimate 3 adjacency matrices


                                                   20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


in every regimes (the matrix for instantaneous links, first time lagged links and second time lagged
links). We can notice that CASTOR estimates well the graphs and infers the regime partitions.


                                                21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 4: The estimated temporal causal graphs for five regimes (Linear case), with one matrix
representing instantaneous links and another delineating time-lagged relations. The second column
showcases the actual causal graphs, while the final column highlights the discrepancies between the
estimated and true graphs.


                                                22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 5: The estimated temporal causal graphs For MTS with 2 lags and 10 nodes and 2 regimes
for the linear case


                                             23
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D.5     F URTHER EXPERIMENTS : C OMPARISON WITH CD-NOD AND R HINO

We conducted a comparative analysis with CD-NOD, a causal discovery model specifically designed
for heterogeneous data and non-stationary time series (Huang et al., 2020). In the context of MTS
with multiple regimes, CD-NOD learns a summary causal graph encapsulating the entire MTS.
It’s worth noting that in the work by Huang et al. (2020), CD-NOD demonstrates the capability to
learn both the regime partition and the summary causal graph. However, in our specific scenario,
we utilized the publicly available version of CD-NOD within the causal-learn7 . In this pack-
age, CD-NOD focuses on learning the summary causal graph while necessitating the availability of
regime indexes.
Our experimental setup involves linear causal relations and diverse configurations, including 2, 3,
and 4 regimes, each with varying numbers of nodes (10, 20, 40). For independence test of CD-
NOD, we chose Fisher’s Z conditional independence test for faster runs; note that we tested KCI
CD-NOD, the model takes over 2000 seconds for 2 regimes, with F1 scores in a similar range.
We systematically compared the performance of CD-NOD against CASTOR, with the evaluation
centered on the summary causal graphs as the basis for comparison.

Definition 7 (Summary causal graph, (Assaad et al., 2022)) Let (Xt )t∈T be a MTS and G =
(V, E) the associated summary causal graph. The set of vertices in that graph consists of the set
of components X 1 , . . . , X d at each time t ∈ N. The edges E of the graph are defined as follows:
variables X p and X q are connected if and only if there exists some time t and some time lag τ such
       p
that Xt−τ  causes Xtq at time t with a time lag of 0 ≤ τ for p ̸= q and with a time lag of 0 < τ for
p = q.



                             d     Method       K=2       K=3       K=4
                                   CD-NOD       20.2      11.4      38.8
                             10
                                   CASTOR       100       100       97.9
                                   CD-NOD       25.2      23.7      12.7
                             20
                                   CASTOR       100       97.2      93.4
                                   CD-NOD       0         11.3      5.57
                             40
                                   CASTOR       100       99.8      99.2

Table 6: F1 Scores by Models and Settings: d indicates number of nodes and K refers to the number
of regimes. The comparison is made for linear relations

From Table 6, it is evident that despite having access to regime indexes, CD-NOD does not manage
to outperform CASTOR in various settings (with an F1 score that does not exceed 26%). Addition-
ally, a clear trend emerges where CD-NOD’s performance declines when the number of nodes is 40.
On the contrary, CASTOR exhibits consistent performance across different settings, achieving a F1
score of over 93% in all scenarios.
We conducted a thorough comparison between CASTOR and Rhino, a cutting-edge model in causal
discovery. Rhino is specifically designed to infer causal graphs from time series data, particularly
Multivariate Time Series (MTS) characterized by history-dependent noise. This means that Rhino
considers the possibility of non-stationary noise, where its distribution is influenced by past obser-
vations. The work by Gong et al. (2022) involves optimizing a variational model to discern the
inherent graph structure within the data.
It’s worth noting that Rhino’s training involves at least 50 MTS, all sharing the same causal graph, to
learn the target Directed Acyclic Graph (DAG). In our comparison with Rhino, we generated diverse
MTS compositions with distinct regimes. We ensured that each regime contained a minimum of
10,000 data points (calculated as 50 × 200, where 50 is the number of MTS, and 200 is the length of
each MTS). This approach aimed to replicate a scenario similar to the one presented in the referenced
paper.
   7
       https://causal-learn.readthedocs.io/


                                                  24
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


To facilitate the comparison, we manually partitioned the MTS for Rhino.

                                        K=2             K=3            K=4
              d     Method      Type    SHD     F1      SHD     F1     SHD     F1
                                Inst.   36      36.4    48      37.8   64      39.1
                    Rhino
                                Lag     38      36.9    60      33.6   85      34.7
              10
                                Inst.   0       100     1       97.3   1       99.3
                    CASTOR
                                Lag     0       100     0       100    2       98.4

Table 7: F1 and SHD Scores by Models and Settings: d indicates number of nodes, K refers to the
number of regimes, and ’Type’ refers to the causal links as either instantaneous or time-lagged.

In comparison to other baselines, Rhino surpasses VARLINGAM in terms of F1 score, underscoring
its competitive performance in causal discovery.
Examining Table 7, it becomes evident that CASTOR consistently outperforms Rhino across various
settings. Notably, CASTOR achieves this superior performance without relying on access to regime
indexes, a noteworthy distinction. Moreover, Rhino necessitates a training phase that demands a
larger amount of data to effectively learn the temporal causal graph.

D.6   M ODELS RUNNING TIME

We compute the running time of every model in different settings, that includes 10 nodes and 2,3 or
4 different regimes, Figure 6 summarizes the results.


Figure 6: Running time per model, the y axis represents the running time in s and the x axis the
number of regime
VARLINGAM and CD-NOD (employing Fisher’s Z conditional independence test for faster runs;
note that KCI CD-NOD takes over 2000 seconds for 2 regimes, with F1 scores in a similar range)
exhibit remarkable speed compared to other methods. However, in terms of scores, both models en-
counter challenges in effectively learning causal graphs. Notably, CASTOR runs faster than Rhino,
even though CASTOR learns both temporal causal graphs and regime indexes.
A fair comparison arises when comparing RPCMCI and CASTOR, as both models learn regime in-
dexes and temporal causal graphs. It’s essential to mention that RPCMCI necessitates specifying the
number of regimes and the maximum number of transitions, producing only time-lagged relations.
From Figure 6, it is apparent that CASTOR converges more rapidly than RPCMCI. This difference
in convergence time becomes more pronounced as the settings become more complex.


                                                25
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D.7   F URTHER EXPERIMENTS : NONLINEAR CASE

In this section, we present additional results using non-linear synthetic data with varying numbers
of nodes, specifically {10, 20}, and diverse numbers of regimes {3, 5}. In this case, we compare
our model against various baseline models, namely DYNOTEARS (Pamfil et al., 2020) and VAR-
LINGAM (Hyvärinen et al., 2010). CASTOR showcases performance similar to DYNOTEARS in
modeling non-linear time-lagged relations while simultaneously learning the regime indexes. Addi-
tionally, it effectively identifies instantaneous links. As depicted in figures 8 and 9, the performance
of CASTOR diminishes with an increase in the number of regimes in non-linear scenarios. This out-
come is understandable since non-linearity poses a more challenging causal discovery problem, and
an increase in the number of regimes augments the number of parameters, consequently affecting
our model’s performance.


Figure 7: F1 by Models for K=3 Setting, Inst means instantaneous links and lag time-lagged ones.


                                                  26
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 8: The estimated temporal causal graphs for 3 regimes (non Linear case), with one matrix
representing instantaneous links and another delineating time-lagged relations. The second column
showcases the actual causal graphs, while the final column highlights the discrepancies between the
estimated and true graphs.


                                                27
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 9: The estimated temporal causal graphs for 5 regimes (non Linear case), with one matrix
representing instantaneous links and another delineating time-lagged relations. The second column
showcases the actual causal graphs, while the final column highlights the discrepancies between the
estimated and true graphs.



                                                28
