Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


L ARGE L ANGUAGE M ODELS AS T OOL M AKERS
 Tianle Cai1,2∗ Xuezhi Wang1 Tengyu Ma1,3† Xinyun Chen1                      Denny Zhou1
 1
   Google Deepmind 2 Princeton University 3 Stanford University



                                                A BSTRACT
             Recent research has highlighted the potential of large language models (LLMs)
             to improve their problem-solving capabilities with the aid of suitable external
             tools. In our work, we further advance this concept by introducing a closed-
             loop framework, referred to as LLMs As Tool Makers (LATM), where LLMs
             create their own reusable tools for problem-solving. Our approach consists of two
             phases: 1) tool making: an LLM acts as the tool maker that crafts tools for a set
             of tasks, where a tool is implemented as a Python utility function. 2) tool using:
             another LLM acts as the tool user, which applies the tool built by the tool maker
             for problem-solving. The tool user can be either the same or a different LLM
             from the tool maker. On the problem-solving server side, tool-making enables
             continual tool generation and caching as new requests emerge. This framework
             enables subsequent requests to access cached tools via their corresponding APIs,
             enhancing the efficiency of task resolution. Beyond enabling LLMs to create their
             own tools, our framework also uncovers intriguing opportunities to optimize the
             serving cost of LLMs: Recognizing that tool-making requires more sophisticated
             capabilities, we assign this task to a powerful, albeit resource-intensive, model.
             Conversely, the simpler tool-using phase is delegated to a lightweight model. This
             strategic division of labor allows the once-off cost of tool-making to be spread
             over multiple instances of tool-using, significantly reducing average costs while
             maintaining strong performance. Furthermore, our method offers a functional
             cache through the caching and reuse of tools, which stores the functionality of
             a class of requests instead of the natural language responses from LLMs, thus
             extending the applicability of the conventional cache mechanism. We evaluate
             our approach across various complex reasoning tasks, including Big-Bench tasks.
             With GPT-4 as the tool maker and GPT-3.5 as the tool user, LATM demonstrates
             performance equivalent to using GPT-4 for both roles, but with a significantly
             reduced inference cost. The codebase can be found in https://github.com/
             ctlllll/LLM-ToolMaker.


1       I NTRODUCTION
Large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated outstanding capabilities across a broad array of
NLP tasks (Brown et al., 2020; Chowdhery et al., 2022; Zhang et al., 2022; Hoffmann et al., 2022;
OpenAI, 2023; Google, 2023) and have even shown promising signs of achieving certain aspects
of artificial general intelligence (Bubeck et al., 2023; Kosinski, 2023). Moreover, analogous to the
evolution of human intelligence, recent research has unveiled the potential of augmenting LLMs with
external tools, thereby significantly enhancing their problem-solving capacities and efficiencies (Yao
et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2023; Parisi et al., 2022; Schick et al., 2023).
However, the applicability of these tool-using methods is largely contingent on the availability of
suitable tools. According to the lessons learned from the evolutionary milestones of humans, a
crucial turning point was that humans got the ability to fabricate their own tools to address emerging
challenges. Inspired by the importance of tool-making for humans, in this work, we embark on an
initial exploration to apply this evolutionary concept to the realm of LLMs. We propose a closed-loop
framework, which we term as LLMs As Tool Makers (LATM), enables LLMs to generate their own
reusable tools to tackle new tasks. Our approach comprises two key stages: 1) tool making: an LLM,
    ∗
        Work done as a Student Researcher at Google Deepmind.
    †
        Work done as a Visiting Researcher at Google Deepmind.


                                                      1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 1: The closed-loop framework of LATM. In situations with numerous problem-solving
requests, directly utilizing a powerful LLM to solve all the instances can result in high costs. On the
other hand, lightweight models are cost-effective but usually struggle with complex tasks. LATM
leverages the strengths of both models by employing a powerful model as the tool maker to generate
reusable tools (implemented as Python functions) for tasks observed in the requests and pass the
tool to a cost-effective tool user model for solving similar instances in the following requests. This
approach allows the lightweight model to achieve performance comparable to the powerful model
while maintaining greater cost-efficiency.


known as the tool maker, designs tools (implemented as Python functions) specifically for a given
task. 2) tool using: another LLM referred to as the tool user, which can be the same as the tool maker,
applies the tools to handle new requests. The two-stage design allows LATM to allocate jobs in each
stage to the most suitable LLM. Specifically, the tool-making process, which requires a high degree
of capability, can be assigned to a powerful albeit resource-intensive model (e.g., GPT-4). On the
other hand, the tool-using process, which is comparatively simpler, can be assigned to a lightweight
and cost-effective model (e.g., GPT-3.5 Turbo). This approach not only enhances the problem-solving
capabilities of LLMs, but also significantly reduces the average computational cost of addressing a
series of tasks.
As the tool-making process needs to be executed only once for a given functionality, the resulting
tools can be reused across different task instances. This approach paves the way for a scalable and
cost-efficient solution for handling complex task. For instance, consider a task where a user ask
the LLM to schedule a meeting that works for everyone (e.g., in email conversations). Lightweight
models like GPT-3.5 Turbo often struggle with such tasks that involve complex arithmetic reasoning.
In contrast, more powerful models (e.g., GPT-4) can find the correct solutions, despite that the
inference costs become much higher. LATM overcomes these hurdles by employing a powerful
yet expensive model as the tool maker, and passing it to a cost-effective model as the tool user, for
subsequent usage. After the tool has been forged, the lightweight tool user can use it to solve the
task efficiently with high performance. This paradigm can similarly be applied to recurring tasks
in various workflows, such as parsing and analyzing web documents into specific data formats or
formulating routing plans that satisfy several custom requirements, or being used to solve popular
games like the 24-game, Sudoku.
In the context of serving cost reduction, LATM introduces the opportunity of creating a functional
cache for the LLM server. Specifically, consider a streaming setting where the LLM server continu-
ously receives a sequence of requests. Traditional cache systems, such as GPTCache (Zilliz, 2023),
store the responses generated by the LLMs and reuse them for textually similar requests. However,
with the capacity for tool-making that LATM introduces, the system can store tools crafted by the
tool maker and reuse them for functionally analogous requests. This novel approach, combined with
the strategic division of labor between the tool maker and tool user, has the potential to considerably
reduce the average cost of serving a sequence of requests while maintaining high performance.


                                                  2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Our experiments validate the effectiveness of this approach on a range of complex reasoning tasks,
including several challenging Big-Bench tasks (Srivastava et al., 2022). The results show that LATM
can achieve performance on par with more resource-intensive models while being more cost-effective.
This novel approach to LLMs, which mimics the evolutionary leap of humans in creating and using
tools, opens up exciting possibilities for a growing community with LLM-generated tools.

2    R ELATED W ORK

Chain of thought (CoT). Recently, significant progress has been made in enhancing the problem-
solving abilities of large language models (LLMs) for complex tasks. For instance, CoT prompt-
ing (Wei et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2022) has been proposed to bolster LLM reasoning capabilities,
demonstrating improved performance across various reasoning and natural language processing tasks.
CoT is typically articulated through natural languages (Ling et al., 2017; Cobbe et al., 2021; Suzgun
et al., 2022; Shi et al., 2022; Zhou et al., 2022), yet it might also be effectively represented using
programming languages (Amini et al., 2019; Austin et al., 2021; Nye et al., 2021; Chowdhery et al.,
2022; Gao et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2022). More recently, Arora et al. (2023) proposed using LLMs
to generate structured views over documents, balancing quality and cost by ensembling extractions
from multiple synthesized functions. Our method shares a similar spirit with Arora et al. (2023) in
managing cost and quality trade-offs but focuses on more general use cases.

Augmenting language models with tools. Recent works have explored the potential of using
external tools to supplement LLMs’ capabilities for complex tasks. Yao et al. (2023); Yang et al.
(2023) proposed augmenting reasoning traces with task-specific actions in LLMs, enabling models to
reason and act synergistically. Various studies (Liu et al., 2023; Parisi et al., 2022; Schick et al., 2023;
Shen et al., 2023; Lu et al., 2023; Paranjape et al., 2023; Liang et al., 2023) have demonstrated that
supplementing LLMs with tools, such as calculators, search engines, translation systems, calendars,
or even API calls on other models, can help solve tasks that are not easily addressed by LLMs alone.
Similar to LATM, methods like Chameleon (Lu et al., 2023) also incorporate Python executors in the
pipeline. However, their primary focus is on using Python executors to accurately solve sub-steps
involving arithmetic reasoning, similar to Gao et al. (2023); Chen et al. (2022). In contrast, we
use Python executors to create reusable tools for addressing other task instances. Furthermore, the
separation of the tool maker and tool user enables the use of a lightweight model for most inferences,
thus enhancing efficiency and cost-effectiveness in LATM.

Adaptive generation in language models. In addition, recent research has proposed methods to
adaptively control decoding in LLMs to improve text generation efficiency (Leviathan et al., 2022;
Chen et al., 2023a; Xia et al., 2023). Speculative decoding is based on the notion that generating
text tokens (a more expensive process) can be expedited with a faster yet less powerful model while
approximating the performance of larger, costlier models by using them to score generated tokens (a
much faster process). Our approach of passing tools from a more expensive model to a smaller, faster
model also shares a similar spirit of adaptive computing. Instead of altering the decoding procedure,
we transfer newly generated tools between models to boost both the performance and efficiency of an
LLM in solving tasks.

Language model cascades. There is recent evidence that LLMs can enable repeated interactions
and that multiple LLMs can be combined to extend their capabilities further (Wu et al., 2022;
Zhou et al., 2022; Dohan et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2023c). Also, Chen et al. (2023b) demonstrated
that identifying optimal LLM combinations can help reduce costs while improving accuracy. Our
motivation aligns with these findings; however, rather than merely cascading LLMs, we identify task
categories that can be better addressed using new tools generated by a larger model and assign each
individual inference within that task category to a smaller model.

Early attempts on tool-making. Concurrent and independent to our work, several early attempts
have been made towards using LLMs to make tools. Wang et al. (2023) conducted research within
the Minecraft environment and demonstrated the ability of an LLM-powered agent to acquire new
skills in the form of programs. Similarly, Qian et al. (2023) proposes a method of decomposing
problem-solving for each individual instance into an abstract tool creation phase and a concrete tool


                                                     3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


application phase. Our work aligns with the spirit of both Wang et al. (2023) and Qian et al. (2023) in
the aim to let LLMs to generate their own tools for problem-solving. However, we also underscore
the significance of tool reusability and cost-effectiveness stemming from the division of labor. The
idea of tool making is also mentioned in a recent survey paper (Qin et al., 2023).


3     LLM AS T OOL M AKER (LATM)


Figure 2: The pipeline of LATM. LATM can be divided into two stages: 1) tool making: a powerful
yet more expensive model serves as the tool maker to generate generic and reusable tools from a few
demonstrations; 2) tool using: a lightweight and cheaper model serves as the tool user to use the
tool to solve various instances of the task. The tool-making stage can be further divided into three
sub-stages: (i) tool proposing: the tool maker makes an attempt to generate the tool (Python function)
from a few training demonstrations, if the tool is not executable, report the error and generate a new
one (fix the function); (ii) tool verification: the tool maker runs unit tests on validation samples, if the
tool does not pass the tests, report the error and generate new tests (fix the function calls in unit tests);
and (iii) tool wrapping: wrapping up the function code and the demonstrations of how to convert a
question into a function call from unit tests, preparing usable tools for tool user.


3.1   M AKING N EW T OOLS AND R EUSE T HEM

In the LATM paradigm, the main process can be split into two stages: Tool Making and Tool Using.
Each stage utilizes different types of Large Language Models (LLMs) to balance performance and
cost-effectiveness. All the prompts used in our experiments are shown in Appendix C.

Tool Making. This stage employs a powerful yet more expensive model, such as GPT-4, to serve
as the tool maker. Tool maker’s role is to create a generic and reusable tool (implemented as a Python
function) from a few demonstrations of a task. This stage can be further divided into three sub-stages:

• Tool Proposing: In this stage, tool maker attempts to generate a Python function to solve the
  demonstrations from the given task. This process follows the “programming by example” (PbE)


                                                     4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    paradigm (Halbert, 1984) where several concrete demonstrations are provided, and the model is
    required to write programs that produce the demonstrated behaviors. In our experiments, we use 3
    demonstrations for this stage. If the proposed tool is unexecutable or encounters errors, tool maker
    appends the error messages to the history and makes another attempt.
• Tool Verification: In this stage, the tool maker generates unit tests using validation samples and
  subsequently executes these tests on the proposed tool. We utilize 3 validation samples in our
  experiments. If the tool fails any of these tests, the tool maker records the error in its history
  and makes an attempt to rectify the issues within the unit tests (this procedure will only correct
  the function calls in the unit test part and will not correct the function). The ability of LLMs to
  self-debug has been demonstrated effectively in recent research (Madaan et al., 2023; Chen et al.,
  2023c; Lu et al., 2023; Kim et al., 2023). However, within the LATM pipeline, the verification
  stage serves a slightly different usage. This stage fulfills two key roles: 1) it provides examples that
  demonstrate how to convert natural language questions into function calls, and 2) it verifies the
  tool’s reliability, enabling the entire process to be fully automated.
• Tool Wrapping: If the execution or verification fails over a preset threshold, the Tool Making
  stage is viewed as failed. Otherwise, tool maker is ready to prepare the wrapped tool for tool user.
  This step involves wrapping up the function code and providing demonstrations of how to convert a
  task into a function call. These demonstrations are extracted from the Tool Verification step, which
  converts questions into unit tests. This final product is then ready for use by the tool user. Please
  see Appendix D for examples of the wrapped tools.

Tool Using. This second stage involves a lightweight and cost-effective model, such as GPT-3.5
Turbo, to serve as the tool user. The tool user’s role is to utilize the verified tool to solve various
instances of the task. The prompt for this stage is the wrapped tool which contains the function for
solving the task and demonstrations of how to convert a task query into a function call. With the
demonstrations, tool user can then generate the required function call in an in-context learning fashion.
The function calls are then executed to solve the task. Optionally, postprocessing can be applied
to convert the output to match the required format of the task, such as options for multiple-choice
questions.
The tool-making stage, including tool proposing, verification, and wrapping, only needs to be
performed once for each type of task. The resulting tools can then be reused for all instances of
that task. This makes LATM significantly more efficient and cost-effective than using a powerful
model alone. Furthermore, the Python function tools are a more generic form of Chain-of-Thought,
enhancing the overall utility and flexibility of the LLMs, as they can be used to solve questions that
involve algorithmic reasoning ability (Veličković and Blundell, 2021).


4     LATM F OSTERS A F UNCTIONAL C ACHE M ECHANISM FOR LLM S ERVING

In real-world scenarios, tasks often arrive in a sequential stream. To address this, we introduce a third
LLM, the dispatcher, that decides whether to engage the tool user or tool maker for each incoming
task. While this tool selection function mirrors existing works (Lu et al., 2023; Shen et al., 2023;
Schick et al., 2023; Paranjape et al., 2023), our dispatcher distinctively contributes to creating a
functional cache—it discerns new tasks that cannot be resolved with existing tools, thereby triggering
the tool maker to generate appropriate tools for these tasks.
The dispatcher maintains a repository of existing tools crafted by the tool maker in the format of
function APIs. Upon receipt of a new task instance, the dispatcher first attempts to locate a compatible
tool within the cache. If such a tool is present, the dispatcher assigns the instance and corresponding
tool to the tool user for resolution. However, if no suitable tool is available, the dispatcher identifies
this as a novel task, either solving it with a powerful model or, if necessary, invoking a human labeler.
These new instances are then cached until a sufficient number are amassed to craft a new tool, further
enriching the functional cache. This mechanism allows for the functionally similar tasks to reuse
these tools, expanding the coverage of the classic cache mechanism and reducing the overall serving
cost. Given the simplicity of the dispatching task, a lightweight model equipped with appropriate
prompts (See Appendix C) can efficiently serve as the dispatcher, adding only a marginal cost to the
entire pipeline.


                                                    5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 3: An illustration of the Tool Proposing and Tool Using stages of the LATM pipeline
for the Logical Deduction task (Srivastava et al., 2022). This task requires determining the order
of five objects based on several given conditions. In the Tool Proposing stage, the tool maker (such
as GPT-4) formulates a generic Python function capable of solving the provided k demonstrations
from the task (where k equals 3 in our experiments). The tool maker generates a search algorithm
that enumerates all possible orderings and verifies each against the provided conditions. During the
tool-using stage, the tool user translates each natural language question into a series of conditions,
generating function calls to utilize the tool for each task instance.


5     E XPERIMENTS
5.1   E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP

Datasets. We evaluate our approach on six datasets from diverse domains, including Logical
Deduction, Tracking Shuffled Objects, Dyck Language, Word Sorting, Chinese Remainder Theorem,
and Scheduling Meeting. The first five datasets are sourced from BigBench (Srivastava et al., 2022).
We take the 5 objects version of the Logical Deduction and Tracking Shuffled Objects tasks, referred
to as Logical Deduction (5) and Tracking Shuffled Objects (5) in the paper. We also constructed the
Scheduling Meeting task to demonstrate the effectiveness of LATM in real-world scenarios. Detailed
information on dataset generation can be found in Appendix E. We divide each dataset into training,
validation, and test sets, containing 3, 3, and 240 instances, respectively.

Model settings. During the tool-making stage, we set the temperature to 0.3 to introduce ran-
domness to the generation process, allowing for retries if necessary. For this stage, we conduct
experiments using GPT-4 and GPT-3.5 Turbo models with the ChatCompletion API, always
appending the response to the chat history to create an interactive experience. In the tool-using stage,
the LLM API call is made only once, and we also perform ablation studies on GPT-3-type models
with the standard Completion API. When using the tools, we consistently set the temperature to
0.0. We set the maximal retry times to be 3 for the tool-proposing and tool-verification stages.

5.2   E FFECTIVENESS OF THE T OOL -M AKING S TAGE

In the tool-making stage, we use a powerful yet slower model to generate generic Python functions
tailored to a specific task. This step is performed only once for each task, and the overhead is
amortized across all instances of that task. In our experiments, we use GPT-4 (OpenAI, 2023) as a


                                                   6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  Logical     Tracking Shuffled Dyck     Word                           Chinese                         Schedule
Deduction (5)    Objects (5)   Language Sorting                    Remainder Theorem                    Meeting
      Search         Simulation          Stack       Sort       Search/Extended Euclidean Interval intersections


               Table 1: The utility functions generated by tool maker to solve the tasks.


representative tool maker, while we explore other models’ tool-making capabilities in Section 5.5.
We provide several few-shot exemplars for the language model, guiding it to generate generic Python
programs, as illustrated in Figure 3.
Our observations indicate that when GPT-4 is employed as the tool maker, the model frequently
devises suitable algorithms for solving tasks. For instance, as shown in Table 1, the tool maker
creates code to solve the logical deduction task by searching through all permutations and selecting
the correct one that satisfies the given constraints. In our experiment, the tool-verification stage is
mainly used to provide examples that demonstrate how to convert natural language questions into
function calls, and we only observe 2 cases out of the 60 trials that the tool maker can correct its
mistakes with the guide of error messages. See Section 5.5 for more discussions on the tool maker.

5.3    LATM I MPROVES THE P ERFORMANCE OF L IGHTWEIGHT LLM S

In Table 2, we compare the performance of Chain-of-Thought prompting (Wei et al., 2022) with our
method, LATM. We employ GPT-4 as the tool maker to generate tools for the six tasks, and evaluate
the performance of both GPT-3.5 Turbo and GPT-4 as tool user. The results demonstrate that with the
help of the tool, a lightweight model like GPT-3.5 Turbo can achieve performance on par with GPT-4,
significantly outperforming CoT prompting. Additionally, the average cost of using GPT-3.5 Turbo
with the tool is much lower compared to using GPT-4. This highlights the effectiveness of LATM
in enhancing the performance of lightweight models and therefore reducing the cost compared to
employing expensive models. Intriguingly, for the Dyck Language task, GPT-3.5 Turbo as the tool
user even surpasses GPT-4 in its role as the tool user. Upon investigating the failure cases, we find
that when converting the question into a function call, GPT-4 occasionally superfluously closes some
brackets within the argument instead of leaving the argument unchanged and letting the function
solve it, which leads to incorrect function output.

Tool User          Logical     Tracking Shuffled   Dyck            Word            Chinese         Schedule     Cost on
          Method
 Model           Deduction (5)    Objects (5)    Language         Sorting     Remainder Theorem    Meeting     n samples
 GPT-3.5    CoT        66.4           61.6           20.4         59.2               0.0              18.9        O(nc)
  Turbo    LATM     79.7 (+13.3)   99.6 (+38.0)   92.2 (+71.8) 98.3 (+39.1)     100.0 (+100.0)    100.0 (+81.1) O(nc + C)
            CoT        88.8           100.0          63.6          90.9              0.0              55.6      O(nC)
 GPT-4
           LATM        86.6           100.0          87.5          99.1             100.0            100.0      O(nC)


Table 2: Accuracy comparison between LATM and Chain-of-Thought. The six tasks are detailed
in Section 5.1. For LATM, the tool is created by GPT-4 and utilized by both GPT-3.5 Turbo and GPT-
4. The results demonstrate that the application of LATM can significantly enhance the performance
of GPT-3.5 Turbo, often surpassing or matching GPT-4’s performance with CoT in certain scenarios.
The last column depicts the overall cost of processing n samples. Here, C represents the cost of one
call to GPT-4, while c denotes the cost of one call to GPT-3.5 Turbo. At the time of writing this paper,
C is over 15x larger than c. The few-shot CoT demonstrations for the first four tasks are provided by
Suzgun et al. (2022), while for the last two tasks, we apply direct few-shot prompting without CoT.


5.4    A DAPTING LATM TO A DYNAMIC S TREAM OF D IVERSE TASKS

As discussed in Section 4, we can adapt LATM to handle a dynamic stream where instances from
potentially different tasks emerge in real-time. In this setting, we introduce an additional model,
the dispatcher, tasked with identifying the task to which each incoming instance pertains. We
employ GPT-3.5 Turbo for this role, evaluating its effectiveness in two key functions: 1) Identifying
and employing existing tools from the functional cache to resolve an incoming instance, and 2)


                                                            7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                      Logical       Tracking Shuffled         Dyck      Word          Chinese        Schedule
 Tool Maker Model
                    Deduction (5)      Objects (5)          Language   Sorting   Remainder Theorem   Meeting
   GPT-3.5 Turbo         0/5              0/5                 5/5       5/5             5/5            0/5
      GPT-4              3/5              4/5                 5/5       5/5             5/5            3/5


Table 3: Success rate of generating new tools (Python functions that pass the tool-verification
step) in the tool-making stage with GPT-4 v.s. GPT-3.5 Turbo. We run 5 trials for each model on
each task, n/5 means n trails out of 5 successes to produce a valid tool. For hard tasks like Logical
Deduction and Tracking Shuffled Objects, GPT-3.5 Turbo fails in all trials, showing the necessity of
using a more powerful model as tool maker.


Detecting unseen tasks and triggering the tool maker to create appropriate tools for these tasks. This
experimental setup helps assess how effectively our system can reduce serving costs by reusing and
extending the functional cache in a dynamic, multi-tasking scenario.

Identifying existing tools. The first part of our evaluation assesses the dispatcher’s capability to
recognize existing tools within the functional cache that correspond to a given instance, analogous
to the cache fetching phase of traditional cache systems. To this end, we generate a test set of
100 samples, randomly mixed from the six tasks discussed in Section 5.1. For each instance, the
dispatcher is tasked to determine the appropriate tool from existing ones, utilizing prompts containing
task examples associated with these tools (See Appendix C). Success is measured by the correct
identification of the tool. Over five random constructions of the test set, the accuracy in correctly
determining the suitable tool is 95% ± 2%.

Requesting tool-making. The second part of our evaluation tests the dispatcher’s ability to request
tool-making for instances originating from an unseen task. This situation is akin to enqueuing a new
instance into the cache when a cache miss happens. We randomly designate four tasks as existing
tasks with readily available tools and select four other tasks for testing—two of these are unseen, and
the other two fall within the realm of existing tasks. Again, a test set of 100 samples is generated.
For each instance in the test set, the dispatcher determines whether it needs to request tool-making
or if an existing tool can solve the instance. Over multiple runs, the accuracy of making the correct
decision stands at 96% ± 3%, demonstrating the robustness of our approach in efficiently managing
the functional cache.
The above results illustrate that the dispatcher can effectively recognize existing tools and accurately
request tool-making for unseen tasks, all while maintaining high performance. These findings
highlight the potential of LATM to be seamlessly adapted to a streaming environment encompassing
a diverse range of tasks. This validation serves to fortify the viability of our framework in real-world
applications, particularly where the efficient management of functional cache is paramount.

5.5   A BLATION S TUDY

Capacity required for the tool-making language model. We investigate the capacity requirements
for the language model used in the tool-making stage (See Table 3). Generally, we found that a more
powerful and expensive model better serves the purpose, as this stage is performed only once for each
task, and high accuracy is crucial for effectively passing tools to a smaller model. Specifically, on
hard tasks like Logical Deduction and Tracking Shuffled Objects, GPT-3.5 Turbo fails in all the 5
trails. And the major failure reason is that the tool is not general enough and may only work on the
training samples. On the other hand, we also discovered that for easy tasks, the tool maker can be
a lightweight language model. For simple tasks like Word Sorting, GPT-3.5 Turbo can effortlessly
generate a program that solves the task. Another limitation that may contribute to the tool maker’s
failure is the context length constraints. Since we use the entire history in each step of tool-making to
enhance the reliability of the tool-making stage, this also introduces a longer context. In this case
GPT-4 with 8192 context length is preferable.

Capacity required for the tool-using language model. In this section, we investigate the capacity
requirements for the tool-using model. The results are presented in Table 4. We observed that GPT-3.5


                                                        8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                    GPT-3.5 Turbo   text-davinci-002    davinci   curie     babbage    ada
       Logical Deduction (5)           79.7%               58.2%        11.6%      6.5%     11.6%      3.0%
    Tracking Shuffled Objects (5)       99.6%             100.0%        62.1%     20.7%     16.4%      5.2%
          Dyck Language                92.2%               35.8%        16.4%     18.1%     9.1%       9.9%
           Word Sorting                98.3%               60.8%        26.6%      7.3%     7.3%       0.9%
    Chinese Remainder Theorem          100.0%             100.0%        99.6%     93.1%     75.0%     66.0%
         Schedule Meeting              100.0%             100.0%        62.9%     59.1%     23.2%      0.0%
       Cost ($ per 1K tokens)           0.002              0.02          0.02     0.002     0.0005    0.0004

Table 4: A performance comparison of various tool user models, all using the same tool generated
by GPT-4. All costs are based on the rates at the time of writing. Of all the models, GPT-3.5 Turbo
demonstrates the best trade-off between performance and cost. We opted for GPT-3 models prior to
instruction tuning (ada instead of text-ada-001, etc.), as we observed that the models after instruction
tuning underperformed in the tool-using stage. We postulate that this is due to the instruction tuning
impairing the in-context learning ability, which is essential for the tool-using stage.


Turbo offers the best balance between performance and cost among all the models tested. Regarding
the older GPT-3 series of models (ada, babbage, curie, davinci), we found that models that before
instruction tuning often perform better than their counterparts post instruction tuning (text-ada-001,
etc.). We hypothesize that the instruction tuning phase in these models may adversely impact the
in-context learning ability, which is crucial for the tool-using stage.

CoT as a tool does not help. In addition to LATM, we investigate if we can improve task
performance by reusing Chain-of-Thought (CoT) from a larger model to a smaller model similar to
LATM pipeline. Specifically, we use the same larger model (GPT-4) in the “CoT-making” stage,
using zero-shot prompting “Let’s think step by step.” to elicit the intermediate thought steps, and
then use the generated CoT to the same smaller tool-using model (GPT-3.5 Turbo). We test this on
two tasks and report the results Table 5. We observe that using CoT from a large model has a similar
or even worse performance than human-written CoT, which is much worse than LATM.

                            Accuracy              GPT-4 CoT       Human-written CoT   LATM
                     Logical Deduction (5)          36.8                66.4              79.7
                  Tracking Shuffled Objects (5)     63.2                61.6              99.6

Table 5: Accuracy of using CoT generated by GPT-4. The performance is similar to human-written
CoT, which is much worse than LATM.


6    C ONCLUSION AND F UTURE W ORK
We introduced LATM, a closed-loop framework empowering large language models (LLMs) to create
and utilize their own tools for diverse tasks. Our approach, inspired by human’s evolutionary strides
in tool creation, employs two key stages: Tool Making and Tool Using. This division of labor allows
us to harness the capabilities of advanced LLMs while significantly reducing computational costs.
Our experiments confirmed the efficacy of LATM across various complex tasks, demonstrating that
our framework performs comparably to resource-intensive models while being more cost-effective.
In addition, we show that adding another dispatcher LLM can further provide flexibility to our
framework, enabling on-the-fly tool creation and usage.
In our evaluation process, we identified a significant lack of high-quality datasets that authentically
represent daily human-computer interactions, including recurring tasks such as scheduling meetings
or booking flights over email or phone calls, in their raw natural language format. We anticipate
that our work will stimulate the research community to create such datasets, which could prove
instrumental in cultivating the next generation of AI systems. These systems, capable of generating
and applying their own tools, will be equipped to tackle complex tasks more effectively. An exciting
avenue for future research is enabling the tool maker to refine and upgrade existing tools to manage
new problem instances, much like in software development. This adaptability could further catalyze
the evolution of the AI ecosystem, unlocking a wealth of opportunities.


                                                      9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Aida Amini, Saadia Gabriel, Peter Lin, Rik Koncel-Kedziorski, Yejin Choi, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi.
  Mathqa: Towards interpretable math word problem solving with operation-based formalisms.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:1905.13319, 2019.
Simran Arora, Brandon Yang, Sabri Eyuboglu, Avanika Narayan, Andrew Hojel, Immanuel Trummer,
  and Christopher Ré. Language models enable simple systems for generating structured views of
  heterogeneous data lakes, 2023.
Jacob Austin, Augustus Odena, Maxwell Nye, Maarten Bosma, Henryk Michalewski, David Dohan,
  Ellen Jiang, Carrie Cai, Michael Terry, Quoc Le, and Charles Sutton. Program synthesis with large
  language models, 2021.
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are
  few-shot learners. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:1877–1901, 2020.
Sébastien Bubeck, Varun Chandrasekaran, Ronen Eldan, Johannes Gehrke, Eric Horvitz, Ece Kamar,
  Peter Lee, Yin Tat Lee, Yuanzhi Li, Scott Lundberg, et al. Sparks of artificial general intelligence:
  Early experiments with gpt-4. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.12712, 2023.
Charlie Chen, Sebastian Borgeaud, Geoffrey Irving, Jean-Baptiste Lespiau, Laurent Sifre, and John
  Jumper. Accelerating large language model decoding with speculative sampling. February 2023a.
  doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2302.01318.
Lingjiao Chen, Matei Zaharia, and James Zou. Frugalgpt: How to use large language models while
  reducing cost and improving performance, 2023b.
Wenhu Chen, Xueguang Ma, Xinyi Wang, and William W. Cohen. Program of thoughts prompting:
 Disentangling computation from reasoning for numerical reasoning tasks, 2022.
Xinyun Chen, Maxwell Lin, Nathanael Schärli, and Denny Zhou. Teaching large language models to
  self-debug. ARXIV.ORG, 2023c. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2304.05128.
Aakanksha Chowdhery, Sharan Narang, Jacob Devlin, Maarten Bosma, Gaurav Mishra, Adam
  Roberts, Paul Barham, Hyung Won Chung, Charles Sutton, Sebastian Gehrmann, et al. Palm:
  Scaling language modeling with pathways. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.02311, 2022.
Karl Cobbe, Vineet Kosaraju, Mohammad Bavarian, Mark Chen, Heewoo Jun, Lukasz Kaiser,
  Matthias Plappert, Jerry Tworek, Jacob Hilton, Reiichiro Nakano, et al. Training verifiers to solve
  math word problems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.14168, 2021.
David Dohan, Winnie Xu, Aitor Lewkowycz, Jacob Austin, David Bieber, Raphael Gontijo Lopes,
 Yuhuai Wu, Henryk Michalewski, Rif A. Saurous, Jascha Sohl-dickstein, Kevin Murphy, and
  Charles Sutton. Language model cascades, 2022.
Luyu Gao, Aman Madaan, Shuyan Zhou, Uri Alon, Pengfei Liu, Yiming Yang, Jamie Callan, and
  Graham Neubig. Pal: Program-aided language models, 2023.
Google. Palm 2 technical report, 2023. URL https://ai.google/static/documents/
  palm2techreport.pdf.
Daniel Conrad Halbert. Programming by example. University of California, Berkeley, 1984.
Jordan Hoffmann, Sebastian Borgeaud, Arthur Mensch, Elena Buchatskaya, Trevor Cai, Eliza
  Rutherford, Diego de Las Casas, Lisa Anne Hendricks, Johannes Welbl, Aidan Clark, et al.
  Training compute-optimal large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.15556, 2022.
Geunwoo Kim, P. Baldi, and S. McAleer. Language models can solve computer tasks. ARXIV.ORG,
  2023. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2303.17491.
Michal Kosinski. Theory of mind may have spontaneously emerged in large language models. arXiv
 preprint arXiv:2302.02083, 2023.


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Yaniv Leviathan, Matan Kalman, and Yossi Matias. Fast inference from transformers via speculative
  decoding. November 2022. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2211.17192.
Yaobo Liang, Chenfei Wu, Ting Song, Wenshan Wu, Yan Xia, Yu Liu, Yang Ou, Shuai Lu, Lei Ji,
  Shaoguang Mao, et al. Taskmatrix. ai: Completing tasks by connecting foundation models with
  millions of apis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.16434, 2023.
Wang Ling, Dani Yogatama, Chris Dyer, and Phil Blunsom. Program induction by rationale gen-
 eration: Learning to solve and explain algebraic word problems. In Proceedings of the 55th
 Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers),
 pages 158–167, Vancouver, Canada, July 2017. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi:
 10.18653/v1/P17-1015. URL https://aclanthology.org/P17-1015.
Ruibo Liu, Jason Wei, Shixiang Shane Gu, Te-Yen Wu, Soroush Vosoughi, Claire Cui, Denny
  Zhou, and Andrew M. Dai. Mind’s eye: Grounded language model reasoning through simulation.
  In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023. URL https:
  //openreview.net/forum?id=4rXMRuoJlai.
Pan Lu, Baolin Peng, Hao Cheng, Michel Galley, Kai-Wei Chang, Ying Nian Wu, Song-Chun Zhu,
  and Jianfeng Gao. Chameleon: Plug-and-play compositional reasoning with large language models.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.09842, 2023.
Aman Madaan, Niket Tandon, Prakhar Gupta, Skyler Hallinan, Luyu Gao, Sarah Wiegreffe, Uri
 Alon, Nouha Dziri, Shrimai Prabhumoye, Yiming Yang, et al. Self-refine: Iterative refinement
 with self-feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.17651, 2023.
Maxwell Nye, Anders Johan Andreassen, Guy Gur-Ari, Henryk Michalewski, Jacob Austin, David
 Bieber, David Dohan, Aitor Lewkowycz, Maarten Bosma, David Luan, et al. Show your work:
 Scratchpads for intermediate computation with language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.00114,
 2021.
OpenAI. Gpt-4 technical report, 2023.
Bhargavi Paranjape, Scott Lundberg, Sameer Singh, Hannaneh Hajishirzi, Luke Zettlemoyer, and
  Marco Tulio Ribeiro. Art: Automatic multi-step reasoning and tool-use for large language models.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.09014, 2023.
Aaron Parisi, Yao Zhao, and Noah Fiedel. Talm: Tool augmented language models, 2022.
Cheng Qian, Chi Han, Yi R Fung, Yujia Qin, Zhiyuan Liu, and Heng Ji. Creator: Disentangling
  abstract and concrete reasonings of large language models through tool creation. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2305.14318, 2023.
Yujia Qin, Shengding Hu, Yankai Lin, Weize Chen, Ning Ding, Ganqu Cui, Zheni Zeng, Yufei
  Huang, Chaojun Xiao, Chi Han, et al. Tool learning with foundation models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2304.08354, 2023.
Timo Schick, Jane Dwivedi-Yu, Roberto Dessì, Roberta Raileanu, Maria Lomeli, Luke Zettlemoyer,
  Nicola Cancedda, and Thomas Scialom. Toolformer: Language models can teach themselves to
  use tools, 2023.
Yongliang Shen, Kaitao Song, Xu Tan, Dongsheng Li, Weiming Lu, and Yueting Zhuang. Hugginggpt:
  Solving ai tasks with chatgpt and its friends in huggingface. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.17580,
  2023.
Freda Shi, Mirac Suzgun, Markus Freitag, Xuezhi Wang, Suraj Srivats, Soroush Vosoughi,
  Hyung Won Chung, Yi Tay, Sebastian Ruder, Denny Zhou, et al. Language models are mul-
  tilingual chain-of-thought reasoners. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.03057, 2022.
Aarohi Srivastava, Abhinav Rastogi, Abhishek Rao, Abu Awal Md Shoeb, Abubakar Abid, Adam
  Fisch, Adam R Brown, Adam Santoro, Aditya Gupta, Adrià Garriga-Alonso, et al. Beyond the
  imitation game: Quantifying and extrapolating the capabilities of language models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2206.04615, 2022.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Mirac Suzgun, Nathan Scales, Nathanael Schärli, Sebastian Gehrmann, Yi Tay, Hyung Won Chung,
 Aakanksha Chowdhery, Quoc V Le, Ed H Chi, Denny Zhou, et al. Challenging big-bench tasks
 and whether chain-of-thought can solve them. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.09261, 2022.
Petar Veličković and Charles Blundell. Neural algorithmic reasoning. Patterns, 2(7):100273, 2021.
Guanzhi Wang, Yuqi Xie, Yunfan Jiang, Ajay Mandlekar, Chaowei Xiao, Yuke Zhu, Linxi Fan, and
 Anima Anandkumar. Voyager: An open-ended embodied agent with large language models. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2305.16291, 2023.
Xuezhi Wang, Jason Wei, Dale Schuurmans, Quoc Le, Ed Chi, and Denny Zhou. Self-consistency
  improves chain of thought reasoning in language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.11171, 2022.
Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Ed Chi, Quoc Le, and Denny
  Zhou. Chain of thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2201.11903, 2022.
Tongshuang Wu, Michael Terry, and Carrie Jun Cai. Ai chains: Transparent and controllable human-ai
  interaction by chaining large language model prompts. In Proceedings of the 2022 CHI Conference
  on Human Factors in Computing Systems, pages 1–22, 2022.
Heming Xia, Tao Ge, Si-Qing Chen, Furu Wei, and Zhifang Sui. Speculative decoding: Lossless
  speedup of autoregressive translation, 2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
  H-VlwsYvVi.
Zhengyuan Yang, Linjie Li, Jianfeng Wang, Kevin Lin, Ehsan Azarnasab, Faisal Ahmed, Zicheng Liu,
  Ce Liu, Michael Zeng, and Lijuan Wang. Mm-react: Prompting chatgpt for multimodal reasoning
  and action. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.11381, 2023.
Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik R Narasimhan, and Yuan
  Cao. React: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models. In The Eleventh International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?
  id=WE_vluYUL-X.
Susan Zhang, Stephen Roller, Naman Goyal, Mikel Artetxe, Moya Chen, Shuohui Chen, Christopher
  Dewan, Mona Diab, Xian Li, Xi Victoria Lin, et al. Opt: Open pre-trained transformer language
  models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.01068, 2022.
Denny Zhou, Nathanael Schärli, Le Hou, Jason Wei, Nathan Scales, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans,
  Olivier Bousquet, Quoc Le, and Ed Chi. Least-to-most prompting enables complex reasoning in
  large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.10625, 2022.
Zilliz. Gptcache. https://github.com/zilliztech/GPTCache, 2023.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A    I LLUSTRATION OF THE D ISPATCHER


Figure 4: An illustration of the Dispatcher that enables functional cache mechanism. In an
online setting where task instances arrive sequentially, the dispatcher, a lightweight model, assesses
each incoming instance. If a suitable tool already exists in the cache to tackle the task, the dispatcher
selects this tool and forwards the task instance to the tool user for resolution. If no suitable tool is
found, the dispatcher routes the task instance to the tool maker to create a new tool that can be used
by tool user later.


B    B ROADER I MPACT AND L IMITATIONS

This paper explores the potential of enabling Large Language Models (LLMs) to create their own
tools, thus allowing them greater autonomy in developing their ecosystem. While this avenue of
research is promising, it also raises important ethical, safety, and control considerations that need to
be carefully addressed.
One of the most significant impacts of our work lies in the potential for LLMs to grow and achieve
unprecedented capabilities automatically. This could significantly enhance the range and complexity
of tasks these models can handle, potentially revolutionizing fields such as customer service, tech-
nical support, and even areas of research and development. It could lead to more efficient use of
computational resources and a reduction in human intervention, especially for routine or repetitive
tasks.
However, this newfound autonomy of LLMs is a double-edged sword. As we endow LLMs with
the ability to generate their own tools, we also create a scenario where the quality of the tools they
develop may not always meet the standards or expectations set by human developers. Without proper
safeguards, there’s a risk that these models could generate solutions that are suboptimal, incorrect, or
even potentially harmful. Furthermore, as LLMs become more autonomous, the potential for loss
of control increases. If these models are widely used without appropriate regulation, there could be
unforeseen consequences, potentially even leading to scenarios where humans lose control over the
AI systems.
In this study, we have not addressed these control and safety issues in depth, and our work has some
limitations. Our proposed framework, LLM As Tool Maker, while effective in the tested scenarios,
is still in its early stages of development. It is crucial to note that the real-world performance and
safety of the system may vary based on the complexity and nature of the tasks it is applied to.
Additionally, the evaluation and validation of the tools created by the tool maker in a real-world
setting is a challenge that needs to be addressed.


                                                   13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C    LATM P ROMPTS

    Tool Maker Prompt

    Please write a generic Python function to solve this type of
     ,→ problems using only standard python libraries. The output
     ,→ of the function can later be converted to the answer
     ,→ (option for multiple choice question). All the function
     ,→ should be wrapped by
    ```python
    ```



    Tool Verifier Prompt

    Write unit tests to verify the correctness of the function on
     ,→ the questions above using the following format:
    ```python
    {parse the question into the arguments of the function}
    {call the function and save the return value in a variable
     ,→ named "ret"}
    {for multiple choice question, parse the options}
    {convert the return value "ret" to the answer (if the
     ,→ question is a multiple choice question, convert to an
     ,→ option) and save it in a variable named "ans", otherwise}
    {assert ans == the provided answer (if the question is a
     ,→ multiple choice question, assert ans == option)}
    ```



    Tool Wrapper Prompt

    Success! The function is correct. We will need to summarize
     ,→ the function and use cases up for further use. Please
     ,→ extract the information from the history in the following
     ,→ format:

    Here is a function to solve a class of problems:
    ```python
    {the function, including necessary imports}
    ```

    Use cases:
    Question: {question (including options)}
    Solution:
    ```python
    {parse the question into the arguments of the function}
    {call the function and save the return value in a variable
     ,→ named "ret"}
    {for multiple choice question, parse the options}
    {convert the return value "ret" to the answer (if the
     ,→ question is a multiple choice question, convert to an
     ,→ option) and save it in a variable named "ans", otherwise}
    ```
    Do this for all the questions in the verification step.



                                               14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   Dispatcher Prompt

   Here are several functions that can be used to solve some
    ,→ task:

   Task: logical_deduction_five_objects

   API: find_order(objects, constraints):
   Finds the order of objects that satisfies a given set of
    ,→ constraints.
   objects: A list of unique objects (strings) to be ordered.
   constraints: A list of lambda functions that represent the
    ,→ constraints on the order of objects. Each constraint
    ,→ should take the order of objects as input and return a
    ,→ boolean value (True if the constraint is satisfied, False
    ,→ otherwise).
   return: A tuple representing the order of objects that
    ,→ satisfies all the constraints. If no such order exists,
    ,→ the function returns None.

   ===

   Task: tracking_shuffled_objects_five_objects

   API: square_dance(initial_partners, switches):
   This function takes an initial list of pairs and a list of
    ,→ switches, and returns a dictionary representing the final
    ,→ state of the pairs after performing the switches.

   initial_partners: A list of tuples, where each tuple contains
    ,→ two elements representing a pair (e.g., [("Alice",
    ,→ "goalkeeper"), ("Bob", "left midfielder"), ...]). The
    ,→ elements can be any type (e.g., strings, integers, etc.).

   switches: A list of tuples, where each tuple contains two
    ,→ elements representing a pair of elements from the
    ,→ initial_partners list that will be switched (e.g.,
    ,→ [("Alice", "Claire"), ("Alice", "Bob"), ...]). The
    ,→ elements should match the types used in the
    ,→ initial_partners list.

   return: A dictionary representing the final state of the
    ,→ pairs after performing the switches. The keys are the
    ,→ first elements of the pairs in the initial_partners list,
    ,→ and the values are the corresponding second elements
    ,→ after performing the switches (e.g., {"Alice": "right
    ,→ winger", "Bob": "center midfielder", ...}).

   ===

   Skip other tasks

   Here is a question:\n{question}\n\nAccoding to the API
    ,→ documents above, you may find some functions that can be
    ,→ used to solve the task, or, sometimes there does not
    ,→ exist proper function to solve the task. Figure out if
    ,→ there is function to solve the task and reply in the
    ,→ format:\nTask: {{task}} (reply unknown if no function can
    ,→ solve the question)


                                               15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                               16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D    W RAPPED T OOLS

    Tool for Logical Deduction

    Here is a function to solve a class of problems:

    ```python
    from itertools import permutations

    def find_order(objects, constraints):
        for order in permutations(objects):
            valid = True
            for constraint in constraints:
                if not constraint(order):
                    valid = False
                    break
            if valid:
                return order
    ```

    Use cases:

    Question: The following paragraphs each describe a set of
     ,→ five objects arranged in a fixed order. The statements
     ,→ are logically consistent within each paragraph. On a
     ,→ shelf, there are five books: a white book, a green book,
     ,→ a brown book, a gray book, and an orange book. The gray
     ,→ book is to the right of the orange book. The green book
     ,→ is the second from the right. The brown book is to the
     ,→ right of the white book. The brown book is to the left of
     ,→ the orange book.
    Options:
    (A) The white book is the third from the left
    (B) The green book is the third from the left
    (C) The brown book is the third from the left
    (D) The gray book is the third from the left
    (E) The orange book is the third from the left
    Solution:

    ```python
    objects = ["white", "green", "brown", "gray", "orange"]

    constraints = [
        lambda order: order.index("gray") >
         ,→ order.index("orange"),
        lambda order: order.index("green") == len(order) - 2,
        lambda order: order.index("brown") >
         ,→ order.index("white"),
        lambda order: order.index("brown") <
         ,→ order.index("orange")
    ]

    ret = find_order(objects, constraints)
    options = {
        "A": "white",
        "B": "green",
        "C": "brown",
        "D": "gray",
        "E": "orange"
    }
    ans = [k for k, v in options.items() if v == ret[2]][0]
    ```                           17
    Skip two more questions...
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   Tool for Tracking Shuffled Objects

   Here is a function to solve a class of problems:

   ```python
   def square_dance(initial_partners, switches):
       # Create a dictionary to store the current partners
       current_partners = dict(initial_partners)

         # Iterate through the switches and update the current
          ,→ partners
         for switch in switches:
             dancer1, dancer2 = switch
             partner1 = current_partners[dancer1]
             partner2 = current_partners[dancer2]

               # Swap the partners
               current_partners[dancer1] = partner2
               current_partners[dancer2] = partner1

         return current_partners
   ```

   Use cases:

   Question: Alice, Bob, Claire, Dave, and Eve are on the same
    ,→ team in a soccer match. At the start of the match, they
    ,→ are each assigned to a position: Alice is playing
    ,→ goalkeeper, Bob is playing left midfielder, Claire is
    ,→ playing right winger, Dave is playing striker, and Eve is
    ,→ playing center midfielder.
   As the game progresses, pairs of players occasionally swap
    ,→ positions. First, Alice and Claire trade positions. Then,
    ,→ Alice and Bob trade positions. Then, Dave and Bob trade
    ,→ positions. Then, Bob and Eve trade positions. Finally,
    ,→ Dave and Eve trade positions. At the end of the match,
    ,→ Eve is playing
   Options:
   (A) goalkeeper
   (B) left midfielder
   (C) right winger
   (D) striker
   (E) center midfielder
   Answer: (C)

   Solution:
   ```python
   initial_positions = [("Alice", "goalkeeper"), ("Bob", "left
    ,→ midfielder"), ("Claire", "right winger"), ("Dave",
    ,→ "striker"), ("Eve", "center midfielder")]
   switches = [("Alice", "Claire"), ("Alice", "Bob"), ("Dave",
    ,→ "Bob"), ("Bob", "Eve"), ("Dave", "Eve")]

   ret = square_dance(initial_positions, switches)
   options = ["goalkeeper", "left midfielder", "right winger",
    ,→ "striker", "center midfielder"]
   ans = options.index(ret["Eve"]) + 1 # Convert the return
    ,→ value to an option index (1-based)
   ```
   Skip two more questions...
                                               18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   Tool for Dyck Language

   Here is a function to solve a class of problems:

   ```python
   def complete_sequence(input_str):
       stack = []
       closing_map = {'(': ')', '[': ']', '<': '>', '{': '}'}
       result = []

         for char in input_str:
             if char in closing_map.keys():
                 stack.append(char)
             elif char in closing_map.values():
                 if stack and closing_map[stack[-1]] == char:
                     stack.pop()
                 else:
                     return "Invalid sequence"
             else:
                 return "Invalid character"

         while stack:
             result.append(closing_map[stack[-1]])
             stack.pop()

         return ''.join(result)
   ```

   Use cases:

   Question: Complete the rest of the sequence, making sure that
    ,→ the parentheses are closed properly. Input:
    ,→ ([[[{}]]{<[<[{}]>]>}
   Answer: ])

   Solution:
   ```python
   input_str = "([[[{}]]{<[<[{}]>]>}"
   ret = complete_sequence(input_str)
   ans = ret
   ```
   Skip two more questions...


                                               19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   Tool for Word Sorting

   Here is a function to solve a class of problems:
   ```python
   def sort_words_alphabetically(word_list):
       return sorted(word_list)
   ```

   Use cases:

   Question: Sort the following words alphabetically: List:
    ,→ conference apparition ignore dutton layperson coupe
    ,→ superstitious westward turnoff messenger copra floruit
    ,→ primitive implement
   Answer: apparition conference copra coupe dutton floruit
    ,→ ignore implement layperson messenger primitive
    ,→ superstitious turnoff westward

   Solution:
   ```python
   words1 = ["conference", "apparition", "ignore", "dutton",
    ,→ "layperson", "coupe", "superstitious", "westward",
    ,→ "turnoff", "messenger", "copra", "floruit", "primitive",
    ,→ "implement"]
   ret1 = sort_words_alphabetically(words1)
   ans1 = " ".join(ret1)
   ```
   Skip two more questions...


                                               20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   Tool for Chinese Remainder Theorem

   Here is a function to solve a class of problems:

   ```python
   def find_number(max_limit, divisors, remainders):
       for num in range(max_limit + 1):
           if all((num - remainder) % divisor == 0 for divisor,
            ,→ remainder in zip(divisors, remainders)):
               return num
       return None
   ```

   Use cases:

   Question: There is a basket of no more than 1188877 durians.
    ,→ If we divide them equally among 41 penguins, we have 17
    ,→ left; if we divide them equally among 107 dinosaurs, we
    ,→ have 42 left; if we divide them equally among 271
    ,→ elephants, we have 260 left. How many durians are in the
    ,→ basket?

   Solution:
   ```python
   max_limit = 1188877
   divisors = [41, 107, 271]
   remainders = [17, 42, 260]
   ret = find_number(max_limit, divisors, remainders)
   ans = ret
   ```
   Skip two more questions...


                                               21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    Tool for Schedule Meeting

    Here is a function to solve a class of problems:

    ```python
    from datetime import datetime, timedelta

    def find_earliest_time_slot(a_availability, b_availability,
     ,→ meeting_duration):
        a_availability = [(datetime.strptime(start, '%H:%M'),
         ,→ datetime.strptime(end, '%H:%M')) for start, end in
         ,→ a_availability]
        b_availability = [(datetime.strptime(start, '%H:%M'),
         ,→ datetime.strptime(end, '%H:%M')) for start, end in
         ,→ b_availability]

          for a_start, a_end in a_availability:
              for b_start, b_end in b_availability:
                  latest_start = max(a_start, b_start)
                  earliest_end = min(a_end, b_end)

                     if earliest_end - latest_start >=
                      ,→ timedelta(minutes=meeting_duration):
                         return latest_start.strftime('%H:%M'),
                          ,→ (latest_start +
                          ,→ timedelta(minutes=meeting_duration)).strftime('%H:%M')

          return None
    ```

    Use cases:
    Question: A and B want to schedule a 1-hour meeting together.
     ,→ A's availability: 12:00 - 12:30, 13:00 - 13:30, 14:30 -
     ,→ 15:30, 17:30 - 18:00. B's availability: 09:00 - 11:00,
     ,→ 12:00 - 12:30, 13:00 - 13:30, 15:30 - 16:30, 17:30 -
     ,→ 18:00. What time slot works best? (if multiple, choose
     ,→ the earliest one)
    Answer: No time slot works.

    Solution:
    ```python
    a_availability = [('12:00', '12:30'), ('13:00', '13:30'),
     ,→ ('14:30', '15:30'), ('17:30', '18:00')]
    b_availability = [('09:00', '11:00'), ('12:00', '12:30'),
     ,→ ('13:00', '13:30'), ('15:30', '16:30'), ('17:30',
     ,→ '18:00')]
    meeting_duration = 60

    ret = find_earliest_time_slot(a_availability, b_availability,
     ,→ meeting_duration)
    ans = ret if ret else "No time slot works."
    ```
    Skip two more questions...



E    DATASET C ONSTRUCTION

For the “schedule meeting” task, we use the following template to generate the dataset:


                                                22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


question_format = """A and B want to schedule a {interval}-hour
 ,→ meeting together.
A's availability: {A_availability}
B's availability: {B_availability}
What time slot works best? (if multiple, choose the earliest
 ,→ one)"""

where the interval is randomly sampled from {0.5, 1, 1.5}, and the availability of A and B are
randomly sampled from 8:00-18:00 with 30 minutes as the granularity. The answer is computed by
computing the intersection of the two availability sets and then find the earliest time slot that is at
least as long as the meeting duration. If there is no such time slot, we return “No time slot works.”.


                                                  23
