Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


P ROTOTYPE G ENERATION : ROBUST F EATURE V ISU -
ALISATION FOR DATA I NDEPENDENT I NTERPRETABIL -
ITY

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT

         We introduce Prototype Generation, a stricter and more robust form of feature vi-
         sualisation for model-agnostic, data-independent interpretability of image classi-
         fication models. We demonstrate its ability to generate inputs that result in natural
         activation paths, countering previous claims that feature visualisation algorithms
         are untrustworthy due to the unnatural internal activations. We substantiate these
         claims by quantitatively measuring similarity between the internal activations of
         our generated prototypes and natural images. We also demonstrate how the inter-
         pretation of generated prototypes yields important insights, highlighting spurious
         correlations and biases learned by models which quantitative methods over test-
         sets cannot identify.


1   I NTRODUCTION

Interpretability techniques have become crucial in the era of increasingly powerful artificial intelli-
gence (AI) systems (OpenAI, 2023; Anthropic, 2021; Anil et al., 2023; Touvron et al., 2023). As
AI models continue to outperform human benchmarks across numerous tasks and domains, the im-
portance of understanding their decision-making processes has never been more pressing. This is
particularly true for black-box deep learning models, which are increasingly employed across vari-
ous industries ranging from healthcare to autonomous vehicles (Bohr & Memarzadeh, 2020; Elallid
et al., 2022). Apart from safety concern in these high-stakes domains, EU law requires certain
AI systems to comply with the ’right to explanation’ (Goodman & Flaxman, 2017) making inter-
pretability crucial for business operations.
Over the past decade, various methods have been developed to improve human understanding of
complex AI models. Techniques such as LIME (Ribeiro et al., 2016), SHAP (Lundberg & Lee,
2017), CAM (Oquab et al., 2015) and Network Dissection (Bau et al., 2017; Zhou et al., 2018) have
targeted local interpretability, offering explanations of model decisions for individual data points.
However, these techniques cannot provide a global understanding of what a model has learned
overall, which is necessary for comprehensive analysis and trust in automated systems.
In this work, we focus on feature visualisation (Olah et al., 2017) as a powerful interpretability tool
able to extract such holistic insights from arbitrary neural networks. Despite its promise, feature
visualisations have not been without criticism. Past research has pointed out the disparity between
internal processing of feature visualisations as compared to other natural images (Geirhos et al.,
2023) by observing path similarity. We discuss these criticisms further in Section 2.
Addressing these limitations, we introduce Prototype Generation in Section 3, a robust visualisation
tool that not only contains determining features for any given class but also maintains equal or
better path similarity with natural images. Our experiments using Resnet-18(He et al., 2015) and
InceptionV1(Szegedy et al., 2014) show that prototypes generated using our method are highly
similar to natural images in terms of internal path activations.
Understanding the model at a global level helps in identifying systemic biases, uncovering spurious
correlations, and potentially refining the model for better performance and fairness. We use pro-
totype generation to discover undesired correlations and identify failure modes on unseen data in
Section 4, demonstrating how our method provides data-independent insights, removing the need


                                                  1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


for time-consuming manual inspection of training datasets to subjectively identify unwanted bi-
ases. Through this, our contribution serves the broader goal of enhancing global data-independent
interpretability in deep learning models, thereby making them more transparent, accountable, and
trustworthy.

2   R ELATED W ORK
Feature visualisation is a method to extract information from a model about what it has learned (Mol-
nar, 2021; Mordvintsev et al., 2015; Erhan et al., 2009; Olah et al., 2017; Nguyen et al., 2016).
Unlike local interpretability methods that focus on individual predictions, feature visualisation is
a global interpretability method that aims to visualise the features that different neurons inside a
model have learned to respond to. Observing feature visualisations to understand model behaviour
is a data-independent approach to interpretability, allowing for qualitative assessment of a model’s
internal logic irrespective of any test dataset – and so, can be used to find failure modes irrespective
of whether examples of those failures exist in a test set. This technique works by generating an input
x̂ that maximises a chosen output logit or internal activation (in this case, output logit c with respect
to model h): x̂ = arg max hc (x). Feature visualisation has been used for a number of purposes,
                           x
such as identifying specialised circuits within neural networks (Olah et al., 2020) and understanding
the learned features of individual nodes or groups of nodes (Olah et al., 2018).
Despite its utility, feature visualisation is not without its detractors. One prominent line of criticism
comes from Geirhos et al. (2023), arguing that the visualisations may not truly represent what the
model has learned, and so cannot be reliably used to predict its behaviour on unseen data in the
future. These criticisms are substantiated by experiments that manipulate feature visualisations to
produce misleading or contradictory representations without changing the model’s decision-making
process. They also introduce the path similarity metric to quantify this. This metric measures the
similarity between internal activation ’paths’ caused by two different inputs across the layers of
a neural network. If two inputs excite similar neurons, this leads to a high path similarity between
these two inputs. The measure of similarity chosen by Geirhos et al. (2023) is Spearman’s rank order
correlation (referred to as spearman similarity (SS) in the rest of this paper). This path similarity
metric is used to show the disparity between internal activations in response to natural images versus
feature visualisations of the same class.
 Geirhos et al. (2023) also provide a proof that feature visualisation cannot formally guarantee trust-
worthy results, claiming that without additional strong assumptions about the neural network feature
visualisations can’t be trusted. However, this is also the case with any existing evaluation metric –
on a given test set, two models may perform exactly alike, but there is always the possibility that
they will differ on some unknown future input. Therefore, we argue that feature visualisation based
approaches should not be seen as a magic bullet – but rather as an important and practically useful
complement to quantitative assessment metrics.
In the sections that follow, we show that feature visualisations of a specific kind – prototypes – gen-
erated using our method contain key features for the class they represent, and maintain a consistent
path similarity with natural images. By doing so, we overcome some of the limitations previously
associated with feature visualisation.

3   P ROTOTYPE G ENERATION
For a given model M , we define a prototype P as an input that maximally activates the logit cor-
responding to c, while keeping the model’s internal activations in response to that input close to
the distribution of ’natural’ inputs. Let I represent the set of all possible natural inputs that would
be classified by model M as belonging to class c. We aim to generate a prototype P such that it
aggregates the representative features of a majority of inputs in I. Formally, we posit that the ac-
tivations AP of P are ’closer’ to the mean activations AI of all I ∈ I than any individual natural
image I across all layers L in M . We measure ’closeness’ between AP and AI using two metrics:
L1 distance and spearman correlation.
We use spearman similarity as per Geirhos et al. (2023) to allow for direct comparison of our meth-
ods with their published work. We also use the L1 distance to further substantiate this comparison.


                                                   2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


        (a) Mosquito Net (0.61)         (b) Alaskan malamute (0.53)            (c) Flute (0.54)

 Figure 1: Example prototypes generated by our method for the ImageNet classes Mosquito Net,
Alaskan malamute and Flute with their average spearman similarity across all layers of Resnet-18
                                     denoted in brackets


        (a) Mosquito Net (0.33)         (b) Alaskan Malamute (0.22)            (c) Flute (0.31)

 Figure 2: Example prototypes generated by Olah et al. (2017)’s method for the ImageNet classes
Mosquito Net, Alaskan malamute and Flute with their average spearman similarity across all layers
                               of Resnet-18 denoted in brackets


Calculating spearman similarity involves ranking the activations in terms of magnitude, whereas
calculating L1 distance preserves the magnitude of activations. Since the input images are subject
to preprocessing and so belong to a set training distribution, the magnitude of activations is relevant
information that provides a more complete picture of path similarity.
Using L1 distance our formal assertion is that,
                                  X                       X
                                        |AIl − APcl | ≤         |AIl − AIl |                              (1)
                                  l∈L                     l∈L
                                           P                                   P
For the rest of the paper we will denote       l∈L |AIl − APcl | as DP and     l∈L |AIl − AIl | as DI .

Denoting spearman similarity as SS, our formal assertion is that:

                           SS(AIl , APcl ) ≥ SS(AIl , AIl ), ∀l ∈ L, ∀I ∈ I                               (2)

If both of these conditions are satisfied, we can confidently assert that prototype P shows prototypical
qualities of the class c, and contains features representative of the model’s understanding of that
class.

3.1   O UR M ETHOD

Existing feature visualisation methods aim to generate an input that maximally activates a selected
neuron inside a neural network. Prototype generation is similarly a technique that generates an


                                                     3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                         (a) Flowchart for methodology used by Olah et al. (2017)


                                       (b) Flowchart of our method

Figure 3: Comparison between our method and feature visualisation method proposed by Olah et al.
(2017)



input, but with the objective of maximally activating a selected output logit (rather than an internal
activation), as shown in Figure 1. This positions prototype generation as a specialised form of feature
visualisation, distinguished by its focus on class-specific logits rather than internal activations. When
a generated input satisfies the criteria we have laid out, remaining within the domain of ’natural’
inputs and capturing representative features of its corresponding class, we term it as the model’s
’learned prototype’ for that class. Here, ’ideal representation’ is used to signify that this learned
prototype encapsulates what the model perceives as the most representative or ’ideal’ features for
categorising inputs into that particular class.
Our approach differs from the existing feature visualisation methodology in a number of ways, as
shown in Figure 3,
We compare our implementation with the publicly available Lucent (Greentfrapp, 2018) library –
the PyTorch implementation of the methodology proposed by Olah et al. (2017).
Both implementations begin with a randomly initialised image. Lucent converts this randomly ini-
tialised image to the Fourier basis, but we find (as shown later) that this causes the resulting feature
visualisations to be unrepresentative of natural class features. In contrast, we do not optimise in the
Fourier basis, instead optimising the input pixels directly. We first optimise to minimise what we
call probability variance loss, Lpv to generate a baseline input. This loss ensures that the output
logits for our input image are balanced i.e. the input image has roughly an equal chance of being
predicted to be a member of any class. Our preprocessing steps vary depending on the model’s
expectations; for models trained on ImageNet, this involves a normalisation shift using the mean
and standard deviation of the ImageNet training set – of whatever preprocessing the model expects
for inference. Additionally we apply random affine transformations to constrain the optimisation
process and discourage the generation of out-of-distribution (OOD) adversarial inputs – we further
discuss the effect of these transformations in Appendix A. Lucent uses similar random transforma-
tions, but does not tune them for path similarity. The difference in the resultant prototypes for Lucent
and our method can be seen clearly by comparing Figures 1 and 2.
We define two losses: Lc , the negative of the logit for the desired class; and Lhf , the high-frequency
loss that penalises large differences between adjacent pixel values. We use both Lc and Lhf to define
our combined loss whereas Olah et al. (2017) employ only Lc .


3.2   E XPERIMENTS

We assess the prototypes generated by observing how closely the prototype’s activations mirror the
average activations of natural images in the same class. We quantify closeness between activations
by calculating L1 distance and spearman similarity as defined in Section 2. Appendix A contains
information about hyperparameters and other implementation details.


                                                    4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


L1 distance. We generate prototypes for 11 random classes from Resnet-18 and InceptionV1 and
collect 100 random images from each of these classes. We use these prototypes and images to
calculate average DP and average DI across all 11 classes. In the case of Resnet-18 we find that
for the 67 layers in the model, DP is lower than DI for 55/67 i.e. 82.1% of Resnet-18 layers. For
InceptionV1, we find that DP is lower than DI for 150/223 layers i.e. 67.2% of all layers. Figure
4 shows DP and DI across all layers in Resnet-18 and InceptionV1. We also plot DIdc where Idc
denotes the set of all images that belong to different classes than the class P is generated for. It is
clear to see that DP is lower than both DI and DIdc for most of the layers for prototypes generated
from both Resnet-18 and InceptionV1 showing that the prototypes approximately satisfy our formal
assertion related to L1 distances as specifed in Equation 1. For the majority of the model’s layers,
generated prototypes results in activations that are closer to the mean natural activation, than any
individual natural input image.


                                             (a) Resnet-18


                                            (b) InceptionV1

Figure 4: Comparison of L1 Distance. The L1 distances are normalised such that 0 corresponds to
the mean L1 distance between natural image activations of the same class and 1 corresponds to the
mean L1 distance between natural image activations of different classes.

Path similarity per layer. To characterise the path similarity of our generated prototypes, we select
11 random classes from the ImageNet dataset.
We approximate AI by averaging the activations of 100 randomly selected images from each of the
11 classes. For each class c, we generate a prototype P , capture its activations AP , and also capture
activations from the individual images in I. To alow for direct comparison of our results with those
reported by Geirhos et al. (2023), we also select 100 random images from other classes and capture
their activations denoted by AIdc . Our raw results consist of three sets of spearman similarity scores
between,
       • Approximated AI and AP
       • Approximated AI and AI , averaged across all I ∈ I
       • Approximated AI and AIdc , averaged across all Idc ∈ Idc
This raw data is normalised such that 1 corresponds to the spearman similarity obtained by compar-
ing natural images of the same class, and 0 corresponds to the spearman similarity obtained by com-
paring images of one class against images of different classes. To reduce noise in our plots showing


                                                  5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                              (a) Resnet-18


                                            (b) InceptionV1


                           (c) InceptionV1, results from Geirhos et al. (2023).

Figure 5: Comparison of Spearman Similarity. Spearman similarities are normalised such that 1
corresponds to the spearman similarity between natural image activations of the same class and 0
corresponds to the spearman similarity between natural image activations of different classes. Here
we show examples on two different networks, and for comparative purposes also provide the results
of the same experiment from Geirhos et al. (2023). Note that our method produces super-normal
results, with early layer activations from prototypes being closer to the mean natural activation than
any natural input.


                                                    6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


spearman similarity between AI and AP , we smooth the curve using scipy.ndimage.convolve with a
window size of 10 for the mean values, and 5 for the standard deviations.
Figure 5 shows the normalised path similarity obtained by making the above comparisons. Our
experimental results show that these prototypes support our formal assertion for Spearman similarity
specified in Equation 2 for 38/67 i.e. 56.7% of all layers and have higher path similarity than natural
images for all layers of Resnet-18 averaged across 11 different classes. In the case of InceptionV1
we find that our formal assertion holds for 147/224 i.e 65.6% of all layers in InceptionV1 averaged
across the same 11 classes.
                        Table 1: Comparison of average spearman similarity

                                                 Average spearman similarity
                          Prototype P                    0.54 ± 0.06
                      Same class images Ic               0.50 ± 0.05
                      Diff class images Idc              0.41 ± 0.06
                                              (a) Resnet-18

                                                 Average spearman similarity
                          Prototype P                    0.56 ± 0.07
                      Same class images Ic               0.50 ± 0.05
                      Diff class images Idc              0.40 ± 0.06
                                            (b) InceptionV1



Using our raw results, we also quantify the mean spearman similarity across all layers of Resnet-
18 and InceptionV1 in Table 1. We can see that the average spearman similarity of our generated
prototypes is higher than other natural images belonging to the same class on average, for both
Resnet-18 and InceptionV1.

4   P ROTOTYPE I NSIGHTS
Since our method generates prototypes that have high path similarity with natural images, 3 we
might expect to be able to better understand what models have learned about given classes simply
by observing their generated prototypes for those classes. Here follows a case study to test whether
information present in our prototypes can reliably predict model behaviour on unseen data. We
focus on prototypes for two Imagenet classes: the academic gown prototype and the mortarboard
prototype, generated by Resnet-18, as shown in Figure 6. We experimented with a diversity objective
as in Olah et al. (2017) to generate varied prototypes but found limited differences in prototypes, we
show the results of the diversity objective in Section C.
Hypothesis 1: Resnet-18 will have higher accuracy classifying lighter skinned people wearing aca-
demic gowns than darker skinned people wearing academic gowns.
This hypothesis emerges from the observation that the academic gown prototype in Figure 6a shows
a lighter-skinned face prominently. We test this hypothesis by observing the performance of Resnet-
18 on two different sets of images, one containing lighter skinned people wearing academic gowns
and the other containing darker skinned people wearing academic gowns. We collect 50 random
images for each of these sets from the internet, taking care to maintain a general parity between the
two sets in image quality, setting and size. As shown in Table 2, lighter-skinned people wearing
academic gowns are more likely to be classified as the academic gown class than darker-skinned
people.
Hypothesis 2: Resnet-18 is likely to misclassify images of mortarboards as academic gowns, if the
images have a mortarboard and a face in them.
By observing differences in the mortarboard and academic gown prototypes, we see that the mortar-
board prototype has a much weaker representation of a face, compared to the academic prototype.
This leads us to hypothesise that an image containing both a mortarboard and a face is likely to be
misclassified as an academic gown. To test this hypothesis we again observe the performance of


                                                   7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


      (a) Academic Gown Prototype                                     (b) Mortarboard Prototype

                           Figure 6: Example prototypes from Resnet-18

    Table 2: Comparison of Resnet-18 performance on light and dark skinned people wearing
       academic gowns along with the probability of prediction for academic gowns(AG)

                                                 Accuracy      Probability(AG)
                     Lighter-skinned people       72.5%             0.62
                     Darker-skinned people         60%              0.54


Resnet-18 on a set of images containing mortarboards with no faces and a set of images containing
mortarboards and a face. We ensure that the mortarboards with faces have no presence of academic
gowns. Results were again as expected, Table 3 shows that mortarboards with faces are more likely
to be misclassified as academic gowns.

Table 3: Comparison of Resnet-18 performance on mortarboards with and without faces along with
          the probability of prediction for mortarboards(MB) and academic gowns(AG)

                                        Accuracy      Probability(MB)      Probability(AG)
        Mortarboard without face         92.3%             0.77                 0.05
         Mortarboard with face           70.5%             0.67                 0.25

Inspection of these prototypes directly hints at biases embedded in the training data. For instance,
the academic gown prototype’s lighter-skinned face prominence suggests that the training dataset
might have had an over-representation of lighter-skinned individuals – and inspection of ImageNet
training dataset shows that this is indeed the case. This imbalance, when unaddressed, could lead to
real-world consequences where certain demographic groups consistently experience lower accuracy,
perpetuating biases. The differences observed between prototypes can further shine light on potential
areas of misclassification. Using the mortarboard example, understanding how the model interprets
and prioritises features can identify when and why an image might be misclassified; this model
seems to be great at classifying mortarboards in a vacuum, but the inclusion of facial features leads
to misclassification. Crucially, all of this is done without reference to any test set of data, meaning
that our insights are not constrained only to misclassifications contained within that limited test
set. In both these cases, we didn’t have to comb through the entire dataset but rather observing
the prototypes provided us with a data-independent way of understanding Resnet-18’s behaviour on
unseen data.
While metrics on a test set can provide a broad overview of a model’s performance with respect
to that test set, they often don’t provide the granularity needed to understand why a model might
be likely to fail on future, unseen data. Prototypes can meaningfully augment existing evaluation
metrics in a number of ways:


                                                  8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


       • Identifying dataset bias. If a model shows bias, as in the lighter-skinned academic gown
         prototype, this points at bias in the data. Armed with this knowledge, the dataset can be
         modified or augmented to remove this bias, and the model retrained to improve perfor-
         mance on underrepresented classes or features.
       • Spotting spurious correlations. By comparing prototypes for closely related classes, one
         can discern which features are given undue importance, enabling deeper understanding of
         model failures due to the presence of potentially misleading features.
       • Rapid Iteration. Model developers can generate prototypes during training, spotting issues
         like biases or potential misclassifications early in the process. These insights also enable
         targeted data augmentation, necessitating the collection and preprocessing of data samples
         specific to correcting a problem in the model.


5   D ISCUSSION

The primary advantage of our methodology is its ability to furnish insights into what a model has
learned. In situations where the stakes are high – medical diagnoses, financial predictions, or au-
tonomous vehicles, to name a few – a deeper comprehension of what a model has learned is impor-
tant for safety.
Our prototypes allow us to essentially engage in an iterative feedback loop that continually enhances
a model’s performance:

       • Prototype Generation. Initially, we generate prototypes to visualize the model’s under-
         standing of different classes.
       • Insight Extraction. Once these prototypes are available, they can reveal specific biases or
         tendencies in the model’s learning. As shown in Section 4, if the prototype of an ’academic
         gown’ predominantly features a lighter-skinned individual, it highlights a potential bias in
         the model’s understanding of that class.
       • Targeted Retraining. Based on the insights derived from the prototypes, targeted retrain-
         ing can be conducted. Using our earlier example, the model can be retrained with a more
         diverse set of images representing ’academic gowns’, thus rectifying its inherent bias.

Furthermore, if a model is underperforming on a specific class and the reason is not immediately
clear from the validation data, generating a prototype can shed light on the shortcomings in its learn-
ing. Moreover, interpretability techniques of this kind make knowledge discovery possible – that is,
if we are able to train a model to perform a task that humans cannot, we can use interpretability to
understand what patterns it has identified in its training data that we are unaware of, and thereby
gain new insights about that data.
Future Work While our method has shown promise, it’s essential to acknowledge its limitations.
We cannot, as of now, provide a formal proof that feature visualisation of this nature will consistently
offer useful insights across all use cases and models. Geirhos et al. (2023) also raise the issue of
fooling circuits, and demonstrate that it is possible to make visual changes in the prototype that
can still maximally activate a given class logit without containing any representative features of the
class, which we do not address.
Although we use path similarity as an evaluation metric to gauge the natural look of prototypes, there
are some limitations associated with the metric such as ignoring outliers. This is one of the reasons
we don’t use the path similarity metric to directly optimise prototypes to have high path similarity
with natural images. Rather we tune our parameters and optimisation process to lead to high path
similarity. The diversity objective mentioned in Section 4 is underexplored and has the potential to
generate prototypes that can capture the entire range of features relevant for a class including outliers
allowing for more robust analysis.
We wish to address these limitations in future work, and expand our analysis with further case
studies of models deployed in the real world, with reference to both bias detection and knowledge
discovery. We also aim to benchmark Prototype Generation using tests such as the one introduced
by Casper et al. (2023) further showing the robustness of our method.


                                                   9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Rohan Anil, Andrew M. Dai, Orhan Firat, Melvin Johnson, Dmitry Lepikhin, Alexandre Passos,
  Siamak Shakeri, Emanuel Taropa, Paige Bailey, Zhifeng Chen, Eric Chu, Jonathan H. Clark,
  Laurent El Shafey, Yanping Huang, Kathy Meier-Hellstern, Gaurav Mishra, Erica Moreira, Mark
  Omernick, Kevin Robinson, Sebastian Ruder, Yi Tay, Kefan Xiao, Yuanzhong Xu, Yujing Zhang,
  Gustavo Hernandez Abrego, Junwhan Ahn, Jacob Austin, Paul Barham, Jan Botha, James Brad-
  bury, Siddhartha Brahma, Kevin Brooks, Michele Catasta, Yong Cheng, Colin Cherry, Christo-
  pher A. Choquette-Choo, Aakanksha Chowdhery, Clément Crepy, Shachi Dave, Mostafa De-
  hghani, Sunipa Dev, Jacob Devlin, Mark Dı́az, Nan Du, Ethan Dyer, Vlad Feinberg, Fangxiaoyu
  Feng, Vlad Fienber, Markus Freitag, Xavier Garcia, Sebastian Gehrmann, Lucas Gonzalez, Guy
  Gur-Ari, Steven Hand, Hadi Hashemi, Le Hou, Joshua Howland, Andrea Hu, Jeffrey Hui, Jeremy
  Hurwitz, Michael Isard, Abe Ittycheriah, Matthew Jagielski, Wenhao Jia, Kathleen Kenealy,
  Maxim Krikun, Sneha Kudugunta, Chang Lan, Katherine Lee, Benjamin Lee, Eric Li, Music Li,
  Wei Li, YaGuang Li, Jian Li, Hyeontaek Lim, Hanzhao Lin, Zhongtao Liu, Frederick Liu, Mar-
  cello Maggioni, Aroma Mahendru, Joshua Maynez, Vedant Misra, Maysam Moussalem, Zachary
  Nado, John Nham, Eric Ni, Andrew Nystrom, Alicia Parrish, Marie Pellat, Martin Polacek, Alex
  Polozov, Reiner Pope, Siyuan Qiao, Emily Reif, Bryan Richter, Parker Riley, Alex Castro Ros,
  Aurko Roy, Brennan Saeta, Rajkumar Samuel, Renee Shelby, Ambrose Slone, Daniel Smilkov,
  David R. So, Daniel Sohn, Simon Tokumine, Dasha Valter, Vijay Vasudevan, Kiran Vodrahalli,
  Xuezhi Wang, Pidong Wang, Zirui Wang, Tao Wang, John Wieting, Yuhuai Wu, Kelvin Xu, Yun-
  han Xu, Linting Xue, Pengcheng Yin, Jiahui Yu, Qiao Zhang, Steven Zheng, Ce Zheng, Weikang
  Zhou, Denny Zhou, Slav Petrov, and Yonghui Wu. PaLM 2 Technical Report, September 2023.
  URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2305.10403. arXiv:2305.10403 [cs].
Anthropic. Model card and evaluations for claude models, 2021.
David Bau, Bolei Zhou, Aditya Khosla, Aude Oliva, and Antonio Torralba. Network Dissec-
  tion: Quantifying Interpretability of Deep Visual Representations, April 2017. URL http:
  //arxiv.org/abs/1704.05796. arXiv:1704.05796 [cs].
Adam Bohr and Kaveh Memarzadeh. The rise of artificial intelligence in healthcare applications. Ar-
  tificial Intelligence in Healthcare, pp. 25–60, 2020. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-818438-7.00002-2.
  URL https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7325854/.
Stephen Casper, Yuxiao Li, Jiawei Li, Tong Bu, Kevin Zhang, Kaivalya Hariharan, and Dylan
  Hadfield-Menell. Red teaming deep neural networks with feature synthesis tools, 2023.
Badr Ben Elallid, Nabil Benamar, Abdelhakim Senhaji Hafid, Tajjeeddine Rachidi, and Nabil
  Mrani. A Comprehensive Survey on the Application of Deep and Reinforcement Learning
  Approaches in Autonomous Driving. Journal of King Saud University - Computer and Infor-
  mation Sciences, 34(9):7366–7390, October 2022. ISSN 1319-1578. doi: 10.1016/j.jksuci.
  2022.03.013. URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
  S1319157822000970.
D. Erhan, Yoshua Bengio, Aaron C. Courville, and Pascal Vincent. Visualizing Higher-Layer Fea-
  tures of a Deep Network, 2009. URL https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/
  Visualizing-Higher-Layer-Features-of-a-Deep-Network-Erhan-Bengio/
  65d994fb778a8d9e0f632659fb33a082949a50d3.
Robert Geirhos, Roland S. Zimmermann, Blair Bilodeau, Wieland Brendel, and Been Kim. Don’t
  trust your eyes: on the (un)reliability of feature visualizations, July 2023. URL http:
  //arxiv.org/abs/2306.04719. arXiv:2306.04719 [cs, q-bio].
Bryce Goodman and Seth Flaxman.                  European Union Regulations on Algorith-
  mic Decision Making and a “Right to Explanation”.                 AI Magazine, 38(3):50–
  57, 2017.         ISSN 2371-9621.        doi: 10.1609/aimag.v38i3.2741.   URL https:
  //onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1609/aimag.v38i3.2741. eprint:
  https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1609/aimag.v38i3.2741.
Greentfrapp. Lucent, 2018. URL https://github.com/greentfrapp/lucent. original-
  date: 2020-05-09T18:07:01Z.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image recog-
  nition. CoRR, abs/1512.03385, 2015. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1512.03385.
Scott Lundberg and Su-In Lee. A Unified Approach to Interpreting Model Predictions, November
  2017. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1705.07874. arXiv:1705.07874 [cs, stat] version:
  2.
C    Molnar.    10.1 learned features. https://christophm.github.io/
    interpretable-ml-book/cnn-features.html, 2021. Accessed: 2021-12-21.
A Mordvintsev, C Olah, and M Tyka. Inceptionism: Going deeper into neural networks. Google
  Research Blog (2015), 2015.
Anh Nguyen, Jason Yosinski, and Jeff Clune. Deep Neural Networks are Easily Fooled: High
  Confidence Predictions for Unrecognizable Images, April 2015. URL http://arxiv.org/
  abs/1412.1897. arXiv:1412.1897 [cs].
Anh Nguyen, Jason Yosinski, and Jeff Clune. Multifaceted Feature Visualization: Uncovering the
  Different Types of Features Learned By Each Neuron in Deep Neural Networks, May 2016. URL
  http://arxiv.org/abs/1602.03616. arXiv:1602.03616 [cs].
Chris Olah, Alexander Mordvintsev, and Ludwig Schubert. Feature Visualization. Distill, 2(11):e7,
  November 2017. ISSN 2476-0757. doi: 10.23915/distill.00007. URL https://distill.
  pub/2017/feature-visualization.
Chris Olah, Arvind Satyanarayan, Ian Johnson, Shan Carter, Ludwig Schubert, Katherine Ye,
  and Alexander Mordvintsev. The Building Blocks of Interpretability. Distill, 3(3):e10, March
  2018. ISSN 2476-0757. doi: 10.23915/distill.00010. URL https://distill.pub/2018/
  building-blocks.
Chris Olah, Nick Cammarata, Ludwig Schubert, Gabriel Goh, Michael Petrov, and Shan Carter.
  Zoom In: An Introduction to Circuits. Distill, 5(3):e00024.001, March 2020. ISSN 2476-
  0757. doi: 10.23915/distill.00024.001. URL https://distill.pub/2020/circuits/
  zoom-in.
OpenAI. GPT-4 Technical Report, March 2023. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2303.
  08774. arXiv:2303.08774 [cs].
Maxime Oquab, Leon Bottou, Ivan Laptev, and Josef Sivic.     Is Object Localiza-
 tion for Free? - Weakly-Supervised Learning With Convolutional Neural Networks,
 2015.    URL https://openaccess.thecvf.com/content_cvpr_2015/html/
 Oquab_Is_Object_Localization_2015_CVPR_paper.html.
Marco Tulio Ribeiro, Sameer Singh, and Carlos Guestrin. ”Why Should I Trust You?”: Explain-
 ing the Predictions of Any Classifier, August 2016. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1602.
 04938. arXiv:1602.04938 [cs, stat] version: 3.
Christian Szegedy, Wei Liu, Yangqing Jia, Pierre Sermanet, Scott E. Reed, Dragomir Anguelov,
  Dumitru Erhan, Vincent Vanhoucke, and Andrew Rabinovich. Going deeper with convolutions.
  CoRR, abs/1409.4842, 2014. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1409.4842.
Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Albert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei, Niko-
  lay Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti Bhosale, Dan Bikel, Lukas Blecher,
  Cristian Canton Ferrer, Moya Chen, Guillem Cucurull, David Esiobu, Jude Fernandes, Jeremy
  Fu, Wenyin Fu, Brian Fuller, Cynthia Gao, Vedanuj Goswami, Naman Goyal, Anthony Hartshorn,
  Saghar Hosseini, Rui Hou, Hakan Inan, Marcin Kardas, Viktor Kerkez, Madian Khabsa, Isabel
  Kloumann, Artem Korenev, Punit Singh Koura, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Thibaut Lavril, Jenya Lee,
  Diana Liskovich, Yinghai Lu, Yuning Mao, Xavier Martinet, Todor Mihaylov, Pushkar Mishra,
  Igor Molybog, Yixin Nie, Andrew Poulton, Jeremy Reizenstein, Rashi Rungta, Kalyan Saladi,
  Alan Schelten, Ruan Silva, Eric Michael Smith, Ranjan Subramanian, Xiaoqing Ellen Tan, Binh
  Tang, Ross Taylor, Adina Williams, Jian Xiang Kuan, Puxin Xu, Zheng Yan, Iliyan Zarov, Yuchen
  Zhang, Angela Fan, Melanie Kambadur, Sharan Narang, Aurelien Rodriguez, Robert Stojnic,
  Sergey Edunov, and Thomas Scialom. Llama 2: Open Foundation and Fine-Tuned Chat Models,
  July 2023. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2307.09288. arXiv:2307.09288 [cs].


                                               11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Bolei Zhou, David Bau, Aude Oliva, and Antonio Torralba. Interpreting Deep Visual Representa-
  tions via Network Dissection, June 2018. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1711.05611.
  arXiv:1711.05611 [cs] version: 2.


A    E XPERIMENTAL D ETAILS
Choice of classes. The 11 randomly chosen classes for our experiment in terms of Imagenet class
indices were [12, 34, 249, 429, 558, 640, 669, 694, 705, 760, 786].
Optimisation parameters. The randomly initialised image is initialised using torch.rand(3, 224,
224) and the optimisation process uses the Adam optimiser with a constant learning rate of 0.05
over 512 optimisation steps.
Selecting regularisation parameters. Generating a feature visualisation that maximises a certain
output logit related to class c without any constraints will result in adversarial images that have no
representative features of c (Erhan et al., 2009). To guide the optimisation process towards creating
feature visualisations that maintain the natural structure of images belonging to c we need to utilise
some constraints in the form of regularisation. The concept of regularisation originates from the
broader field of optimisation and is crucial for preventing overfitting.
During the prototype generation process we need to be cautious while implementing regularisation.
An unprincipled approach can lead to undesirable outcomes, such as creating visualisations that
are aesthetically pleasing but lack meaningful information about what the model has truly learned
during training. In contrast, foregoing regularisation may result in visualisations that contain high-
frequency noise or adversarial inputs, which are not only hard to interpret but also unlikely to yield
useful insights. This brings us to the delicate balance we aim to strike: optimising the feature
visualisation in such a way that it remains useful and informative while avoiding misleading or un-
interpretable outputs. Figure 7 shows the increasing effect of regularisation on generated prototypes,
starting from no regularisation at the left and increasing towards the right, for prototypes generated
using Resnet-18 for the goldfish class.
We find that path similarity can work as a reliable measure of features that conform to the natural
structure found in images belonging to a certain class in the training set. Regularisation can take
many forms (Nguyen et al., 2015; Mordvintsev et al., 2015) but our focus here will be on two specific
forms of regularisation: high-frequency penalisation and random affine transformations.
High-frequency penalisation aims to suppress unnecessary details and noise, facilitating a cleaner,
more interpretable visualisation. Transformation robustness, on the other hand, ensures that minor
alterations in the input space do not result in significantly different visualisations, thus maintaining
consistency and reliability. We perform high-frequency penalisation to minimise large variation in
magnitude of adjacent pixel values across all channels and apply it by adding the loss Lhf described
earlier in Section 3 to our overall loss. We also ensure transformation robustness using random
affine transforms made up of random scale, random translate and random rotation transforms. The
parameters of random scale, random translate and random rotation guide the degree of freedom of
the random affine transform and lead to varying visual characteristics of our generated prototype.


         (a)                        (b)                         (c)                         (d)

     Figure 7: Effect of increasing regularisation (from left to right) for the goldfish prototype

To find regularisation parameters that lead to reliable prototypes, we test the effect of random affine
transforms on the spearman similarity between prototypes generated using a particular set of regu-
larisations, and average natural image activations from the training set. We test a set of 125 random


                                                  12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


affine transforms with varying parameters for random scale, random translate and random rotation
transforms,

        • Random scale: None, (0.9, 1.1), (0.8, 1.2), (0.7, 1.3), (0.5, 1.5)
        • Random rotation: None, 30, 60, 90, 180
        • Random translate: None, (0.05, 0.05), (0.1, 0.1), (0.2, 0.2), (0.5, 0.5)

Table 4 shows the top 5 regularisation parameters we discovered, in terms of path similarity calcu-
lated using spearman similarity between the AP (created using these regularisation parameters) and
AI , where I contains 100 natural images belonging to the goldfish class, averaged over all the layers
of our model of choice, Resnet-18. The prototype generated using the best regularisation can be
seen in Figure 7d.

    Table 4: Spearman similarity of top five affine transformation protocols with respect to average
                                      natural image activations.

                      Scale      Rotation    Translate     Average path similarity
                    (0.7, 1.3)     180       (0.5, 0.5)            0.564
                    (0.5, 1.5)     30        (0.5, 0.5)            0.563
                    (0.8, 1.2)     30        (0.5, 0.5)            0.562
                    (0.5, 1.5)     60        (0.1, 0.1)            0.561
                    (0.7, 1.3)     30        (0.5, 0.5)            0.560

We choose the regularisation parameters that lead to the best average path similarity with the param-
eters of scale, rotations and translation set at (0.7, 1.3), 180 and (0.5, 0.5) respectively.

B      R AW E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS
Figures 4 and 5 show the normalised plots for our experimental results comparing L1 distance and
Spearman Similarity of our generated prototypes with natural images. In this section, we want to
show the raw results before normalisation for our path similarity experiments. Figure 8 shows how
close the similarity values are to each other for most part of the network before diverging heavily at
the end of the network.

C      R ESULTS OF DIVERSITY OBJECTIVE
We use a pixel-based diversity objective to generate pixel-level differences in the prototypes rather
than the cosine difference of activations from a given neuron as in Olah et al. (2017). This leads
to imperceptible pixel differences in the prototypes rather then leading to prototypes that show di-
verse features. Figure 9 shows this change over different classes, although they look exactly the
same to human eyes, they lead to different classification probabilities showing that the changes are
impreceptible.


                                                   13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                         (a) Resnet-18


                                  (b) InceptionV1 (Googlenet)

                 Figure 8: Raw value plots for spearman similarity comparisons


                                              14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                        (a) Mosquito Net


                                            (b) Flute


                                      (c) Alaskan Malamute


                                       (d) Academic Gown


                                         (e) Mortarboard

                  Figure 9: Imperceptible differences using diversity objective


                                               15
