Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


L ARGE TRAJECTORY MODELS ARE SCALABLE
MOTION PREDICTORS AND PLANNERS

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT

         Motion prediction and planning are vital tasks in autonomous driving, and re-
         cent efforts have shifted to machine learning-based approaches. The challenges
         include understanding diverse road topologies, reasoning traffic dynamics over
         a long time horizon, interpreting heterogeneous behaviors, and generating poli-
         cies in a large continuous state space. Inspired by the success of large language
         models in addressing similar complexities through model scaling, we introduce
         a scalable trajectory model called State Transformer (STR). STR reformulates
         the motion prediction and motion planning problems by arranging observations,
         states, and actions into one unified sequence modeling task. With a simple model
         design, STR consistently outperforms baseline approaches in both problems. Re-
         markably, experimental results reveal that large trajectory models (LTMs), such as
         STR, adhere to the scaling laws by presenting outstanding adaptability and learn-
         ing efficiency. Qualitative results further demonstrate that LTMs are capable of
         making plausible predictions in scenarios that diverge significantly from the train-
         ing data distribution. LTMs also learn to make complex reasonings for long-term
         planning, without explicit loss designs or costly high-level annotations.


1   I NTRODUCTION

Motion planning and prediction in autonomous driving rely on the ability to semantically understand
complex driving environments and interactions between various road users. Learning-based meth-
ods are pivotal to overcoming this complexity as rule-based and scenario-specific strategies often
prove inadequate to cover all possible situations and unexpected events that may occur during oper-
ations. Such learning problems can be regarded as conditional sequence-to-sequence tasks, where
models leverage past trajectories to generate future ones, depending on the observations. Notably,
these problems share structural similarities with other sequence modeling problems, such as lan-
guage generation. This parallel in terms of both the problem settings (i.e. predicting the next state in
a sequence vs. predicting the next token of language in a sequence) and the challenges (i.e. learning
diverse driving behaviors against observations vs. answers against prompts) evokes a compelling
question: Can we follow large language models to crack these complexities of motion prediction
and motion planning in autonomous driving by large trajectory models?
Recent studies (Mirchandani et al., 2023; Zeng et al., 2023) have demonstrated that the LLMs excel
not only in natural language generation but also in tackling a wide range of sequence modeling prob-
lems and time series forecasting challenges. Building on these insights, prior research (Chen et al.,
2021; Janner et al., 2021; Sun et al., 2023) have effectively utilized conditional causal transformers
to address motion planning as a large sequence modeling problem, with both behavior cloning and
reinforcement learning. Furthermore, (Brohan et al., 2023) replace the transformer backbone with
language models, demonstrating the potential to merge motion planning along with other modalities
within one large sequence for LLMs.
However, learning from large-scale real-world datasets for autonomous driving presents additional
complexities: (i) intricate and varied map topology, (ii) prediction within a substantially large con-
tinuous space, (iii) noisy and ambiguous demonstrations from diverse human drivers, and more.
Furthermore, the evaluation metrics associated measure accuracy up to 8 seconds, placing addi-
tional challenges on the long-term reasoning capabilities of different methods. Previous works, like
(Seff et al., 2023), fail to scale the size of the model over 10M before overfitting.


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


In this study, we propose a novel and scalable adaptation of conditional causal transformers named
State Transformers (STR). Our experimental results indicate that scaling the GPT-2 model back-
bone (Radford et al., 2019) significantly improves the learning efficiency and mitigates generaliza-
tion problems in complex map topologies when arranging all components into one sequence for
learning. In this sequence, we arrange the embeddings of encoded maps, past trajectories of road
users, and traffic light states as conditions for future state sequence generation. The design of STR
is both concise and adaptable. STR is compatible with additional supervisions or priors by inserting
additional embeddings, like adding prompts for the language generation models. Specifically, we
introduce Proposals followed by Key Points in the sequence to alleviate the problem of large output
spaces. Proposal classification has been proven (Shi et al., 2022) as a useful technique to guide the
model to learn from a mixed distribution of different modalities on single agents, easing the prob-
lem of ambiguous demonstrations and large output spaces. Key Points serve a dual purpose: on one
hand, they improve the model’s capacity for long-term reasoning during training, and on the other
hand, they function as anchors to empower the model to generate high-level instructions and rules,
such as lane changes, by incorporating them as additional generation conditions at different time
steps. Lastly, we implement a diffusion-based Key Point decoder to fit the multimodal distribution
of futures caused by the interactions of multiple road users.
We evaluate STR through rigorous experiments on two expansive real-world datasets: NuPlan
(H. Caesar, 2021) for the motion planning task, and Waymo Open Motion Dataset (WOMD) (Et-
tinger et al., 2021) for the motion prediction task. The NuPlan dataset covers over 900 hours of
driving experiences across four distinct cities located in two countries. Notably, the training sub-
set of this dataset includes over 1 billion human-driving waypoints of the planning vehicle, align-
ing with the scale of vast language datasets. To comprehensively evaluate the scalability of our
approach, we conducted experiments spanning 3 orders of magnitude in terms of the size of the
training set and 4 orders of magnitude with respect to the model size. The model size is measured
in terms of the number of trainable parameters within the GPT-2 backbone. The empirical results
reveal intriguing parallels in the scaling behaviors with training the LLMs and the LTMs. Further-
more, we observed that LTMs exhibit superior performance when tested with previously unseen
map scenarios, surpassing their smaller counterparts. These parallels between future state predic-
tion challenges and the rapidly evolving field of language modeling tasks suggest promising op-
portunities for leveraging emerging language model architectures to advance the learning efficiency
of motion prediction and motion planning in the future. Source codes and models are available at
https://github.com/Tsinghua-MARS-Lab/StateTransformer.


2   R ELATED W ORKS

Motion planning constitutes a substantial research domain for autonomous driving. In this study, our
primary focus lies on the learning part, recognizing that learning constitutes merely a segment of the
comprehensive puzzle. More precisely, we approach the motion planning problem by framing it as a
future state prediction problem. In the subsequent parts of this paper, we will use the terms “trajec-
tory generation”, “trajectory prediction”, “state prediction”, and “pose prediction” interchangeably.
All these terms refer to the same objective, which is to predict the future states, including both the
position and the yaw angle, of the ego vehicle.

Motion Prediction. In recent years, significant advancements have been made in learning-based
trajectory prediction for diverse types of road users. Graph neural networks have been introduced
as an effective way to encode the vectorized geometry and topology of maps (Gao et al., 2020;
Liang et al., 2020). Given the multimodal nature of future motions, various decoder heads have been
proposed, including anchor-based (Chai et al., 2019), goal-based (Zhao et al., 2021), heatmap-based
models (Gu et al., 2021; Gilles et al., 2021). Transformer architectures have also been applied in
motion prediction tasks to enable simple and general architectures for early fusion (Nayakanti et al.,
2023) and joint prediction and planning (Ngiam et al., 2021). To provide a more comprehensive
understanding of the interactions between multiple agents, there have been advancements including
factored (Sun et al., 2022) and joint future prediction models (Luo et al., 2023).

Motion Planning. Imitation learning (IL) and reinforcement learning (RL) are two major learning
paradigms in robotics motion planning. IL has been applied to autonomous driving since the early


                                                  2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


days (Pomerleau, 1988; Bojarski et al., 2016; Zhang et al., 2021; Vitelli et al., 2022; Lioutas et al.,
2022). However, IL suffers from the covariate shift problem (Ross et al., 2011), where the accumu-
lated error leads to out-of-distribution scenarios, posing severe safety risks. Reinforcement learning
avoids the covariate shift problem by learning in a closed-loop simulator. Nevertheless, reinforce-
ment learning introduces several unique challenges: reward design, high-quality traffic simulation,
and sim-to-real transfer. It is especially challenging to design proper reward functions reflecting in-
tricate human driving courtesies. More recently, (Hester et al., 2018; Vecerik et al., 2017; Lu et al.,
2022) proposed to combine imitation learning and reinforcement learning to improve the safety and
reliability of the learned policies.

Diffusion Models in Prediction and Planning. Diffusion models (Ho et al., 2020; Dhariwal &
Nichol, 2021; Rombach et al., 2022) have emerged as a new paradigm for generative tasks. Recently,
diffusion models have been used in motion planning tasks and have shown a strong ability to fit
multimodal distributions with uncertainty. In the area of robotics, (Janner et al., 2022) utilizes
diffusion models for motion planning by iteratively denoising trajectories and (Chi et al., 2023)
proposes a method to learn policies in a conditional denoising diffusion process. As for trajectory
prediction, (Jiang et al., 2023) utilizes diffusion models to capture the multimodal distribution for
multi-agent motion prediction in autonomous driving and achieves state-of-the-art performance.

Scaling Laws in Large Language Models. Hestness et al. (Hestness et al., 2017) identified
scaling laws for deep neural networks. Kaplan et al. (Kaplan et al., 2020) conducted an extensive
study of scaling laws in large language models. They empirically demonstrated that the performance
of transformer-based models on a range of natural language processing tasks scales as a power-law
function with the number of model parameters, amount of training data, and compute resources
used for training. This research laid the groundwork for understanding how scaling influences the
efficacy of language models. Henighan et al. (Henighan et al., 2020) further studied scaling laws in
autoregressive generative modeling of images, videos, vision-language, and mathematical problems.
These works suggest that scaling laws have important implications for neural network performance.

3     P RELIMINARIES AND P ROBLEM S ETUP

3.1   T RAJECTORY G ENERATION
Motion prediction and planning are two classic problems in autonomous driving, often formulated
in different setups. The goal of motion prediction is to estimate the possible future trajectories of
other road agents. More specifically, given a static scene context c such as a high-definition map,
ego vehicle states sego and a set of observed states of other road agents s = [s0 , ..., sN −1 ], our goal
is to predict the future states of other agents up to some fixed time step T. The overall probabilistic
distribution we aim to estimate is P (sT |c, sego , s).
On the other hand, the definition of motion planning is as follows: given scene context c, ego
states sego , the observed states of other road agents s, and a route r from a navigation system, find
the policy π for our ego agent that maximizes expected return R, which is usually defined as a
mixture of safety, efficiency, and comfortness: arg max R(π|c, sego , s, r). If we are given expert
                                                        π
demonstrations π ∗ in motion planning, and take the behavior cloning approach, then its formulation
becomes estimating the probabilistic distribution of expert policy P (π ∗ |c, sego , s, r). This objective
is highly similar to motion prediction, apart from taking an additional route as input. Therefore, it is
reasonable to leverage a general framework to model both of them as trajectory generation tasks.

3.2   C ONDITIONAL D IFFUSION M ODELS
The primary goal of conditional diffusion models on trajectory generation tasks is to generate the
future states conditioning on given context. Specifically, given a condition vector f and a desired
output vector s∗ , the probabilistic framework that captures this relationship is defined as P (s∗ |f ),
which is the probability distribution the diffusion model estimates. In this work, we let s∗ be a latent
feature related to sT (for example, Key Points of the future trajectory) and f be the feature obtained
by forwarding c, sego , s, r through a backbone (for example, certain Transformer backbone).
Particular conditional Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models (Ho et al., 2020) are based on two
processes: the forward process (diffusion) and the reverse process (denoising). In the forward pro-


                                                    3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                                                   t+n

                               t                                       t                                 t

         (i)                   t-m                 (ii)                t-m            (iii)              t-m

                                                                   Proposal Key Points               Future States
      Supervised
       Targets                                                             P   KP1 … KP5      St+1     St+2    …    St+n
       Decoders
       Learned
                                                                                  …
    Representations


     Transformer
        Blocks
                                                      Causal Transformer Backbone


     Embeddings                                           …                       …

       Encoders

         Inputs              Ot-m    St-m Ot-m+1 St-m+1 …     Ot           P   KP1 … KP5
 (Rasterized / Vectorized)


                                           Context                 Proposal Key Points

Figure 1: The architecture of STR. There are four components in the sequence, namely Context,
Proposal, Key Points, and Future States. Each part is encoded by its corresponding encoder. The
causal transformer backbone, the GPT-2 model in our experiments, learns representations on the
embedding level. The Proposal and Key Points are two optional components. A full generation
process of STR is as follows. (i) STR selects Top K Proposals indicating future directions. (ii) STR
generates a set of Key Points consecutively. (iii) STR generates the future states.

cess s∗ is gradually transformed into noise tensor z through Td diffusion steps. At each diffusion
time step td , the data point is perturbed with Gaussian noise εtd :

                                  s∗td = 1 − βtd · s∗td −1 + βtd · εtd
                                        p                   p
                                                                                               (1)
where s∗0 = s∗ , s∗Td = z and βtd is a noise schedule parameter. It can be derived to:
                                            1
                             s∗td −1 = p          · s∗td − βtd · εtd .
                                                           p
                                                                                                                           (2)
                                          1 − βtd

In the denoising phase, the goal is to generate s∗ when sampling from z. The key problem here is
to estimate the noise term εtd with respect to std , f , td . Given an estimated term ε̂td , s∗td −1 can be
                                                                                                  ∗
calculated with Eqn. (2). By performing this reverse process iteratively we can
       ∗                                                                   ∗
                                                                                    generate s0 starting
with sTd = z. Notably, by learning to estimate εtd through ε̂td = gθ std , f , td , the diffusion model
captures the multi-modality structure inherent in the data distribution.

4     S TATE T RANSFORMERS
In this section, we introduce each element in the sequence of our proposed approach STR for both
motion planning and motion prediction tasks, shown in Fig. 1. The main idea is to formulate the
future states prediction problem as a conditional sequence modeling problem. This formulation
arranges the observations, the past states, and the future states into one large sequence. This for-
mulation is maintained as general, allowing it to be applicable for both motion planning and motion
prediction tasks with diverse intermediate supervisions or priors.
Context. To begin with, we define the Context, including the map, the past trajectory of other
road users, and states of traffic lights, as observations at that time step and the past states of the
ego vehicle. In the sequence generation problem setting, we treat these factors as conditions for


                                                                   4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                      Loss vs Model and Dataset Sizes                                    Loss vs Model Size and Opt. Steps
              2.2                              Model Size                        3.2                             Model Size
              2.0                          300K             124M                 3.1                             300K         124M
                                           16M              1.5B                 3.0                             16M          1.5B
              1.8                                                                2.9
              1.6                                                                2.8
                                                                                 2.7
Log of Loss


                                                                   Log of Loss
              1.4                                                                2.6
                                                                                 2.5
              1.2                                                                2.4
                                                                                 2.3
              1.0                                                                2.2
                                                                                 2.1
                                                                                 2.0
              0.8                                                                1.9 5
                104              105                 106                            10           2 × 105   3 × 105 4 × 105    6 × 105
                                Dataset Size                                                      Optimized Steps
Figure 2: These two figures demonstrate the substantial scalability of STR, illustrating the scaling
laws for training LTMs. The left figure reveals that LTMs exhibit smooth scalability with the size of
the training dataset. When the training is not constrained by the size of the dataset, larger trajectory
models tend to converge to a lower evaluation loss. The right figure shows that larger trajectory
models learn faster to converge than their smaller counterparts, indicating superior data efficiency.

the generation, like prompts for language generation. The context can be both rasterized (tested
later with NuPlan) or vectorized (tested later with WOMD) features, each paired with its respective
encoder.

Proposal. Given the multi-modal distribution mixture of future states, we introduce a classification
of the Proposals to separate along different modalities given the same prompt. The modalities here
indicate different intentions in the future, such as changing speeds or changing lanes to the left or
right. In this work, we leverage the intention points (Shi et al., 2022) as the Proposals. Ground
truth Proposals are fed into the sequence facilitating a teacher-forcing style of training to guide the
prediction of future states.

Key Points. Moreover, we introduce a series of Key Points into the sequence. These Key Points
represent specific points at designated time steps from the future trajectory. They are trained in
                                               QM
an auto-regressive manner with P (K M ) = m=1 P (Km |K1:m ) where m is the number of the
Key Points to predict. STR is compatible with diffusion decoders, if necessary, to cover the multi-
modality at each time step. These Key Points guide the model to reason about long-term decisions
during training.
During the generation process, post-procession, filtering, and searching can be applied to refine or
select the optimal Key Points. In other words, these Key Points function as anchors for generating
future states following additional high-level guidance. For example, if Key Points are off-road
during the generation process, we can move them to the nearest lane to instruct future states to stay
close to the road. For our experiments in this work, we select 5 Key Points in an exponentially
decreasing order which are the states of 8s, 4s, 2s, 1s, and 0.5s in the future.

Future States. Finally, the model learns the pattern to generate all Future States given the Con-
texts, Proposals, and the Key Points with direct regression losses in a specified frequency, which is
10Hz for both WOMD and NuPlan in our experiments.

Causal Transformer Backbone. Our architecture is compatible with most transformer-based lan-
guage models, serving as the causal transformer backbone. The backbone can be easily updated with
the later iterations, or be scaled up or down by modifying the number of the layers. As a result, we
can evaluate different sizes of backbones without touching the structure of the encoders or decoders
for a fair comparison. Considering the excellent generalization ability and scalability, we test mul-
tiple language models and select the GPT-2 model as our Causal Transformer Backbone to report in
this work.


                                                                    5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


5     E XPERIMENTS
We design experiments to (i) verify the scalability of STR, (ii) compare the performance with pre-
vious benchmarks, and (iii) implement ablation studies on design choices. To test the scalability
of our approach, we train and evaluate STR on the motion planning task with NuPlan v1.1. The
training dataset scales from 15k to 1 million scenarios and the models scale from 300k to 1.5 billion
trainable parameters. Following (Kaplan et al., 2020), we measure the performance with converged
evaluation losses, which are the lowest evaluation losses after training with sufficient computations.
We train each size of our model with the full training dataset and compare the evaluation results
with the performance reported in (Dauner et al., 2023). For the task of motion prediction, the model
is trained with the size of 16 million with the training dataset of the WOMD v1.1 and compares the
evaluation results with the performance from (Ngiam et al., 2021) and (Shi et al., 2022).

5.1   DATASETS AND M ETRICS
Dataset for Planning. We evaluate the task of motion planning on NuPlan Dataset and test the
scalability of our approach on this dataset considering it is the largest dataset at the time. Following
the setting of (Dauner et al., 2023), which is the current benchmark method on NuPlan’s leaderboard,
we use the same scenarios in the training set. Each frame in these scenarios is labeled with scenario
tags, such as “turning left”, “turning right”, etc. This training set has 15,523,077 samples of 8
seconds driving across 4 different cities. For testing, we follow the previous setting to test on the
validation 14 set for a fair comparison. The validation 14 set is a hand-picked subset of the whole
validation set, which is claimed by (Dauner et al., 2023) to be well-aligned with the full validation
set and the test set.

Metrics for Planning. For the motion planning task, NuPlan provides three sets of metrics includ-
ing Open-Loop Simulation (OLS), Closed-Loop Simulation with Reactive Agents (CLS-R), Closed-
Loop simulation with Non-Reactive Agents (CLS-NR). As discussed in (Dauner et al., 2023), there
is a notable misalignment between the closed-loop simulation metrics and ego-forecasting. Since
we focus on the learning performance of the models in this paper, we report and compare scores of
the metrics on the accuracy, including averaged displacement error (ADE), final displacement error
(FDE), miss rate (MR), and the OLS score. The miss rate in NuPlan metrics is the percentage of
scenarios with a length of 15 seconds in which the max displacement errors in the three horizons
are larger than the corresponding threshold. The OLS is defined as an averaged overall score of all
the errors on displacement, heading errors, and the miss rate. Please refer to Appendix A.3 for more
details.

Dataset and Metrics for Prediction. For the motion prediction task, we conduct training and
testing on WOMD. For comparison, following previous approaches, we report testing results on the
validation set with 4 metrics: mAP, minADE, minFDE, and MR. The MR here is the percent of
scenarios in which the prediction’s FDE is larger than a certain threshold.

5.2   E NCODERS AND D ECODERS
Encoders. For the NuPlan dataset, we employ a raster encoder utilizing ResNet18 (He et al.,
2016) because it is convenient for fast visualization and debugging. For the WOMD dataset, a
vector encoder identical to MTR (Shi et al., 2022) is implemented. Additionally, we employ max-
pooling along the instance axis instead of the time axis in order to arrange all the states in a sequence
of embeddings to the backbone. For the Key Points, we implement a single Multilayer Perceptron
(MLP) layer followed by an activation layer of Tanh. The ground truth Key Points are fed into the
backbone during training to learn in an auto-regression style, implying predicting the next key point
only. At the inference stage, the model rolls out the Key Points one by one. We use the same encoder
for the Proposals on WOMD.

Decoders. STR involves three distinct decoders for the Proposal, Key Points, and Future States.
We implement STR(CPS) which includes the Proposal for the motion prediction task on WOMD and
STR(CKS) which includes the Key Points for the motion planning task on NuPlan. The Proposal
decoders are two separate heads of MLPs respectively trained with a Cross-Entropy loss and an MSE
loss. The Key Points decoders are diffusion decoders trained with an MSE loss. The Future State
decoders are also MLPs trained with an MSE loss. For better convergence, we apply the diffusion
process to the latent feature space of the Key Points rather than directly to the latent feature space of


                                                   6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 1: Performance comparison of motion planning on the validation 14 set of the NuPlan dataset.

 Methods                                    8sADE ↓         3sFDE ↓    5sFDE ↓      8sFDE ↓      MR ↓    OLS ↑
 IDM (Treiber et al., 2000)                   9.600          6.256      10.076       16.993      0.552   37.7
 PlanCNN (Renz et al., 2022)                  2.468          0.955       2.486        5.936      0.064   64.0
 Urban Driver (Scheel et al., 2022)           2.667          1.497       2.815        5.453      0.064   76.0
 PDM-Open (Dauner et al., 2023)                 -              -            -           -          -     72.0
 PDM-Open (Privileged)                        2.375          0.715        2.06        5.296      0.042   85.8
 STR(CKS)-300k (Ours)                         2.069          1.200      2.426        5.135       0.067   82.2
 STR(CKS)-16m (Ours)                          1.923          1.052      2.274        4.835       0.058   84.5
 STR(CKS)-124m (Ours)                         1.777          0.951      2.105        4.515       0.053   88.0
 STR(CKS)-1.5b (Ours)                         1.783          0.971      2.140        4.460       0.047   86.6

      Table 2: Performance comparison of motion prediction on the validation set of the WOMD.

          Methods                                       mAP ↑        minADE ↓     minFDE ↓       MR ↓
          SceneTransformer (Ngiam et al., 2021)             0.28       0.61           1.22        0.16
          MTR-e2e (Shi et al., 2022)                        0.32       0.52           1.10        0.12
          STR(CPS)-16m (Ours)                               0.33       0.72           1.44        0.19


the Future States. For better training efficiency, the diffusion decoders are trained separately from
the other parts. The details of this decoder and settings for training can be found in Appendix A.1.

5.3      S CALING L AWS
We test the scalability of our approach with the NuPlan dataset. We measure the performance with
the evaluation loss, which is the sum of the MSE losses for the Key Points and all target future states.
The experiment results indicate that the performance of our method smoothly scales over the size
of the dataset across 3 magnitudes and over the size of the model across 4 magnitudes. To measure
the relation between the size of the dataset, the model size, and the performance, we compare the
converged loss value with sufficient training iterations before overfitting for each set of experiments.
In general, we find that learning processes on motion prediction and motion planning with our
method follow scaling laws similar to the learning processes on language modeling problems. The
ratio of each scaling law varies depending on the experimental settings, such as whether or not key
point predictions are included. However, the general pattern holds as long as the settings within this
group of experiments are the same. The size of the model is measured by the number of trainable
parameters of the backbone Transformers.

Performance with Dataset Size, Model Size, and Computation. Following (Dauner et al.,
2023), we measure the converged loss on the validation 14 NuPlan dataset over the different sizes
of the training dataset. We discover a log-log relationship between the log of the evaluation loss and
the size of the dataset, as shown in Fig. 2. The size is measured by the number of samples avail-
able for the training. This means that as the size of the dataset grows exponentially, the MSE loss
will decrease exponentially. This relation promises our method a great scalability to exploit larger
datasets. Additionally, we find that larger models generally exploit more from larger datasets.

Performance with Training Time. We log the evaluation loss with 4 different model sizes during
training. As shown in Fig. 2, larger trajectory models learn significantly faster than the smaller ones
before they converge. These curves are the evaluation losses for every 4000 steps while training
with ten percent scenarios of the whole training dataset. All 4 experiments in this group are training
with the same setting of batch size, learning rates scheduler, and dataset random seed.

5.4      Q UANTITATIVE A NALYSIS
Comparison on Motion Planning. As shown in Table 1, STR 1 surpasses other methods by a
large margin. In this table, we compare the performance with diverse approaches. Intelligent Diver
   1
       This performance of the large model (1.5b) was trained for 0.28 epoch and not fully converged.


                                                        7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 3: Performance comparison for different design choices with a subset of the training set.
The methods with CKS generate future states with 5 auto-regressive Key Points as conditions. The
methods with fwd and bkwd generate these Key Points in forward indices (0.5s, 1s, 2s, 4s, 8s) and
backward indices (8s, 4s, 2s, 1s, 0.5s) respectively. Methods indicated by w/o Diff. output these Key
Points with MLP layers and methods indicated by w Diff. output Key Points with diffusion decoders.

         Methods                             8sADE ↓     3sFDE ↓     5sFDE ↓     8sFDE ↓
         STR(CS)-16m                           2.223       1.253       2.608       5.480
         STR(CKS)-16m fwd w/o Diff.            3.349       2.030       4.160       7.751
         STR(CKS)-16m bkwd w/o Diff.           2.148       1.159       2.563       5.426
         STR(CKS)-16m bkwd w Diff.             2.095       1.129       2.519       5.300


Model (IDM) (Treiber et al., 2000) is a pure rule-based planner that infers future states based on
lanes from a graph search algorithm. Similar to our approach, PlannCNN (Renz et al., 2022) also
learns from raster representations. Urban Driver (Scheel et al., 2022) and PDM-Open (Dauner et al.,
2023) leverage similar model structures and learn from polygon and graph representations. PDM-
Open (Privileged) explores additional priors from the centerlines, which are the guidance produced
by the IDM planner. Considering learning with additional priors, PDM-Open (Privileged) is not a
perfectly fair comparison with other methods. We list its performance with gray font for reference.
Compared to these baselines, STR not only outperforms the PlanCNN with similar inputs of raster
representations but also exceeds both Urban Driver and PDM-Open by a large margin on both aver-
aged displacement error and final displacement errors. The superior performance indicates STR as a
better approach regardless of different representations, or encoders. The larger versions of STR even
outperform the PDM-Open (Privileged), saving future methods from picking priors for better per-
formance. For experiments on motion planning with the NuPlan dataset, we implement a simplified
version (CKS) that includes only three parts: the context, Key Points, and target states to generate.

Comparison on Motion Prediction. We compare STR with two benchmarks, SceneTransformer
(Ngiam et al., 2021) and MTR (Shi et al., 2022) on the validation set of the WOMD. SceneTrans-
former is a general method for both motion prediction and motion planning, sharing similar model
designs with STR by arranging the past states of each agent at each time step in a 2D sequence. On
the other hand, STR includes the intention points from MTR in the proposals for classification. We
choose the end-to-end version of MTR (MTR-e2e) to facilitate the evaluation of different models
under similar input and output conditions, ensuring a fair comparison. As shown in Table 2, STR
outperforms both MTR-e2e and SceneTransformer on mAP and comparable results on other metrics
without queries and complex refinements at all for the decoding process. These results also reveal
the versatile aspects of STR for integrating classification and regression for motion prediction. We
implement a simplified version (CPS) that includes only three parts of the whole sequence without
Key Points for motion prediction experiments on WOMD.

5.5   A BLATION S TUDY
We execute the ablation study on the planning task with the NuPlan dataset. We use the STR with 16
million parameters. As shown in Table 3, STR (CKS) 16m bkwd outperforms STR (CS) 16m showing
that adding backwardly generated Key Points enhances the performance in accuracy. However,
adding forwardly generated Key Points poisons the performance due to significant accumulative
errors. Finally, replacing the Key Points decoder from simple MLP layers with diffusion decoders
further improves the performance as shown in the last row.

5.6   Q UALITATIVE A NALYSIS
Beyond great scalability and better numerical results on accuracy, we explore diverse scenarios with
visualizations to further analyze the generalizability of different size STR models. The NuPlan
dataset includes scenarios from vast and diverse areas across 4 different cities: Boston, Pittsburgh,
Las Vegas, and Singapore. The map topologies across each city exhibit significant variations. For
example, there are narrow three-way intersections on the map of Pittsburgh and large parking areas
of the hotels on the map of Las Vegas which are absent on the map of Boston.


                                                 8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                            1.5B-Boston
                                                                                            16M-Boston
                                                                                            Ground Truth


              Tested on Pittsburgh                                Tested on Las Vegas
                                         Planning Tested on Different Cities
                                                                                            1.5B-All
                                                                                            16M-All
                                                                                            Ground Truth


                 Learns to stop behind                       Learns to change lanes for coming turns

                                         Emerging Semantics Learning

Figure 3: Qualitative analysis on trajectory models of different scales. The route given for each
scenario is marked as green roadblocks. The ego vehicle to plan is marked as the dark blue box.
All the other road users are marked as green boxes with their given size of shape as well as the yaw
angles. The planning results are marked as larger circles in orange for larger models and purple for
smaller models. These circles are sampled at every second from the trajectory of 8 seconds in total.


The ability to generalize over a new area or new city not included in the training dataset is crucial for
autonomous driving since collecting data is extremely expensive. To examine, we train two models
with the sizes of 16 million and 1.5 billion parameters on the NuPlan training dataset collected from
Boston. We then evaluate them with the validation dataset in unseen environments, specifically with
unique scenarios from Pittsburgh and Las Vegas. Consequently, our findings reveal that larger STR
exhibits a significantly better generalization ability when facing a new environment. Additionally,
we observe that smaller STR tends to generate an over-smoothed trajectory when traversing an
intersection that is different from other intersections in the training dataset, as shown in the example
of the upper left case in Fig. 3. The larger 1.5B model also demonstrates enhanced comprehension
of unseen road topologies, such as when driving into a hotel pick-up area in Las Vegas which is not
present in the training dataset of Boston, as shown in the example of the upper right case in Fig. 3.
These examples indicate a better generalization ability of larger trajectory models.
Additional comparison indicates that larger models tend to generate future states with better reason-
ings about the surroundings, despite similar displacement errors with the smaller ones in these cases.
As shown in the lower left case in Fig. 3, the large model learns to stop behind other vehicles. As
for the example in the lower right case in Fig. 3, the large model learns to change lanes to the left to
prepare for the next coming left turn. Note there are no extra losses or rewards to guide the ego to
avoid collisions or commit lane changes in advance.


6   C ONCLUSION

In this paper, we present a novel way of arranging all elements of both motion prediction and motion
planning problems into one sequence and present a general framework, STR. Experimental results
indicate that by proper formulation, large trajectory models like STR present great scalability over
both the size of the dataset and the size of the Transformers. STR outperforms previous benchmarks
on both motion prediction and motion planning on the NuPlan dataset and the WOMD.


                                                       9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Mariusz Bojarski, Davide Del Testa, Daniel Dworakowski, Bernhard Firner, Beat Flepp, Prasoon
 Goyal, Lawrence D Jackel, Mathew Monfort, Urs Muller, Jiakai Zhang, et al. End to end learning
 for self-driving cars. arXiv preprint arXiv:1604.07316, 2016.
Anthony Brohan, Noah Brown, Justice Carbajal, Yevgen Chebotar, Xi Chen, Krzysztof Choroman-
  ski, Tianli Ding, Danny Driess, Avinava Dubey, Chelsea Finn, et al. Rt-2: Vision-language-action
  models transfer web knowledge to robotic control. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.15818, 2023.
Yuning Chai, Benjamin Sapp, Mayank Bansal, and Dragomir Anguelov. Multipath: Multiple prob-
  abilistic anchor trajectory hypotheses for behavior prediction, 2019.
Lili Chen, Kevin Lu, Aravind Rajeswaran, Kimin Lee, Aditya Grover, Misha Laskin, Pieter Abbeel,
  Aravind Srinivas, and Igor Mordatch. Decision transformer: Reinforcement learning via sequence
  modeling. Advances in neural information processing systems, 34:15084–15097, 2021.
Cheng Chi, Siyuan Feng, Yilun Du, Zhenjia Xu, Eric Cousineau, Benjamin Burchfiel, and Shuran
  Song. Diffusion policy: Visuomotor policy learning via action diffusion. In Proceedings of
  Robotics: Science and Systems (RSS), 2023.
Daniel Dauner, Marcel Hallgarten, Andreas Geiger, and Kashyap Chitta. Parting with misconcep-
  tions about learning-based vehicle motion planning. In Conference on Robot Learning (CoRL),
  2023.
Prafulla Dhariwal and Alexander Nichol. Diffusion models beat gans on image synthesis. Advances
  in neural information processing systems, 34:8780–8794, 2021.
Stefan Elfwing, Eiji Uchibe, and Kenji Doya. Sigmoid-weighted linear units for neural network
  function approximation in reinforcement learning. Neural networks, 107:3–11, 2018.
Scott Ettinger, Shuyang Cheng, Benjamin Caine, Chenxi Liu, Hang Zhao, Sabeek Pradhan, Yuning
  Chai, Ben Sapp, Charles R Qi, Yin Zhou, et al. Large scale interactive motion forecasting for
  autonomous driving: The waymo open motion dataset. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Interna-
  tional Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 9710–9719, 2021.
Jiyang Gao, Chen Sun, Hang Zhao, Yi Shen, Dragomir Anguelov, Congcong Li, and Cordelia
   Schmid. Vectornet: Encoding hd maps and agent dynamics from vectorized representation.
   In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp.
   11525–11533, 2020.
Thomas Gilles, Stefano Sabatini, Dzmitry Tsishkou, Bogdan Stanciulescu, and Fabien Moutarde.
  Home: Heatmap output for future motion estimation. In 2021 IEEE International Intelligent
  Transportation Systems Conference (ITSC), pp. 500–507. IEEE, 2021.
Junru Gu, Chen Sun, and Hang Zhao. Densetnt: End-to-end trajectory prediction from dense goal
  sets. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 15303–
  15312, 2021.
K. Tan et al. H. Caesar, J. Kabzan. Nuplan: A closed-loop ml-based planning benchmark for au-
  tonomous vehicles. In CVPR ADP3 workshop, 2021.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image recog-
  nition. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp.
  770–778, 2016.
Tom Henighan, Jared Kaplan, Mor Katz, Mark Chen, Christopher Hesse, Jacob Jackson, Heewoo
  Jun, Tom B Brown, Prafulla Dhariwal, Scott Gray, et al. Scaling laws for autoregressive generative
  modeling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.14701, 2020.
Todd Hester, Matej Vecerik, Olivier Pietquin, Marc Lanctot, Tom Schaul, Bilal Piot, Dan Horgan,
  John Quan, Andrew Sendonaris, Ian Osband, et al. Deep q-learning from demonstrations. In
  Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 32, 2018.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Joel Hestness, Sharan Narang, Newsha Ardalani, Gregory Diamos, Heewoo Jun, Hassan Kianinejad,
  Md Mostofa Ali Patwary, Yang Yang, and Yanqi Zhou. Deep learning scaling is predictable,
  empirically. arXiv preprint arXiv:1712.00409, 2017.

Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:6840–6851, 2020.

Michael Janner, Qiyang Li, and Sergey Levine. Offline reinforcement learning as one big sequence
 modeling problem. Advances in neural information processing systems, 34:1273–1286, 2021.

Michael Janner, Yilun Du, Joshua Tenenbaum, and Sergey Levine. Planning with diffusion for
 flexible behavior synthesis. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2022.

C. Jiang, A. Cornman, C. Park, B. Sapp, Y. Zhou, and D. Anguelov. Motiondiffuser: Con-
  trollable multi-agent motion prediction using diffusion. In 2023 IEEE/CVF Conference on
  Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 9644–9653, Los Alamitos, CA, USA,
  jun 2023. IEEE Computer Society. doi: 10.1109/CVPR52729.2023.00930. URL https:
  //doi.ieeecomputersociety.org/10.1109/CVPR52729.2023.00930.

Jared Kaplan, Sam McCandlish, Tom Henighan, Tom B Brown, Benjamin Chess, Rewon Child,
   Scott Gray, Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, and Dario Amodei. Scaling laws for neural language
   models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2001.08361, 2020.

Ming Liang, Bin Yang, Rui Hu, Yun Chen, Renjie Liao, Song Feng, and Raquel Urtasun. Learn-
 ing lane graph representations for motion forecasting. In Computer Vision–ECCV 2020: 16th
 European Conference, Glasgow, UK, August 23–28, 2020, Proceedings, Part II 16, pp. 541–556.
 Springer, 2020.

Vasileios Lioutas, Adam Scibior, and Frank Wood. Titrated: Learned human driving behavior with-
  out infractions via amortized inference. Transactions on Machine Learning Research, 2022.

Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter. Decoupled weight decay regularization. In International Confer-
   ence on Learning Representations, 2018.

Yiren Lu, Justin Fu, George Tucker, Xinlei Pan, Eli Bronstein, Becca Roelofs, Benjamin Sapp,
  Brandyn White, Aleksandra Faust, Shimon Whiteson, et al. Imitation is not enough: Robus-
  tifying imitation with reinforcement learning for challenging driving scenarios. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2212.11419, 2022.

Wenjie Luo, Cheol Park, Andre Cornman, Benjamin Sapp, and Dragomir Anguelov. Jfp: Joint
 future prediction with interactive multi-agent modeling for autonomous driving. In Conference
 on Robot Learning, pp. 1457–1467. PMLR, 2023.

Suvir Mirchandani, Fei Xia, Pete Florence, Brian Ichter, Danny Driess, Montserrat Gonzalez Are-
  nas, Kanishka Rao, Dorsa Sadigh, and Andy Zeng. Large language models as general pattern
  machines. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.04721, 2023.

Nigamaa Nayakanti, Rami Al-Rfou, Aurick Zhou, Kratarth Goel, Khaled S Refaat, and Benjamin
  Sapp. Wayformer: Motion forecasting via simple & efficient attention networks. In 2023 IEEE
  International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pp. 2980–2987. IEEE, 2023.

Jiquan Ngiam, Vijay Vasudevan, Benjamin Caine, Zhengdong Zhang, Hao-Tien Lewis Chiang, Jef-
   frey Ling, Rebecca Roelofs, Alex Bewley, Chenxi Liu, Ashish Venugopal, et al. Scene trans-
   former: A unified architecture for predicting future trajectories of multiple agents. In Interna-
   tional Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.

Dean A Pomerleau. Alvinn: An autonomous land vehicle in a neural network. Advances in neural
  information processing systems, 1, 1988.

Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, Ilya Sutskever, et al. Language
  models are unsupervised multitask learners. OpenAI blog, 1(8):9, 2019.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Katrin Renz, Kashyap Chitta, Otniel-Bogdan Mercea, A Sophia Koepke, Zeynep Akata, and An-
  dreas Geiger. Plant: Explainable planning transformers via object-level representations. In 6th
  Annual Conference on Robot Learning, 2022.
Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer. High-
  resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Con-
  ference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 10684–10695, 2022.
Stéphane Ross et al. A reduction of imitation learning and structured prediction to no-regret online
   learning. In AI Stats, 2011.
Oliver Scheel, Luca Bergamini, Maciej Wolczyk, Błażej Osiński, and Peter Ondruska. Urban driver:
  Learning to drive from real-world demonstrations using policy gradients. In Conference on Robot
  Learning, pp. 718–728. PMLR, 2022.
Ari Seff, Brian Cera, Dian Chen, Mason Ng, Aurick Zhou, Nigamaa Nayakanti, Khaled S Re-
  faat, Rami Al-Rfou, and Benjamin Sapp. Motionlm: Multi-agent motion forecasting as language
  modeling. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pp.
  8579–8590, 2023.
Shaoshuai Shi, Li Jiang, Dengxin Dai, and Bernt Schiele. Motion transformer with global intention
  localization and local movement refinement. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  35:6531–6543, 2022.
Qiao Sun, Xin Huang, Junru Gu, Brian C Williams, and Hang Zhao. M2i: From factored marginal
  trajectory prediction to interactive prediction. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
  Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 6543–6552, 2022.
Yanchao Sun, Shuang Ma, Ratnesh Madaan, Rogerio Bonatti, Furong Huang, and Ashish Kapoor.
  SMART: Self-supervised multi-task pretraining with control transformers. In International Con-
  ference on Learning Representations, 2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?
  id=9piH3Hg8QEf.
Martin Treiber, Ansgar Hennecke, and Dirk Helbing. Congested traffic states in empirical observa-
 tions and microscopic simulations. Physical review E, 62(2):1805, 2000.
Mel Vecerik, Todd Hester, Jonathan Scholz, Fumin Wang, Olivier Pietquin, Bilal Piot, Nico-
 las Heess, Thomas Rothörl, Thomas Lampe, and Martin Riedmiller. Leveraging demonstra-
 tions for deep reinforcement learning on robotics problems with sparse rewards. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:1707.08817, 2017.
Matt Vitelli, Yan Chang, Yawei Ye, Ana Ferreira, Maciej Wołczyk, Błażej Osiński, Moritz Niendorf,
 Hugo Grimmett, Qiangui Huang, Ashesh Jain, et al. Safetynet: Safe planning for real-world self-
 driving vehicles using machine-learned policies. In 2022 International Conference on Robotics
 and Automation (ICRA), pp. 897–904. IEEE, 2022.
Thomas Wolf, Lysandre Debut, Victor Sanh, Julien Chaumond, Clement Delangue, Anthony Moi,
  Pierric Cistac, Tim Rault, Rémi Louf, Morgan Funtowicz, Joe Davison, Sam Shleifer, Patrick
  von Platen, Clara Ma, Yacine Jernite, Julien Plu, Canwen Xu, Teven Le Scao, Sylvain Gug-
  ger, Mariama Drame, Quentin Lhoest, and Alexander M. Rush. Transformers: State-of-the-art
  natural language processing. In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in
  Natural Language Processing: System Demonstrations, pp. 38–45, Online, October 2020. As-
  sociation for Computational Linguistics. URL https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/
  2020.emnlp-demos.6.
Ailing Zeng, Muxi Chen, Lei Zhang, and Qiang Xu. Are transformers effective for time series
  forecasting? In Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence, volume 37, pp.
  11121–11128, 2023.
Zhejun Zhang, Alexander Liniger, Dengxin Dai, Fisher Yu, and Luc Van Gool. End-to-end urban
  driving by imitating a reinforcement learning coach. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Interna-
  tional Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 15222–15232, 2021.


                                                 12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Hang Zhao, Jiyang Gao, Tian Lan, Chen Sun, Ben Sapp, Balakrishnan Varadarajan, Yue Shen,
  Yi Shen, Yuning Chai, Cordelia Schmid, et al. Tnt: Target-driven trajectory prediction. In Con-
  ference on Robot Learning, pp. 895–904. PMLR, 2021.


                                               13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A     I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS
A.1   M ODEL AND H YPERPARAMETERS
We use the same model and training settings for both the motion planning on NuPlan and the motion
prediction on WOMD. Our transformer backbone is derived from the GPT-2 model from the Hug-
gingface transformers (Wolf et al., 2020). We select SiLU (Elfwing et al., 2018) as the activation
function. We use the AdamW (Loshchilov & Hutter, 2018) optimizer with a linear learning rate
scheduler with 50 warmup steps, a weight decay of 0.01, and a learning rate of 5 × 10−5 . We train
all models with the same batch size of 16 to compare the performance over different sizes. We elab-
orate on the details of the model settings for 4 different model sizes we use in our experiments in
Table 4. For the motion planning task on the NuPlan dataset, we train the 300k and 16M STR (CKS)
on 8 NVIDIA RTX3090 (24G) GPUs. We train the 124M and 1.5B STR (CKS) on 8 NVIDIA A100
(80G) GPUs. For WOMD, we train the model in a 2-stage fashion. We first train the STR (CPS)
with the loss of cross-entropy for Proposal classification and MSE for Proposal regression. After
converging on the validation set, we train the STR (CPS) with the loss of MSE for the Future States
regression. We train the STR (CPS)-16M on 8 NVIDIA RTX A6000 (48G) GPUs for each type of
agent.

              Table 4: Model settings of the Transformer backbone in different sizes.

             Model Size     Layer     Embedding dimension        Inner dimension    Head
             300K             1                    64                    256          1
             16M              4                   256                   1024          8
             124M            12                   768                   3072         12
             1.5B            48                  1600                   6400         25



A.2   N U P LAN DATASET C ONSTRUCTION
The NuPlan dataset includes diverse real-world driving data across four different cities, which are
Boston, Pittsburgh, Vegas, and Singapore. It also provides diverse tags describing each scenario.
Each scenario, or each sample in the dataset for training, covers the trajectory and environmental
context spans from two seconds in the past to eight seconds in the future. Following the NuPlan
challenge’s setting, we filter the dataset by 14 different tags. See Fig. 4 for all of these tags and
their distributions in the training set. We summarize the number of scenarios of each city after the
filtering in Table 5.

A.3   N U P LAN M ETRIC AND E VALUATION
NuPlan introduces a unique metric called Open Loop Score (OLS). In this section, we explain the
computation details of this metric. There are 5 sub-metrics to compute before the OLS which are
average displacement error (ADE), final displacement error (FDE), average heading error (AHE),
final heading error (FHE), and miss rate (MR).
The 4 displacement error sub-metrics share the same compute method. Let the 4 displacement errors
be X={ADE, FDE, AHE, FHE}. The result of each error x is computed by averaging errors across
three prediction horizons and can be described as:

                                                 x3 + x5 + x8
                                          x̄ =                                                    (3)
                                                      3


            Table 5: Number of scenarios of each city in the training set after filtering.

                       Boston       Pittsburgh    Singapore     Vegas     Total
                        941K          914K          540K        12.7M    15.1M


                                                   14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                 high_magnitude_speed
       high_magnitude_speed
       changing_lane
       stationary_in_traffic
       following_lane_with_lead
       traversing_pickup_dropoff                                              48.6%
       stopping_with_lead
       low_magnitude_speed
       starting_straight_intersection_traversal
       near_multiple_vehicles
       waiting_for_pedestrian_to_cross
       high_lateral_acceleration
       behind_long_vehiclechanging_lane
       starting_right_turn                          0.1%
       starting_left_turn                                                                              1.6%            starting_left_turn
                                                                                                      1.6%
                                                                                                      1.2%             starting_right_turn
                                                                                                     2.2%             behind_long_vehicle
                                                      17.3%                                         0.5%
                                                                                                   3.8%              high_lateral_acceleration
                        stationary_in_traffic                                                    0.4%               waiting_for_pedestrian_to_cross
                                                               0.1%                          8.0%                near_multiple_vehicles
                                                                         14.6%        0.1%
                                                                                                              starting_straight_intersection_traversal

                                  following_lane_with_lead                                            low_magnitude_speed
                                                                                              stopping_with_lead
                                                  traversing_pickup_dropoff

        Figure 4: The distribution of the scenarios with each scenario tag in the training set.



x3 , x5 , x8 are the values of the corresponding errors in horizon-3s (0-3s), horizon-5s (0-5s), and
horizon-8s (0-8s) predictions. The score for each sub-metric ranging from 0 to 1 is computed by:

                                                                                           x̂
                                                  scorex = max(0, 1 −                             )                                                      (4)
                                                                                       thresholdx
Specifically, the displacement error threshold is set to 8 (meter) and the heading error threshold is set
to 0.8 (rad). The miss rate is the proportion of scenes that are missed as a percentage of all scenes.
The score of miss rate scoremiss is 0 if the scenario-wise miss rate is more than 0.3 else 1.
Finally, the overall weighted score is calculated as the open loop score (OLS) for each scenario:
                                                       wx ∗ scorex
                                                  OLS = P          ∗ scoremiss                                                                           (5)
                                                          x∈X wx

The weights wx for heading errors are 2 while the weights for displacement errors are 1.

A.4   N U P LAN R ASTER E NCODER
We encoder map elements, routes, traffic lights, and the past states of all road users into different
channels of the raster. All the element points are normalized relative positions in the ego-vehicle
coordinate. Particularly, the input raster at each timestamp includes 33 channels. The first two
channels (0-2) are respectively the route blocks and route lanes. The route blocks are a list of
roadblocks, as polygons, provided by the NuPlan dataset for each scenario. The route lanes are all
lane center lines that belong to each of these route blocks. The following 20 channels (2-22) are road
map channels and each channel encodes one type of road element such as stop lines, roadblocks,
various road connectors, and other road components. In the next three channels (22-25), intersection
blocks with traffic lights will be rasterized into corresponding channels based on their traffic states
which can be green, red, or yellow. In addition to road-related information, at each timestamp in the
past two-second horizons, the relative positions and the shapes of all agents are rasterized into the
last eight channels (25-33), each channel for each type of agent.
We rasterize all the contexts with two different scopes in the bird’s-eye view, as illustrated in Fig.
5. To learn long-term reasoning, we construct low-resolution rasters with an ego agent view field of
about 300 meters. To learn low-speed subtle maneuvers, we construct high-resolution rasters with
an ego agent view field of about 60 meters. The features of both high-resolution and low-resolution
rasters after a ResNet (He et al., 2016) network are concatenated as one observation feature at each
time step.
‘


                                                                              15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


High Resolution
Low Resolution


                         (a)                     (b)                    (c)                      (d)

Figure 5: Visualization of rasters in bird view. The upper row is the rasters with high resolution
while the second row is the same scenario in low resolution visualization. (a) Start turning left. (b)
Traversing intersection (c) Passing roundabout (d) Traversing pickup drop-off



A.5               D IFFUSION D ECODER
For better training efficiency, we train the diffusion-based Key Points decoder separately on the
NuPlan dataset. We first train STR with an MLP Key Point decoder with an MSE loss. After
converging on the validation set, we freeze the backbone and train the diffusion-based Key Points
decoder together with the trajectory decoder. Note the diffusion Key Points decoder still outputs
the Key Points one by one in an autoregression style. We expand the embedding dimension and the
inner dimension along with the settings of the backbones, as listed in Table 6. For all diffusion Key
Points decoders, we use the standard DDPM process (Ho et al., 2020) with 10 steps and a linear
noise schedule from β0 = 0.01 to β9 = 0.9.

                     Table 6: Model settings of the diffusion Key Points decoder in different sizes.

             Backbone          KP Decoder Size   Layer   Embedding dimension       Inner dimension     Head
                  300K              219K           1              64                     256            1
                   16M              13M            7              256                   1024            8
                  124M              75M            7              768                   3072            8
                  1.5B              0.3B           7             1600                   6400            8



A.6               T RAJECTORY AUGMENTATION
For the task of motion planning on the NuPlan dataset, trajectory augmentations are widely used
by most of the previous methods. Following the common augmentation methods provided by the
NuPlan devkit, we select a linear perturbation as the only augmentation during training. We add a
linearly decreasing noise. This noise is randomly sampled from 0 to 10 percent of the normalized
positions 2 seconds ago:
                                                      t
                                           σt = σ ∗                                           (6)
                                                     Tm
Tm is the history frames number, t ∈ {Tm , . . . , 0} is the augmenting history frame, where t = 0
indicates the current frame. σ is the sampled maximum noise.


                                                           16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.7   WOMD M OTION P REDICTION
In MTR(Shi et al., 2022), there are mainly three complicated tricks for performance improvement:
iterative refinement, local movement refinement and dense future prediction. We only leverage dense
future prediction as an auxiliary loss to improve our context encoder but we do not employ the object
features updated from it. For multi-modal future trajectory prediction in WOMD, in the inference
phase, we explicitly do top K = 6 classification on the proposals. After selecting the proposals by
our scoring decoder model, we embed the coordinate values respectively and apply the backbone
followed by the trajectory decoder to generate a trajectory according to each of the 6 modalities.
Our encoder and decoder are much simpler than MTR while keeping comparable performance with
its end-to-end results.

B     A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENT R ESULTS
B.1   P ER - TYPE R ESULTS OF WOMD VALIDATION
The per-category performance of our approach for motion prediction challenges of Waymo Open
Motion Dataset is reported in Table 7 for reference.

       Table 7: Per-type performance of motion prediction on the validation set of WOMD.

                    Object type      mAP ↑     minADE ↓       minFDE ↓       MR ↓
                    Vehicle          0.3600      0.8964         1.7698      0.1995
                    Pedestrian       0.3274      0.3778         0.7855      0.1239
                    Cyclist          0.2880      0.8723         1.7626      0.2447
                    Avg              0.3251      0.7155         1.4393      0.1894


B.2   Q UALITATIVE R ESULTS IN WOMD
We provide more qualitative results of our framework in Fig. 6. As shown in the visualization
results, our STR model can successfully resolve the problem of uncertainties and multi-modalities.
In Fig. 6a, the best proposal is chosen as the indicator of the trajectory generation in the intersection
scenario, providing the information of ”go straight” instruction and the velocity. As shown in Fig.
6b, our model is able to deal with low-speed scenarios since the velocity states are offered to the
backbone. For more complex road situations, our model displays excellent robustness and accuracy
in Fig. 6c. Fig. 6d shows the rare ”U-turn” case, which certificates the ability of our model to learn
from road graphs and inherent patterns in trajectory data.

B.3   FAILURE C ASES IN WOMD
Some failure cases are visualized in Fig. 7. For Fig. 7a and 7b, there are some cases in which the
model fails to classify the correct proposals. These are mainly caused by the absence of dynamic
traffic information such as traffic lights. To fairly compare with the state-of-the-art models, the
dynamic traffic information is not considered in the current STR model, so the model cannot predict
a ”Stop” or ”Slow down” modality properly in the scenarios mentioned above. However, due to the
extensive ability of the unified sequence design, the dynamic road graph can be plugged into our
model with trivial efforts. The other cases, shown in Fig. 7c and 7d, indicate that although STR
successfully classifies the matching proposals, there are some errors generating the future trajectory
predictions. These failures are due to the lane-changing behaviors of human drivers, especially when
turning in the intersections.


                                                   17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                        (a)                                                (b)


                        (c)                                                (d)

Figure 6: The qualitative results of motion prediction task in WOMD. The blue rectangles indicate
the other traffic agents and the green one is the vehicle to predict. The green dots compose the ground
truth trajectory containing both the history frames and the future. The rhombus marks represent the
proposals and we use the intensity of colors to indicate the degree of confidence predicted by STR.
Correspondingly, each predicted trajectory for each modality is shown in a sequence of dots with
the same color as its proposal. The red cross symbol is the ground truth static proposal.


                                                  18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                      (a)                                            (b)


                      (c)                                            (d)

Figure 7: The visualization of some failure cases in motion prediction task in WOMD. The legend
and annotations follow Fig. 6.


                                              19
