Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


V I C O : P LUG - AND - PLAY V ISUAL C ONDITION FOR P ER -
SONALIZED T EXT- TO - IMAGE G ENERATION

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT
         Personalized text-to-image generation using diffusion models has recently emerged
         and garnered significant interest. This task learns a novel concept (e.g., a unique
         toy), illustrated in a handful of images, into a generative model that captures fine
         visual details and generates photorealistic images based on textual embeddings.
         In this paper, we present ViCo, a novel lightweight plug-and-play method that
         seamlessly integrates visual condition into personalized text-to-image generation.
         ViCo stands out for its unique feature of not requiring any fine-tuning of the
         original diffusion model parameters, thereby facilitating more flexible and scalable
         model deployment. This key advantage distinguishes ViCo from most existing
         models that necessitate partial or full diffusion fine-tuning. ViCo incorporates
         an image attention module that conditions the diffusion process on patch-wise
         visual semantics, and an attention-based object mask that comes at no extra cost
         from the attention module. Despite only requiring light parameter training (∼6%
         compared to the diffusion U-Net), ViCo delivers performance that is on par with,
         or even surpasses, all state-of-the-art models, both qualitatively and quantitatively.
         This underscores the efficacy of ViCo, making it a highly promising solution
         for personalized text-to-image generation without the need for diffusion model
         fine-tuning.

1   I NTRODUCTION
Nowadays, people can easily generate unprecedentedly high-quality photorealistic images with
text prompts using fast-growing text-to-image diffusion models (Ho et al., 2020; Song et al., 2021;
Ramesh et al., 2022; Nichol et al., 2022; Saharia et al., 2022; Rombach et al., 2022). However,
these models are trained on a text corpus of seen words, and they fail to synthesize novel concepts
like a special-looking dog or your Batman toy collection. Imagine how fascinating it would be if
your plastic Batman toy could appear in scenes of the original ‘Batman’ movie. Recent works (Gal
et al., 2023a; Ruiz et al., 2023; Kumari et al., 2023) make this fantasy come true, terming the task
personalized text-to-image generation. Specifically, given several images of a unique object, the goal
is to capture the object and reconstruct it in text-guided image generation.
DreamBooth (Ruiz et al., 2023) incorporates a unique identifier before the category word in the text
embedding space and finetunes the entire diffusion model during training. The authors also finetune
the text encoder, which empirically shows improved performance. Custom Diffusion (Kumari et al.,
2023) finds that only tuning a few parameters, i.e., key and value projection matrices, is sufficiently
powerful. DreamBooth and Custom Diffusion both meet the issue of language drift (Lee et al.,
2019; Lu et al., 2020) because finetuning the pretrained model on new data can lead to a loss of
the preformed language knowledge. They leverage a preservation loss to address this problem,
which requires manually generating (Ruiz et al., 2023) or retrieving massive class-specific images.
Textual Inversion (Gal et al., 2023a) adopts minimal optimization by exclusively learning a novel
text embedding to represent the given object, showing enhanced performance using latent diffusion
models (Rombach et al., 2022). For the more powerful Stable Diffusion, however, the learned
embedding struggles to express fine details of the visual object, and the generated results are prone
to overfitting to training samples due to the limited fine-grained expressiveness of CLIP (Radford
et al., 2021). In this work, we follow (Gal et al., 2023a) to use a single learnable token embedding S⋆
to represent the novel concept instead of the form of “[V] class” used in (Ruiz et al., 2023; Kumari
et al., 2023). In our vision, a single token embedding should be capable of effectively representing
any visual concept within an ideal unified text-image space.


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                   Infer


    Training: 𝑆∗             A 𝑆∗ among the        A 𝑆∗ floating on top     A 𝑆∗ under an       A 𝑆∗ with a tree          A 𝑆∗ on a
                              skyscrapers                of water         astonishing sunset   and autumn leaves      cobblestone street


                   Infer


    Training: 𝑆∗           A 𝑆∗ in a firefighter     A 𝑆∗ wearing a         A 𝑆∗ wearing a      A 𝑆∗ in a luxurious   A 𝑆∗ in a dream of a
                                  outfit             rainbow scarf             Santa hat       interior living room      distant galaxy
Figure 1: Personalized text-to-image generation. Generated images of the Batman toy (top) and
the Toller (bottom) by ViCo. S⋆ denotes the learnable text embedding (Gal et al., 2023a).
To overcome the issue of declined model expressiveness of novel concepts, we propose a novel plug-in
method that integrates visual conditions into the diffusion process, which harnesses the inherent
richness of diffusion models. Specifically, we present an image cross-attention module, facilitating
the seamless integration of intermediate features from a reference image, which are extracted by the
original denoising U-Net, into the denoising process. Our method stands out for not requiring any
modifications or fine-tuning of any layers in the original diffusion model, setting it apart from most
existing methods like DreamBooth (Ruiz et al., 2023) and Custom Diffusion (Kumari et al., 2023).
As the language knowledge remains intact without requiring fine-tuning of the diffusion model, our
method avoids the problem of language drift, which eliminates the need for heavy preprocessing like
image generation (Ruiz et al., 2023) and retrieval (Kumari et al., 2023).
Another challenge we address is the difficulty in isolating the foreground object of interest from the
background. Instead of relying on prior annotated masks as in concurrent works (Wei et al., 2023;
Shi et al., 2023; Jia et al., 2023), we propose an automatic mechanism to generate object masks that
are naturally incorporated into the denoising process. Specifically, we leverage the notable semantic
correlations between text and image in cross-attentions (Hertz et al., 2023) and utilize the cross-
attention map associated with the learnable object token to generate an object mask. Our method is
computationally efficient, non-parametric, and online, and can effectively suppress the influence of
distracting backgrounds in the training samples. We also design an easy-to-employ regularization
between the cross-attention maps associated with the end-of-text token and the learnable token to
help refine the object mask.
We name our model ViCo, which offers a number of advantages over previous works. (1) It is
fast (∼6 minutes) and lightweight (6% of diffusion U-Net). (2) It is plug-and-play and requires no
fine-tuning of the original diffusion model, allowing highly flexible and transferable deployment.
(3) It is easy to implement and use, requiring no heavy preprocessing or mask annotations. (4) It can
preserve fine object-specific details of the novel concept in text-guided generation (see Fig. 1).
Our contributions include: (1) proposing an image cross-attention module to integrate visual condi-
tions into the denoising process for capturing object-specific semantics; (2) introducing an automatic
object mask generation mechanism from the cross-attention map; (3) providing quantitative and
qualitative comparisons with state-of-the-art methods (Ruiz et al., 2023; Kumari et al., 2023; Gal
et al., 2023a) and demonstrating the efficiency of ViCo in multiple applications.

2     R ELATED WORK
Text-to-image synthesis. In the literature of GANs (Goodfellow et al., 2014; Brock et al., 2019;
Karras et al., 2019; 2020; 2021), plenty of works have gained remarkable progress in text-to-image
generation (Reed et al., 2016; Zhu et al., 2019; Tao et al., 2022; Xu et al., 2018; Zhang et al., 2021;
Ye et al., 2021) and image manipulation using text (Gal et al., 2022; Patashnik et al., 2021; Xia
et al., 2021; Abdal et al., 2022), advancing the generation of images conditioned on plain text.
These methods are trained on a fixed dataset that leverages strong prior knowledge of a specific
domain. Towards a zero-shot fashion, auto-regressive models (Ramesh et al., 2021; Yu et al., 2022)
trained on large-scale data of text-image pairs achieve high-quality and content-rich text-to-image
generation results. Based on the pretrained CLIP (Radford et al., 2021), Crowson et al. (Crowson


                                                                   2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


et al., 2022) applies CLIP similarity to optimize the generated image at test time without any training.
The use of diffusion-based methods (Ho et al., 2020) has pushed the boundaries of text-to-image
generation to a new level. Examples include DALL·E 2 (Ramesh et al., 2022), Imagen (Saharia
et al., 2022), GLIDE (Nichol et al., 2022), and LDM (Rombach et al., 2022). Recently, some works
consider personalized text-to-image generation by learning a token embedding (Gal et al., 2023a) and
finetuning (Ruiz et al., 2023) or partially finetuning (Kumari et al., 2023) a diffusion model. Recently,
Qiu et al. (2023) proposes a fine-tuning method named Orthogonal Finetuning, which can be used for
efficient DreamBooth fine-tuning. Many works emerge lately, but they require finetuning the whole
or partial networks in the vanilla U-Net such as Perfusion (Tewel et al., 2023), ELITE (Wei et al.,
2023), and UMM-Diffusion (Ma et al., 2023), or training with large-scale data on specific category
domains based on encoders (Shi et al., 2023; Jia et al., 2023; Gal et al., 2023b; Chen et al., 2023) or
with text-image pairs (Li et al., 2023). In contrast, our work tackles the general domain-agnostic task
while keeping the pretrained diffusion model completely frozen. We compare the characteristics of
different models in Tab. 1.
                                    Table 1: Model characteristics.
                                          Placeholder type   Preprocessing     #Trainable params    Diffusion U-Net      Text encoder   Visual condition
 DreamBooth (Ruiz et al., 2023)              [V] class        Generation           982.6M           Fully finetuned       Finetuned            ✗
 Custom Diffusion (Kumari et al., 2023)      [V] class         Retrieval           57.1M           Partially finetuned     Frozen              ✗
 Textual Inversion (Gal et al., 2023a)          S⋆               Null                768                 Frozen            Frozen              ✗
 ViCo                                           S⋆               Null              51.3M                 Frozen            Frozen              ✓

Visual condition. Visual condition is commonly used in image-to-image translation (Isola et al.,
2017; Zhu et al., 2017a;b; Choi et al., 2018; Park et al., 2020), which involves training a model to
map an input image to an output image based on a certain condition, e.g., edge, sketch, or semantic
segmentation. Similar techniques have been used for tasks such as style transfer (Gatys et al., 2016;
Johnson et al., 2016), colorization (Zhang et al., 2016; Larsson et al., 2016; Zhang et al., 2017),
and super-resolution (Ledig et al., 2017; Johnson et al., 2016; Wang et al., 2018). In the context of
diffusion models, visual condition is also used for image editing (Brooks et al., 2023) and controllable
conditioning (Mou et al., 2023; Zhang & Agrawala, 2023). Despite the massive study on visual
condition, most works use it for controlling the spatial layout and geometric structure but discard its
rich semantics. Our work stands out in capturing fine-grained semantics related to the specific visual
appearance from visual conditions, an aspect that is rarely discussed.
Diffusion-based generative models. Diffusion-based generative models develop fast and continu-
ously produce striking outcomes. Ho et al. (Ho et al., 2020) first presents DDPMs to progressively
denoise from random noise to a synthesized image. DDIMs (Song et al., 2021) accelerate the
sampling process of DDPMs. Latent diffusion models (LDMS) (Rombach et al., 2022) introduce
multiple conditions in latent diffusion space, producing realistic and high-fidelity text-to-image
synthesis results. Following the implementation of LDMs (Rombach et al., 2022), Stable Diffu-
sion (SD) is trained on a large-scale text-image data collection, which achieves the state-of-the-art
text-to-image synthesis performance. Diffusion models are widely used for generation tasks such as
video generation (Ho et al., 2022; Wu et al., 2022), inpainting (Lugmayr et al., 2022), and semantic
segmentation (Hoogeboom et al., 2021; Baranchuk et al., 2022).

3     M ETHOD
Given a handful of images (4-7) showing a novel object concept, we target at generating images of
this unique object following some text guidance. We aim to neatly inject visual condition, which is
neglected in previous works, along with text condition into the diffusion model to better preserve
the visual expressions. Following the attempt of textual inversion (Gal et al., 2023a), we adopt a
placeholder (S⋆ ) as the learnable text embedding to capture the unique visual object. We first quickly
review Stable Diffusion (Rombach et al., 2022) which serves as our base model (Sec. 3.1). We then
introduce a simple yet efficient method to inject fine-grained semantics from visual conditions into the
denoising process (Sec. 3.2), and show how to automatically generate object masks within training
(Sec. 3.3). We finally present our overall learning objective and implementation details (Sec. 3.4).
Fig. 2 shows an overview of our method.

3.1     S TABLE D IFFUSION
Stable Diffusion (SD) (Rombach et al., 2022) is a latent text-to-image diffusion model derived
from classic Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models (DDPMs) (Ho et al., 2020). SD applies a
largely pretrained autoencoder E to extract latent code for images, and a corresponding decoder D


                                                                           3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                                                              𝑛#                𝑐"            𝑐!


 <|SOT|>


                                 <|EOT|>
               photo
                                                                Diffusion U-Net


                       of
                                                                                                                                                            <TEXT>


                            S*
           a
                            🔥


                                                                                     Image Attention
                                                                    Text Attention
           Text Encoder
                       ❄                    Noisy                                                              Denoised       Q     KV              Q   KV
                                                           ❄                                               ❄              Text Attention
                                                                                                                                           ❄
                                                                                                                                               Text Attention
                                                                                                                                                                $
                                                                                                                                                                𝑀
                                                                                                                          ❶

           🔥 Trainable                                              ❄ 🔥                                                       Q     KV          M
                                                                                                                                                            (Fig. 3)
                                           Reference
                                                                                                                                                        🔥
                                                                                                                                  Image Attention
           ❄ Frozen
                                                                                                                                       ❷

Figure 2: Method overview. We introduce a module of image (cross-)attention to integrate visual
conditions into the frozen diffusion model. On the left, the noisy image and a reference image are
fed into diffusion U-Net in parallel. We follow (Gal et al., 2023a) to learn the embedding S⋆ . On
the right, we present the data stream comprising the original text attention and the proposed image
attention. ❶ denotes the attention output in vanilla diffusion model and ❷ represents the visually
conditioned output. The generation and use of the mask M̂ are further detailed in Sec. 3.3.
to reconstruct the original images. Specifically, the autoencoder maps images x ∈ I to latent code
z = E(x), and the decoder maps latent code back to images x̂ = D(E(x)), where x̂ ≈ x. SD adopts
a diffusion model in the latent space of the autoencoder. For the text-to-image diffusion model, text
conditions can be added to the diffusion process. The diffusion process can be formulated as iterative
denoising that predicts the noise at the current timestep. In this process, we have the loss
                         LSD = Ez∼E(x),y,ϵ∼N (0,1),t [∥ϵ − ϵθ (zt , t, cπ (y))∥22 ]                     (1)
where t is the timestep, zt is the latent code at timestep t, cπ is the text encoder that maps text prompts
y into text embeddings, ϵ is the noise sampled from Gaussian distribution, and ϵθ is the denoising
network (i.e., U-Net (Ronneberger et al., 2015)) that predicts the noise. Training SD is flexible, such
that we can jointly learn cπ and ϵθ or exclusively learn ϵθ with a frozen pretrained text encoder.

3.2            V ISUAL CONDITION INJECTION
Common approaches for conditioning diffusion models on images include feature concatena-
tion (Brooks et al., 2023) and direct element-wise addition (Mou et al., 2023; Zhang & Agrawala,
2023). These visual conditions show astonishing performance in capturing the layout of images.
However, visual semantics, especially fine-grained details, are hard to preserve or even lost using
these image conditioning methods. Instead of only considering the patches at the same spatial location
on the noisy latent code and visual condition, we exploit correlations across all patches on both
images. To this end, we propose to train an image cross-attention block that has the same structure as
the text cross-attention block in the vanilla diffusion U-Net. The image cross-attention block takes an
intermediate noisy latent code and a visual condition as inputs, integrating visual conditions into the
denoising process.
Some works (Gal et al., 2023b; Shi et al., 2023) acquire visual conditions from reference images by
additionally training a visual feature extractor. This may cause a misalignment between the feature
spaces of the latent code and the visual condition. Instead of deploying extra networks, we directly
feed the autoencoded reference image into the vanilla diffusion U-Net, and apply the intermediate
latent codes as visual conditions. We use the pretrained autoencoder to map the reference image
xr ∈ I to the latent space: zr = E(xr ). Let ϵlθ (·) denote the output of the l-th attention block of
U-Net. The visual condition at the l-th attention block is then given by
                              clI = ϵlθ (zr , t, cT ), l ∈ {0, 1, · · · , L − 1}                 (2)
where L is the number of attention blocks in U-Net, and cT = cπ (y) is the text condition from
the text encoder. Note that cT is derived from token embeddings in which the embedding S⋆ is
learnable. Let the raw text cross-attention block from vanilla U-Net be AT (q, kv), the proposed
image cross-attention block be AI (q, kv). We denote the new denoising process after incorporating
AI as ϵθ,ψ , in which the l-th attention block is denoted as ϵlθ,ψ . We can compute the intermediate
latent code of the generated noisy image at the l-th attention block as
                                                    nlt = ϵlθ,ψ (zt , t, cT , clI ), l ∈ {0, 1, · · · , L − 1}                                                      (3)


                                                                                                       4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                  ... ...   S*   ...   S*
                                                                  "
                                                                  𝑀


                                                            1 0
                                                                      ⊙                     1 0   Binarization

                                                                                            ⊙ Hadamard
                                                                                                  Product


                              Text Attention                              Image Attention


Figure 3: Mask mechanism. We can obtain a similarity distribution from the cross-attention map of
the reference image associated with the learnable object token S⋆ . The distribution can be unflattened
into a similarity map. After binarization with Otsu thresholding (Otsu, 1979), the derived binary
mask can be applied to the image cross-attention map to discard the non-object patches.
Because all operations are executed at the l-th attention block, we can omit all superscripts of l for
simplicity. The original attention at each attention block in U-Net, i.e., n′t = AT (nt , cT ), can be
replaced by n̂t = AT (nt , cT ), ĉI = AT (cI , cT ), n′t = AI (n̂t , ĉI ), where n′t is the output of the
current attention block that is fed into the following layers in U-Net. At the image cross-attention
block AI , we can capture visual semantics from the reference image and inject them into the noisy
generated image.

3.3      E MERGING OBJECT MASKS
To avoid capturing the background from training samples and exclusively learn the foreground object
we are interested in, we propose an online, computationally-efficient, and non-parametric method that
is naturally incorporated into our pipeline to generate reliable object masks. Next, we will illustrate
how attention maps of text and image conditions can be directly used as object masks to capture the
object-exclusive patch regions.
Recall the process of computing the text cross-attention in diffusion U-Net
                                                                    QK T
                          TextAttention(Q, K, V ) = softmax( √ )V                                     (4)
                                                                       dk
where the query is the reference image, the key and value are the text condition, and the scaling factor
dk is the dimension of the query and key.1 Inspired by (Hertz et al., 2023) that diffusion models gain
                                                                          T
pretty good cross-attentions, we notice the attention map softmax( QK  √
                                                                         dk
                                                                             ) inherently implies a good
object mask for the reference image. Specifically, the attention map for the text condition and the
visual condition from the reference image reveals the response distribution of each text token to all
image patches of different resolutions. The learnable embedding S⋆ has strong responses at the exact
patch regions where the foreground object lies. After binarizing the similarity distribution of S⋆ on
the reference image, we can obtain a good-quality object mask M̂ . In this paper, we simply apply
Otsu thresholding (Otsu, 1979) for binarization. The mask can be directly deployed in our proposed
image cross-attention by simply masking the attention map between the noisy generated image and
the reference image in the latent space. The masked image cross-attention is formulated as
                                                                        QK T

                    ImageAttention(Q, K, V ) = M̂ ⊙ softmax( √ ) V                                    (5)
                                                                            dk
where the query is the noisy generated image, the key and value are the reference image, and ⊙ is
Hadamard product (element-wise product) with broadcasting M̂ . The masking process is depicted
in Fig. 3. By masking the attention map in Eq. (5), distractors from the background can be drastically
suppressed. We can thus condition the generation process exclusively on the foreground object that is
captured in the reference image.
Regularization. Due to fine-tuning on a small set of images, S⋆ is sometimes overfitted, deriving
undesirable object masks. Nevertheless, we empirically find the end-of-text token <|EOT|>, the
global representation in transformers, can maintain consistently good semantics on the unique object.
From this observation, we apply a regularization between similarity maps of the reference image
associated with S⋆ and <|EOT|> in the text cross-attention. Specifically, from cross-attentions,
                                                 T
we have the attention map A := softmax( QK   √
                                               d
                                                   ) ∈ RB×Dp ×Dt where B is the batch size, Dp is
                                                              k


   1
       All happen in the latent space after linear projections.


                                                                  5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


the number of image patches, and Dt is the number of text tokens. Let S⋆ be the i-th token and
<|EOT|> be the j-th token, and their corresponding similarity logits be A⋆,i and A⋆,j . We define
our regularization as
                          Lreg = ∥A⋆,i / max(A⋆,i ) − A⋆,j / max(A⋆,j )∥22                         (6)
where we apply a max normalization to guarantee the same scale of the two logits. We can flexibly
leverage this regularization during training to refine the attention map of S⋆ , thereby enhancing the
object mask used in our method. This refinement ensures the reliability of the mask.
3.4   T RAINING AND INFERENCE
Training. We train our model on 4-7 images with the vanilla diffusion U-Net frozen. We formulate
the final training loss by integrating the standard denoising loss and the regularization term as
               L = Ez∼E(x),zr ∼E(xr ),y,ϵ∼N (0,1),t [∥ϵ − ϵθ,ψ (zt , t, zr , cπ (y))∥22 ] + λLreg (7)
where λ is the scaling weight of the regularization loss, and ϵθ,ψ is the new denoising networks
composed of the vanilla diffusion U-Net parameterized by θ and the proposed image attention blocks
parameterized by ψ. During training, we freeze the pretrained diffusion model and only train the
image attention blocks and finetune the learnable text embedding S⋆ simultaneously.
Implementation details. We use Stable Diffusion (Rombach et al., 2022) as our backbone. The
diffusion U-Net (Ronneberger et al., 2015) contains encoder, middle, and decoder layers. We
incorporate the proposed image attention module into every other attention block exclusively in the
decoder. Our image attention module follows the standard attention-feedforward fashion (Vaswani
et al., 2017), and has the same structure as the text cross-attention used in LDMs (Rombach et al.,
2022) only differing in the dimension of the condition projection layer. We set λ = 5 × 10−4 and
learning rate to 5 × 10−3 for S⋆ and 10−5 for image attention blocks. We train ViCo with a batch
size of 4 for 400 steps. At inference, our model also requires a reference image input for the visual
condition, injected into the denoising process in the same way as in training. Our method is insensitive
and robust to the reference image. Therefore, either one in the training samples or a new image of
the identical object is a feasible visual condition in sampling. For fair evaluation, we use the same
reference image for each dataset in all experiments.
4     E XPERIMENT
4.1 Q UANTITATIVE EVALUATION
Data. Previous works (e.g., Textual Inversion (Gal et al., 2023a), DreamBooth (Ruiz et al., 2023), and
Custom Diffusion (Kumari et al., 2023)) use different datasets for evaluation. For a fair and unbiased
comparison, we collect a dataset of 20 unique concepts from these three works. The collected dataset
spans a large range of object categories covering 6 toys, 6 live animals, 4 accessories, 3 containers,
and 1 building, allowing a comprehensive evaluation. Each object category contains 4-7 images of a
unique object (except for one having 12 images). Based on the prompt list provided in (Ruiz et al.,
2023), we remove one undesirable prompt “a cube shaped S⋆ ” because we are more interested in
keeping the appearance of the unique object. In addition, we add more detailed and informative
prompts to test the expressiveness of richer and more complex textual knowledge (e.g., “a S⋆ among
the skyscrapers in New York city”). Totally, we collect 31 prompts for 14 non-live objects and 31
prompts for 6 live animals. We generate 8 samples per prompt for each object, giving rise to 4,960
images in total, for robust evaluation. More details about the dataset can be found in Appendix B.
Metric. In our task, we concern with two core questions regarding the personalized generative
models: (1) how well do the generated images capture and preserve the input object? and (2) how
well do the generated images tail the text condition? For the first question, we adopt two metrics,
namely CLIP (Radford et al., 2021) image similarity ICLIP and DINO (Caron et al., 2021) image
similarity IDINO . Specifically, we compute the feature similarity between the generated image and the
corresponding real image respectively using CLIP (Radford et al., 2021) or DINO (Caron et al., 2021).
DINO is trained in a self-supervised fashion without ground-truth class labels, thus not neglecting
the difference among objects from the same category. Therefore, DINO metric better reflects how
well the generated object resembles the real one, as also noted in (Ruiz et al., 2023). For the second
question, we adopt one metric, namely CLIP text similarity TCLIP . Specifically, we compute the
feature similarity between the CLIP visual feature of the generated image and the CLIP textual feature
of the corresponding prompt text that omits the placeholder. The three metrics are derived from the
average similarities of all compared pairs. In our experiments, we deploy ViT-B/32 for the CLIP
vision model and ViT-S/16 for the DINO model to extract visual and textual features.


                                                   6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


          Table 2: Quantitative comparison.                              Table 3: Time cost (averaged over 5 runs).
  Quantitative metrics                     IDINO ↑   ICLIP ↑   TCLIP ↑   Time cost (sec.)                         Training   Inference
  DreamBooth (Ruiz et al., 2023)           0.628     0.804     0.236     DreamBooth (Ruiz et al., 2023)           1411±27    11.2±0.1
  Custom Diffusion (Kumari et al., 2023)   0.570     0.768     0.249     Custom Diffusion (Kumari et al., 2023)    682±59     8.4±0.4
  Textual Inversion (Gal et al., 2023a)    0.520     0.768     0.216     Textual Inversion (Gal et al., 2023a)     735±7      9.8±0.4
  ViCo                                     0.631     0.809     0.229     ViCo                                      353±3     15.4±0.1

Comparison. We compare our method ViCo with three state-of-the-art models, namely Textual
Inversion (Gal et al., 2023a), DreamBooth (Ruiz et al., 2023), and Custom Diffusion (Kumari et al.,
2023). We use Stable Diffusion for all compared methods for a fair comparison. The results of three
quantitative metrics are shown in Tab. 2. Our model achieves the highest image similarity on both
DINO and CLIP metrics, indicating our method best preserves the object-specific semantics from the
image. DreamBooth and Custom Diffusion perform better on the text similarity metric because they
use the fashion of “[V] class” to represent the visual object in the text space. The class category word
provides rich prior knowledge, while the learnable identifier “[V]” primarily serves as an auxiliary
guidance, such as controlling texture or facial appearance in the generation process. In contrast,
Textual Inversion and our method employ a single token in the text embedding space, which, once
learned, may dominate the text space and slightly weaken the influence of text-related information
in the generated results. We deliberately choose the single-token fashion in our work because we
believe that representing a visual concept with a single word token is crucial for achieving effective
text-image alignment. This minimalist approach allows us to capture the essence of the concept in a
concise and precise manner, focusing on the core problem of aligning textual and visual information.
Besides, DreamBooth and Custom Diffusion require finetuning either the full SD network or a
portion of it while our model and Textual Inversion do not. With the same foundation, our method
outperforms Textual Inversion by a significant margin on all metrics.
We report the training and inference time cost of the four methods in Tab. 3. All methods are
trained using four 3090 GPUs and tested on a single one. Note that DreamBooth requires generating
coarse-category samples and Custom Diffusion involves retrieving real images with given and similar
captions, which are not included in the time overheads presented in the table. Overall, the majority of
the time cost is in the training, while the inference takes much less time for all methods. ViCo has a
slightly longer inference time due to the additional image attention.
4.2   Q UALITATIVE EVALUATION
In our massive qualitative experiments, depicted in Fig. 4, we observe that ViCo produces text-guided
images of high quality. We assess the qualitative results based on several aspects.
Image fidelity. Our model preserves fine details of the object in the training samples. As a
comparison, Textual Inversion fails to preserve sufficient details in many cases (the 3rd and 5th rows)
due to its limited expressiveness. The use of “[V] class” in DreamBooth and Custom Diffusion,
while providing strong class-related information, may result in the loss of object-specific details. For
instance, in the second row, both DreamBooth and Custom Diffusion alter the appearance of the cat.
Similarly, DreamBooth fails to preserve the holes in the generated elephant in the fourth row.
Text fidelity. Our model can faithfully follow the text prompt guidance to generate reasonable results.
For example, in the first row of the “teddy bear”, our model successfully incorporates elements
such as “a tree” and “autumn leaves” as indicated by the text, while other models may occasionally
struggle to achieve this level of fidelity. In more complex cases, like the third and fourth rows, Textual
Inversion fails to express any information from the text prompts.
Text-image Equilibrium. Our model excels at balancing the effects of both text conditions and
visual conditions, resulting in a harmonious equilibrium between the text and the image. The text
prompts and the image samples may have varying degrees of influence on generation. For example,
in the last row, Custom Diffusion successfully generates an appealing “lion face” guided by the text,
but the generated image is almost no longer a “pot”. Similarly, DreamBooth maintains the overall
appearance of a pot but loses significant details of the original “wooden pot”. In contrast, our method
excels at preserving the original “pot” details while synthesizing a high-quality “lion face” on it.
Authenticity. Our generation results are authentic and photorealistic, devoid of noticeable traces of
artificial synthesis. For example, in the fourth row, although Custom Diffusion generates visually
appealing images, they may appear noticeably synthetic. In comparison, our results are more
photorealistic, authentically depicting a golden elephant statue positioned at Times Square.
Diversity. Our model demonstrates the capability to generate diverse results, presenting a notable
abundance of variation and showcasing a wide range of synthesis possibilities.


                                                                    7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


         Training Samples                                Ours                    Textual Inversion                   Custom Diffusion           DreamBooth


                                                                                      A 𝑆∗ with a tree and autumn leaves


                                                                                             A 𝑆∗ wearing pink glasses


                                                                                 A 𝑆∗ with the Eiffel Tower in the background


                                                                                           A golden 𝑆∗ on Times Square


                                                                                                  A lion face on a 𝑆∗

Figure 4: Qualitative comparison. Given input images (first column), we generate three samples
using ViCo (ours), Textual Inversion (Gal et al., 2023a), Custom Diffusion (CD) (Kumari et al.,
2023), and DreamBooth (DB) (Ruiz et al., 2023). The text prompt is under the generation samples, in
which S⋆ for CD and DB is “[V] class”.
  Real sample     Textual Inversion   + Visual condition        Real sample       Ours w/o mask       Ours w/ mask


                                                                                                                                               Ours w/o mask reg
  Reference: 𝑆∗     A 𝑆∗ with a city in the background          Reference: 𝑆∗       A 𝑆∗ on top of a wooden floor

                                                                                                                          Reference
                                                                                                                           image


                                                                                                                                               Ours w/ mask reg
  Reference: 𝑆∗             A 𝑆∗ in the snow                    Reference: 𝑆∗        A 𝑆∗ floating on top of water

         (a) Visual condition                                                   (b) Masking                                           (c) Regularization
Figure 5: Ablation study. We ablate each component in our method and report: (a) results with or
without the visual condition; (b) results with or without the masking; and (c) attentions, masks, and
generations (from left to right) with or without the regularization.

4.3 A BLATION STUDY AND ANALYSIS
We study the effect of the visual condition, the automatic mask, and the initialization of S⋆ . Repre-
sentative results are compiled in Fig. 5 and a quantitative comparison is reported in Tab. 4.
Visual condition. The proposed visual condition module can significantly improve the visual
expressiveness of the single learnable embedding used by Textual Inversion, making higher image
fidelity. We compare the performance of Textual Inversion before and after adding the visual condition
module in Fig. 5(a). We can observe the degree of object detail preservation is considerably enhanced
without losing text information after adding our visual condition module. Row (1) in Tab. 4 also shows
our visual condition can significantly enhance our baseline Textual Inversion (Gal et al., 2023a).
Automatic mask. Our automatic mask mechanism enables isolating the object from the distracting
background, which further improves the object fidelity. As shown in Fig. 5(b), the generation results
may be occasionally distorted without the mask. After adding the mask, the object can be well
captured and reconstructed. Row (2) in Tab. 4 also quantitatively shows applying the mask can
further improve image fidelity. We also validate using regularization for the object mask refinement
in Fig. 5(c), showing the mask is well aligned with the object after leveraging the regularization term.


                                                                                          8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                                       Initialize S*     Initialize S*                               Initialize S*   Initialize S*
Table 4: Quantitative improvements.                                                                     as “clock”       as “object”                                  as “dog”       as “animal”

TI denotes the baseline Textual Inver-
                                                                                            Textual                                                       Textual
sion (Gal et al., 2023a), VC denotes our                                                   Inversion                                                     Inversion

visual condition, and M denotes the pro-
                                                                                            ViCo                                                          ViCo
posed mask mechanism.                                                         Reference
                                                                                            (ours)                                           Reference    (ours)
                                                                                  S*                                                             S*
        TI      VC     M    IDINO ↑         ICLIP ↑           TCLIP ↑
                                                                                                            A 𝑆∗ in the jungle                                            A 𝑆∗ in the jungle
 (0)     ✓                  0.520           0.768             0.216
 (1)     ✓      ✓           0.630 +21.2%    0.805 +4.8%       0.229 +6.0%   Figure 6: Comparison of our method and Textual Inversion
 (2)     ✓      ✓      ✓    0.631 +21.3%    0.809 +5.3%       0.229 +6.0%
                                                                            when initializing S⋆ with a general word (object or animal).
       Training samples                                                                         Recontextualization


             Training: 𝑆∗                  A 𝑆∗ in the snow     A 𝑆∗ with a blue house      A 𝑆∗ under an              A 𝑆∗ floating in an     A 𝑆∗ among the           A 𝑆∗ on surfboard
                                                                  in the background       astonishing sunset                  ocean             skyscrapers               in the desert

       Training samples                                         Art Renditions                                                                  Costume


             Training: 𝑆∗                     Van Gogh                  Vermeer                 Monet                     Spider Man              Iron Man                 Harry Potter

Figure 7: Applications. We use different contexts, artistic styles, and various costume outfits to
generate images of high image fidelity and text fidelity.
Robust S⋆ initialization. Proper word initialization is crucial for Textual Inversion (Gal et al.,
2023a) due to its high sensitivity to the chosen initialization word. In contrast, ViCo is robust to
such initialization variations, benefiting from the visual condition. When unsure about a suitable
initialization word, “object” or “animal” can be generally reliable options. Fig. 6 compares different
initialization words for Textual Inversion and our method. While Textual Inversion exhibits severe
distortion when initialized with “object” or “animal”, our approach maintains high-quality generation.
4.4       A PPLICATIONS
We show three types of applications of ViCo in Fig. 7. The first application is recontextualization. We
generate images for a novel object in different contexts. The generated results present natural-looking
and unobtrusive integration of the object and the contexts, with diverse poses (e.g., sitting, standing,
and floating). We also generate art renditions of novel objects in different painting styles. We use
a text prompt “a painting of a S⋆ in the style of [painter]”. Our results have novel poses that are
unseen in the training samples, e.g., the painting in the style of “Vermeer”. In addition, we change
the costume for the novel object using a text prompt “a S⋆ in a [figment] outfit”, producing novel
image variations while preserving the appearance of novel objects.

5       C ONCLUSION
In summary, our paper introduces ViCo, a fast and lightweight method for personalized text-to-image
generation that preserves fine object-specific details. Our approach incorporates visual conditions into
the diffusion process through an image cross-attention module, enabling the extraction of accurate
object masks. These masks effectively isolate the object of interest, eliminating distractions from the
background in the latent space. Our visual condition module seamlessly integrates with pretrained
diffusion models without the need for diffusion fine-tuning, allowing for scalable deployment.
Moreover, our model is easy to use, as it doesn’t rely on prior object masks or extensive preprocessing.
Limitations. We also notice certain limitations of our method. The decision to keep the diffusion
model frozen can sometimes result in lower performance compared to methods that fine-tune the
original diffusion model (Ruiz et al., 2023; Kumari et al., 2023). Additionally, the use of Otsu
thresholding for mask binarization adds a slight time overhead during training and inference for each
sampling step. However, these limitations are mitigated by the shorter training time, as our method
requires no preprocessing and is optimized for fewer steps, and the negligible increase in inference
time (several seconds), which has minimal impact on the overall model implementation.


                                                                                            9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Rameen Abdal, Peihao Zhu, John Femiani, Niloy Mitra, and Peter Wonka. Clip2stylegan: Unsuper-
  vised extraction of stylegan edit directions. In ACM SIGGRAPH, 2022.
Dmitry Baranchuk, Andrey Voynov, Ivan Rubachev, Valentin Khrulkov, and Artem Babenko. Label-
 efficient semantic segmentation with diffusion models. In ICLR, 2022.
Andrew Brock, Jeff Donahue, and Karen Simonyan. Large scale GAN training for high fidelity
  natural image synthesis. In ICLR, 2019.
Tim Brooks, Aleksander Holynski, and Alexei A Efros. Instructpix2pix: Learning to follow image
  editing instructions. In CVPR, 2023.
Mathilde Caron, Hugo Touvron, Ishan Misra, Hervé Jégou, Julien Mairal, Piotr Bojanowski, and
 Armand Joulin. Emerging properties in self-supervised vision transformers. In ICCV, 2021.
Wenhu Chen, Hexiang Hu, Yandong Li, Nataniel Rui, Xuhui Jia, Ming-Wei Chang, and William W
 Cohen. Subject-driven text-to-image generation via apprenticeship learning. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2304.00186, 2023.
Yunjey Choi, Minje Choi, Munyoung Kim, Jung-Woo Ha, Sunghun Kim, and Jaegul Choo. Stargan:
  Unified generative adversarial networks for multi-domain image-to-image translation. In CVPR,
  2018.
Katherine Crowson, Stella Biderman, Daniel Kornis, Dashiell Stander, Eric Hallahan, Louis Cas-
  tricato, and Edward Raff. Vqgan-clip: Open domain image generation and editing with natural
  language guidance. In ECCV, 2022.
Rinon Gal, Or Patashnik, Haggai Maron, Amit H Bermano, Gal Chechik, and Daniel Cohen-Or.
  Stylegan-nada: Clip-guided domain adaptation of image generators. ACM Transactions on
  Graphics (TOG), 2022.
Rinon Gal, Yuval Alaluf, Yuval Atzmon, Or Patashnik, Amit H Bermano, Gal Chechik, and Daniel
  Cohen-Or. An image is worth one word: Personalizing text-to-image generation using textual
  inversion. In ICLR, 2023a.
Rinon Gal, Moab Arar, Yuval Atzmon, Amit H Bermano, Gal Chechik, and Daniel Cohen-Or.
  Encoder-based domain tuning for fast personalization of text-to-image models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2302.12228, 2023b.
Leon A Gatys, Alexander S Ecker, and Matthias Bethge. Image style transfer using convolutional
  neural networks. In CVPR, 2016.
Ian Goodfellow, Jean Pouget-Abadie, Mehdi Mirza, Bing Xu, David Warde-Farley, Sherjil Ozair,
  Aaron Courville, and Yoshua Bengio. Generative adversarial nets. In NeurIPS, 2014.
Amir Hertz, Ron Mokady, Jay Tenenbaum, Kfir Aberman, Yael Pritch, and Daniel Cohen-or. Prompt-
 to-prompt image editing with cross-attention control. In ICLR, 2023.
Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. In NeurIPS,
  2020.
Jonathan Ho, Tim Salimans, Alexey A Gritsenko, William Chan, Mohammad Norouzi, and David J
  Fleet. Video diffusion models. In NeurIPS, 2022.
Emiel Hoogeboom, Didrik Nielsen, Priyank Jaini, Patrick Forré, and Max Welling. Argmax flows
 and multinomial diffusion: Learning categorical distributions. NeurIPS, 2021.
Phillip Isola, Jun-Yan Zhu, Tinghui Zhou, and Alexei A Efros. Image-to-image translation with
  conditional adversarial networks. In CVPR, 2017.
Xuhui Jia, Yang Zhao, Kelvin CK Chan, Yandong Li, Han Zhang, Boqing Gong, Tingbo Hou,
  Huisheng Wang, and Yu-Chuan Su. Taming encoder for zero fine-tuning image customization with
  text-to-image diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.02642, 2023.


                                              10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Justin Johnson, Alexandre Alahi, and Li Fei-Fei. Perceptual losses for real-time style transfer and
  super-resolution. In eccv, 2016.

Tero Karras, Samuli Laine, and Timo Aila. A style-based generator architecture for generative
  adversarial networks. In CVPR, 2019.

Tero Karras, Samuli Laine, Miika Aittala, Janne Hellsten, Jaakko Lehtinen, and Timo Aila. Analyzing
  and improving the image quality of stylegan. In CVPR, 2020.

Tero Karras, Miika Aittala, Samuli Laine, Erik Härkönen, Janne Hellsten, Jaakko Lehtinen, and Timo
  Aila. Alias-free generative adversarial networks. In NeurIPS, 2021.

Alexander Kirillov, Eric Mintun, Nikhila Ravi, Hanzi Mao, Chloe Rolland, Laura Gustafson, Tete
  Xiao, Spencer Whitehead, Alexander C Berg, Wan-Yen Lo, et al. Segment anything. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2304.02643, 2023.

Nupur Kumari, Bingliang Zhang, Richard Zhang, Eli Shechtman, and Jun-Yan Zhu. Multi-concept
  customization of text-to-image diffusion. In CVPR, 2023.

Gustav Larsson, Michael Maire, and Gregory Shakhnarovich. Learning representations for automatic
  colorization. In ECCV, pp. 577–593, 2016.

Christian Ledig, Lucas Theis, Ferenc Huszár, Jose Caballero, Andrew Cunningham, Alejandro
  Acosta, Andrew Aitken, Alykhan Tejani, Johannes Totz, Zehan Wang, et al. Photo-realistic single
  image super-resolution using a generative adversarial network. In CVPR, 2017.

Jason Lee, Kyunghyun Cho, and Douwe Kiela. Countering language drift via visual grounding. In
  EMNLP, 2019.

Dongxu Li, Junnan Li, and Steven CH Hoi. Blip-diffusion: Pre-trained subject representation for
  controllable text-to-image generation and editing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.14720, 2023.

Yuchen Lu, Soumye Singhal, Florian Strub, Aaron Courville, and Olivier Pietquin. Countering
  language drift with seeded iterated learning. In ICML, 2020.

Andreas Lugmayr, Martin Danelljan, Andres Romero, Fisher Yu, Radu Timofte, and Luc Van Gool.
  Repaint: Inpainting using denoising diffusion probabilistic models. In CVPR, 2022.

Yiyang Ma, Huan Yang, Wenjing Wang, Jianlong Fu, and Jiaying Liu. Unified multi-modal latent
  diffusion for joint subject and text conditional image generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.09319,
  2023.

Chong Mou, Xintao Wang, Liangbin Xie, Jian Zhang, Zhongang Qi, Ying Shan, and Xiaohu Qie.
  T2i-adapter: Learning adapters to dig out more controllable ability for text-to-image diffusion
  models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.08453, 2023.

Alexander Quinn Nichol, Prafulla Dhariwal, Aditya Ramesh, Pranav Shyam, Pamela Mishkin, Bob
  Mcgrew, Ilya Sutskever, and Mark Chen. Glide: Towards photorealistic image generation and
  editing with text-guided diffusion models. In ICML, 2022.

Nobuyuki Otsu. A threshold selection method from gray-level histograms. IEEE transactions on
  systems, man, and cybernetics, 1979.

Taesung Park, Alexei A Efros, Richard Zhang, and Jun-Yan Zhu. Contrastive learning for unpaired
  image-to-image translation. In ECCV, 2020.

Or Patashnik, Zongze Wu, Eli Shechtman, Daniel Cohen-Or, and Dani Lischinski. Styleclip: Text-
  driven manipulation of stylegan imagery. In ICCV, 2021.

Zeju Qiu, Weiyang Liu, Haiwen Feng, Yuxuan Xue, Yao Feng, Zhen Liu, Dan Zhang, Adrian Weller,
  and Bernhard Schölkopf. Controlling text-to-image diffusion by orthogonal finetuning. In NeurIPS,
  2023.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual
  models from natural language supervision. In ICML, 2021.

Aditya Ramesh, Mikhail Pavlov, Gabriel Goh, Scott Gray, Chelsea Voss, Alec Radford, Mark Chen,
  and Ilya Sutskever. Zero-shot text-to-image generation. In ICML, 2021.

Aditya Ramesh, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alex Nichol, Casey Chu, and Mark Chen. Hierarchical text-
  conditional image generation with clip latents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.06125, 2022.

Scott Reed, Zeynep Akata, Xinchen Yan, Lajanugen Logeswaran, Bernt Schiele, and Honglak Lee.
  Generative adversarial text to image synthesis. In ICML, 2016.

Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer. High-
  resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In CVPR, 2022.

Olaf Ronneberger, Philipp Fischer, and Thomas Brox. U-net: Convolutional networks for biomedical
  image segmentation. In MICCAI, 2015.

Nataniel Ruiz, Yuanzhen Li, Varun Jampani, Yael Pritch, Michael Rubinstein, and Kfir Aberman.
  Dreambooth: Fine tuning text-to-image diffusion models for subject-driven generation. In CVPR,
  2023.

Chitwan Saharia, William Chan, Saurabh Saxena, Lala Li, Jay Whang, Emily L Denton, Kamyar
  Ghasemipour, Raphael Gontijo Lopes, Burcu Karagol Ayan, Tim Salimans, et al. Photorealistic
  text-to-image diffusion models with deep language understanding. In NeurIPS, 2022.

Jing Shi, Wei Xiong, Zhe Lin, and Hyun Joon Jung. Instantbooth: Personalized text-to-image
   generation without test-time finetuning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.03411, 2023.

Jiaming Song, Chenlin Meng, and Stefano Ermon. Denoising diffusion implicit models. In ICLR,
   2021.

Ming Tao, Hao Tang, Fei Wu, Xiao-Yuan Jing, Bing-Kun Bao, and Changsheng Xu. Df-gan: A
 simple and effective baseline for text-to-image synthesis. In CVPR, 2022.

Yoad Tewel, Rinon Gal, Gal Chechik, and Yuval Atzmon. Key-locked rank one editing for text-to-
  image personalization. In ACM SIGGRAPH, 2023.

Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Łukasz
  Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. In NeurIPS, 2017.

Xintao Wang, Ke Yu, Shixiang Wu, Jinjin Gu, Yihao Liu, Chao Dong, Yu Qiao, and Chen Change Loy.
  Esrgan: Enhanced super-resolution generative adversarial networks. In ECCV, 2018.

Yuxiang Wei, Yabo Zhang, Zhilong Ji, Jinfeng Bai, Lei Zhang, and Wangmeng Zuo. Elite: Encoding
  visual concepts into textual embeddings for customized text-to-image generation. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2302.13848, 2023.

Jay Zhangjie Wu, Yixiao Ge, Xintao Wang, Weixian Lei, Yuchao Gu, Wynne Hsu, Ying Shan,
  Xiaohu Qie, and Mike Zheng Shou. Tune-a-video: One-shot tuning of image diffusion models for
  text-to-video generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.11565, 2022.

Weihao Xia, Yujiu Yang, Jing-Hao Xue, and Baoyuan Wu. Tedigan: Text-guided diverse face image
 generation and manipulation. In CVPR, 2021.

Tao Xu, Pengchuan Zhang, Qiuyuan Huang, Han Zhang, Zhe Gan, Xiaolei Huang, and Xiaodong He.
  Attngan: Fine-grained text to image generation with attentional generative adversarial networks.
  In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, 2018.

Hui Ye, Xiulong Yang, Martin Takac, Rajshekhar Sunderraman, and Shihao Ji. Improving text-to-
  image synthesis using contrastive learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.02423, 2021.


                                               12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Jiahui Yu, Yuanzhong Xu, Jing Yu Koh, Thang Luong, Gunjan Baid, Zirui Wang, Vijay Vasudevan,
   Alexander Ku, Yinfei Yang, Burcu Karagol Ayan, et al. Scaling autoregressive models for content-
   rich text-to-image generation. Transactions on Machine Learning Research, 2022.
Han Zhang, Jing Yu Koh, Jason Baldridge, Honglak Lee, and Yinfei Yang. Cross-modal contrastive
  learning for text-to-image generation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer
  vision and pattern recognition, 2021.
Lvmin Zhang and Maneesh Agrawala. Adding conditional control to text-to-image diffusion models.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.05543, 2023.
Richard Zhang, Phillip Isola, and Alexei A Efros. Colorful image colorization. In ECCV, 2016.
Richard Zhang, Jun-Yan Zhu, Phillip Isola, Xinyang Geng, Angela S Lin, Tianhe Yu, and Alexei A
  Efros. Real-time user-guided image colorization with learned deep priors. ACM Transactions on
  Graphics (TOG), 2017.
Jun-Yan Zhu, Taesung Park, Phillip Isola, and Alexei A Efros. Unpaired image-to-image translation
  using cycle-consistent adversarial networks. In ICCV, 2017a.
Jun-Yan Zhu, Richard Zhang, Deepak Pathak, Trevor Darrell, Alexei A Efros, Oliver Wang, and Eli
  Shechtman. Toward multimodal image-to-image translation. In NeurIPS, 2017b.
Minfeng Zhu, Pingbo Pan, Wei Chen, and Yi Yang. Dm-gan: Dynamic memory generative adversarial
 networks for text-to-image synthesis. In CVPR, 2019.

A    M ORE DETAILS ON IMPLEMENTATION
Architecture. The proposed image cross-attention blocks, designed to accept visual conditions with
the standard attention architecture as in (Vaswani et al., 2017), are integrated into specific attention
layers within the decoder of the diffusion U-Net architecture. Specifically, we incorporate these
blocks into every other attention layer in the decoder of the U-Net, to achieve balanced and effective
performance. This design is based on the observation that integrating visual-condition attention
into decoder layers produces better results compared to encoder layers, as shown in Fig. 8. We also
observe that integrating visual-condition attention into both layers yields comparable performance
to integrating it solely in the decoder layers. Therefore, we opt to exclusively integrate visual-
conditioned attention in the decoder layers in order to reduce the parameter load and achieve a more
lightweight design. The details of which attention layers are incorporated with the visual condition
can be found in Tab. 5.
Table 5: Architecture scheme. Diffusion U-Net consists of encoder, middle, and decoder layers,
with 16 original cross-attention blocks. The last row indicates the integration of visual-condition
attention in specific cross-attention layers.
       U-Net                Encoder     Middle                           Decoder
       Attention index        0–5          6       7    8    9      10    11   12   13    14   15
       Visual condition?        ✗          ✗       ✗   ✓     ✗      ✓     ✗    ✓     ✗    ✓        ✗


        Sample             Encoder                 Decoder (ours)              Encoder + Decoder
Figure 8: Comparison of integrating visual-condition attention into encoder layers, decoder layers,
and both layers.

Masking strategy. In Fig. 9, we present a comparison between our automatic mask and the
ground-truth mask generated by SAM (Kirillov et al., 2023). Additionally, we compare our masking
strategy and attention alignment. The alignment is enforced by employing MSE between the S⋆
cross-attention map and either the ground-truth mask or our automatic mask. It is important to note


                                                  13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                              A 𝑆∗ with a city in the background


                                                      A 𝑆∗ in the snow



           Sample


                             Masking w/       Alignment w/        Alignment w/       Masking w/
                             SAM mask          SAM mask          automatic mask    automatic mask
                                                                                       (Ours)
Figure 9: Comparison of different mask settings. We employ SAM (Kirillov et al., 2023) to
generate the so-called ground-truth object mask.


Figure 10: Training samples and naive generations. For each image pair, we show one training
sample of a unique object on the left, and one generation result using our model with the text prompt
“a photo of a S⋆ ” on the right.



that our automatic mask is inherently derived from the attention, making the alignment process akin
to a self-supervised technique. Remarkably, the masking performance using the ground-truth mask
is on par with our automatic mask, demonstrating the effectiveness of our automatic mask. The
results from attention alignment using both masks closely resemble each other but fall short of the
performance achieved using the proposed masking strategy.
Training data sampling. During training, we sample training images in sequential order and sample
reference images randomly from the rest. This approach ensures that for each step, the training
image and the reference image are different, allowing the model to focus on learning the shared novel
concept between the two images rather than the entire image.


                                                 14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                Table 6: More information on training images.
                           Index        Object        Category            From           #Samples
                           0            cat statue      Toy         Textual Inversion         6
                           1        elephant statue     Toy         Textual Inversion         5
                           2            duck toy        Toy           DreamBooth              4
                           3          monster toy       Toy           DreamBooth              5
                           4           teddy bear       Toy         Custom Diffusion          7
                           5        tortoise plushy     Toy         Custom Diffusion         12
                           6          brown dog          Pet          DreamBooth              5
                           7             fat dog         Pet          DreamBooth              6
                           8          brown dog          Pet          DreamBooth              5
                           9            black cat        Pet          DreamBooth              5
                           10          brown cat         Pet          DreamBooth              5
                           11           black dog        Pet        Custom Diffusion          8
                           12             clock       Accessory     Textual Inversion         5
                           13       pink sunglasses   Accessory       DreamBooth              6
                           14         fancy boot      Accessory       DreamBooth              6
                           15           backpack      Accessory       DreamBooth              6
                           16         berry bowl      Container       DreamBooth              6
                           17          red teapot     Container     Textual Inversion         5
                           18              vase       Container       DreamBooth              6
                           19              barn       Building      Custom Diffusion          7

Table 7: Text prompt list for quantitative evaluation. “{}” represents S⋆ in Textual Inversion (Gal
et al., 2023a) and ours, and represents “[V] class” in DreamBooth (Ruiz et al., 2023) and Custom
Diffusion (Kumari et al., 2023).
    Text prompts for non-live objects                            Text prompts for live objects
    “a {} in the jungle”                                         “a {} in the jungle”
    “a {} in the snow”                                           “a {} in the snow”
    “a {} on the beach”                                          “a {} on the beach”
    “a {} on a cobblestone street”                               “a {} on a cobblestone street”
    “a {} on top of pink fabric”                                 “a {} on top of pink fabric”
    “a {} on top of a wooden floor”                              “a {} on top of a wooden floor”
    “a {} with a city in the background”                         “a {} with a city in the background”
    “a {} with a mountain in the background”                     “a {} with a mountain in the background”
    “a {} with a blue house in the background”                   “a {} with a blue house in the background”
    “a {} on top of a purple rug in a forest”                    “a {} on top of a purple rug in a forest”
    “a {} with a wheat field in the background”                  “a {} wearing a red hat”
    “a {} with a tree and autumn leaves in the background”       “a {} wearing a santa hat”
    “a {} with the Eiffel Tower in the background”               “a {} wearing a rainbow scarf”
    “a {} floating on top of water”                              “a {} wearing a black top hat and a monocle”
    “a {} floating in an ocean of milk”                          “a {} in a chef outfit”
    “a {} on top of green grass with sunflowers around it”       “a {} in a firefighter outfit”
    “a {} on top of a mirror”                                    “a {} in a police outfit”
    “a {} on top of the sidewalk in a crowded street”            “a {} wearing pink glasses”
    “a {} on top of a dirt road”                                 “a {} wearing a yellow shirt”
    “a {} on top of a white rug”                                 “a {} in a purple wizard outfit”
    “a red {}”                                                   “a red {}”
    “a purple {}”                                                “a purple {}”
    “a shiny {}”                                                 “a shiny {}”
    “a wet {}”                                                   “a wet {}”
    “a {} with Japanese modern city street in the background”    “a {} with Japanese modern city street in the background”
    “a {} with a landscape from the Moon”                        “a {} with a landscape from the Moon”
    “a {} among the skyscrapers in New York city”                “a {} among the skyscrapers in New York city”
    “a {} with a beautiful sunset”                               “a {} with a beautiful sunset”
    “a {} in a movie theater”                                    “a {} in a movie theater”
    “a {} in a luxurious interior living room”                   “a {} in a luxurious interior living room”
    “a {} in a dream of a distant galaxy”                        “a {} in a dream of a distant galaxy”

B      DATASET DETAILS
Training images. For quantitative evaluation, our training images comprise 20 objects in 5 categories,
namely 6 toys, 6 live animals, 4 accessories, 3 containers, and 1 building, selected from Textual
Inversion (Gal et al., 2023a), DreamBooth (Ruiz et al., 2023), and Custom Diffusion (Kumari et al.,
2023), allowing a fair and comprehensive evaluation. We list the objects and their information
in Tab. 6. We show the training image samples in Fig. 10, with our naive generations, i.e., generated
images using “a photo of a S⋆ ”. We observe that the naive generations successfully preserve the
original object, demonstrating the effectiveness of our model in capturing and reproducing intricate
visual details.


                                                            15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                             1 training sample     2 training samples       3 training samples       4 training samples


 Full 5 training samples



                            3 training samples     3 training samples      3 training samples       3 training samples
                           Seen reference image   Seen reference image   Unseen reference image   Unseen reference image
Figure 11: Full 5 training samples vs. varying training samples and reference images. On the left,
we present the generated images using our model with the full 5 training samples. On the right, the
top row showcases the generated images with different numbers of training samples. In the bottom
row, we display the generated images using different reference images during inference, including
both seen images from the training set and unseen images. This analysis provides insights into the
effects of training sample size and reference image selection on the image generation process.
Text prompts. We adopt the same text prompt list used in Textual Inversion (Gal et al., 2023a) for
training. For quantitative evaluation, we collect 31 prompts for 11 non-live objects and 31 prompts
for 5 live animals in total. We show them in Tab. 7.

C     A NALYSIS OF VARYING TRAINING SAMPLES AND REFERENCE IMAGES
The number of training samples. In the main paper, we follow the standard training protocol
outlined in (Gal et al., 2023a), where all available training samples for each object are utilized.
However, we also conduct additional experiments to examine the impact of varying the number of
training samples on the generation performance, as depicted in the top row of Fig. 11. Specifically,
we select the object "black cat" and employ 1, 2, 3, and 4 training samples from the complete dataset
of 5 training samples in total. In the case of using only 1 training sample, it is employed as both
the denoising target and the reference image. The generated images from scenarios with only 1 or 2
training samples exhibit a tendency to overfit the object, resulting in a diminished representation of
the textual information. Nevertheless, across all cases, our method consistently demonstrates high
image fidelity and quality.
Different reference images. In addition, we also evaluate the generation performance by employing
different reference images during inference, including both seen images from the training set and
unseen ones. The results are presented in the bottom row of Fig. 11. Remarkably, we observe that the
variations in the generated images are minimal when using the same random seed, underscoring the
robustness of our proposed visual condition to the input image. This finding suggests that our model
can effectively generalize and maintain consistent performance regardless of whether the reference
image is seen or unseen during training.
Multiple reference images. Our image cross-attention mechanism has the ability to handle a
variable number of input tokens. This flexibility enables us to seamlessly use multiple reference
images by accommodating any number of tokens from the concatenated reference images. In Fig. 12,
we compare the results obtained by using two reference images with those obtained by using a
single reference image. We observe that using different types of reference images produces similar
generated images, which highlights the robustness of the image cross-attention mechanism.

D     T RAINING STEP DISCUSSION
In the main paper, we report all results at the checkpoint of 400 training steps, which generally yield
the best overall performance within a short training time (∼5 minutes). However, we observe that for
some objects, text information is better preserved with fewer training steps. In Fig. 13, we present
some cases where training for 300 steps results in better preservation of text-related information. This
observation can be attributed to the fact that more training steps can potentially lead to overfitting the
generation to the training images, thereby neglecting the information provided by the text prompt to
some extent. In practical applications, it is advisable to save multiple checkpoints at different training
steps, allowing users to choose the most suitable checkpoint for text-prompted inference.


                                                         16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                                                 A 𝑆∗ on the beach


                 Reference A                   Reference B                           Single A                          Single B                                A+B
Figure 12: Multiple reference images vs. a single reference image. For multiple reference images,
we concatenate the tokens corresponding to each image and pass the concatenated tokens through the
image cross-attention.


  Training
  samples
Training steps


                  300


                  400


                           A 𝑆∗ in a     A 𝑆∗ with a      A 𝑆∗ in a leafy     A 𝑆∗ in a      A 𝑆∗ in the   A 𝑆∗ among the      A 𝑆∗ on top of a   A 𝑆∗ on top of   A 𝑆∗ wearing a
                         movie theater beautiful sunset       forest        movie theater      snow        skyscrapers in       wooden floor      a purple rug      black top hat
                                                                                                           New York city                           in a forest     and a monocle

Figure 13: Generation results with different training steps. In the top row, we present the training
samples. The middle row showcases the generated images after training for 300 steps, while the
bottom row displays the generated images after training for 400 steps. Each object is evaluated using
three distinct text prompts, ensuring a comprehensive and unbiased assessment.

E                  U SER STUDY
To gain insights into human preferences regarding generation performance, we conduct a user study
to evaluate our model along with the compared methods. The study consists of 18 samples of different
objects, including some objects used for quantitative evaluation as well as additional new ones. These
samples are prompted by various text prompts.
During each trial, we generated 8 images using each method and selected the most visually appealing
and best-aligned image as the candidate for comparison. For each question in the study, users were
asked to assess the image candidates and choose the best one (or two if they found two results
equally good) based on three perspectives: image quality, text fidelity, and object fidelity. An example
question is shown in Fig. 14. In total, we collected answers from 40 users for a total of 18 comparative
questions, resulting in 720 individual responses across the three evaluation metrics. The user study
votes are plotted in Fig. 15 and the percentage results of the votes are reported in Tab. 8, providing a
distribution summary of the user preferences for each evaluated metric.
The results indicate that our method significantly outperforms the other models in all metrics. Note
that the users involved in the study have no prior knowledge of the specific task details and many
of them come from non-technical backgrounds. The evaluation metrics used in the user study may
be subjective in nature, as they rely on the personal opinions and preferences of the participants.
However, this subjective evaluation provides a more human-centered perspective, which ensures that
our model produces outputs that align with human preferences and expectations.

                        Table 8: Comparison of user preferences. The percentages of votes are reported.
                                                                                        Image quality               Text fidelity             Object fidelity
                   Textual Inversion (Gal et al., 2023a)                                      0.117                         0.054                      0.076
                   Custom Diffusion (Kumari et al., 2023)                                     0.259                         0.288                      0.158
                   DreamBooth (Ruiz et al., 2023)                                             0.249                         0.301                      0.318
                   ViCo (ours)                                                                0.375                         0.357                      0.448


                                                                                        17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 14: An example question of the user study. We provide the reference image and the text
prompt and ask the users to vote for one or two candidates based on three metrics.

                            500
                                                         Models by metrics
                                    Textual Inversion    Custom Diffusion         DreamBooth           Ours
                                                                                                     431
                            400                                             392
                                                   362
                                                                     331
                                                               316                             306
                            300
               User votes


                                        250 241

                            200
                                                                                         152
                                  113
                            100
                                                                                    73
                                                          59

                              0
                           Image quality        Text fidelity         Object fidelity
Figure 15: User votes in three metrics. Note that the sum of votes in each metric is more than 720
because the user can vote for 2 candidates in one question if they find two results equally good.

F    FAILURE CASES
In Fig. 16, we present several failure cases encountered by our model, highlighting the challenges and
areas for improvement. These failure cases can be categorized into two types: image misalignment
and text misalignment. Image misalignment occurs when the object has an intricate appearance,
making it difficult for the model to accurately capture and reproduce all the details. Additionally,
image misalignment can also occur when there are multiple objects of the same category that co-occur,
leading to difficulties in properly distinguishing the individual object of interest. Text misalignment,
on the other hand, is primarily caused by two factors. Firstly, it can occur due to the loss of text
information, resulting in a mismatch between the intended text prompt and the synthesized image.
Secondly, text misalignment can arise from the undesirable synthesis of the object and the text prompt,
leading to unexpected or nonsensical combinations. While our current model faces these challenges,
we acknowledge them as areas for future improvement and research.


                                                               18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                         Image misalignment


 A 𝑆∗ among the skyscrapers in     A 𝑆∗ floating on top of water         A 𝑆∗ in a luxurious interior       A 𝑆∗ with a mountain in the
        New York city                                                            living room                        background

                                                          Text misalignment


  A 𝑆∗ on top of a wooden floor     A 𝑆∗ on top of pink fabric          A 𝑆∗ with a landscape from the    A 𝑆∗ with the Eiffel Tower in the
                                                                                     Moon                           background
Figure 16: Failure cases. We present two types of failure cases: image misalignment and text
misalignment. Each pair of samples consists of a reference image on the left and the corresponding
generated image on the right.

                        Reference                        Ours w/o Reg                             Ours w/ Reg


                      A photo of a S*                      𝐼!"#$ = 0.686                           𝐼!"#$ = 0.603
                       in the snow                         𝐼%&"' = 0.834                           𝐼%&"' = 0.746
                                                           𝑇%&"' = 0.348                           𝑇%&"' = 0.368
Figure 17: The defect in quantitative metrics. We present a reference image along with two
generated images: one produced with the regularization applied and the other without it. We compute
the three quantitative metrics below each generated image.

G      D EFECT IN QUANTITATIVE METRICS
Our quantitative metrics are based on pretrained models CLIP (Radford et al., 2021) and DINO (Caron
et al., 2021), which produce global representations for images. Therefore, it may be hard to reflect
some local details in quantitative comparison stemming from comparing feature vectors. For example,
we present two images generated with and without the regularization and compute three similarity
scores in Fig. 17. We notice that although the image generated using the regularization shows
better quality, its image similarity metric greatly lags behind the other because the one without the
regularization overfits to the training data to some extent (presenting the “cabinet”). We believe a more
proper evaluation metric that can reflect the details in the images is desired for future advancement.

H      A DDITIONAL VISUALIZATIONS OF ATTENTION
Mask visualization. We visualize the mask of the reference image derived from the attention map
during training and inference. In Fig. 18, we visualize attention maps and corresponding binarized
masks along with sampling steps, which exhibit the notable effect of image matting. In Fig. 19,
we visualize the object mask throughout the training process. In the initial steps, the mask rapidly
converges to a reliable indicator for object segmentation, consistently showcasing the significant
image matting in subsequent steps.

Effect of the regularization on attention. We provide additional visualization results to show
that regularization effectively directs the attention to focus on the object of interest in Fig. 20. We
also observed that in certain cases, such as the last row in Fig. 20, the regularization had minimal
impact on the attention. Therefore, in practical applications, users have the flexibility to customize


                                                                   19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                              t=0       t=10      t=20       t=30       t=40      t=50


                              t=0       t=10      t=20       t=30       t=40      t=50


Figure 18: Mask samples in inference. For each instance (“teddy bear” and “clock”), given a
reference image (left), we visualize the attention associated with S⋆ (top) and the corresponding mask
(bottom) of it with an interval of 10 during the 50 inference steps.


           Training: 0                                                                       400 epochs
Figure 19: Mask samples during training. Given a reference image (left), we visualize the mask of
it, uniformly sampled throughout the training process. Except for the mask at the very beginning of
training, all masks in subsequent steps present good image matting, which can be efficiently used in
the visual condition module.
the weight of the regularization during training to further control the attention behavior according to
their specific needs.

Attention at each step. The visualized attention presented in Fig. 20 represents the average
attention across all inference steps. Additionally, we provide visualizations of the attention at each
inference step with an interval of 5 in Fig. 21, allowing for a more detailed observation of the attention
dynamics throughout the generation process. In the early steps, the attention tends to exhibit more
scattered responses, exploring different regions in the generated image. As the inference progresses,
the attention quickly converges and becomes more focused on the object of interest.


                                                   20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


          Reference      Textual Inversion             Ours w/o reg            Ours w/ reg


                                            A 𝑆∗ with a city in the background


                                              A 𝑆∗ on top of a wooden floor


                                                    A 𝑆∗ on the beach


                                                           A 𝑆∗


                                                A 𝑆∗ on top of a dirt road


                                                  A 𝑆∗ in New York city
Figure 20: Visualization of attention associated with S⋆ . We visualize the average attention in
the inference process of Textual Inversion (Gal et al., 2023a) and ours with or without the proposed
regularization.


   Generated                                                                                 Average
                                           Inference Sampling (T=50)
    Image                                                                                    Attention


                          t=0       t=5         t=10        t=15        t=20      t=25


                                    t=30        t=35        t=40        t=45      t=50

Figure 21: Inference steps. We visualize the attention associated with S⋆ with an interval of 5 during
the 50 inference steps. We also present the generated image (on the left) and the average attention
along with all inference steps (on the right).


                                                   21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                               OFT


                              ViCo
                             w/ OFT


                              ViCo
    Input images

                              Iteration:     400             1200            2000             2800
Figure 22: Generation results across different number of iterations. We compare ViCo, OFT (Qiu
et al., 2023), and using both ViCo and OFT when training different iterations.

I   A DDITIONAL COMPARISON RESULTS
Due to the page limit of the main paper, we include additional generation results in Fig. 26. The
results compare our model with Textual Inversion (Gal et al., 2023a), DreamBooth (Ruiz et al., 2023),
and Custom Diffusion (Kumari et al., 2023). For each comparison, we select the visually best image
from a set of 8 randomly generated images using different objects. We observe that our method
performs on par with, or even surpasses, the finetuning-based methods DreamBooth (Ruiz et al.,
2023) and Custom Diffusion (Kumari et al., 2023). The generated images exhibit high quality in
terms of image fidelity, text fidelity, text-image equilibrium, authenticity, and diversity.

Comparison with OFT. Orthogonal Finetuning (OFT) (Qiu et al., 2023) is a recently proposed
fine-tuning method that can be efficiently used to fine-tune DreamBooth (Ruiz et al., 2023). OFT
demonstrates stability in generating images even with a large number of training steps. It can also be
applied in conjunction with ViCo. In Fig. 22, we present the generated results comparing different
iterations of OFT, ViCo, and ViCo with OFT. In the early steps (e.g., 400), ViCo is capable of
producing images that preserve fine object details, while OFT has not yet learned accurate object-
specific semantics. As the number of training steps increases significantly (e.g., 2800), the generated
images by OFT exhibit slight distortions, and ViCo may overfit to the training image, resulting in
the loss of text information. By combining ViCo with OFT, we can address both of these issues and
achieve the highest generation quality at all iterations.

Comparison with the encoder-based method ET4. Encoder for Tuning (E4T) (Gal et al., 2023b)
is a representative work of encoder-based models (Shi et al., 2023; Jia et al., 2023; Gal et al., 2023b;
Chen et al., 2023). It is worth noting that these models, including E4T, are not directly related to
our current study, as they necessitate training on extensive datasets specific to particular category
domains. In Fig. 23, we compare our model with E4T which is pretrained on a substantial dataset of
human faces. According to Gal et al. (2023b), a large batch size of 16 or larger is crucial. To adhere
to this setting, we implement the use of gradient accumulation over 16 steps in E4T. Notably, our
model excels in preserving facial details compared to E4T.

J   A DDITIONAL RESULTS OF VARIOUS APPLICATIONS
We present the results of our model deployed to various applications in Fig. 27. In addition to the
applications of recontextualization, art renditions, and costume changing, which have been showcased
in the main paper, we further demonstrate the effectiveness of our model in activity control, such as
controlling a dog to sleep or to jump, and attribute editing, such as editing the pattern or the color of
a container. We also show more generated results in terms of complicated style change in Fig. 28,
highlighting our model’s edit-ability to effectively condition on complex styles. Furthermore, we


                                                   22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  Face
                               “Yann LeCun”                                      “Gal Gadot”
 sample



   E4T


  Ours
(1-image)


  Ours
(5-image)


                𝑆∗ on the    𝑆∗ with a          𝑆∗ with a                      𝑆∗ in the   𝑆∗ in a movie
                                                             Cyberpunk 𝑆∗
                 beach       mountain            sunset                        kitchen        theater
Figure 23: Comparison with E4T (Gal et al., 2023b) on face images. E4T is initially pretrained on
a large-scale dataset of human faces and then fine-tuned using a single image of “Yann Lecun” or
“Gal Gadot”. We present our results by training ViCo on either a single image or five images.


                                         Flying             Light           Spider Man         Chef


         Training samples
                                         Wave               Fire              Green            Apple
Figure 24: Comic character generation. We generate text-guided images (on the right) with the
given comic object (on the left). Our results preserve the comic style and the appearance of the object.
present the implementation of our model for comic character generation in Fig. 24. This application
allows us to generate comic-style images that exhibit a text-guided property. These additional
examples highlight the versatility and flexibility of our model in various creative and interactive
scenarios.

Multi-object composition. Our model can also be easily altered to support multi-object composi-
tion with two different objects. Particularly, we train S1⋆ , S2⋆ , and unified image cross-attention
blocks with two datasets of different objects. In inference, we feed two different reference images
into the image cross-attention by token concatenation and respectively obtain object masks from S1⋆ ,
S2⋆ . We report our results of multi-object composition in Fig. 25.


                                                     23
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                   𝑆1∗                     𝑆2∗                     𝑆1∗ and 𝑆2∗


                   𝑆1∗                     𝑆2∗                     𝑆1∗ and 𝑆2∗


                   𝑆1∗                     𝑆2∗                𝑆1∗ in the style of 𝑆2∗
Figure 25: Multi-object composition. Our model supports multi-object compositions, demonstrating
results in two composition types: (1) simultaneous appearance of two objects, and (2) one object in
the style of the other object.


                                                 24
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 Training Samples           Ours          Textual Inversion    Custom Diffusion   DreamBooth


                                     A 𝑆∗ with a wheat 1ield in the background


                                      A 𝑆∗ with a mountain in the background


                                                   A 𝑆∗ in the jungle


                                              A 𝑆∗ on top of pink fabric


                                   A 𝑆∗ with the Eiffel Tower in the background


                                      A 𝑆∗ in a luxurious interior living room


                                        A 𝑆∗ on top of a purple rug in a forest
Figure 26: Additional comparison results on more objects. Our model consistently demonstrates
superb performance across all experimental trials. Zoom in to see the image details.
                                              25
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Training samples                                                   Recontextualization


                   A 𝑆∗ on top of green grass A 𝑆∗ with Egyptian        A 𝑆∗ among the          A 𝑆∗ underwater      A 𝑆∗ on the surface
                   with sun7lowers around it       pyramids         skyscrapers in New York                                of Mars


                       A 𝑆∗ in the snow           A 𝑆∗ on a            A 𝑆∗ on the beach      A 𝑆∗ with a mountain    A 𝑆∗ in a football
                                              cobblestone street                               in the background          stadium

                                                                      Art Renditions


                           Van Gogh               Vermeer                   Monet                 Rembrandt          Leonardo da Vinci

                                                                         Costume


                       Spider Man out7it       Iron Man out7it             Santa hat             Rainbow scarf         Yellow glasses

                                                                          Activity


                           Running                Jumping             Playing with a ball          Sleeping              Swimming

                                                                         Attributes


                            Bird 🐦                  Cat 🐱                 Dragon 🐲                  Owl 🦉                Buddha 🧘


                            Red 🔴                 Yellow 🟡                 Green 🟢                 Purple 🟣               Silver ⚪
Figure 27: Additional applications using our method. ViCo excels in various tasks, including
recontextualizing input images, synthesizing diverse art renditions, changing costumes, controlling
object poses in different activities, and editing object intrinsic attributes. The generated images
exhibit high authenticity. Zoom in to see the image details.



                                                             26
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                               Image samples


    Styles


Impressionism


   Da Vinci


  Rembrandt


  Van Gogh


   Vermeer


    Monet


   Ink water
Figure 28: Generated results in various styles. Each style is prompted by the text condition “a
painting of S⋆ in the style of [STYLE]”.


                                              27
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


K    B ROADER IMPACTS
Our research on personalized text-to-image generation has significant impacts, both positive and
negative. On the positive side, our approach has numerous applications, such as recontextualization,
art renditions, and costume changing, which can be widely utilized in industries like artistic creations,
media production, and advertising. For example, in advertising, designers can efficiently synthesize
drafts of the advertising subject and the desired context with minimal effort.
However, we acknowledge that our research also raises social concerns regarding the potential
unethical use of fake images. There is a risk of malicious exploitation as our model allows easy
generation of photorealistic images by anyone, even without prior technical knowledge. This could
lead to the fabrication of images that include specific individuals or personal belongings. For instance,
using readily available selfies from the internet, individuals with malicious intent could fabricate
images to engage in fraudulent activities or defamatory actions by portraying someone unethically.
To mitigate the potential negative impacts, we strongly advocate for strict regulation and responsible
use of this technology. It is essential to establish guidelines and ethical frameworks to govern the
deployment and application of personalized text-to-image generation models like ours. With proper
regulations, we can help prevent misuse and ensure that this technology is used for legitimate and
ethical purposes. This could include measures such as obtaining consent for image generation,
implementing authentication mechanisms, and promoting public awareness about the risks and ethical
considerations associated with this technology.


                                                   28
