Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


M EMORY-C ONSISTENT N EURAL N ETWORKS FOR I MI -
TATION L EARNING

 Kaustubh Sridhar1 , Souradeep Dutta1 , Dinesh Jayaraman1 , James Weimer1,2 , Insup Lee1
 1
  University of Pennsylvania, 2 Vanderbilt University
 {ksridhar, duttaso, dineshj, weimerj, lee}@seas.upenn.edu



                                                A BSTRACT

            Imitation learning considerably simplifies policy synthesis compared to alternative
            approaches by exploiting access to expert demonstrations. For such imitation
            policies, errors away from the training samples are particularly critical. Even rare
            slip-ups in the policy action outputs can compound quickly over time, since they
            lead to unfamiliar future states where the policy is still more likely to err, eventually
            causing task failures. We revisit simple supervised “behavior cloning” for conve-
            niently training the policy from nothing more than pre-recorded demonstrations,
            but carefully design the model class to counter the compounding error phenomenon.
            Our “memory-consistent neural network” (MCNN) outputs are hard-constrained to
            stay within clearly specified permissible regions anchored to prototypical “memory”
            training samples. We provide a guaranteed upper bound for the sub-optimality gap
            induced by MCNN policies. Using MCNNs on 10 imitation learning tasks, with
            MLP, Transformer, and Diffusion backbones, spanning dexterous robotic manipu-
            lation and driving, proprioceptive inputs and visual inputs, and varying sizes and
            types of demonstration data, we find large and consistent gains in performance,
            validating that MCNNs are better-suited than vanilla deep neural networks for
            imitation learning applications.1


1        I NTRODUCTION

For sequential decision making problems such as robotic control, imitation learning is an attractive
and scalable option for learning decision making policies when expert demonstrations are available
as a task specification. Such demonstrations are typically easier to provide than the typical task
specification requirements for reinforcement learning and model-based control, namely, dense rewards
and good models of the environment. Furthermore, imitation learning is also typically less experience-
intensive than reinforcement learning and less expertise-intensive than model-based control.
We consider the simplest and perhaps most widely used imitation learning algorithm, behavior cloning
(BC) [29], which reduces policy synthesis to supervised learning over the expert demonstration data.
For example, a neural network policy for an autonomous car could be trained to mimic human driving
actions [2]. While the policy is synthesized with supervised learning, the evaluation setup is very
different: rather than merely achieving low average error on states from the training data, as common
in supervised learning, the trained policy must, when rolled out in the world, successfully accomplish
the demonstrated task.
This sequential deployment makes the behavior of imitation policy functions away from their training
data particularly critical. To see this, observe that during rollout, the policy’s own output actions
determine its future input states. Task performance is most closely tied to the policy’s behavior on this
self-induced set of states, which can deviate from the training dataset of expert demonstrations. In
particular, a minor error in the policy’s action output at any time may induce a future input state that
is subtly different from expert states. If the policy behaves erratically under such small deviations, as
it often does in practice, the situation quickly snowballs into a vicious cycle of compounding errors
leading to task failure.

     1
         Our website: https://sites.google.com/view/mcnn-imitation.


                                                       1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Past solutions to this compounding error problem have focused on modifying the be-
havior cloning setup, such as by permitting online experience [13, 34], reward labels
[28], queryable experts [37], or modifying the demonstration data collection procedure
[19]. Instead, we retain the conveniences of the plain BC setup and focus on design-
ing a model class that encourages better behavior beyond the training data, which in turn
could boost task performance by mitigating the compounding error phenomenon discussed
above. We provide a simple plug-in approach to improve BC with any deep neural network.
It is well known that vanilla deep neural networks, only by
themselves, can generate large errors when evaluated away
from the training points, and even rare errors could derail
an entire task rollout. These large errors are particularly
evident when the expert demonstrations are few in num-
ber such as in robotics where human demonstrations are
essential for imitation learning. To tame these errors, we
propose semi-parametric “memory-consistent neural net-
works” (MCNN). MCNNs first subsample the dataset into
representative prototype “memories” to form the scaffold
for the eventual function. They then fit a parametric func-
tion to the rest of the training data that is hard-constrained
by the very formulation of the model class, to exactly fit
the training data at all the memories, and further, to stay
within double-cone-like zones of controllable shapes and
sizes centered at each memory. As a result, an MCNN Figure 1: MCNN significantly improves
behaves mostly like a nearest-neighbor function close to performance on realistic demonstration
                                                               datasets. We plot the percentage increase
memories, and mostly like a deep neural network (subject in return with MCNN over D4RL BC [9]
to the double-cone constraints) far from them. All func- for various number of demonstrations across
tions in this MCNN model class lie within “permissible many tasks. In this plot, each point is a sep-
regions” centered on each memory, meaning that function arate MCNN policy. We see significant im-
values away from the training points are bounded. Un- provements in the few demonstrations regime
der mild assumptions on the expert policy, we show that where most realistic imitation learning tasks
this property of MCNNs induces an upper bound on the can be found. The choice of model class is
suboptimality of the learned BC policy. Visualizations of crucial in such regimes and MCNN shines.
MCNNs can be found in Figure 2.                                Additional details are in Appendix F.

Using MCNNs on 10 imitation learning tasks, with MLP, Transformer and Diffusion backbones,
spanning dexterous robotic manipulation and driving, proprioceptive inputs and visual inputs, and
varying sizes and types of demonstration data, we find large and consistent gains in performance,
validating that MCNNs are better-suited than vanilla deep neural networks for imitation learning
applications. Figure 1 visualizes the percentage increase in return with MCNN policies compared to
the vanilla BC results reported in D4RL [9] for various quantities of training demonstrations across
tasks. The trend of the median demonstrates that MCNNs are highly effective in the low data regime
where generalization to test trajectories is stressed.

2    R ELATED W ORK
We present a detailed related work discussion in Appendix D & summarize closely related work here.
Compounding errors in imitation learning have previously been tackled by permitting online
experience [13, 34], reward labels [28], queryable experts [37], or modifying the demonstration
data collection procedure [19]. Our work is orthogonal to these methods and creates a model class
that avoids compounding errors by construction. Other works that propose new models for IL such
as Implicit BC (IBC) [7], Behavior Transformer (BeT) [38], Action Chunking Transformer [48],
and Diffusion Policies [44, 1] are orthogonal to our approach. MCNN can be used as a plug-in
approach to improve any of these methods. In fact, we show that MCNN with a BeT backbone
outperforms vanilla BeT and MCNN with a diffusion model outperforms diffusion BC on all tasks in
our experiments in Section 5. We also show that MCNN outperforms IBC in Section 5.
Non-parametric and semi-parametric methods in imitation learning such as nearest neighbors
[39], RBFs [35], and SVMs [20] have historically shown competitive performance on various robotic
control benchmarks. But, only recently, a semi-parametric approach consisting of neural networks for
representation learning and k-nearest neighbors for control was proposed in Visual Imitation through


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Nearest Neighbors (VINN) [26]. This is the closest paper to our work and in Section 5, we compare
with VINN and demonstrate that we outperform their method comprehensively.
Theoretical guarantees on the sub-optimality gap in imitation learning with MCNN are provided
in this paper. Such guarantees are not available with vanilla neural networks. Our theorem builds on
earlier work on reductions for imitation learning in [36, 31, 2, 32] and leverages intuitions from [25]
on bounding the width of the model class.

3     P ROBLEM F ORMULATION
A Markov Decision Process (MDP) is a tuple E = (S, A, P, R, γ, I), where S ⊆ Rn is the set
of states, A is the set of actions, P(s′ |s, a) is the probability of transitioning from state s to s′
when taking action a, R(s, a) is the reward accrued in state s upon taking action a, γ ∈ [0, 1) is
the discount factor, and I is the initial state distribution. We assume that the MDP operates over
trajectories with finite length H, in an episodic fashion. Additionally, we assume the set of states S
to be closed and compact. Given a policy π : S 7→ A, the expected cumulative reward accrued over
the duration of an episode is given by the following,
                                                   H
                                                   X
                                      J(π) = Eπ           R(st , at ) .                                (1)
                                                    t=1

In imitation learning, we assume that there exists an expert policy π ∗ unknown to the learner. This
policy induces a distribution dπ∗ on the state-action space S × A obtained by rollouts on the MDP.
The learner agent has access to an expert trajectory dataset D = (s0 , a0 ), (s1 , a1 ), . . . , (sN , aN )
drawn from distribution dπ∗ . The goal of imitation learning is to estimate a policy π̂, which mimics
the expert’s policy and reduces the sub-optimality gap: J(π ∗ ) − J(π̂).

4     A PPROACH
Our approach involves developing a new model class, memory consistent neural networks (MCNN),
and training it with supervised learning to clone the expert from the demonstration data. We start by
setting up the MCNN model class in Sec 4.1, analyze its theoretical properties for imitation learning
in Sec 4.2, and finally describe our behavior cloning algorithm that uses MCNNs in Sec 4.3.

4.1   T HE M ODEL C LASS : M EMORY-C ONSISTENT N EURAL N ETWORKS

First, we develop the semi-parametric MCNN model class for imitation learning. MCNNs rely on
a code-book set of “memories” B := {(si , ai )}Ki=1 which are subsampled from the expert training
dataset and summarize it. In practice, such a memory code-book can be created using one of various
off-the-shelf approaches. We describe our algorithmic choices later in Sec 4.3. For notational
convenience, we describe the approach for a scalar action space, but it is easily generalizable to the
vector action spaces we evaluate in our experiments.
Given this memory code-book B, we now define a “nearest memory neighbor policy”. For a finite
set S ⊂ S, and an input x ∈ S, we first define its closest element in S as, CS (x) = arg min d(s, x),
                                                                                           s∈S
where d is some distance metric defined on the space S. We denote by B|S , and B|A as the set of all
states and actions captured by the memory code-book B. With slight abuse of notation, we denote
B(s) as the action assigned by the codebook for a state input s. Using the above, we now define a
nearest neighbor regression function f N N as the following,
Definition 4.1 (Nearest Memory Neighbor Function). For an input x ∈ S, assume that s′ = CB|S (x),
then f N N (x) := B(s′ ).

In other words, the nearest memory neighbor function assigns actions according to a nearest neighbor
look-up in the memory code-book B. We are now ready to define memory-consistent neural networks
(MCNN), which permit interpolating between nearest neighbor functions and parametric deep neural
network (DNN)-based functions. Let f θ denote a DNN function parameterized by θ, which maps
from MDP states to actions.


                                                    3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 2: The elements of the MCNN model class. In the top row, the left panel shows the nearest memory
neighbour component with memories subsampled from the training dataset shown in red circles. The middle
panel depicts the constrained neural network function class, where the blue shaded regions represent the
permissible regions; by design, the function cannot take values outside these shaded regions. Finally, the right
panel shows the combined MCNN model class. The size of the permissible regions can be modulated by
increasing λ (bottom left) or by decreasing the number of memories (bottom right). The second row shows many
such MCNN model families with increasing capacity. For additional plots, see Appendix A.

Definition 4.2 (Memory-Consistent Neural Network). A memory-consistent neural network f M C is
defined using the codebook and DNN function pair (B, f θ ), and hyperparameters λ ∈ R+ , L ∈ R as
                                            ′
                                                                        ′

               MC
              fθ,B (x) = f N N (x) e−λ d(x,s )    + L 1 − e−λ d(x,s ) σ(f θ (x))              (2)
                           |       {z          }     |               {z            }
                            Nearest Memory Neighbour Function   Constrained Neural Network Function Class

where, s′ = CB|S (x) is the nearest memory to x, and σ : R 7→ [−1, 1] is a compressive non-linearity
that imposes hard limits on the outputs of f θ . In practice, we use tanh or similar functions.

We refer the reader to Figure 2 to drive the intuition. For inputs that are close to the points in the code-
book B, the function predicts values that are similar to the one observed in the training dataset. More
concretely, the value predicted by the function is a simple mixture: αf N N (x)+(1 − α) L σ(f θ (x)) ,
where the mixing factor α ∈ [0, 1] changes in proportion to the distance to the nearest memory. Thus,
for points further away more weight is placed on the neural network and the memories have little
influence. The degree of permissible deviation from nearest neighbor prediction f N N is controlled
by the parameter λ. Thus, we obtain a purely nearest neighbor function for λ = 0, and a vanilla
deep neural network function for λ = ∞. Note that the MCNN function values in regions far away
from memories are in the set [−L, L]. For this reason, we normalize output actions to [−L, L] before
training an MCNN function.

4.2   T HEORETICAL A NALYSIS OF MCNN S FOR I MITATION L EARNING
For fixed hyperparameters L, λ and memory codebook B, we denote by F, the class of memory-
consistent functions outlined in Equation 2. Note that a choice of the DNN function parameters θ
fixes a specific function in this class as well.
Assumption 4.3 (Realizability). We assume that the expert policy π ∗ belongs to the function class F.

This assumption trivially holds at the memories, where the MCNN exactly reproduces expert actions.
For all other points, we assume that there exist some parameters θ, which can capture the policy π ∗
                                                                                   ′
with sufficient accuracy, for a choice of L and λ. For a point
                                                            x at a distance  of d(s , x), the vanilla
                                                                         ′
DNN can affect the predictions only by an amount of ±L 1 − e−λ d(x,s ) . Without this restriction,
we might have been able to capture behaviors that went well beyond these ranges. This is reasonable
since, expert policies do not make sudden unbounded jumps in their actions. What we propose here
is a way to enforce this bound using a zeroth order nearest neighbor estimate.


                                                         4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


We analyze the behavior of this function class, and present some useful lemmas along the way. For
a set of memories present in B|S , we wish to capture the maximum value that the distance term:
d(x, s′ ) can take in Equation 2. To that end, we define the most isolated state as the following:
Definition 4.4 (Most Isolated State). For a given
                                                      set of memory points B|S , we define the most
isolated state sIB|S := arg max min d(s, m) , and consequently the distance of the most isolated
                            s∈S   m∈B|S
point as dIB|S = min d(sIB|S , m)
                    m∈B|S

The distance of the most isolated state captures the degree of emptiness that persists with the current
knowledge of the state space due to memory code-book B.
Lemma 4.5. Assume two sets of memory code-books Bi , Bj , such that Bi ⊆ Bj , then dIBi |S ≥ dIBj |S
Proof: The proof of the above lemma is straightforward, since the infimum of a subset (Bi ) is larger
than the infimum of the original set (Bj ).
This observation is useful when we study the effects of increasing the size of the code-book B. Note,
                                                      MC
when learning a memory-consistent neural network fθ,B    , we deploy the standard SGD based training
to adjust the parameters θ. The choice of the number of memories in B is kept as a hyperparameter.
This allows us to bound the maximum width of the function class, first described in [25] . We analyze
this for single output functions next.
Lemma 4.6. (Width   of Function  Class) The width of the function class F, ∀ θ1 , Iθ2  ∈ Θ, and ∀s ∈ S,
defined as max | fθMi ,BC
                          − fθMj ,B
                                  C
                                    (s)| is upper bounded by : 2L × 1 − e−λ dB|S
           θi ,θj

Proof : Please see Appendix B.
                                                                               I
Theorem 4.7. The sub-optimality gap J(π ∗ ) − J(π̂) ≤ min{H, H 2 |A|L 1 − e−λ dB|S }


Proof: Please see Appendix C.
                                                                          I          −λ dIB |
Corollary 4.8. Using Lemma 4.5 we know that if Bi ⊆ Bj , then 1 − e−λ dBi |S ≥ 1 − e

                                                                                           j S .

                                                                                  2
This can result in lower performance gap according to Theorem 4.7, when H ≥ H |A|L 1 −
     I
e−λ dB|S . Hence, reflecting the utility of adding more memories in such cases.


Takeaways. We summarize the insights from the above theoretical analysis here. First, our MCNN
class of functions is bounded in width (Lemma 4.6) even though it uses a high-capacity function
approximator like DNNs. No such bound is available for vanilla neural networks. This translates to a
bounded sub-optimality gap (Theorem 4.7) also not available in vanilla neural networks. Finally, our
Corollary states that we can likely gain better imitation learning performance by simply adding more
memories (up to a limit).
4.3   A LGORITHM : I MITATION L EARNING W ITH MCNN P OLICIES

We now describe our algorithm to use MCNNs for imitation learning. The first step in our method is
to learn the memory code-book B from the expert trajectory dataset D. The goal of Algorithm 1 is to
build the nearest memory neighbor function f N N . This is followed by details on the training aspects
of the MCNN parameters from the imitation dataset De in Algorithm 2.
For building the memory code-book, we leverage an off-the-shelf approach, Neural Gas [8], that
selects prototype samples to summarize a dataset. For completeness, we summarize this approach
briefly below.
Definition 4.9 (Neural Gas). A neural gas G := (N , E), is composed of the following components,
1. A set N ⊂ S of the nodes of a network. Each node mi ∈ N is called a memory in this paper.
2. A set E ⊂ {(mi , mj ) ∈ N 2 , i ̸= j} of edges among pairs of nodes, which encode the topological
   structure of the data. The edges are unweighted.
Neural gas. The neural gas algorithm [8, 30, 22] is primarily used for unsupervised learning tasks,
particularly for data compression or vector quantization. The goal is to group similar data points
together based on their similarities. The algorithm works by creating a set of prototype vectors, also
known as codebook vectors or neurons. These vectors represent the clusters in the data space. The
algorithm works by adaptively placing prototype vectors in the data space and distributing them like


                                                  5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 1 Learning Memories
   Input: Offline dataset D = {(si , ai )}N
                                          i=1 , number of memories m
   Output: A nearest neighbor based function f N N : S 7→ A
 1: Nodes N , edges E ← NeuralGasClustering(S, m)                        // learns the distribution induced by D
 2: Nodes N ′ , D(N ′ ) ← For each node in N , find the closest observation in D, and call this N ′ . Additionally,
    return the corresponding action taken by the expert in D, denoted by the map D(N ′ )
 3: G ← Define neural-gas with nodes N ′ , and edges E.
 4: Define a memory code-book B using B|S = G and B|A = D(N ′ ). Pairing nodes in the neural-gas to its
    corresponding actions.
 5: Define a nearest neighbor function fBN N , along the lines described in Definition 4.1 using B.
 6: return fBN N



a gas in order to capture the density. For more details we refer the reader to [8]. We use this in
Algorithm 1 (Line 1) to get the initial clustering. We can now go ahead and outline how “memories”
are picked in our case.
Learning memories. Algorithm 1 first uses the neural-gas algorithm to pick candidate points
(nodes) N in the state space. However, these points could be potentially absent in the dataset D,
making it hard to associate the correct action. To remedy this situation, we replace these points with
the closest states from the training set as memories. Such memory states come with the corresponding
actions taken by the expert. This is then used to define a nearest neighbor function by building the
memory codebook B and defining a function as outlined in Definition 4.1.

Algorithm 2 Behavior Cloning with Memory-Consistent Neural Networks: Training
    Input: Dataset D = {(si , ai )}N                                   NN
                                      i=1 , nearest neighbor function fB  , neural network function f θ (.), batch
size, total training steps T , parameters λ and L.
                                 MC
    Output: Learned policy fθ,B
 1: for step= 1 to T do
 2:     Sample batch B from D.
                                                                            ′                     ′
 3:     Forward propagate (si , ai ) ∼ B, fθ,BMC
                                                  (x) = fBN N (x) e−λ d(x,s ) + L 1 − e−λ d(x,s ) σ(f θ (x))
      where,  s′ is the nearest neighbor of x in B|S , σβ  (x) is a tanh-like activation function  given by σβ (x) =
      2 LeakyReLUβ x+1           − (1 − β)ReLU x−1           − 1 and β = max 0, 1 − ⌊ step

                            2                         2                                    100
                                                                                               ⌋ .
                                            MC
 4:   Update θ ← θ − ∇ E(si ,ai )∼B L(fθ,B (si ), ai ) where L is the negative log-likelihood or mean squared
      loss or other loss function.
 5: end for


Training MCNNs. Finally, we train MCNN policies through gradient descent on the parameters θ
of the neural network over the expert dataset De . For the compressive non-linearity, we use the σβ
function given in Algorithm 2 which is similar to tanh. We describe this in detail in Appendix F.


Figure 3: The environments here include: Adroit Pen, Hammer, Relocate, and Door [33], CARLA’s Town03
and Town04 [3], and Franka Kitchen [11]. The four Adroit environments and Franka Kitchen have proprioceptive
observations and the CARLA environment has image observations.

                                                         6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


5    E XPERIMENTAL E VALUATION
We now perform a thorough experimental evaluation of MCNN-based behavior cloning in a large
variety of imitation learning settings.
Environments and Datasets: We test our approach on 10 tasks, in 6 environments: 4 Adroit dextrous
manipulation, 1 CARLA environment, and the Franka Kitchen environment as pictured in Figure 3.
Demonstration datasets are drawn from D4RL [9] for Adroit and CARLA and from the multimodal
relay policy learning dataset [11] for Franka Kitchen. For each Adroit task, we evaluate imitation
learning from 2 different experts: (1) small realistic human demonstration datasets (‘human’) with 25
trajectories per task (5000 transitions), and (2) large demonstration datasets with 5000 trajectories (1
million transitions) from a well-trained RL policy (‘expert’). In CARLA, we train on demonstrations
from a hand-coded expert. The Franka Kitchen demos were collected by humans wearing VR
headsets. For observations, we use high-dimensional states in Adroit and Franka Kitchen, and 48 × 48
images in CARLA. Action spaces are 24-30 dimensional in the Adroit, 9-D in Franka Kitchen, and
2-D in CARLA. Further, in all Adroit environments, a goal is randomly chosen at reset and goal
information is included in the observation vector (more in Appendix F).
Baselines: We run the following baselines for comparison. (1) Behavior Cloning: We obtain results
with a vanilla MLP architecture. The details of the architecture can be found in Appendix F. We
report results from our implementation of BC and also report results given in D4RL [9] under the
names ‘MLP-BC’ and ‘D4RL BC’ respectively. Our BC implementation has only one difference
from [9]’s implementation: we normalize the observations. Normalizing observations has been shown
to improve BC’s performance [10]. (2) 1 Nearest Neighbours (1-NN): We set up a simple baseline
where the action for any observation in the online evaluation is the action of the closest observation
in the training data. In the expert and cloned datasets for each environment, this amounts to having to
perform a search amongst a million datapoints online at every step (which is highly inefficient). (3)
Visual Imitation with (k) Nearest Neighbours (VINN) [26]: VINN is a recent method that performs
a Euclidean kernel weighted average of some k nearest neighbors. In the Adroit case, we directly
perform the k nearest neighbors on the raw observation vectors. In the CARLA case, we perform it in
the same embedding space that we use to create memories (we discuss this embedding space more
below). (4) CQL-Sparse (CQL-S): We learn a policy using the CQL offline RL algorithm [18] and
a sparse reward given for task completion only. (5) Implicit BC (IBC) [7]: We report the results
from [7] which performs BC with energy models on the human tasks. (6) Behavior Transformer
(BeT-BC) [38]: We train and evaluate a behavior transformer using the official implementation on
all tasks. (7) Diffusion BC (Diff-BC) [44, 1]: We also train and evaluate a diffusion-based BC
policy using the implementations in [44, 1]. We provide additional details for all baselines and
comprehensive hyperparameter sweeps in Appendix F.
Learning memories and MCNN: We learn memories using the incremental neural gas algorithm for
10 epochs starting from 2.5% of the total dataset to 10% of the total dataset for each task. We update
all the transitions in each dataset by appending the closest memory observation and its corresponding
target action ( Algorithm 1). We train the MCNN on this dataset following Algorithm 2 for 1 million
steps and evaluate on 20 trajectories after training and repeat each experiment for a minimum of 3
seeds. We report results with an MLP, a behavior transformer (BeT), and a diffusion policy as the
underlying neural network under the names ‘MCNN+MLP’, ‘MCNN+BeT’, and ‘MCNN+Diff’
respectively. We expand on the experimental setup and all hyperparameters in Appendix F.
Embedding CARLA images: In the CARLA tasks, we use an off-the-shelf ResNet34 encoder [2]
that has been shown to be robust to background and environment changes in CARLA to convert the
48 × 48 images to embeddings of size 512. We use this embedding space as the observation space
for learning memories and policies.
Performance Metrics: All our environments come with pre-specified dense task rewards which we
use to define performance metrics. We report the cumulative rewards (return) for each task. For the
aggregate plots on a set of four tasks, we compute the percentage increase in return of a method over
D4RL BC in all four tasks and report the median.
Results: First, for the “human” tasks with the most realistic imitation learning setup, we plot
aggregate and taskwise results in Figure 4. In aggregate-human, we see that MCNN+MLP with fixed
hyperparameters performs the best followed by MCNN+Diff and IBC at second place. We also see
that the MCNN variants of MLP, BeT and Diffusion consistently outperform the vanilla versions.


                                                   7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 4: Adroit human tasks [25 demos]: Comparison of returns (across 20 evaluation trajectories and 3
random seeds) between baselines and our methods (MCNN+BeT, MCNN+Diff, and MCNN+MLP). Our MCNN
methods use the same fixed set of hyperparameters across all tasks.


Figure 5: Adroit expert tasks [5000 demos]: Comparison of returns (across 20 evaluation trajectories and 3
random seeds) between baselines and our methods (MCNN+BeT, MCNN+Diff, and MCNN+MLP). Our MCNN
methods use the same fixed set of hyperparameters across all tasks.
In pen-human-v1, MCNN+MLP outperforms the nearest baseline
by 33%. It is also the only method to shoot past the expert
ceiling of 100 (depicted by a dashed red line). In hammer-human-
v1, MCNN+MLP is the only method to obtain a positive return
outpacing the nearest baseline by an order of magnitude (from -11
to 262). In relocate-human-v1, MCNN+BeT is the only method
to achieve a positive return. We attribute, like previous work [24],
the stronger performance of MCNN+BeT over other MCNN
variants in the relocate task to the ‘memory’ advantage available
to transformers that is specifically suited for this task (where        Figure 8:         CARLA [400 de-
the historical states inform whether the ball has been grasped).        mos]: Comparison of return (across
                                                                        20 evaluation trajectories and 3
Lastly, in door-human-v1, MCNN+Diff outperforms all but the             random seeds) between baselines
IBC baseline by an order of magnitude. In this task, where              and our methods (MCNN+BeT and
repeated attempts at grasping and opening the door handle are           MCNN+MLP). For the results shown
usually required for success, we see methods that enable such           here, our MCNN methods use the
repetition (energy models in IBC and diffusion in MCNN+Diff)            same fixed set of hyperparameters
succeed.                                                                across all tasks.
On the expert tasks in Figure 5, even with a large        Table 1: Franka Kitchen [566 demos]: Com-
amount of data, we see MCNN+MLP come in first             parison of probabilities/success rates of interacting
outperforming the nearest baseline in the aggregate       with 1 to 5 objects (given by p1 to p5 respectively)
                                                          in Franka Kitchen between baselines and one of
plot by over 100%. MCNN+Diff comes in second in
                                                          our methods (MCNN+Diff).
aggregate with a 40% improvement over the nearest
baseline. Here too, MCNN variants outperform the
                                                                                     Franka Kitchen
vanilla versions across all tasks. Also, MCNN+MLP                              p1      p2      p3     p4     p5
and MCNN+Diff are the only methods to exceed               LSTM-GMM [21]      1.0      0.9   0.74     0.34     0
the expert ceiling in all four tasks. Across expert              IBC          0.99    0.87   0.61     0.24     0
tasks both MCNN+MLP and MCNN+Diff perform                     BeT-BC          0.99    0.93   0.71     0.44     0
                                                             Diff-BC [1]      1.0     1.0     1.0     0.99   0.02
competitively and obtain up to a 25% improvement             MCNN+Diff        1.0     1.0     1.0      1.0   0.08
over the nearest baseline.


                                                    8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 6: Number of Memories in MCNN+MLP:
Comparison of returns (across 20 evaluation trajecto-
                                                            Figure 7: Fixed vs Tuned Hyperparameters in
ries) with our method (MCNN+MLP) using between
                                                            MCNN+MLP: Comparison of returns (across 20 eval
2.5% to 80% of the dataset as memories. We find a
                                                            trajectories and 3 seeds) between our method with
"sweet spot" for number of memories at 10-20%. We
                                                            fixed hyperparameters across all tasks and with hy-
also see the expected decrease to 1-NN performance
                                                            perparameters tuned online. Hence, it’s possible to
as number of memories increases to 100%.
                                                            improve performance with limited online interaction.

In the high dimensional CARLA lane task as well, we see in Figure 8 that MCNN+MLP outperforms
the nearest baseline by 27%. MCNN+BeT comes in a close second.
In Table 1, we compare MCNN+Diff with various baselines in the multimodal Franka Kitchen task.
Following previous work [1], we compare the probability of success in interacting with 1 to 5 objects
(p1-p5). MCNN+Diff performs similarly to Diff-BC [1] and obtains 100% success on p1 to p4. On
p5, where baselines have failed to show any success, MCNN+Diff obtains a 4x improvement over the
nearest baseline. Additional figures and all means and standard deviations of our results can be found
in Appendix G.
Discussion: We identify some high-level trends across our results here. For every architecture –
MLP, BeT, or Diffusion, plugging in MCNN significantly improves performance in every task. The
best-performing method in nearly every task is an MCNN-based method. MCNN can even improve
the performance of simple MLP architectures to beyond that of more sophisticated recent architectures
such as Diffusion models. For example, in pen-human-v1 in Figure 4, diffusion outperforms MLP
but MCNN+MLP significantly improves upon Diffusion. The above statements remain true across
different types and sizes of expert data and across disparate tasks. We discuss some ablations next.
Ablations: We plot return against number of memories in Figure 6 for MCNN+MLP. It demonstrates
the existence of a "sweet spot" for the number of memories around 10-20% of the dataset. This
allows for more efficient inference in MCNN than in baselines like VINN and 1-NN. It also shows
the expected degradation to 1-NN performance as the number of memories increases towards 100%.
Additional discussion on computation cost and improved efficiency of MCNN compared to VINN
and 1-NN can be found in Appendix F.
In Figure 7, we show that given limited online interaction (20 episodes), selecting the best-performing
hyperparameters (λ, L, and number of memories) further improves MCNN+MLP performance. We
show the significance of neural gas-based memories by comparing MCNN+MLP with a version
that uses randomly chosen memories in Figure 13 in Appendix G. We observe significant reduction
in performance with randomly chosen memories. Neural-gas uses competitive Hebbian learning
algorithm which is better at capturing the distribution of training points (creating memories that are
"spread out"). This reduces the distance to the most isolated state, improving imitation performance.
Ablation results on the values of λ and other tasks is in Appendix G.

6    C ONCLUSIONS AND L IMITATIONS .
Imitation learning, and in particular behavior cloning, is one of the most promising approaches when
it comes to transferring complex robotic manipulation skills from experts to embodied agents. In
this work, we introduced MCNNs, a semi-parametric approach to behavior cloning that significantly
increases the performance of behavior cloning methods across diverse realistic tasks and datasets
regardless of the underlying architecture (MLP, transformer, or diffusion). While our theoretical and
empirical results support the idea that appropriately constraining the function class based on training
data memories improves imitation performance, MCNNs are only one heuristic way to accomplish
this; it is very likely that there are even better-designed model classes in this spirit, that we have not
explored in this work. Finally, we would like in future work to explore MCNNs as model classes
beyond just behavior cloning, such as in reinforcement learning and meta-learning.


                                                        9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Acknowledgements: This work was supported in part by ARO MURI W911NF-20-1-0080, NSF
2143274, and ONR N00014-22-1-2677. Any opinions, findings, conclusions or recommendations
expressed in this material are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views the Army
Research Office (ARO), Office of Naval Research (ONR), the Department of Defense, or the United
States Government.

Reproducibility Statement: To ensure reproducibility, we have released all code for
MCNN variants and the baselines at our website https://sites.google.com/view/
mcnn-imitation. We have also described all environments, datasets, baselines, and MCNN
variants in detail (with their hyperparameters) in Section 5 and Appendix F.


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
 [1] Cheng Chi, Siyuan Feng, Yilun Du, Zhenjia Xu, Eric Cousineau, Benjamin Burchfiel, and
     Shuran Song. Diffusion policy: Visuomotor policy learning via action diffusion. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2303.04137, 2023. (Cited on 2, 7, 8, 9, 17, 18, 19)
 [2] Felipe Codevilla, Eder Santana, Antonio M López, and Adrien Gaidon. Exploring the limitations
     of behavior cloning for autonomous driving. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International
     Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 9329–9338, 2019. (Cited on 1, 3, 7, 17, 18)
 [3] Alexey Dosovitskiy, German Ros, Felipe Codevilla, Antonio Lopez, and Vladlen Koltun. Carla:
     An open urban driving simulator. In Conference on robot learning, pp. 1–16. PMLR, 2017.
     (Cited on 6)
 [4] Souradeep Dutta, Yahan Yang, Elena Bernardis, Edgar Dobriban, and Insup Lee. Mem-
     ory classifiers: Two-stage classification for robustness in machine learning. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2206.05323, 2022. (Cited on 18)
 [5] Souradeep Dutta, Kaustubh Sridhar, Osbert Bastani, Edgar Dobriban, James Weimer, Insup Lee,
     and Julia Parish-Morris. Exploring with sticky mittens: Reinforcement learning with expert
     interventions via option templates. In Conference on Robot Learning, pp. 1499–1509. PMLR,
     2023. (Cited on 18)
 [6] Patrick Esser, Robin Rombach, and Bjorn Ommer. Taming transformers for high-resolution
     image synthesis. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern
     recognition, pp. 12873–12883, 2021. (Cited on 18)
 [7] Pete Florence, Corey Lynch, Andy Zeng, Oscar A Ramirez, Ayzaan Wahid, Laura Downs,
     Adrian Wong, Johnny Lee, Igor Mordatch, and Jonathan Tompson. Implicit behavioral cloning.
     In Conference on Robot Learning, pp. 158–168. PMLR, 2022. (Cited on 2, 7, 17, 18, 19, 22,
     23)
 [8] Bernd Fritzke. A growing neural gas network learns topologies. In Proceedings of the 7th
     International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, NIPS’94, pp. 625–632,
     Cambridge, MA, USA, 1994. MIT Press. (Cited on 5, 6)
 [9] Justin Fu, Aviral Kumar, Ofir Nachum, George Tucker, and Sergey Levine. D4rl: Datasets for
     deep data-driven reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.07219, 2020. (Cited on 2,
     7, 18, 20, 21, 22, 23)
[10] Scott Fujimoto and Shixiang Shane Gu. A minimalist approach to offline reinforcement learning.
     Advances in neural information processing systems, 34:20132–20145, 2021. (Cited on 7)
[11] Abhishek Gupta, Vikash Kumar, Corey Lynch, Sergey Levine, and Karol Hausman. Relay
     policy learning: Solving long-horizon tasks via imitation and reinforcement learning. arXiv
     preprint arXiv:1910.11956, 2019. (Cited on 6, 7, 18)
[12] Philippe Hansen-Estruch, Amy Zhang, Ashvin Nair, Patrick Yin, and Sergey Levine. Bisimula-
     tion makes analogies in goal-conditioned reinforcement learning. In International Conference
     on Machine Learning, pp. 8407–8426. PMLR, 2022. (Cited on 18)
[13] Jonathan Ho and Stefano Ermon. Generative adversarial imitation learning. Advances in neural
     information processing systems, 29, 2016. (Cited on 2, 17)
[14] Kuk Jin Jang, Souradeep Dutta, Jean Park, James Weimer, and Insup Lee. Memory classifiers
     for robust ecg classification against physiological noise. Annual International Conference of
     the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society (EMBC), 2023. (Cited on 18)
[15] Xiayan Ji, Hyonyoung Choi, Oleg Sokolsky, and Insup Lee. Incremental anomaly detection with
     guarantee in the internet of medical things. In Proceedings of the 8th ACM/IEEE Conference on
     Internet of Things Design and Implementation, IoTDI ’23, pp. 327–339, New York, NY, USA,
     2023. Association for Computing Machinery. ISBN 9798400700378. doi: 10.1145/3576842.
     3582374. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3576842.3582374. (Cited on 18)


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


[16] Ramneet Kaur, Susmit Jha, Anirban Roy, Sangdon Park, Edgar Dobriban, Oleg Sokolsky, and
     Insup Lee. idecode: In-distribution equivariance for conformal out-of-distribution detection.
     In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 36, pp. 7104–7114,
     2022. (Cited on 18)
[17] Ramneet Kaur, Kaustubh Sridhar, Sangdon Park, Susmit Jha, Anirban Roy, Oleg Sokolsky, and
     Insup Lee. Codit: Conformal out-of-distribution detection in time-series data. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2207.11769, 2022. (Cited on 18)
[18] Aviral Kumar, Aurick Zhou, George Tucker, and Sergey Levine. Conservative q-learning
     for offline reinforcement learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:
     1179–1191, 2020. (Cited on 7, 18, 19, 22, 23)
[19] Michael Laskey, Jonathan Lee, Roy Fox, Anca Dragan, and Ken Goldberg. Dart: Noise injection
     for robust imitation learning. In Conference on robot learning, pp. 143–156. PMLR, 2017.
     (Cited on 2, 17)
[20] Minwoo Lee and Charles W Anderson. Robust reinforcement learning with relevance vector
     machines. Robot Learning and Planning (RLP 2016), pp. 5, 2016. (Cited on 2, 17)
[21] Ajay Mandlekar, Danfei Xu, Josiah Wong, Soroush Nasiriany, Chen Wang, Rohun Kulkarni,
     Li Fei-Fei, Silvio Savarese, Yuke Zhu, and Roberto Martín-Martín. What matters in learning
     from offline human demonstrations for robot manipulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.03298,
     2021. (Cited on 8)
[22] T.M. Martinetz, S.G. Berkovich, and K.J. Schulten. ’neural-gas’ network for vector quantization
     and its application to time-series prediction. IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks, 4(4):
     558–569, 1993. doi: 10.1109/72.238311. (Cited on 5)
[23] Vincent Micheli, Eloi Alonso, and François Fleuret. Transformers are sample efficient world
     models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.00588, 2022. (Cited on 18)
[24] Tianwei Ni, Michel Ma, Benjamin Eysenbach, and Pierre-Luc Bacon. When do transformers
     shine in rl? decoupling memory from credit assignment. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.03864,
     2023. (Cited on 8)
[25] Ian Osband and Benjamin Van Roy. Model-based reinforcement learning and the eluder dimen-
     sion. In Proceedings of the 27th International Conference on Neural Information Processing
     Systems - Volume 1, NIPS’14, pp. 1466–1474, Cambridge, MA, USA, 2014. MIT Press. (Cited
     on 3, 5, 18)
[26] Jyothish Pari, Nur Muhammad Shafiullah, Sridhar Pandian Arunachalam, and Lerrel Pinto.
     The surprising effectiveness of representation learning for visual imitation. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2112.01511, 2021. (Cited on 3, 7, 18, 19, 22, 23)
[27] Tim Pearce, Tabish Rashid, Anssi Kanervisto, Dave Bignell, Mingfei Sun, Raluca Georgescu,
     Sergio Valcarcel Macua, Shan Zheng Tan, Ida Momennejad, Katja Hofmann, et al. Imitating
     human behaviour with diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.10677, 2023. (Cited on 17)
[28] Xue Bin Peng, Aviral Kumar, Grace Zhang, and Sergey Levine. Advantage-weighted regression:
     Simple and scalable off-policy reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.00177, 2019.
     (Cited on 2, 17)
[29] Dean A Pomerleau. Efficient training of artificial neural networks for autonomous navigation.
     Neural computation, 3(1):88–97, 1991. (Cited on 1)
[30] Y. Prudent and A. Ennaji. An incremental growing neural gas learns topologies. In Proceedings.
     2005 IEEE International Joint Conference on Neural Networks, 2005., volume 2, pp. 1211–1216
     vol. 2, 2005. doi: 10.1109/IJCNN.2005.1556026. (Cited on 5)
[31] Nived Rajaraman, Lin F. Yang, Jiantao Jiao, and Kannan Ramchandran. Toward the fundamental
     limits of imitation learning. In Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Neural
     Information Processing Systems, NIPS’20, Red Hook, NY, USA, 2020. Curran Associates Inc.
     ISBN 9781713829546. (Cited on 3, 17, 18)


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


[32] Nived Rajaraman, Yanjun Han, Lin Yang, Jingbo Liu, Jiantao Jiao, and Kannan Ramchandran.
     On the value of interaction and function approximation in imitation learning. In M. Ranzato,
     A. Beygelzimer, Y. Dauphin, P.S. Liang, and J. Wortman Vaughan (eds.), Advances in Neural
     Information Processing Systems, volume 34, pp. 1325–1336. Curran Associates, Inc., 2021.
     URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2021/file/
     09dbc1177211571ef3e1ca961cc39363-Paper.pdf. (Cited on 3, 17, 18)

[33] Aravind Rajeswaran, Vikash Kumar, Abhishek Gupta, Giulia Vezzani, John Schulman, Emanuel
     Todorov, and Sergey Levine. Learning complex dexterous manipulation with deep reinforcement
     learning and demonstrations. arXiv preprint arXiv:1709.10087, 2017. (Cited on 6)

[34] Aravind Rajeswaran, Vikash Kumar, Abhishek Gupta, Giulia Vezzani, John Schulman, Emanuel
     Todorov, and Sergey Levine. Learning complex dexterous manipulation with deep reinforcement
     learning and demonstrations. arXiv preprint arXiv:1709.10087, 2017. (Cited on 2, 17)

[35] Aravind Rajeswaran, Kendall Lowrey, Emanuel V Todorov, and Sham M Kakade. Towards
     generalization and simplicity in continuous control. Advances in Neural Information Processing
     Systems, 30, 2017. (Cited on 2, 17)

[36] Stéphane Ross and Drew Bagnell. Efficient reductions for imitation learning. In Proceedings
     of the thirteenth international conference on artificial intelligence and statistics, pp. 661–668.
     JMLR Workshop and Conference Proceedings, 2010. (Cited on 3, 17, 18)

[37] Stéphane Ross, Geoffrey Gordon, and Drew Bagnell. A reduction of imitation learning and
     structured prediction to no-regret online learning. In Proceedings of the fourteenth interna-
     tional conference on artificial intelligence and statistics, pp. 627–635. JMLR Workshop and
     Conference Proceedings, 2011. (Cited on 2, 17)

[38] Nur Muhammad Shafiullah, Zichen Cui, Ariuntuya Arty Altanzaya, and Lerrel Pinto. Behavior
     transformers: Cloning k modes with one stone. Advances in neural information processing
     systems, 35:22955–22968, 2022. (Cited on 2, 7, 17, 19, 22, 23)

[39] Devavrat Shah and Qiaomin Xie. Q-learning with nearest neighbors. Advances in Neural
     Information Processing Systems, 31, 2018. (Cited on 2, 17)

[40] Kaustubh Sridhar, Souradeep Dutta, James Weimer, and Insup Lee. Guaranteed conformance of
     neurosymbolic models to natural constraints. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.01346, 2022. (Cited
     on 18)

[41] Kaustubh Sridhar, Oleg Sokolsky, Insup Lee, and James Weimer. Improving neural network
     robustness via persistency of excitation. In 2022 American Control Conference (ACC), pp.
     1521–1526. IEEE, 2022. (Cited on 18)

[42] Yihao Sun. Offlinerl-kit: An elegant pytorch offline reinforcement learning library. https:
     //github.com/yihaosun1124/OfflineRL-Kit, 2023. (Cited on 19)

[43] Aaron Van Den Oord, Oriol Vinyals, et al. Neural discrete representation learning. Advances in
     neural information processing systems, 30, 2017. (Cited on 18)

[44] Zhendong Wang, Jonathan J Hunt, and Mingyuan Zhou. Diffusion policies as an expressive
     policy class for offline reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.06193, 2022. (Cited
     on 2, 7, 17, 19, 22, 23)

[45] Yahan Yang, Ramneet Kaur, Souradeep Dutta, and Insup Lee. Interpretable detection of distri-
     bution shifts in learning enabled cyber-physical systems. In 2022 ACM/IEEE 13th International
     Conference on Cyber-Physical Systems (ICCPS), pp. 225–235. IEEE, 2022. (Cited on 18)

[46] Yahan Yang, Souradeep Dutta, Kuk Jin Jang, Oleg Sokolsky, and Insup Lee. Incremental
     learning with memory regressors for motion prediction in autonomous racing. In Proceedings
     of the ACM/IEEE 14th International Conference on Cyber-Physical Systems (with CPS-IoT
     Week 2023), pp. 264–265, 2023. (Cited on 18)


                                                 13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


[47] Amy Zhang, Rowan McAllister, Roberto Calandra, Yarin Gal, and Sergey Levine. Learning
     invariant representations for reinforcement learning without reconstruction. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2006.10742, 2020. (Cited on 18)
[48] Tony Z Zhao, Vikash Kumar, Sergey Levine, and Chelsea Finn. Learning fine-grained bimanual
     manipulation with low-cost hardware. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.13705, 2023. (Cited on 2, 17)


                                               14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A PPENDIX

A    E XAMPLES OF THE MCNN F UNCTION C LASSES

We demonstrate the effects of varying number of memories, λ, and L in Figures 9, 10, and 11
respectively. By increasing L or decreasing the number of memories, we directly increase the
width of the model class. By increasing λ, we quicken the interpolation from the nearest neighbor
components to the neural network function class. Similarly, by decreasing λ, we slow this transition.


Figure 9: Effects of varying number of memories (keeping λ and L fixed) on the MCNN function
class.


                                                15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 10: Effects of varying λ (keeping L and number of memories fixed) on the MCNN function
class.


Figure 11: Effects of varying L (keeping λ and number of memories fixed) on the MCNN function
class.


                                               16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B        P ROOF OF L EMMA 4.6

The  width of  the function class F, ∀  θ1 , θ2 ∈ Θ, and            ∀s ∈ S,                  defined     as
                                                         −λ dIB|
max | fθMC
        i ,B
             − f MC
                θj ,B (s)| is upper bounded by 2L × 1 − e       S
θi ,θj

Proof. Using Equation 2, we can express the difference as the following :
                                              ′
                                                                             ′

   |fθMi ,B
          C
            − fθMj ,B
                    C
                      |(x) = |L 1 − e−λ d(x,s ) σ(f θi (x)) − L 1 − e−λ d(x,s ) σ(f θj (x))|            (3)
                                            ′

                           = L 1 − e−λ d(x,s ) |σ(f θi (x)) − σ(f θj (x))|                              (4)
                                        I

                           ≤ L 1 − e−λ dB|S |σ(f θi (x)) − σ(f θj (x))|                                 (5)

Now, observing that |σ(f θi (x)) − σ(f θj (x))| ≤ 2 completes the proof.


C        P ROOF OF T HEOREM 4.7
                                                                 I

The sub-optimality gap J(π ∗ ) − J(π̂) ≤ min{H, H2 |A|L 1 − e−λ dB|S }

Proof. In order to take advantage of well-known results in the imitation learning literature [36, 31,
2, 32], we restrict ourselves for the purpose of this analysis to the discrete action-space A scenario,
where the policy π : S 7→ ∆(A). Even still, the intuitions developed through this analysis guide our
algorithmic choices in continuous environments. The actions picked in the expert dataset D induce a
dirac distribution over the actions corresponding to each input state.
Recall that in imitation learning, if the population total variation (TV) risk T(π̂, π ∗ ) ≤ ϵ, then,
J(π ∗ ) − J(π̂) ≤ min{H, H 2 ϵ} (See [31] Lemma 4.3). We note the following for population TV
risk:
                      H                                               H
                  1 X                                              1 X                            I
   T(π̂, π ∗ ) =         Est ∼fπt ∗ T V (π̂(·|st ), π ∗ (·|st )) ≤       Est ∼fπt ∗ |A|L 1 − e−λ dB|S

                 H t=1                                             H t=1
                                   I
               ≤ |A|L 1 − e−λ dB|S

                                                                                                         (6)
where fπt ∗ is the empirical distribution induced on state st obtained by rolling out policy π ∗ . For the
first inequality in the above derivation, we use Lemma 4.6. Using this, in the performance gap lemma
gives us the following:
                                                                              I

                          J(π ∗ ) − J(π̂) ≤ min{H, H 2 |A|L 1 − e−λ dB|S }



D        E XTENDED R ELATED W ORK

Compounding errors in imitation learning have previously been tackled by permitting online
experience [13, 34], reward labels [28], queryable experts [37], or modifying the demonstration
data collection procedure [19]. Our work is orthogonal to these methods and creates a model class
that avoids compounding errors by construction. Other works that propose new models for IL such
as Implicit BC (IBC) [7], Behavior Transformer (BeT) [38], Action Chunking Transformer [48],
and Diffusion Policies [44, 1, 27] are orthogonal to our approach. MCNN can be used as a plug-in
approach to improve any of these methods. In fact, we show that MCNN with a BeT backbone
outperforms vanilla BeT and MCNN with a diffusion model outperforms diffusion BC on all tasks in
our experiments in Section 5. We also show that MCNN outperforms IBC in Section 5.
Non-parametric and semi-parametric methods in imitation learning such as nearest neighbors
[39], RBFs [35], and SVMs [20] have historically shown competitive performance on various robotic
control benchmarks. But, only recently, a semi-parametric approach consisting of neural networks for
representation learning and k-nearest neighbors for control was proposed in Visual Imitation through


                                                    17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Nearest Neighbors (VINN) [26]. This is the closest paper to our work and in Section 5, we compare
with VINN and demonstrate that we outperform their method comprehensively.
Theoretical guarantees on the sub-optimality gap in imitation learning with MCNN are provided
in this paper. Such guarantees are not available with vanilla neural networks. Our theorem builds on
earlier work on reductions for imitation learning in [36, 31, 2, 32] and leverages intuitions from [25]
on bounding the width of the model class.
Learning a codebook of prototypes, like our memories, has been previously explored for image
reconstruction [43, 6], physics-constrained learning [40], online RL [23, 47, 12, 5], interpretable
OOD detection [45, 16, 17, 15], robust classification [4, 14, 41], and motion prediction [46]. The
closest related usage of memories that are representative of the topology of the input space is in [40].
But, here, external information in the form of physics and medical constraints plays a key role in
enforcing constraints at these pivotal points. In this paper, our prior is simply a kind of “consistency”
with no external information utilized.


E    C OMPUTE

We ran the experiments on either two Nvidia GeForce RTX 3090 GPUs (each with 24 GB of
memory) or two Nvidia Quadro RTX 6000 GPUs (each with 24 GB of memory). The CPUs used
were Intel Xeon Gold processors @ 3 GHz. Videos of our policies for many random goals across
environments as well as our code can be found in our website https://sites.google.com/
view/mcnn-imitation.


F    D ETAILED E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP

Additional information about our task definition: Following notation in prior works [9, 18, 7],
we define an imitation learning task as a tuple of (environment, reward function, and demonstration
dataset). Since we perform experiments with both "expert" and "human" demonstrations, our
experiment list has the following 9 tasks: pen-human-v1, pen-expert-v1, hammer-human-v1, hammer-
expert-v1, door-human-v1, door-expert-v1, relocate-human-v1, relocate-expert-v1, and carla-lane-v0.
Additional information for Adroit environments: All policies learned in the four Adroit envi-
ronments are goal-conditioned. The goal positions and orientations are provided as part of the
observation vector. Every time that the environment is reset (such as for a new evaluation rollout), the
goal is randomly chosen. These include random goal orientations of the pen, goal locations for the
relocate task, door locations in the door task, and nut-and-bolt location in the hammer task. In Adroit
human tasks in particular, with only 25 demonstrations, it is not possible to cover every random goal
location for each of the four environments (such as every possible pen orientation) in the training
dataset. This increases the difficulty of the four adroit tasks. Even with this challenge, MCNN
methods outperform baselines across environments and demonstrate their ability to generalize even
from small datasets of demonstrations.
We also provide videos of the Adroit human demos in our website. The multimodality in these
datasets collected by humans wearing VR gloves is visible in these videos. Some examples include
(1) in the hammer task, some demonstrations move the hammer above the bolt before hitting it, some
move it below, and some directly hit the bolt and (2) in the pen task, some demonstrations have the
little finger above the pen and some have it below the pen throughout the episode. MCNN helps
address the significant compounding error challenge which MLP-BC fails to address and hence results
in MCNN+MLP having an overall better performance than Diffusion-BC even though Diffusion
is better equipped to handle multimodality [1]. Our results in Franka Kitchen (see Appendix G)
highlight this where MCNN+Diffusion improves upon the already strong Diffusion-BC baseline.
Additional information for Franka Kitchen environment: In this environment, a Franka robot arm
interacts with various items in a Kitchen such as a kettle, microwave, light switch, cabinets, burners,
etc. We use the multimodal relay policy learning dataset [11] with 566 demonstrations collected
by humans wearing VR headsets interacting with 4 objects (out of a total 7 in the environment) in
each episode. The goal is to execute as many demonstrated tasks as possible and the metrics capture
the probability of successful interactions with various numbers of objects. These metrics, following


                                                  18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


previous work [1], have been named p1 to p5 for the probability of success in interacting with 1 to 5
objects respectively.
Normalization of inputs: We normalized all observations by subtracting the mean and dividing by
standard deviation. We didn’t have to normalize the actions as they are already in the range [−1, 1]
but if we are learning transition models instead, the outputs (next state or reward) would have to be
normalized.
Our tanh-like dynamic activation function: We plot our activation function σβ (.) described in
Algorithm 2 in Figure 12. It is exactly like the tanh function for β  = 0 as seen in Figure 2. Further,
as given in Algorithm 2’s Line 3, we set β = max 0, 1 − ⌊ step    100 ⌋ . Hence, β = 0 after 100 steps
until 1 million steps during training. We also set β = 0 during inference. For β = 0, our activation
function reduces to −1 for x < −1, x for −1 ≤ x ≤ 1, and 1 for x > 1. This is exactly like tanh.
The reason for using this activation function is the very few initial steps when it is not like tanh where
gradients are available beyond [−1, 1] during which time, the neural network component adjusts for
the presence of the nearest neighbor component. We use the standard tanh activation function for
our reimplementation of BC.
Implementation details for baselines and MCNN+MLP: In BC and MCNN+MLP, we use an MLP
with two hidden layers (three total layers) of size [256, 256] for Adroit tasks and [1024, 1024] for
CARLA. We use an Adam optimizer with a starting learning rate of 3e − 4 and train for 1 million
steps. We simply minimize the mean squared error for training the policies. We use a batch size
of 256 throughout. We describe the MCNN-specific hyperparameters, namely λ, L, and number of
memories in another paragraph below. For all other BC hyperparameters, we use the recommended
values in the TD3-BC implementation in [42].
For VINN, we set k = 10 in the Euclidean weighted k nearest neighbors algorithm. This value was
recommended by the original paper [26].
For BeT, we follow the official implementation2 . We use 6 layers, 6 heads, and an embedding
dimension of 120 in the transformer model. We also 64 clusters for action discretization performed
on the actions seen in the first 100 steps. Since the original paper [38] did not run experiments on
D4RL tasks, we ran a sweep over various choices of number of layers (4, 6), number of heads (4, 6),
and embedding dimension (32, 64, 120). Following previous work [7], we chose the hyperparameters
(6 layers, 6 heads, 120 embedding dimension) with the highest average scores on three human tasks.
We used these hyperparameters on all other tasks as well. For all other BeT hyperparameters, we use
the recommended values in the official BeT implementation.
For Diffusion-BC, we use the official implementation from [44]3 in Adroit tasks and the official
implementation from [1]4 in Franka Kitchen tasks. We also use the recommended hyperparameters
provided in the code for pen-human-v1 in the former repository in all human and expert Adroit tasks.
We similarly use the recommended hyperparameters provided in the latter repository along for the
kitchen task.
In CQL-Sparse, we use an MLP with three hidden layers (three total layers) of size [256, 256, 256]
for Adroit tasks. We give a reward of 1 for the last timestep in both expert and human datasets where
each trajectory achieves task completion. Hence, we run CQL-Sparse only on the human and expert
datasets where each trajectory has achieved task completion. We use a reward of 0 in all preceding
timesteps. For all CQL-sparse hyperparameters, we use the recommended values in [18]. We also
ran a sweep over the three key hyperparameters of CQL, namely actor learning rate (3e − 5, 1e − 4),
initial α (5, 10), and Lagrange threshold (5, None). We note that while performing the sweep, if the
Lagrange threshold is None, CQL was run with fixed α. Otherwise, α is tuned automatically, as
described in Kumar et al. [18], based on the Lagrange threshold and starting from its initial value.
We found that the recommended values in [18], i.e. actor learning rate = 3e − 5, initial α = 5, and
Lagrange threshold = 5 performed the best overall.
Implementation details for MCNN + Behavior Transformer (BeT): We train MCNN+BeT
following the official BeT implementation described above with one major change to the action
offsets output by the BeT model. Let us denote the sequence of input observations as τ and the action
   2
     https://github.com/notmahi/miniBET
   3
     https://github.com/Zhendong-Wang/Diffusion-Policies-for-Offline-RL
   4
     https://github.com/real-stanford/diffusion_policy


                                                   19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


       Figure 12: Dynamic tanh-like activation function σβ (x) shown for β = 0 and β = 1.


offsets output by the BeT model as f BeT (τ ). Then, the output of MCNN+BeT is given as follows:
                                               ′
                                                                    ′

              MC
            fBeT,B (τ ) = fBN N (τ ) e−λ d(τ,τ ) + L 1 − e−λ d(τ,τ ) 2σ(f BeT (τ )/2)          (7)

where τ ′ is the nearest (memory) sequence to τ and fBN N (τ ) retrieves the corresponding sequence of
actions from the codebook. We also multiply and divide by two inside the tanh-like function since
each item in the sequence output by the BeT lies in [−2, 2].
Implementation details for MCNN + Diffusion: We augment the diffusion process to use memories
in every step. Rather than predicting the noise value, we predict the true values. This amounts to a
minor change to the loss function within the official implementation. We provide this code in our
repository.
MCNN-specific hyperparameters: We use a value of L = 1.0 for all runs. This is suitable for BC
because our actions in the range of [−1, 1]. For both MCNN+MLP(Fixed) and MCNN+BeT(Fixed),
we use the same set of hyperparameters across all tasks. In particular, the MCNN-specific hyperpa-
rameter values are λ = 0.1 and 10% memories. We show an abltaion study of normalized scores with
varying number of memories (2.5%-80%) in Figure 14. We also show an ablation study with both
varying λ (0.1, 1.0, 10.0, 100.0) values and number of memories (2.5%, 5%, and 10%) in the 3D bar
charts of Figure 15. We also tabulate the highest value across all MCNN-specific hyperparameters
(obtained by evaluating on 20 trajectories) in the MCNN+MLP(Tuned) and MCNN+BeT(Tuned)
columns of Tables 2 and 3.
Implementation details for Figure 1: We run MCNN+MLP experiments on randomly sampled
subsets of the human and expert task datasets and report our performance normalized with that of
the D4RL BC scores from [9]. This means that for many points in Figure 1 we used a smaller set of
datapoints from a particular task for training an MCNN+MLP policy and yet performed better than
D4RL BC’s score on that task.
Discussion on computational costs: The computation cost of MCNN during inference is dominated
by the 1 nearest neighbors search among the M memories in an observation space Rd . From the
neural gas, we obtain a graph connecting memories. The search for the nearest memory is O(M d)
for the first observation. For every subsequent observation, we simply perform a nearby breadth-first
search starting from the previous memory. This is Θ(nearby search depth * d) in the average case.
Please note that the nearby search depth is kept small (1, 2, 3, 4). The search for the first memory can
also be further reduced to O(d log M ) with the K-D trees data structure. Alternatively, leveraging the
parallel processing power of GPUs, this search can be done very quickly (<1 ms) in practice even
without a graph and by simply searching amongst all memories for the closest memory.

Further, since the vanilla neural net is a component of MCNN, we are less efficient at in-
ference than the vanilla neural net component alone. But, MCNN is more efficient than baselines like
VINN and 1-NN since we only have M memories, and this value is set to 10% of the total number of
datapoints or lower. VINN and 1-NN have to perform nearest neighbors search on a much larger


                                                  20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


dataset than MCNN. Further VINN requires the top k neighbors (usually k=10) while we require
only the 1 nearest memory.

G    A DDITIONAL F IGURES AND D ETAILED R ESULTS TABLES
We tabulate all reward values from our previous bar charts in Table 2. We tabulate all corresponding
normalized scores obtained following the methodology in D4RL [9] in Table 3. We plot all the
ablation results for replacing neural gas memories with random memories for human and expert tasks
in Figure 13. We plot performance variation against number of memories (from 2.5% to 80%) for all
human tasks in Figure 14. We also plot a comparison of scores with varying λs (0.1, 1.0, 10.0, 100.0)
and varying number of memories (2.5%, 5%, and 10%) for each task in the 3D bar charts of Figure
15.


                                                 21
     Table 2: Comparison of returns (across 20 evaluation trajectories and 3 random seeds) between baselines, our reimplementation of BC, and our methods –
     MCNN+MLP, MCNN+BeT, and MCNN+Diff (see smaller table below) on the Adroit and CARLA domains. Here, we show both our MCNN results with the same
     fixed set of hyperparameters across all tasks (Fixed) and with hyperparameters tuned online (Tuned).

         Task Name                                                           Baselines                                                                                     Ours

                              D4RL BC         BeT-BC             1-NN                VINN             CQL-Sparse        Implicit BC    MLP-BC        MCNN + MLP       MCNN + MLP       MCNN + BeT        MCNN + BeT
                                [9]            [38]                                   [26]          [18] + 0/1 reward       [7]        (ReImpl.)     (Fixed Hypers)   (Tuned Hypers)   (Fixed Hypers)   (Tuned Hypers)
         pen-human-v1          1122            841 ± 60       1982 ± 227        1490 ± 152              377 ± 55        2586 ± 65      1845 ± 213     3285 ± 209       3405 ± 328       1050 ± 119       1089 ± 110
         pen-expert-v1          2633         1853 ± 117       3102 ± 275        3157 ± 88               671 ± 14             -         3194 ± 127     3947 ± 227       4051 ± 195       2033 ± 1.8       2103 ± 101
         pen-cloned-v1          1792         1348 ± 28        1902 ± 148        1909 ± 35                   -                -         1806 ± 72       2208 ± 82       2820 ± 119       1595 ± 15        1604 ± 12
         hammer-human-v1         -79          -189 ± 11          -66 ± 20        -232 ± 10             -241 ± 0.3       -132 ± 25       -11 ± 118      262 ± 107        262 ± 107        -130 ± 52        -130 ± 52
         hammer-expert-v1      16140         2731 ± 261       10069 ± 770      10551 ± 1010           11311 ± 502            -        13710 ± 2002    16027 ± 383      16387 ± 392      3605 ± 663       4417 ± 297
         hammer-cloned-v1       -170         -235 ± 3.9         -207 ± 17       -230 ± 7.8                  -                -          -232 ± 13      -233 ± 5.2        -155 ± 61      -229 ± 2.6       -228 ± 1.3
         relocate-human-v1      -6.4          -2.7 ± 1.6        -4.7 ± 0.4       -4.7 ± 0.0             -20 ± 0.4       -0.1 ± 2.1      -5.2 ± 1.7      -4.7 ± 0.8       -4.7 ± 0.8       8.2 ± 4.2        10 ± 6.8
         relocate-expert-v1     4289           490 ± 42       1095 ± 268        1283 ± 123            1910 ± 1168            -         4361 ± 55       4566 ± 47        4566 ± 47        558 ± 66         558 ± 66
         relocate-cloned-v1      -11          -4.9 ± 0.1        -8.5 ± 2.1       -9.0 ± 0.4                 -                -          -9.0 ± 0.4      -8.1 ± 0.4       -6.0 ± 0.4      -2.9 ± 2.1       -0.3 ± 1.3
         door-human-v1           -42          -54 ± 0.1         -25 ± 8.5        -39 ± 9.4              -66 ± 0.3        361 ± 67       -53 ± 2.3       -5.4 ± 15         9.0 ± 29       -54 ± 0.3        -53 ± 0.3
         door-expert-v1          969          560 ± 256        2716 ± 24        2760 ± 2.6             2731 ± 117            -         2798 ± 33       3033 ± 0.3       3035 ± 7.0       902 ± 50        1038 ± 141
         door-cloned-v1          -59          -59 ± 0.2         -59 ± 0.6        -59 ± 0.0                  -                -          -59 ± 0.3       -59 ± 0.3        -59 ± 0.9       -58 ± 0.1        -58 ± 0.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


         carla-lane-v0           325           327 ± 14         348 ± 30          297 ± 41                  -                -          358 ± 31        441 ± 35          466 ± 50       390 ± 2.7        390 ± 2.7
         carla-town-v0          -161               -           -458 ± 179       -315 ± 102                  -                -         -497 ± 128      -511 ± 210       -465 ± 215            -                -


22
         Task Name                Baseline                                  Ours

                                  Diff-BC                  MCNN + Diff              MCNN + Diff
                                    [44]                   (Fixed Hypers)          (Tuned Hypers)
         pen-human-v1          2021.41± 46.50              2188.03± 14.01      2345.40± 160.95
         pen-expert-v1         3194.86± 424.14             3516.77± 284.64     3568.63± 284.05
         pen-cloned-v1                 -                          -                   -
         hammer-human-v1        -159.85± 56.20              17.89± 128.08       130.28± 154.21
         hammer-expert-v1     14044.84± 121.54             16088.83± 67.96     16181.62± 88.87
         hammer-cloned-v1              -                          -                   -
         relocate-human-v1        -4.31± 1.70                -2.61± 1.70          0.78± 3.82
         relocate-expert-v1    4361.09± 12.72              4572.25± 15.27      4574.80± 16.96
         relocate-cloned-v1            -                          -                   -
         door-human-v1           121.77± 44.94              179.04± 57.27       197.25± 32.60
         door-expert-v1        2800.39± 11.16               3000.40± 3.23       3032.12 ± 1.47
         door-cloned-v1                -                          -                   -
         carla-lane-v0                 -                          -                   -
         carla-town-v0                 -                          -                   -
     Table 3: Comparison of normalized scores (across 20 evaluation trajectories and 3 random seeds) between baselines, our reimplementation of BC, and our methods –
     MCNN+MLP, MCNN+BeT, and MCNN+Diff (see smaller table below), on the Adroit and CARLA domains. Here, we show both our MCNN results with the same
     fixed set of hyperparameters across all tasks (Fixed) and with hyperparameters tuned online (Tuned).

         Task Name                                                             Baselines                                                                                    Ours

                              D4RL BC          BeT-BC            1-NN                  VINN          CQL-Sparse        Implicit BC      MLP-BC         MCNN + MLP       MCNN + MLP       MCNN + BeT        MCNN + BeT
                                [9]             [38]                                    [26]       [18] + 0/1 reward       [7]          (ReImpl.)      (Fixed Hypers)   (Tuned Hypers)   (Fixed Hypers)   (Tuned Hypers)
         pen-human-v1            34.4          25.0 ± 2.0    63.27 ± 7.63          46.77 ± 5.10      9.43 ± 1.86       83.53 ± 2.18     58.68 ± 7.14    107.0 ± 7.00    111.01 ± 11.00     32.0 ± 4.0        33.3 ± 3.7
         pen-expert-v1           85.1        58.95 ± 3.91    100.83 ± 9.23         102.68 ± 2.94    19.28 ± 0.48             -        103.94 ± 4.25    129.20 ± 7.63    132.70 ± 6.55    64.98 ± 0.06      67.34 ± 3.39
         pen-cloned-v1           56.9          42 ± 0.94     60.60 ± 4.96           60.81 ± 1.18           -                 -          57.36 ± 2.43    70.86 ± 2.75     91.38 ± 4.00     50.3 ± 0.52        50.6 ± 0.4
         hammer-human-v1          1.5        0.66 ± 0.087     1.60 ± 0.15           0.33 ± 0.08      0.26 ± 0.002       1.09 ± 0.19      2.02 ± 0.9     4.11 ± 0.82        4.11 ± 0.82     1.11 ± 0.4        1.11 ± 0.4
         hammer-expert-v1       125.6          23.0 ± 2.0    79.15 ± 5.89           82.84 ± 7.73    88.65 ± 3.84             -        107.01 ± 15.32   124.74 ± 2.93    127.49 ± 3.00    29.69 ± 5.07       35.9 ± 2.27
         hammer-cloned-v1        0.8         0.302 ± 0.03     0.52 ± 0.13           0.34 ± 0.06            -                 -           0.33 ± 0.10    0.32 ± 0.04       0.92 ± 0.47    0.353 ± 0.02       0.36 ± 0.01
         relocate-human-v1       0.0        0.089 ± 0.038     0.04 ± 0.01           0.04 ± 0.00     -0.315 ± 0.01       0.15 ± 0.05      0.03 ± 0.04     0.04 ± 0.02      0.04 ± 0.02    0.345 ± 0.10      0.394 ± 0.16
         relocate-expert-v1     101.3          11.7 ± 1.     25.97 ± 6.33           30.40 ± 2.89    45.19 ± 27.54            -           103. ± 1.3    107.84 ± 1.10    107.84 ± 1.10    13.32 ± 1.56      13.32 ± 1.56
         relocate-cloned-v1      -0.1       0.036 ± 0.003     -0.05 ± 0.05          -0.06 ± 0.01           -                 -          -0.06 ± 0.01    -0.04 ± 0.01      0.01 ± 0.01    0.084 ± 0.05      0.145 ± 0.03
         door-human-v1           0.5        0.096 ± 0.002     1.07 ± 0.29           0.61 ± 0.32     -0.336 ± 0.01      14.22 ± 2.28      0.13 ± 0.08     1.74 ± 0.51      2.23 ± 1.00    0.098 ± 0.01       0.11 ± 0.01
         door-expert-v1         34.9          20.98 ± 8.7     94.39 ± 0.81          95.88 ± 0.09      94.9 ± 4.0             -           97.2 ± 1.13   105.18 ± 0.01    105.26 ± 0.24     32.62 ± 1.7       37.27 ± 4.8
         door-cloned-v1          -0.1       -0.068 ± 0.007    -0.08 ± 0.02          -0.07 ± 0.00           -                 -          -0.10 ± 0.01    -0.10 ± 0.01      -0.07 ± 0.03   -0.05 ± 0.005     -0.05 ± 0.005
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


         carla-lane-v0          31.8          32.0 ± 1.4      34.03 ± 2.95          29.09 ± 3.96           -                 -          35.03 ± 3.00    43.14 ± 3.40     45.59 ± 4.90    38.13 ± 0.26       38.2 ± 0.26
         carla-town-v0           -1.8               -        -13.45 ± 7.00          -7.85 ± 4.00           -                 -         -14.95 ± 5.00   -15.52 ± 8.20     -13.70 ± 8.40          -                 -


23
         Task Name               Baseline                            Ours

                                 Diff-BC            MCNN + Diff          MCNN + Diff
                                  [44]              (Fixed Hypers)      (Tuned Hypers)
         pen-human-v1          64.59 ± 1.56           70.18 ± 0.47           75.46 ± 5.4
         pen-expert-v1        103.96 ± 14.23         114.76 ± 9.55          116.5 ± 9.53
         pen-cloned-v1               -                      -                      -
         hammer-human-v1        0.88 ± 0.43           2.24 ± 0.98             3.1 ± 1.18
         hammer-expert-v1     109.57 ± 0.93          125.21 ± 0.52          125.92 ± 0.68
         hammer-cloned-v1            -                      -                      -
         relocate-human-v1      0.05 ± 0.04           0.09 ± 0.04            0.17 ± 0.09
         relocate-expert-v1    103.0 ± 0.3           107.98 ± 0.36          108.04 ± 0.4
         relocate-cloned-v1          -                      -                      -
         door-human-v1          6.07 ± 1.53           8.02 ± 1.95            8.64 ± 1.11
         door-expert-v1        97.27 ± 0.38          104.08 ± 0.11          105.16 ± 0.05
         door-cloned-v1              -                      -                      -
         carla-lane-v0               -                      -                      -
         carla-town-v0               -                      -                      -
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 13: Neural Gas vs Random Memories in MCNN+MLP: Comparison of returns (across 20 eval
trajectories) between our method with neural-gas-based memories and randomly chosen memories. This shows
that MCNN+MLP performs better with neural gas memories. We attribute this to the spread-out nature of neural
gas memories that reduces the distance to the most isolated state, improving imitation performance.


Figure 14: Number of Memories in MCNN+MLP: Comparison of returns (across 20 evaluation trajectories)
with our method (MCNN+MLP) using 2.5% of the dataset as memories up to 80% of the dataset as memories.
We find a "sweet spot" for num memories at 10-20%. We also see the expected decrease to 1-NN performance
with as num memories increases to 100%.


                                                    24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 15: Bar chart of returns for our method against various combinations of λ and memories for
each task. Each of the 12 bars in each of the 14 subfigures represents the average performance across
20 evaluation trajectories and three seeds. We notice that the best performance can be obtained for λ
values at the middle, i.e., λ ∈ {0.1, 1.0}, for any number of memories. This is where our method can
interpolate, by design, between the nearest memories and vanilla BC. These plots also demonstrate
that by training MCNNs on offline data for a few sets of hyperparameters and simply choosing
the best hyperparameter with limited online interaction, we can obtain significant improvements in
performance.


                                                 25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 1 values: We provide the mean and standard deviation of the return values for various number
of demos for various tasks (across various runs) that were in the scatter plot in Figure 1 in Tables 4
and 5. Other points plotted in Figure 1 include the return values (across various runs) for all 9 tasks
at the full dataset sizes (25 demos for Adroit human tasks, 5000 for Adroit expert tasks, 400 for the
CARLA task) as given in Table 2.

Table 4: Returns with various methods on pen-expert-v1 and door-expert-v1 for subsampled and
full datasets (where NA = Not Available). These values represent the means and standard deviations
obtained from various points (corresponding to various runs) in the scatter plot in Figure 1.

                                                                 Number of demonstrations
  Task       Method
                              100 demos        500 demos        1000 demos   2000 demos         4000 demos         5000 demos
                                                                                                                  (full dataset)
 pen-        MCNN+MLP          2724.61         2931.19           2991.88        3016.65          3025.47              3035
 expert-v1                     ± 138.82         ± 31.84          ± 18.31         ± 9.83           ± 3.31              ± 7.0
             D4RL BC                                                NA                                                969
 door-       MCNN+MLP            NA            3711.79           3807.97        3857.74          3933.75              4051
 expert-v1   MCNN+MLP                            ± 31.6           ± 5.58        ± 29.16          ± 41.83              ± 195
             D4RL BC                                                 NA                                               2633


Table 5: Returns with various methods on pen-human-v1 and hammer-human-v1 for subsampled
and full datasets (where NA = Not Available). These values represent the means and standard
deviations obtained from various points (corresponding to various runs) in the scatter plot in Figure 1.

                                                                     Number of demonstrations
  Task        Method
                                  5 demos                 10 demos            15 demos              20 demos               25 demos
                                                                                                                         (full dataset)
 pen-         MCNN+MLP        2169.45 ± 189.76       2542.62 ± 128.38   2673.36 ± 100.93         2988.21 ± 155.0          3405 ± 328
 human-v1     D4RL BC                                                NA                                                      1122
 hammer-      MCNN+MLP          25.29 ± 5.57           36.19 ± 3.27      113.73 ± 3.08            154.24 ± 8.01          253.57 ± 3.26
 human-v1     D4RL BC                                                NA                                                       -79



Oversampling memories: We also compare MCNN+MLP with a vanilla MLP-BC algorithm that
oversamples the memories which comprise 10% of the dataset and report results in Table 6. It can
be clearly seen that MCNN+MLP significantly outperforms the oversampled MLP-BC for various
amounts of oversampling. Moreover, MLP+BC with oversampling performs similar to vanilla
MLP+BC.

Table 6: Comparison of MCNN+MLP with vanilla MLP-BC with memories (or codebook entries)
oversampled by various amounts. Here, we use ’N x sampled’ to denote that each memory was
sampled N times in each training epoch.

     Task Name                                      Baselines                                                     Ours

                                                    MLP-BC                                       MCNN + MLP            MCNN + MLP

                            normal        2x sampled        3x sampled      6x sampled           (Fixed Hypers)        (Tuned Hypers)
     pen-human-v1          1845 ± 213        2080.13          2093.24        2114.11               3285 ± 209            3405 ± 328
     pen-expert-v1         3194 ± 127        3106.64          3136.44        3285.47               3947 ± 227            4051 ± 195
     hammer-human-v1        -11 ± 118         -10.86           -10.86          -4.33                262 ± 107             262 ± 107
     hammer-expert-v1     13710 ± 2002      13447.58         13447.58        13970.34             16027 ± 383            16387 ± 392
     relocate-human-v1      -5.2 ± 1.7         -5.95            -5.94          -5.66                -4.7 ± 0.8            -4.7 ± 0.8
     relocate-expert-v1    4361 ± 55         4403.49          4403.49        4445.89               4566 ± 47              4566 ± 47
     door-human-v1           -53 ± 23         -48.64           -46.79          -35.6                -5.4 ± 15              9.0 ± 29
     door-expert-v1        2798 ± 33         2821.83           2851.2        2909.94               3033 ± 0.3             3035 ± 7


                                                                 26
