Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


N ON - ERGODICITY IN REINFORCEMENT LEARNING :
ROBUSTNESS VIA ERGODICITY TRANSFORMATIONS

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT

         Envisioned application areas for reinforcement learning (RL) include autonomous
         driving, precision agriculture, and finance, which all require RL agents to make
         decisions in the real world. A significant challenge hindering the adoption of RL
         methods in these domains is the non-robustness of conventional algorithms. In
         this paper, we argue that a fundamental issue contributing to this lack of robust-
         ness lies in the focus on the expected value of the return as the sole “correct”
         optimization objective. The expected value is the average over the statistical en-
         semble of infinitely many trajectories. For non-ergodic returns, this average differs
         from the average over a single but infinitely long trajectory. Consequently, opti-
         mizing the expected value can lead to policies that yield exceptionally high returns
         with probability zero but almost surely result in catastrophic outcomes. This prob-
         lem can be circumvented by transforming the time series of collected returns into
         one with ergodic increments. This transformation enables learning robust policies
         by optimizing the long-term return for individual agents rather than the average
         across infinitely many trajectories. We propose an algorithm for learning ergodic-
         ity transformations from data and demonstrate its effectiveness in an instructive,
         non-ergodic environment and on standard RL benchmarks.



1   I NTRODUCTION

Reinforcement learning (RL) has experienced remarkable progress in recent years, particularly
within virtual environments (Mnih et al., 2015; Silver et al., 2017; Duan et al., 2016; Vinyals et al.,
2019). However, the seamless transition of RL methods to real-world applications lags behind, pri-
marily due to the non-robust nature of conventional RL approaches (Amodei et al., 2016; Leike
et al., 2017; Russell et al., 2015). In addressing this issue, researchers have explored a spectrum
of methods from risk-sensitive RL (Prashanth et al., 2022) to robust (worst-case) RL (Pinto et al.,
2017). In this paper, we take a step back and look at the optimization objective in RL and how it
may, by design, result in non-robust policies. Traditional RL literature, including influential refer-
ences and introductory textbooks such as Sutton & Barto (2018); Bertsekas (2019); Powell (2021),
typically frames the RL problem as maximizing the expected return, i.e., the expected value of the
sum of rewards collected throughout a trajectory. Intuitively, at each time step, an agent shall choose
an action that maximizes the return it can expect when choosing this action and following the opti-
mal policy from then onward. While this indeed seems intuitive, it becomes problematic when the
returns are non-ergodic. When the returns are non-ergodic, the average over many trajectories—
which resembles an expected value—differs from the average along one long trajectory. We find
non-ergodic returns in various contexts, as we discuss in more detail in section 6. One example
are settings in which we have “absorbing barriers,” i.e., states, from which there is no return. Such
as when an autonomous car crashes in an accident. Suppose an autonomous car learns a driving
policy through RL. At deployment time, when we have a passenger in the car, it does not matter to
the passenger whether the policy of the autonomous car receives a high return when averaging over
multiple trajectories—a high ensemble-average return could also result from half of the journeys
reaching the destination very fast and half crashing and never reaching it. The return in a single
instance of a long journey would be negligible if a crash occurred somewhere along the way—and
this is the return that would matter to the individual. Thus, the time average would be the better
choice for an optimization objective in such scenarios.


                                                  1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Optimizing the time average might require developing entirely new RL algorithms. Nevertheless,
existing RL algorithms have demonstrated remarkable performance by optimizing expected returns.
An alternative is to find a suitable transformation. This is related to human decision-making. In
economics and game theory, researchers have found that humans typically do not optimize expected
monetary returns (Bernoulli, 1954), which would correspond to optimizing across a statistical en-
semble. Instead, they seem to optimize along individual time trajectories, corresponding to different
behavioral protocols unless monetary returns are state-independent, i.e., independent of the current
wealth level. Optimization along time trajectories can be implemented by a state-dependent trans-
formation of monetary returns chosen so as to make changes in the transformed quantity ergodic.
Optimizing expected values of these changes then also optimizes long-term growth along an indi-
vidual trajectory. As for the autonomous car, so for the human, it appears more natural to care about
long-term performance. For the individual person, it typically does not matter whether a particular
investment pays off when averaged over a statistical ensemble—instead, what matters is whether or
not investing according to some protocol pays off in the long run in the single trajectory.
Motivated by economics, in particular, by utility (Bernoulli, 1954) and prospect (Kahneman & Tver-
sky, 1997) theory, the field of risk-sensitive RL (Prashanth et al., 2022) has emerged. In most of
risk-sensitive RL, e.g., algorithms using an entropic risk measure, the agents try to optimize the
expected value of transformed returns. By learning with transformed returns, the agents can achieve
higher performance with lower variance. Utility and prospect theory do not consider potential non-
ergodicity. Instead, these theories rely on psychological arguments to argue that some humans are
more “risk-averse” than others. Peters & Adamou (2018) have shown how acknowledging non-
ergodicity and that humans are more likely to optimize the long-term return than an average over an
ensemble of infinitely many trajectories can recover widespread transformations used in utility the-
ory. Empirical research (Meder et al., 2021; Vanhoyweghen et al., 2022) has further shown that this
treatment can better predict actual human behavior. The ergodicity perspective does not rely on psy-
chology as an explanation; instead, it explains psychological observations. It is, in this sense, more
fundamental and, as a result, more general, namely applicable to cases where psychology cannot be
invoked, particularly to inanimate optimizers such as machines devoid of a psyche.
Inspired by Peters & Adamou (2018), we analyze for which dynamics a popular transformation from
risk-sensitive RL optimizes the long-term return. Further, we propose an algorithm for learning a
suitable transformation when the reward function is unknown, which is the typical setting in RL.
Contributions. In this paper, we make the following contributions:
       • We illustrate and assess the impact of non-ergodic returns on RL algorithm policies through
         an intuitive example. This showcases the implications of optimizing for the expected value
         in non-ergodic settings—which we commonly encounter in RL problems—and it makes a
         case for the need for an ergodicity transformation.
       • We propose a transformation that can convert a trajectory of returns into a trajectory with
         ergodic increments. This enables off-the-shelf RL algorithms to optimize their long-term
         return instead of the conventional expected value, resulting in more robust policies without
         the need to develop novel RL algorithms.
       • We demonstrate the performance of this transformation in an intuitive example and, as a
         proof-of-concept, on standard RL benchmarks. In particular, we show that our transforma-
         tion indeed yields more robust policies when returns are non-ergodic.

2   P ROBLEM SETTING
We consider a standard RL setting in which an agent with states s ∈ S ⊆ Rn in the state space S
and actions a ∈ A ⊆ Rm in the action space A shall learn a policy π : S → A. Its performance
is measured by an unknown reward function r : S × A → R. The agent’s goal is to maximize the
accumulated rewards r(tk ) it receives during a trajectory, i.e., the return R(T ) at tk = T ,
                                                  XT
                                        R(T ) =        r(τk ),                                 (1)
                                                 τk =0
where r(tk ) := r(s(tk ), a(tk )). For this, the agent interacts with its environment by selecting ac-
tions, receiving rewards, and utilizing this feedback to learn an optimal policy. The RL problem is in-


                                                  2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


herently stochastic, as it involves learning from finite samples, often within stochastic environments
and with potentially stochastic policies. In standard RL, we, therefore, typically aim at maximizing
the expected value of equation 1 (cf. the “reward hypothesis” stated by (Sutton & Barto, 2018, p. 53))
                                                X
                                              " T          #
                                            E        r(τk ) .                                      (2)
                                                τk =0

Nonetheless, this conventional approach may encounter challenges when the dynamics are non-
ergodic. To illustrate this point, we consider an instructive example introduced by Peters (2019).

2.1   I LLUSTRATIVE EXAMPLE

Imagine an agent starting with an initial reward of
r(t0 ) = 100 is offered the following game. We toss
                                                                          1020
a (fair) coin. If it comes up heads, the agent wins
50 % of its current return. If it comes up tails, the


                                                                R(tk )
                                                                           100
agent loses 40 %. Mathematically, this translates to
                 0.5R(tk − 1)        if η = 1,                           10−20
      r(tk ) =
                 −0.4R(tk − 1)       otherwise,
                                                                                 0   200   400        600   800 1,000
where η is a Bernoulli random variable with equal
probability for both outcomes.                                                                   tk

When analyzing the game dynamics, we find that the
agent receives an expected reward r(tk ) equal to 5 %    Figure 1: Simulation of the coin toss exper-
of its current return. Consequently, the expected re-    iment. We simulate the game for 1000 time
turn for any trajectory length T appears favorable,      steps and 10 agents. The dashed red horizon-
growing exponentially with T :                           tal line marks the initial reward of 100, and
                                      T                  the dashed blue ascending line the expected
                E[R(T )] = 100 · 1.05 .
                                                         value. After 1000 time steps, all agents end
However, when we simulate the game for ten agents up with a lower return than they started with
and 1000 time steps, we find that all of them end up (note the logarithmic scaling of the y-axis).
having a return of almost zero (see figure 1). The
reason is that the coin toss game is non-ergodic. If
the dynamics of a stochastic process are non-ergodic, the average over infinitely many samples may
be arbitrarily different from the average over a single but infinitely long trajectory. Translated to the
coin toss example, if we simulate infinitely many trajectories of the game, each of finite duration
T , we obtain a small set of agents that end up exponentially “rich” so that averaging over all of
them, i.e., taking the expected value, yields 100 · 1.05T . However, if we increase the duration,
T → ∞, the set of agents ending up exponentially rich shrinks exponentially to measure zero. That
is, if we only simulate one agent for T → ∞ and average over time, we receive a time average
             PT
limT →∞ T1 τk =0 r(τk ) = 0 almost surely. A summary of the statistical properties of the coin-toss
game can be found in (Hulme et al., 2023, Appendix).
To define ergodicity properly and connect it explicitly to RL, let us abstract from the coin-toss
example and consider an arbitrary discrete-time stochastic process X. We can now generate multiple
realizations of this process, in the example, by playing the game multiple times. Let X(j) (tk )
denote the value of realization j at time step tk . The process X is ergodic if, for any time step tk
and realization i,
                      1 X (j)          1 X (i)
                             N                           T
                   lim   X (tk ) = lim    X (τk ) almost surely.                                                   (3)
                  N→∞ N           T →∞ T
                            j=1                         τk =1

The left hand side is E[X(tk )], the expected value of X at time tk . The right-hand side is the time
average of realization i. For an ergodic process, these averages are equal. In the RL setting, we are
interested in whether or not the rewards r(tk ) are ergodic:

                                       1 X
                                          T
                                                        R(T )
                   E[r(tk )] = lim         r(τk ) = lim                          almost surely.                    (4)
                                  T →∞ T           T →∞ T
                                        τk =1


                                                    3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


For ergodic rewards, maximizing the expected value at each step corresponds to maximizing the
long-term growth rate of the return for any given realization. However, as the coin-toss example
demonstrates, when rewards are non-ergodic, optimizing the expected value may yield policies with
negative long-term growth rate.

2.2   S OLVING THE ERGODICITY PROBLEM

Redefining the optimization objective of RL algorithms may require a complete redesign. Alter-
natively, we can take existing algorithms and modify the returns to make their increments ergodic.
Peters & Adamou (2018) have shown, in a continuous-time setting, that for a broad class of stochas-
tic processes, we can find transformations h(R) such that their increments ∆h are ergodic and follow
a standard Brownian motion. In our discrete-time setting, this translates to
                               h(R(tk + 1)) = h(R(tk )) + µ + σv(tk ),                                  (5)
with drift µ, volatility σ, and standard normal random variable v(tk ). For our purposes, where we
want to learn a transformation h from data instead of deriving it analytically as Peters & Adamou
(2018), it even suffices if v(tk ) has finite variance, i.e., it does not have to be normally distributed.
In the following, we assess the performance of standard RL algorithms in the coin toss game, with
and without a transformation h. We then propose an algorithm for learning a transformation h with
ergodic increments and relate our findings to risk-sensitive RL.

3     RL WITH NON - ERGODIC DYNAMICS
For the coin toss example, we can easily verify that the dynamics are non-ergodic. Optimizing the
expected value then yields a “policy” in which the agent decides to play the game, leading to ruin
in the long run almost surely. While standard RL algorithms aim at optimizing the expected value,
they need to approximate it from finitely many samples. Thus, we evaluate whether a standard RL
algorithm indeed proposes a detrimental policy in this section and discuss how we can transform the
returns to prevent this. In the version presented in the previous section, the coin toss game offers the
agent a binary decision: either play or not. Here, we make the game slightly more challenging by
letting the agent decide how much of its current return (“wealth”) it invests at each time step. Thus,
we have a continuous variable F ∈ [0, 1] and the dynamics for the reward are
                                          0.5FR(tk − 1)        if η = 1,
                               r(tk ) =
                                          −0.4FR(tk − 1)       otherwise.
We use the popular proximal policy optimization (PPO) algorithm (Schulman et al., 2017), leverag-
ing the implementation provided by Raffin et al. (2021) without changing any hyperparameters, to
learn a policy. Having trained a policy for 1 × 105 episodes, we execute it 100 times for 1000 time
steps and show the first ten trajectories in figure 2a. We see that all ten agents end up with a return
lower than the initial reward of 100. While this could still be caused by a bad choice of agents, it
is confirmed by computing statistics over all 100 trajectories. When computing the median of the
return after 1000 time steps, we obtain 2.5 × 10−4 , i.e., the average agent ends up with a return close
to zero. The mean over all agent yields 115. That is, a small subset of agents obtains a high return.
This confirms the discussion from the previous section. Even if it only approximates the expected
value, PPO does learn a policy that leads to ruin for most agents.
One possibility for coping with non-ergodic dynamics is finding a suitable transformation. For the
coin toss game, where the dynamics are relatively straightforward and the outcomes are fully known,
we can analytically identify an appropriate transformation: the logarithm (Hulme et al., 2023, Ap-
pendix). We subsequently train the PPO algorithm once more with the logarithmic transformation.
Specifically, we redefine the rewards as r̃(tk ) = log(R(tk )) − log(R(tk−1 )). As before, we run
100 experiments for 1000 time steps each and show the first ten trajectories in figure 2b. We see
that all agents end up with a significantly higher return compared to the initial reward. A statistical
analysis confirms this observation, yielding a median return of 5645 and a mean of 15 883. Both
values substantially surpass those obtained by the agents trained with untransformed returns.
This evaluation underscores that standard RL algorithms may inadvertently learn policies leading
to unfavorable outcomes for most agents when dealing with non-ergodic dynamics. Furthermore, it
demonstrates that an appropriate transformation can mitigate this.


                                                    4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


              105
                                                                     104


    R(tk )
                                                                     103
             10−2
                                                                     102

             10−9                                                    101
                    0      200    400        600   800   1,000             0    200    400        600   800   1,000
                                        tk                                                   tk
                    (a) Without transformation.                                (b) With transformation.

Figure 2: Learning bet strategies for the adapted coin toss game. Without transformation, most
agents end up losing, while they end up winning with transformation.


Remark 1. The quantitative results clearly differ between runs, as environment and training process
are stochastic. Nevertheless, the qualitative results are consistent: the training with transformed
returns results in better performance. With transformed returns, the agents sometimes get trapped
in local optima with F = 0, which still results in significantly higher returns for the average agent.

4       L EARNING AN ERGODICITY TRANSFORMATION
In scenarios like the coin toss game, due to the perfect information of future returns, it is possible
to derive a suitable transformation analytically—Peters & Adamou (2018) provide a more detailed
discussion for more general dynamics. However, the true power of reinforcement learning (RL) lies
in its ability to handle complex environments for which we lack accurate analytical expressions.
Therefore, it is desirable to learn transformations directly from data.
The central characteristic of the transformation is that it should render the increments of the trans-
formed return ergodic. Ideally, we aim for a transformation whose increments are independent and
identically distributed (i.i.d.). However, determining this i.i.d. property with a high degree of accu-
racy, especially from real-world data, can be challenging. Instead, we approximate the behavior of
the transform to that of a variance-stabilizing transform.
Definition 1 (Bartlett (1947)). A variance stabilizing transform is defined as
                                                            Zx
                                                                   1
                                                   h(x) =        p     du,
                                                                  v(u)
                                                            0

with variance function v(u) describing the variance of a random variable as a function of its mean.

A variance stabilizing transform aims to transform a given time series into one with constant vari-
ance, independent of the mean (Bartlett, 1947). This is a generalization of our desired i.i.d. property
as if the transformation h(R(tk )) has i.i.d. increments, then the increments also have constant vari-
ance, independent of the mean. Thus, our objective becomes finding a variance stabilizing transform
following definition 1. In our case, as we want to stabilize the variance of the increments, we adapt
the original definition of the variance function v(u) in definition 1 to
                                     v(u) = Var[R(tk+1 ) − R(tk ) | R(tk ) = u].
This variance function represents the variance of the following increment as a function of the current
transformed return.
The approach for estimating v(u) from data is inspired by the additivity and variance stabiliza-
tion method for regression (Tibshirani, 1988). Estimating v(u) first involves plotting R(tk ) against
log((R(tk+1 ) − R(tk ) − µ^ )2 ), with µ
                                       ^ the empirical mean of the increments. In our setting, the mean
of the increments of the original untransformed process may not be constant throughout a trajectory.
Hence, assuming a constant µ    ^ results in small values having an over-estimated variance and large
values having an under-estimated variance. The straightforward way to fix this would be to estimate
µ(u) as a function of u; however, this introduces a further estimation problem. Instead, we can


                                                                 5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


estimate the second moment function and use this as a proxy for the variance function,
                           µ2 (u) = E[(R(tk+1 ) − R(tk ))2 | R(tk ) = u].
In the supplementary material, we show that µ2 (u) ∝ v(u), which is satisfactory for our needs as if
the process R(tk ) has i.i.d. increments, then so will the process a · R(tk ) for any a ∈ R.
To estimate the function log(µ2 (u)) we plot R(tk ) against log((R(tk+1 ) − R(tk ))2 ). Then, fitting
a curve represents taking the expected value. We use the locally estimated scatter-plot smoothing
(LOESS) method (Cleveland, 1979). The reason behind estimating log(µ2 (u)) is that this guaran-
tees µ2 (u) always to be positive, which is vital as the variance stabilizing transform requires us to
take the square root. This approach follows the reasoning by Tibshirani (1988). We provide a Python
implementation of the transformation and the coin toss example in the supplementary material.
Having derived this transformation, we apply it to
the coin toss game. We first collect a return trajec-                107
tory with F = 1. Based on this trajectory, we learn
an ergodicity transformation following the steps de-


                                                            R(tk )
scribed in this section. Then, we again train a PPO                  104
agent but feed it the increments of transformed re-
turns as previously with the logarithmic transforma-                 101
tion. As before, we execute the learned policy 100
times for 1000 time steps each and show rollouts                           0   200   400        600   800 1,000
for the first ten agents in figure 3. Also with this                                       tk
transformation, most agents end up learning winning
strategies. The statistics confirm this: across all 100   Figure 3: Learning bet strategies for the
agents, we have a median return of around 17 517          adapted coin toss game with learned transfor-
and an average return of around 956 884. Thus, we         mation. Similar to the logarithm, also with
conclude that we can learn a suitable transformation      the learned transformation, the majority of
from data, enabling PPO to learn a policy that bene-      the agents ends up winning.
fits individual agents in the long run.

5   R ISK - SENSITIVE RL
The ergodicity transformation serves as a means for RL agents to optimize the long-term perfor-
mance of individual returns, enabling the learning of robust policies, as demonstrated in figure 3.
Another approach to improving the robustness of RL algorithms is through risk-sensitive RL. While
risk-sensitive RL is not motivated by ergodicity, it also proposes transforming returns. Inspired by
Peters & Adamou (2018), we can analyze these transformations and determine under which dynam-
ics they yield transformed returns with ergodic increments. This analysis allows us to gain insights
into which type of transformation may offer robust performance in which settings.
Here, we focus on the exponential transformation,
                                         hrs (R) := β exp(βR),
where β ∈ R \ {0} is a hyperparameter with β < 0 the “risk-averse”, and β > 0 “risk-seeking” case.
For the sake of clarity, we perform our analysis in continuous time. We assume that the return
follows an arbitrary Itô process
                                     dR = f(R) dt + g(R) dW(t),                                               (6)
where f(R) and g(R) are arbitrary functions of R and W(t) is a Wiener process. This captures a
large class of stochastic processes, as both f and g can be nonlinear and even stochastic. We further
assume that the risk-sensitive transformation hrs extracts an ergodic observable from equation 6 such
that its increments follow a Brownian motion, i.e., the continuous-time version of equation 5:
                                       dhrs = µ dt + σ dW(t).                                                 (7)
As we know hrs , we now seek to find f and g for which equation 7 holds.
Following Itô’s lemma (Itô, 1944), we can write dR as
                                             1 2 ∂2 R

                              ∂R      ∂R                         ∂R
                    dR =         +µ       + σ        2
                                                         dt + σ      dW(t).                                   (8)
                              ∂t     ∂hrs 2 ∂hrs                ∂hrs

                                                   6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                              ln( hrs )
As we can invert hrs (R) such that R(hrs ) = ββ and since the inverse is twice differentiable, we
can insert it into equation 8 and obtain
                                  1 σ2

                            µ                      σ
                  dR =          −          dt +         dW(t)
                          βhrs 2 βh2rs           βhrs
                                                 σ2

                               µ         1                          σ
                  dR =                 −                    dt + 2        dW(t).               (9)
                          β2 exp(βR) 2 β3 exp(2βR)              β exp(βR)
This equation provides valuable insights into the role of β. Specifically, it highlights that the volatil-
ity term (the coefficient of dW(t)) is always positive, regardless of the sign of β. However, the drift
term (the coefficient of dt) depends on the sign of β. For β < 0, the drift term is positive, while for
β > 0, it starts negative when β is small and then turns positive as β increases.
From an ergodicity perspective, the risk-averse variant with β < 0 is suitable when equation 9 ex-
hibits a positive drift, while the risk-seeking variant with β > 0 is more appropriate when equation 9
has a negative drift. This aligns with intuitive reasoning: when the drift is negative, there is limited
gain from caution, and one might choose to go all in and hope for luck. This is also the case when
the drift is too small to outweigh the volatility.
The differential dynamics in equation 9 have a closed-form solution. As the derivations are relatively
lengthy, we defer them to the appendix, and here provide directly the solution:
                                       1    σ  1  µ        β
                                Rt =     ln   + ln t + Wt + .                                        (10)
                                       β    β  β  σ        σ
The obtained return dynamics are logarithmic in time. Logarithmic returns (or regrets) are common
in the RL literature. Consider a scenario where a robot arm must reach a set point, and the reward
is defined as the negative distance to that set point. Initially, rapid progress can be made by moving
quickly in the roughly correct direction. As the robot gets closer, the movement becomes more
fine-grained and slower, resulting in slower progress. By using an exponential transformation, we
counteract this phenomenon, ensuring that all time steps contribute equally to the return.
We next apply the exponential transformation to the coin-toss game and test both the “risk-averse”
and the “risk-seeking” setting. For the risk-seeking setting (β > 0), we quickly run into numerical
problems. The coin-toss problem has itself exponential dynamics, and thus, returns can get large.
Exponentiating those again lets us reach the limits of machine precision. For the risk-averse setting
(β < 0), we consistently learn constant policies with F = 0. While this is still better than the policies
standard PPO learned, it cannot compete with the results from figure 3.
This outcome is not surprising. From an ergodicity perspective, the exponential transformation is
only suitable if the dynamics are logarithmic. The dynamics of the coin-toss game are exponential,
which is precisely the inverse behavior. Thus, we would not expect the transformation to yield good
policies, as is confirmed by our experiments.

6    E RGODICITY IN RL AND RELATED WORK
The coin-toss game is an excellent example to illustrate the problem of maximizing the expected
value of non-ergodic rewards. When maximizing non-ergodic rewards, we may end up with a policy
that receives an arbitrarily high return with probability zero but leads to failure almost surely. Also
in less extreme cases, the expected value prefers risky policies if their return in case of success out-
weighs the failure cases. This results in learning non-robust policies, a behavior frequently observed
in standard RL algorithms (Amodei et al., 2016; Leike et al., 2017; Russell et al., 2015).
Non-ergodicity is not unique to the coin-toss game. Peters & Klein (2013) have shown that geo-
metric Brownian motion (GBM) is a non-ergodic stochastic process. GBM is commonly used to
model economic processes, a domain where RL algorithms are increasingly applied (Charpentier
et al., 2021; Zheng et al., 2022). Thus, especially in economics, ergodicity should not simply be
assumed. Nevertheless, the example of GBM is also informative for other applications. Generally,
RL is most interesting when the environment dynamics are too complex to model, i.e., we usually
deal with nonlinear dynamics. If already a linear stochastic process such as GBM is non-ergodic,
we cannot assume ergodicity for the general dynamics we typically consider in RL.


                                                    7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Another way of “ergodicity-breaking” is often motivated using the example of Russian roulette
(Ornstein, 1973). When multiple people play Russian roulette for one round each, and their average
outcome is considered, the probability of death is one in six. However, if a single person plays the
game infinitely many times, that person will eventually die with probability one. In the context of
RL, this is akin to the presence of absorbing barriers or safety thresholds that an agent must not
cross. Particularly in RL applications where the consequences of failure can be catastrophic, such
as in autonomous driving (Brunke et al., 2022), these safety thresholds become vital.
Consequently, in the literature on Markov decision processes (MDPs), we find work that argues
about the (non-)ergodicity of MDPs, see, for instance, (Sutton & Barto, 2018, Ch. 10) or (Puterman,
2014, Ch. 8). Therein, the notion of ergodicity is mainly used to describe MDPs in which every state
will be visited eventually. Following this notion, there has been work within the RL community that
provides guarantees while explicitly assuming ergodicity (Pesquerel & Maillard, 2022; Ok et al.,
2018; Agarwal et al., 2022) or by guaranteeing to avoid any states within an “absorbing” barrier,
i.e., only exploring an ergodic sub-MDP (Turchetta et al., 2016; Heim et al., 2020). For Q-learning,
Majeed & Hutter (2018) have shown convergence even for non-ergodic and non-MDP processes.
Nevertheless, none of these works, as a consequence of non-ergodicity, question the use of the
expectation operator in the objective function.
In this paper, we have proposed to transform returns to deal with non-ergodic rewards. In the pre-
vious section, we have shown how a popular transformation from risk-sensitive RL (Mihatsch &
Neuneier, 2002; Shen et al., 2014; Fei et al., 2021; Noorani & Baras, 2021; Noorani et al., 2022;
Prashanth et al., 2022) can be motivated from an ergodicity perspective. Reward-weighted regres-
sion (Peters & Schaal, 2007; 2008; Wierstra et al., 2008; Abdolmaleki et al., 2018; Peng et al., 2019)
also proposes to use transformations, but the transformations are typically justified using intuitive
arguments instead of from an ergodicity perspective. Interestingly, most existing work also uses an
exponential transformation, which is the cornerstone of risk-sensitive control. Thus, the analysis we
have done for risk-sensitive RL also applies to reward-weighted regression.
Another approach that optimizes transformed returns is Bayesian optimization for iterative learn-
ing (BOIL) (Nguyen et al., 2020). BOIL is developed for hyperparameter optimization. While
this setting is different from the one we consider, we show in the supplementary material that the
transformation used in BOIL can be replaced with ours, leading to similar or better results.
Through the ergodicity transformation, we seek to optimize the long-term performance of RL agents.
Improving the long-term performance of RL agents in continuous tasks is also the goal of average
reward RL. The idea of optimizing the average reward criterion originated in dynamic programming
(Howard, 1960; Blackwell, 1962; Veinott, 1966), and has already in the early days of RL been taken
up to develop various algorithms, see, for instance, the survey by Mahadevan (1996). Also in recent
years, the average reward criterion has been used for novel RL algorithms (Zhang & Ross, 2021;
Wei et al., 2020; 2022). In average reward RL, we still take the expected value of the reward function
and let time go to infinity. Were the reward function ergodic, it would not matter whether we first
take the expected value or first let time go to infinity. However, for a non-ergodic function, it does.
In average reward RL, we first take the expected value. For the coin-toss game, that would yield
an optimization criterion that grows exponentially while the set of agents that obtain a return larger
than zero shrinks to a set of measure zero as time goes to infinity. Thus, average reward RL may fall
into the same trap as conventional RL when dealing with non-ergodic reward functions.



7   P ROOF - OF - CONCEPT

The coin-toss game, while illustrative, represents a simplified scenario. To establish the broader
applicability of the ergodicity perspective and associated transformations in RL, we conducted ex-
periments on two classical RL benchmarks: the cart-pole system and the reacher, using the imple-
mentations provided by Brockman et al. (2016). Both environments feature discrete action spaces.
Thus, instead of PPO, which is designed for continuous action spaces, we use the REINFORCE
algorithm (Williams, 1992). The REINFORCE algorithm is a Monte-Carlo algorithm. It always
collects a return trajectory and then uses this trajectory to update its weights. In our setting, this is
advantageous as it allows us to learn a transformation using the collected trajectory.


                                                   8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


         200                                                         −50
                                                                                Training Phase              Testing Phase
         150                                                         −100
 R(T )   100                                              ergodic
                                                                     −150
                                                          standard
          50
                   Training Phase         Testing Phase
                                                                     −200
          0
               0                    0.5           1                         0              2,000         4,000         6,000
                       Number of episodes      ·10   4                                    Number of episodes

                     (a) Cart-pole.                                                       (b) Reacher.

Figure 4: Ergodic vs. standard REINFORCE on common benchmarks. For the cart-pole, we see
slight improvements when using the ergodicity transformation, while for the reacher, only ergodic
REINFORCE learns a successful policy.



We here compare two settings. First, we train the algorithm in the standard way. Second, after
collecting a return trajectory, we first derive the transformation, transform the returns, and then
use the transformed returns to update the REINFORCE algorithm. In the plots, we always show
the untransformed returns. In both settings, we change the length of pole and links for cart-pole and
reacher, respectively, during testing to evaluate the robustness of the learned policies. Further details
on hyperparameter choices are provided in the supplementary material.
Cart-pole. In the cart-pole environment, the objective is to maintain the pole in an upright position
for as long as possible. To evaluate the long-term performance of the ergodicity transformation, we
train the algorithm using episode lengths of 100 time steps but test it with episodes lasting 200 time
steps. Thus, as we see in figure 4a, the return during testing is higher than during training. We also
see that with transformation, the return is slightly higher than with the standard training procedure.
While the differences are not dramatic in this relatively simple environment, they demonstrate the
potential benefits of our approach.
Reacher. In the reacher environment, we aim to track a set point with the end of the last link. Thus,
extending the episode length does not make sense in this setting. However, this is unnecessary to
demonstrate the advantage of using the ergodicity transformation. As we see in figure 4b, only the
ergodic REINFORCE algorithm learns a reasonable policy in this more challenging environment.


8        C ONCLUSIONS AND LIMITATIONS

This paper discussed the impact of ergodicity on the choice of the optimization criterion in RL. If
the rewards are non-ergodic, focusing on the expected return yields non-robust policies that we cur-
rently find with conventional RL algorithms. An alternative to changing the objective and, with this,
having to come up with entirely new RL algorithms is trying to find an ergodicity transformation.
We presented a method for learning an ergodicity transformation that converts a time series of re-
turns into a time series with ergodic increments. We further showed how the ergodicity perspective
provides a theoretical foundation for transformations used in risk-sensitive RL. We demonstrated
the effectiveness of the proposed transformation on standard RL benchmark environments.
This paper is the first step toward acknowledging non-ergodicity of reward functions and focusing
on the long-term return and, with that, robustness in RL. This opens various directions for future
research. Firstly, addressing the challenge of transforming returns in RL algorithms that update
weights incrementally rather than relying on episodic data remains an open question. Secondly, our
transformation currently focuses solely on the current return, but returns may also depend on the
current state of the system, suggesting the possibility of state-dependent transformations. Thirdly,
extending this research to multi-agent RL could be promising, building on insights from Fant et al.
(2023) and Peters & Adamou (2022) regarding the impact of non-ergodicity on the emergence of
cooperation in biological multi-agent systems. Finally, investigating the connection between opti-
mizing time-average growth rates instead of expected values and discount factors, as explored by
Adamou et al. (2021), could make the discount factor as a hyperparameter in RL dispensable.


                                                          9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EPRODUCIBILITY STATEMENT
The algorithm for learning an ergodicity transformation introduced in section 4 is contained the sup-
plementary material. The supplementary material also contains an implementation of the coin-toss
game and code for training a standard PPO agent, a PPO agent with the logarithmic transformation,
and a PPO agent with the ergodicity transformation from section 4 on the game.


                                                 10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Abbas Abdolmaleki, Jost Tobias Springenberg, Jonas Degrave, Steven Bohez, Yuval Tassa, Dan
  Belov, Nicolas Heess, and Martin Riedmiller. Relative entropy regularized policy iteration. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1812.02256, 2018.
Alexander Adamou, Yonatan Berman, Diomides Mavroyiannis, and Ole Peters. Microfoundations
  of discounting. Decision Analysis, 18(4):257–272, 2021.
Mridul Agarwal, Qinbo Bai, and Vaneet Aggarwal. Regret guarantees for model-based reinforce-
 ment learning with long-term average constraints. In Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, pp.
 22–31, 2022.
Dario Amodei, Chris Olah, Jacob Steinhardt, Paul Christiano, John Schulman, and Dan Mané. Con-
  crete problems in AI safety. arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.06565, 2016.
Maurice S Bartlett. The use of transformations. Biometrics, 3(1):39–52, 1947.
Daniel Bernoulli. Exposition of a new theory on the measurement of risk. Econometrica, 22(1):
  23–36, 1954.
Dimitri Bertsekas. Reinforcement Learning and Optimal Control. Athena Scientific, 2019.
David Blackwell. Discrete dynamic programming. The Annals of Mathematical Statistics, pp. 719–
  726, 1962.
Greg Brockman, Vicki Cheung, Ludwig Pettersson, Jonas Schneider, John Schulman, Jie Tang, and
  Wojciech Zaremba. OpenAI Gym. arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.01540, 2016.
Lukas Brunke, Melissa Greeff, Adam W Hall, Zhaocong Yuan, Siqi Zhou, Jacopo Panerati, and
  Angela P Schoellig. Safe learning in robotics: From learning-based control to safe reinforcement
  learning. Annual Review of Control, Robotics, and Autonomous Systems, 5:411–444, 2022.
Arthur Charpentier, Romuald Elie, and Carl Remlinger. Reinforcement learning in economics and
  finance. Computational Economics, pp. 1–38, 2021.
William S Cleveland. Robust locally weighted regression and smoothing scatterplots. Journal of the
 American Statistical Association, 74(368):829–836, 1979.
Yan Duan, Xi Chen, Rein Houthooft, John Schulman, and Pieter Abbeel. Benchmarking deep
  reinforcement learning for continuous control. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
  pp. 1329–1338, 2016.
Lorenzo Fant, Onofrio Mazzarisi, Emanuele Panizon, and Jacopo Grilli. Stable cooperation emerges
  in stochastic multiplicative growth. Physical Review E, 108(1):L012401, 2023.
Yingjie Fei, Zhuoran Yang, and Zhaoran Wang. Risk-sensitive reinforcement learning with function
  approximation: A debiasing approach. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
  3198–3207. PMLR, 2021.
Steve Heim, Alexander von Rohr, Sebastian Trimpe, and Alexander Badri-Spröwitz. A learnable
  safety measure. In Conference on Robot Learning, pp. 627–639, 2020.
Ronald A Howard. Dynamic Programming and Markov Processes. John Wiley, 1960.
Oliver Hulme, Arne Vanhoyweghen, Colm Connaughton, Ole Peters, Simon Steinkamp, Alexander
  Adamou, Dominik Baumann, Vincent Ginis, Bert Verbruggen, James Price, and Benjamin Skjold.
  Reply to" the limitations of growth-optimal approaches to decision making under uncertainty".
  Econ Journal Watch, 20(2):335–348, 2023.
Kiyosi Itô. Stochastic integral. Proceedings of the Imperial Academy, 20(8):519–524, 1944.
Donald R Jones, Matthias Schonlau, and William J Welch. Efficient global optimization of expensive
  black-box functions. Journal of Global optimization, 13(4):455, 1998.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Daniel Kahneman and Amos Tversky. Prospect theory: An analysis of decision under risk. Econo-
  metrica, 47(2):263–292, 1997.
Peter E. Kloeden and Eckhard Platen. Numerical Solution of Stochastic Differential Equations.
  Springer Berlin, Heidelberg, 1992.
Jan Leike, Miljan Martic, Victoria Krakovna, Pedro A Ortega, Tom Everitt, Andrew Lefrancq, Lau-
  rent Orseau, and Shane Legg. AI safety gridworlds. arXiv preprint arXiv:1711.09883, 2017.
Sridhar Mahadevan. Average reward reinforcement learning: Foundations, algorithms, and empiri-
  cal results. Machine Learning, 22:159–195, 1996.
Sultan Javed Majeed and Marcus Hutter. On Q-learning convergence for non-Markov decision
  processes. In International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pp. 2546–2552, 2018.
David Meder, Finn Rabe, Tobias Morville, Kristoffer H Madsen, Magnus T Koudahl, Ray J Dolan,
  Hartwig R Siebner, and Oliver J Hulme. Ergodicity-breaking reveals time optimal decision mak-
  ing in humans. PLoS Computational Biology, 17(9):e1009217, 2021.
Oliver Mihatsch and Ralph Neuneier. Risk-sensitive reinforcement learning. Machine Learning, 49
  (2):267–290, 2002.
Volodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, David Silver, Andrei A Rusu, Joel Veness, Marc G Belle-
  mare, Alex Graves, Martin Riedmiller, Andreas K Fidjeland, Georg Ostrovski, et al. Human-level
  control through deep reinforcement learning. Nature, 518(7540):529–533, 2015.
Volodymyr Mnih, Adria Puigdomenech Badia, Mehdi Mirza, Alex Graves, Timothy Lillicrap, Tim
  Harley, David Silver, and Koray Kavukcuoglu. Asynchronous methods for deep reinforcement
  learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 1928–1937, 2016.
Vu Nguyen, Sebastian Schulze, and Michael Osborne. Bayesian optimization for iterative learning.
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 9361–9371, 2020.
Erfaun Noorani and John S Baras. Risk-sensitive reinforce: A Monte Carlo policy gradient algorithm
  for exponential performance criteria. In IEEE Conference on Decision and Control, pp. 1522–
  1527, 2021.
Erfaun Noorani, Christos Mavridis, and John Baras. Risk-sensitive reinforcement learning with
  exponential criteria. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.09010, 2022.
Jungseul Ok, Alexandre Proutiere, and Damianos Tranos. Exploration in structured reinforcement
  learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2018.
Donald S Ornstein. An application of ergodic theory to probability theory. The Annals of Probability,
  1(1):43–58, 1973.
Xue Bin Peng, Aviral Kumar, Grace Zhang, and Sergey Levine. Advantage-weighted regression:
  Simple and scalable off-policy reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.00177, 2019.
Fabien Pesquerel and Odalric-Ambrym Maillard. IMED-RL: Regret optimal learning of ergodic
  Markov decision processes. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 26363–
  26374, 2022.
Jan Peters and Stefan Schaal. Reinforcement learning by reward-weighted regression for operational
  space control. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 745–750, 2007.
Jan Peters and Stefan Schaal. Learning to control in operational space. The International Journal of
  Robotics Research, 27(2):197–212, 2008.
Ole Peters. The ergodicity problem in economics. Nature Physics, 15(12):1216–1221, 2019.
Ole Peters and Alexander Adamou. The time interpretation of expected utility theory. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1801.03680, 2018.


                                                 12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Ole Peters and Alexander Adamou. The ergodicity solution of the cooperation puzzle. Philosophi-
  cal Transactions of the Royal Society A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences, 380
  (2227):20200425, 2022.
Ole Peters and William Klein. Ergodicity breaking in geometric Brownian motion. Physical Review
  Letters, 110(10):100603, 2013.
Lerrel Pinto, James Davidson, Rahul Sukthankar, and Abhinav Gupta. Robust adversarial reinforce-
  ment learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 2817–2826. PMLR, 2017.
Warren B Powell. Reinforcement Learning and Stochastic Optimization. John Wiley & Sons, 2021.
LA Prashanth, Michael C Fu, et al. Risk-sensitive reinforcement learning via policy gradient search.
  Foundations and Trends® in Machine Learning, 15(5):537–693, 2022.
Martin L Puterman. Markov Decision Processes: Discrete Stochastic Dynamic Programming. John
 Wiley & Sons, 2014.
Antonin Raffin, Ashley Hill, Adam Gleave, Anssi Kanervisto, Maximilian Ernestus, and Noah Dor-
  mann. Stable-baselines3: Reliable reinforcement learning implementations. Journal of Machine
  Learning Research, 22(268):1–8, 2021.
Stuart Russell, Daniel Dewey, and Max Tegmark. Research priorities for robust and beneficial
  artificial intelligence. AI Magazine, 36(4):105–114, 2015.
John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy
  optimization algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347, 2017.
Yun Shen, Michael J Tobia, Tobias Sommer, and Klaus Obermayer. Risk-sensitive reinforcement
  learning. Neural Computation, 26(7):1298–1328, 2014.
David Silver, Julian Schrittwieser, Karen Simonyan, Ioannis Antonoglou, Aja Huang, Arthur Guez,
  Thomas Hubert, Lucas Baker, Matthew Lai, Adrian Bolton, et al. Mastering the game of Go
  without human knowledge. Nature, 550(7676):354–359, 2017.
Richard S Sutton and Andrew G Barto. Reinforcement Learning: An Introduction. MIT Press, 2018.
Robert Tibshirani. Estimating transformations for regression via additivity and variance stabiliza-
  tion. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 83(402):394–405, 1988.
Matteo Turchetta, Felix Berkenkamp, and Andreas Krause. Safe exploration in finite Markov de-
 cision processes with Gaussian processes. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
 2016.
Hado Van Hasselt, Arthur Guez, and David Silver. Deep reinforcement learning with double Q-
  learning. In AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pp. 2094–2100, 2016.
Arne Vanhoyweghen, Brecht Verbeken, Cathy Macharis, and Vincent Ginis. The influence of er-
  godicity on risk affinity of timed and non-timed respondents. Scientific Reports, 12(1):1–9, 2022.
Arthur F Veinott. On finding optimal policies in discrete dynamic programming with no discounting.
  The Annals of Mathematical Statistics, 37(5):1284–1294, 1966.
Oriol Vinyals, Igor Babuschkin, Wojciech M Czarnecki, Michaël Mathieu, Andrew Dudzik, Juny-
  oung Chung, David H Choi, Richard Powell, Timo Ewalds, Petko Georgiev, et al. Grandmaster
  level in StarCraft II using multi-agent reinforcement learning. Nature, 575(7782):350–354, 2019.
Ziyu Wang and Nando de Freitas. Theoretical analysis of bayesian optimisation with unknown
  gaussian process hyper-parameters. arXiv preprint arXiv:1406.7758, 2014.
Chen-Yu Wei, Mehdi Jafarnia Jahromi, Haipeng Luo, Hiteshi Sharma, and Rahul Jain. Model-
  free reinforcement learning in infinite-horizon average-reward Markov decision processes. In
  International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 10170–10180, 2020.


                                                13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Honghao Wei, Xin Liu, and Lei Ying. A provably-efficient model-free algorithm for infinite-horizon
  average-reward constrained markov decision processes. In AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelli-
  gence, pp. 3868–3876, 2022.
Daan Wierstra, Tom Schaul, Jan Peters, and Juergen Schmidhuber. Episodic reinforcement learning
  by logistic reward-weighted regression. In International Conference on Artificial Neural Net-
  works, pp. 407–416, 2008.
Ronald J Williams. Simple statistical gradient-following algorithms for connectionist reinforcement
  learning. Machine Learning, 8:229–256, 1992.
Yiming Zhang and Keith W Ross. On-policy deep reinforcement learning for the average-reward
  criterion. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 12535–12545, 2021.
Stephan Zheng, Alexander Trott, Sunil Srinivasa, David C Parkes, and Richard Socher. The AI
  economist: Taxation policy design via two-level deep multiagent reinforcement learning. Science
  Advances, 8(18):eabk2607, 2022.


                                                14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A     A PPENDIX
A.1   P ROPORTIONALITY OF VARIANCE AND SECOND MOMENT FUNCTIONS

The variance-stabilizing transform h(x) is unique up to linear transformations. That is, the function
ah(x) + b for a ∈ R+ , b ∈ R will also produce a time series with the desired properties. Thus, we
only need to estimate the variance function up to a scalar multiplier. In the following, we approxi-
mate µ2 (u) := E[(R(tk+1 ) − R(tk ))2 | R(tk ) = u] using a Taylor series expansion and show that
v(u) ∝ µ2 (u). In particular, we have
        µ2 (u) = E[(R(tk+1 ) − R(tk ))2 | R(tk ) = u]
               = E[R(tk+1 )2 | R(tk ) = u] − 2E[R(tk+1 ) | R(tk ) = u][R(tk ) | R(tk ) = u]
               + E[R(tk )2 | R(tk ) = u]
               = E[R(tk+1 )2 | R(tk ) = u] − 2uR[R(tk+1 ) | R(tk ) = u] + u2 .                      (11)
We now perform a second-order Taylor expansion with the function h−1 on the random variable
h(R(tk+1 )) to find E[R(tk+1 ) | R(tk ) = u],
         E[R(tk+1 ) | R(tk ) = u] = E[h−1 (h(R(tk+1 ))) | R(tk ) = u]
                                    = E[h−1 (h(u) + h(R(tk+1 )) − h(u)) | R(tk ) = u]
                                    ≃ E[h−1 (h(u)) + (h−1 ) ′ (h(u))(h(R(tk+1 )) − h(u))
                                      1
                                    + (h−1 ) ′′ (h(u))(h(R(tk+1 )) − h(u))2 | R(tk ) = u]
                                      2
                                                           m2 −1 ′′
                                    = m1 (h−1 ) ′ (h(u)) +     (h ) (h(u)).
                                                           2
In the final step, as h(u) is a function that transforms the original time series into a time series with
independent increments, we can assume that
                 E[(h(R(tk+1 )) − h(u))n | R(tk ) = u] = mn ∈ R for all n ∈ N.
That is, the moments of the transformed increments are stationary over the state-space. We can then
use the inverse-function rule to calculate the derivatives as
                                                     1            1
                          (h−1 ) ′ (h(u)) = ′ −1              = ′
                                             h (h (h(u)))       h (u)
                                             −h ′′ (h−1 (h(u)))   −h ′′ (u)
                         (h−1 ) ′′ (h(u)) = ′ −1                =           .
                                              h (h (h(u)))3        h ′ (u)3
Hence, we have
                                                            m1       m2 h ′′ (u)
                       E[R(tk+1 )2 | R(tk ) = u] ≃ u +             −             .
                                                           h ′ (u)   2h ′ (u)3
We use a similar method to find E[R(tk+1 )2 | R(tk ) = u]. However, this time, we perform the
Taylor expansion with the squared-inverse function h−2 (x) := (h−1 (x))2 ,
           E[R(tk+1 )2 | R(tk ) = u] = E[h−2 (h(R(tk+1 ))) | R(tk ) = u]
                                                                     m2 −2 ′′
                                       ≃ u2 + m1 (h−2 ) ′ (h(u)) +       (h ) (h(u)).
                                                                       2
We can use the chain rule to calculate the derivatives of the squared-inverse function,
                                                                          2u
                         (h−2 ) ′ (h(u)) = 2(h−1 ) ′ (h(u))h−1 (h(u))
                                                                         h ′ (u)
and
                 (h−2 ) ′′ (h(u)) = 2((h−1 ) ′′ (h(u))h−1 (h(u)) + (h−1 ) ′ (h(u))2 )
                                    −2uh ′′ (u)        2
                                  =               + ′ 2.
                                      h ′ (u)3      h (u)


                                                   15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Hence, we have
                                                       2um1 m2 uh ′′ (u)    m2
                E[R(tk+1 )2 | R(tk ) = u] ≃ u2 +               −          + ′ 2.
                                                       h ′ (u)   h ′ (u)3  h (u)
Substituting into equation 11 gives us
   µ2 (u) = E[R(tk+1 )2 | R(tk ) = u] − 2uE[R(tk+1 ) | R(tk ) = u] + u2
                   2um1 m2 uh ′′ (u)                                        m2 h ′′ (u)

                                              m2                   m1
          ≃ u2 + ′         −              +            − 2u   u +         −               + u2
                   h (u)         h ′ (u)3   h ′ (u)2              h ′ (u)   2h ′ (u)3
              m2
          = ′ 2.
            h (u)
Finally, we can use the fundamental theorem of calculus on definition 1 to get
                                       1
                       v(u) =              =⇒ µ2 (u) ∝ v(u) (approximately).
                                  h ′ (u)2

A.2     D ERIVATION OF THE RISK - SENSITIVE REWARD FUNCTION EQUATION 10
                                                                               σ                 σ
We start the derivations by simplifying equation 9. We introduce k(R) := β2 exp(βR)   and cv := µ  ,
which results in
                                1         1
                        dR =       k(R) + k(R)k ′ (R) dt + k(R) dW(t).
                                cv        2
From this, we can see that the resulting stochastic differentiable equation belongs to the class of
reducible SDEs and has a known, general solution (Kloeden & Platen, 1992, pp. 123–124):

                                              1
                                  Rt = ℓ−1       t + Wt + l(0) ,
                                              cv
               Rr ds     R r β2
where ℓ(r) :=     k(s) =     σ exp(βs)ds. Now, we need to find an expression for ℓ(R):
                                          ZR
                                               β2             β
                                 ℓ(R) =           exp(βs) ds = exp(βR).
                                               σ              σ
This expression is invertible,
                                                   1    σ  1
                                     ℓ−1 (R) =       ln   + ln|R|.
                                                   β    β  β
Thus, we finally obtain equation 10:

                                  1                       µ          β
                      Rt = ℓ−1      t + Wt + l(0) = ℓ−1     t + Wt +
                                 cv                       σ          σ
                            1    σ     1   µ          β
                         = ln        + ln t + Wt + .
                           β     β     β   σ          σ

A.3     H YPERPARAMETER OPTIMIZATION

Besides the experiments presented in the main body, we also compared our learned transformation
in a hyperparameter optimization task with the BOIL (Bayesian optimization for iterative learning)
algorithm (Nguyen et al., 2020). Before presenting the results, we briefly introduce BOIL.

A.3.1    BAYESIAN OPTIMIZATION FOR ITERATIVE LEARNING
In Boil, the goal is to train a machine learning algorithm given a d-dimensional hyperparameter
x ∈ X ⊂ Rd for T iterations. This process produces training evaluations R(· | x, T ) with T ∈
[Tmin , Tmax ]. These evaluations could generally be returns of an episode in RL or training accuracies
in deep learning. We here focus on episode returns in reinforcement learning. Given the raw training
curve R(· | x, T ), BOIL assumes an underlying, smoothed black-box function f and then aims to
find x∗ = arg maxx∈X f(x, Tmax ). This black-box function is modeled as a Gaussian process (GP),


                                                     16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


and the next set of hyperparameters is selected using a variation (Wang & de Freitas, 2014) of the
expected improvement (Jones et al., 1998) algorithm.
Existing Bayesian optimization approaches for hyperparameter optimization typically define the ob-
jective function as an average loss over the final learning episodes. This ignores how stable the per-
formance is and might be misleading due to the noise and fluctuations of observed episode returns,
especially during early stages of training. Therefore, in BOIL, the authors propose compressing
the whole learning curve into a numeric score via a preference function. In particular, they use the
Sigmoid function (specifically, the Logistic function) to compute this “utility score” as
                                                                  X
                                                                  t
                                                                              R(u | x, T )
            ^ (R, m0 , g0 ) = R(· |, x, T ) · ℓ(· | m0 , g0 ) =
          y=y                                                                                  ,   (12)
                                                                        1 + exp(−g0 (u − m0 ))
                                                                  u=1

where · is a dot product, and the Logistic function ℓ(· | m0 , g0 ) is parameterized by a growth param-
eter g0 defining the slope and the middle point of the curve m0 . The choice of the Sigmoid function
is mainly motivated by intuitive arguments. Since early weights are small, less credit is given to
fluctuations at the initial stages, making it less likely for the surrogate function to be biased toward
randomly well-performing settings. As weights monotonically increase, hyperparameters with im-
proving performance are preferred. As weights saturate, stable, high-performing configurations are
preferred over short “performance spikes” which often characterize unstable training. The score
assigns higher values to the same performance if it is being maintained over more episodes.
The intuition provided by Nguyen et al. (2020) is that the optimal parameters m0 , g0 will lead to a
better fit of the GP, resulting in better prediction and optimization performance. The authors then
parameterize the GP log marginal likelihood in terms of m0 and g0 and optimize both parameters
using multi-start gradient descent.

A.3.2    C OMPARISON
We tried to apply BOIL to the coin toss game, i.e., we tried to optimize hyperparameters for an RL
algorithm on the coin toss game using BOIL. Unfortunately, we there ran into numerical problems
caused by the large values the return can have in some runs. Therefore, we instead compare BOIL
to our learned transformation on some benchmarks that were presented by Nguyen et al. (2020).
For comparing BOIL with our proposed transformation, we optimize hyperparameters of deep RL
algorithms. This is slightly different from the setting we designed our transformation for, and in
that sense, it also challenges its generality. For the comparison, we will use two benchmarks that
were used by Nguyen et al. (2020): the cart-pole system with the double deep Q-networks (DDQN)
(Van Hasselt et al., 2016) algorithm and the reacher with the advantage actor-critic (A2C) algorithm
(Mnih et al., 2016). In both cases, we tune the learning rate(s) and the discount factor. We adopt
the code from Nguyen et al. (2020), only adding the ergodicity transformation but without changing
any parameter settings.
We show the mean and standard deviation of the average return over five training runs in figure 5.
The general, non-parametric transformation proposed in this paper achieves comparable perfor-
mance as the tuned Sigmoid from Nguyen et al. (2020) on the cart-pole system and can outperform
it on the reacher. This shows that while BOIL relies on intuitive arguments to develop a parametric
transformation, we can achieve at least an en-par performance with a non-parametric transformation
motivated from basic principles. Further, Nguyen et al. (2020) showed significant benefits of BOIL
over existing hyperparameter optimization methods based on Bayesian optimization. Thus, coming
up with reward transformations, in general, can significantly enhance learning. While the transfor-
mation in BOIL is designed for a specific setting, our transformation has a more universal character
and is applicable in more diverse settings.

A.4     H YPERPARAMETER CHOICES

The hyperparameter choices for the experiments in section 7 are provided in table 1.


                                                   17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


     Average Reward



                      200                                            0
                      150                                          −20
                                                                   −40
                      100
                                                    Ergodic        −60                               Ergodic
                       50                                          −80
                                                    BOIL                                             BOIL
                        0                                          −100
                            0         200          400                    0             200         400
                                       Episode                                            Episode

                                (a) Cart-pole.                                      (b) Reacher.

Figure 5: Comparison of BOIL and our transformation for hyperparameter optimization of deep
RL algorithms. Our non-parametric transformation performs at least en par with state-of-the-art
hyperparameter optimization algorithms.


                                Table 1: Hyperparameters for the experiments in section 7.

                                                                          Cart-pole    Reacher
                                Discount rate                               0.99         0.99
                                Training episodes                           1000          500
                                Test episodes                                100          100
                                Training episode length                     100          200
                                Test episode length                          200          200
                                Epochs                                        10           10
                                Nodes in the actor neural network            16            64
                                Learning rate                              0.0007       0.0005


                                                              18
