Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


PAE: R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING FROM E XTERNAL
K NOWLEDGE FOR E FFICIENT E XPLORATION
 Zhe Wu∗ 1 , Haofei Lu∗ 2 , Junliang Xing† 2 ,
 You Wu1,3 , Renye Yan1,4 , Yaozhong Gan 1 , Yuanchun Shi1,2
 1
   QiYuan Lab, 2 Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University
 3
   Nanjing University, 4 Peking University
 {wuzhe, wuyou, yanrenye, ganyaozhong}@qiyuanlab.com,
 luhf23@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, {jlxing, shiyc}@tsinghua.edu.cn



                                              A BSTRACT
            Human intelligence is adept at absorbing valuable insights from external knowl-
            edge. This capability is equally crucial for artificial intelligence. In contrast,
            classical reinforcement learning agents lack such capabilities and often resort to
            extensive trial and error to explore the environment. This paper introduces PAE:
            Planner-Actor-Evaluator, a novel framework for teaching agents to learn to ab-
            sorb external knowledge. PAE integrates the Planner’s knowledge-state align-
            ment mechanism, the Actor’s mutual information skill control, and the Evaluator’s
            adaptive intrinsic exploration reward to achieve 1) effective cross-modal informa-
            tion fusion, 2) enhanced linkage between knowledge and state, and 3) hierarchi-
            cal mastery of complex tasks. Comprehensive experiments across 11 challenging
            tasks from the BabyAI and MiniHack environment suites demonstrate PAE’s su-
            perior exploration efficiency with good interpretability.


1       I NTRODUCTION
Accepting suggestions from external guidance
is an integral part of human learning. Hu-
                                                                                                                   Action
mans can absorb insightful external knowledge
and seamlessly integrate it into their strategies
                                                                  Global
to tackle complex tasks (Council et al., 2000;                  Observation
                                                                                                            Partial
Mills et al., 2010). By leveraging existing                                                               Observation
knowledge, human players can quickly adapt
to completely unfamiliar games after just a few
rounds of playing. Their ability to swiftly trans-
                                                                                       Align
fer and align existing knowledge with the cur-
rent environment is a true testament to human                State       Knowledge                Knowledge          State
                                                            Encoder       Encoder                  Encoder          Encoder
intelligence. Building intelligent systems that
can learn and integrate like humans is an ul-                   Cross Attention                          Cross Attention

timate goal we relentlessly pursue. Currently,
reinforcement learning (RL) has demonstrated
                                                          Planner                                Actor
its potential towards this goal, with remarkable
                                                           Behavior                                                  Behavior
breakthroughs in numerous domains, approach-                                Update                Update
ing or even surpassing human capabilities on                                         Evaluator
Atari Games (Mnih et al., 2013), Go (Silver
et al., 2016) and StarCraft (Vinyals et al., 2019).
                                                  Figure 1: The Planner-Actor-Evaluator (PAE)
However, currently RL struggles to efficiently framework consists of three key components.
capture and integrate the vast amount of expert
knowledge already existing in the domain. Specifically, RL faces challenges in long-term and sparse
reward tasks due to a lack of guidance, requiring extensive trial and error. Our primary focus in this
    ∗
        Equal contribution
    †
        Corresponding Author


                                                      1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


work is teaching agents to leverage external knowledge and approach optimal solutions faster in
sparse reward environments.
Although mimicking human capabilities benefits RL, it remains challenging for RL agents to realize
the above capabilities (Chowdhury et al., 2023). Three main challenges arise when training agents to
absorb external knowledge to improve their capabilities. (1) Difficulties in knowledge acquisition
and representation. Existing approaches utilize Behavioral Cloning (BC) to acquire knowledge by
imitating human behaviors directly (Codevilla et al., 2018) or adopt Inverse Reinforcement Learn-
ing (IRL) to learn reward functions for providing knowledge (Arora & Doshi, 2021). However,
this necessitates many demonstrations, which are costly to label and collect. (2) Obstacles to the
integration of external knowledge and internal strategies. Integration requires bridging the gap
between the discrete nature of external knowledge and the continuous nature of internal strategies.
Two potential directions emerge: one is enabling internal strategies to query external knowledge, but
it faces challenges at the retrieval level (Reid et al., 2022). The other approach is directly encoding
domain knowledge as propositional rules into neural networks for a warm start, leading to training
difficulties and poor generalization (Silva & Gombolay, 2021). (3) Challenge of synergistic updat-
ing of external knowledge and internal strategies. Large Language Models (LLMs) have recently
demonstrated impressive capabilities (Chowdhery et al., 2022; Brown et al., 2020), but constant
changes in the external world can quickly render them obsolete for time-sensitive tasks (e.g., news
question answering). While some recent studies have attempted to directly map the rich seman-
tic knowledge within LLMs to actions (Carta et al., 2023; Mezghani et al., 2023), these mappings
cannot be updated or come with high update costs.
We propose using natural language as a knowledge source to bypass the difficulties of knowledge ac-
quisition and representation. The language contains natural and flexible prior knowledge for efficient
exploration and skill acquisition, enabling rapid generalization across tasks. Truly understanding the
semantics and focusing on the key information is a good start to integrating external knowledge and
internal strategies. To synergize the updating of external knowledge and internal strategies, external
knowledge sources and internal strategies should retain the ability to learn and improve over time.
To bridge the gap between RL and human in handling sparse reward tasks, as shown in Figure 1,
we propose a novel paradigm for guiding agent learning to absorb external knowledge called PAE:
Planner-Actuator-Evaluator. The Planner is equipped with a state-knowledge alignment mecha-
nism. This mechanism enables the Planner to access external knowledge sources and retrieve suit-
able knowledge that aligns with the current state. This aligned knowledge is progressively provided
to the Actor, increasing in complexity. The Actor leverages the state information and the external
knowledge provided by the Planner for joint reasoning. It incorporates a cross-attention mecha-
nism, allowing the Actor to precisely focus on the critical state and external knowledge features.
Additionally, the Actor employs a discriminative network to reverse-infer the Planner’s guidance,
strengthening the connection between states and knowledge. The Evaluator calculates intrinsic re-
wards based on the quality of external knowledge the Planner provides and the Actor’s reasoning
effectiveness. These intrinsic rewards guide independent updates of the Planner and the Actor.
To summarize, our contributions are as follows:
      • We present a novel framework, PAE, for learning to incorporate external knowledge to
        achieve better and faster solutions in sparse reward environments. We demonstrate that
        knowledge instructing significantly improves strategy exploration in RL.
       • Our PAE framework introduces a circular feedback mechanism. The Evaluator’s feedback
         keeps the Planner aware of the scenario. The external knowledge the Planner provides
         aligns with the Actor’s current capabilities, enabling the Actor to master knowledge from
         easy to complex.
      • Our proposed framework produces interpretable sequences of steps, with the Planner pro-
         viding a comprehensible plan in natural language form.
We evaluated our proposed PAE framework across 11 challenging tasks from the BabyAI (Chevalier-
Boisvert et al., 2018) and MiniHack (Samvelyan et al., 2021) environment suites. Compared to
non-knowledge-guided baseline methods, our PAE framework improves performance by an average
of 148% and achieves convergence at least 40% faster. Compared to baseline approaches using
language guidance, the PAE framework exhibits an average performance improvement of at least
13% and converges at least 31% faster.


                                                  2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


2   R ELATED WORK

We build upon extensive work in areas related to the study of knowledge and reinforcement learn-
ing (RL). Our focus lies in knowledge acquisition and representation, the integration of external
knowledge and internal strategies, and exploration in RL.
Knowledge Acquisition and Representation Converting and representing extracted knowledge ef-
fectively is the primary challenge in enhancing a reinforcement learning agent’s capabilities with
external knowledge. Imitation learning and inverse reinforcement learning capture domain knowl-
edge by mimicking human actions via state-action pairs, yet these often require laborious human
labeling and feedback (Codevilla et al., 2018; Ho & Ermon, 2016). Representing knowledge as a
graph (Xu et al., 2020; Zhang et al., 2022), such as a knowledge or scene graph, encounters issues
of limited structured data and sparse valid information. He et al. (2017) treat documents as exter-
nal knowledge; the agent must learn to interpret them for task-solving. Bougie & Ichise (2018) use
environmental data from object detectors as external knowledge, broadening its applicability. In con-
trast, our approach employs natural language directly as external knowledge, eliminating the need
for preprocessing. This fosters agent exploration guided by human-intuitive, natural interaction.
External Knowledge and Internal Strategy Integration Incorporating external knowledge to en-
hance agent decision-making is crucial. Some methods teach AI to use language for querying exter-
nal knowledge (Carta et al., 2022; Liu et al., 2022) but grapple with generating sizable, retrievable
language queries. Several approaches (Humbird et al., 2018; Silva & Gombolay, 2021) aim to
embed human domain knowledge into neural decision trees yet face the challenge of bridging tree-
to-neural network gaps. Our focus is linking natural language with policies to guide agent learning.
Like Language-conditioned RL, our approach trains agents to follow instructions in interactive envi-
ronments (Luketina et al., 2019). While prior research explored this setting for various tasks in 2D or
3D environments (Colas et al., 2020; Chevalier-Boisvert et al., 2018), we aim to craft a comprehen-
sive framework that encompasses knowledge selection and representation, the integration of external
knowledge and internal strategies, and updating knowledge-guided strategy. Our approach absorbs
and understands key parts of the language for joint reasoning and selects external knowledge to
provide knowledge appropriate to the current agent’s capabilities. This results in enhanced task per-
formance, greater adaptability, and improved interpretability. Some more recent work (Carta et al.,
2023; Du et al., 2023) have extracted and employed knowledge from LLMs for decision-making
tasks. These approaches often directly map the internal knowledge of LLMs to actions. However,
this mapping weakens the policy update potential of reinforcement learning algorithms and might
present challenges regarding update costs for time-sensitive tasks.
Exploration in RL Exploration stands as a crucial challenge in reinforcement learning, covering
ϵ-greedy action selection (Strouse et al., 2021), state counting (Bellemare et al., 2016), curiosity-
driven exploration (Schmidhuber, 1991), and intrinsic motivation (Oudeyer et al., 2007). Our ap-
proach aligns with intrinsic motivation, where novelty fosters access to new states. Other forms of
intrinsic motivation include empowerment (Klyubin et al., 2005), promoting agent control over the
environment, and goal diversity (Pong et al., 2020), encouraging increased entropy within the goal
distribution. In contrast, we propose intrinsic motivation as a “cyclic feedback mechanism”: The
Evaluator’s intrinsic reward prompts the Planner to equip the Actor with knowledge suitable for its
current capacity, guiding the Actor to execute tasks aided by external knowledge. Our approach
also emphasizes enhancing reinforcement learning through language-guided exploration (Mu et al.,
2022; Carta et al., 2022). This methodology typically assumes an annotator’s presence to generate
language descriptions for intrinsic rewards, guiding exploration. We adopt this framework while
automating and unifying the entire process, encompassing knowledge representation and selection,
integrating external knowledge and intrinsic strategies, and computation of guided intrinsic rewards.


3    P RELIMINARIES

We formally define the problem formulation of Knowledge-Instructed Reinforcement Learning. We
consider augmented Partially Observable Markov Decision Processes (POMDPs) (Kaelbling et al.,
1998). Our augmented POMDP can be described by a 7-tuple M = ⟨S, A, T , R, Ω, O, K⟩. S is
the state space. A donates the action space. Ω is the observation space. K is the knowledge set.
T : S × A × S 7→ R+ is the state transition function. O : S × A × Ω 7→ R+ is the observation


                                                  3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


function. R : S × A × K 7→ R represents the state-action reward. At each time step t, the agent
receives an observation ot ∈ Ω and a knowledge k ∈ K. Based on these inputs, the agent selects
an action at ∈ A, and transits to the next state st+1 ∈ S. Via RL, our goal is to find some policy
π : S × K 7→ A that maximizes the expected return.
We assume that the environment provides knowledge following previous work (Jiang et al., 2019;
Mirchandani et al., 2021; Waytowich et al., 2019; Mu et al., 2022). We impose no specific represen-
tation requirements and present all knowledge in natural language. Natural language’s hierarchical
structure and rich semantics profoundly impact an agent’s cognitive functions (Colas et al., 2022).
Agents can update internal strategies guided by language’s generality and abstraction, enhancing
comprehension of complex concepts and alignment with human values. Many modern RL environ-
ments include language by default (Mu et al., 2022), like BabyAI (Chevalier-Boisvert et al., 2018),
NetHack (Küttler et al., 2020), MiniHack (Samvelyan et al., 2021), text-based games (Côté et al.,
2019; Shridhar et al., 2020; Urbanek et al., 2019), and most video games. In language-absent envi-
ronments, language descriptions relevant to the agent’s state can be produced by generative models
of language trained on gigantic amounts of text such as GPT (Brown et al., 2020), PaLM (Chowdh-
ery et al., 2022), and Llama (Touvron et al., 2023).

4     M ETHOD

We introduce the PAE framework, a novel approach for instructing agents to learn to absorb knowl-
edge. As shown in Figure 1, PAE consists of three core components: (1) the Planner, a policy
network that delivers language-based external knowledge guidance, adapting in complexity follow-
ing both task features and the Actor’s current capabilities; (2) the Actor, a knowledge-conditioned
policy, designed to integrate external knowledge and environment states for joint reasoning; and (3)
the Evaluator, a module that offers intrinsic rewards to both the Planner and Actor, guiding their
strategy updates.

4.1   A LIGNING E XTERNAL K NOWLEDGE AND S TATES VIA P LANNER

To enhance guidance, the Planner must progressively select increasingly challenging knowledge
for the Actor during the training procedure. This presents two key challenges: 1) correctly under-
standing knowledge in natural language and aligning it with the current environmental state, and 2)
adjusting the complexity of the chosen knowledge based on the Actors’ abilities. To achieve this,
we consider the Planner as a policy network πp (k|s0 , K; θ) modeled by an MDP: it inputs an ini-
tial state s0 1 and a set of knowledge K and selects a piece of knowledge k ∈ K as output. The
Planner provides new knowledge whenever a new episode starts, or the Actor reaches an intrinsic
goal guided by the knowledge. The Planner receives rewards only when the Actor completes the
task using the provided knowledge, aiming to maximize cumulative rewards. Figure 2 provides an
overview of the Planner.
Encoding. To assist the Planner in better comprehending hidden information within the environ-
ment and knowledge, we introduce a state encoder and a knowledge encoder to encode state and
knowledge information to embedded features separately. Specifically, for the state encoder, visual
state embeddings s0 ∈ RHW ×c are fed to a shape-preserving 2D convolution layer to generate the
state feature ŝ0 ∈ RHW ×ds . To capture both the content and spatial characteristics of the states,
position embeddings Epos are added to ŝ0 , which is formulated as:

                   ŝ0 = Conv(s0 ) + Epos ,                s0 ∈ RHW ×C             ŝ0 , Epos ∈ RHW ×ds ,        (1)
where c is the dimension of embedding vectors and ds is the channels of feature maps after convo-
lution. For the knowledge encoder, each unit of knowledge ki ∈ K is encoded using a pre-trained
language model (e.g. BERT-base) with frozen parameters, yielding the knowledge embeddings kˆi :

         k̂ = [k̂ (1) , k̂ (2) , . . . , k̂ (n) ] = Proj(LM([k (1) , k (2) , . . . , k (n) ])),   k̂ ∈ Rn×dk ,   (2)
where Proj(·) is a linear projection layer and dk is the dimension of knowledge embedding vectors.
    1
      The reason we choose s0 instead of st is that the Planner is required to provide macro-level guidance based
on its curriculum, rather than step-by-step guidance based on the Actor’s specific actions at timestep t.


                                                                4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                                           Planner Architecture

                                                                            Position
                                                                                                                                            Actor
                         State Embedding
                                                𝑠!               Conv         𝐬&𝟎
      Full Observation
                                                     BERT
                                                                              K                             V
                                              Pre-trained LM            Q                                       1) Projection
                                                                                     Cross
                                                                                     Cross Attention

                                                                                         Cross Attention


                                           Knowledge Embedding                      Attention                   2) Linear Forward

      Knowledge Oracle   External Knowledge                       $ Knowledge-State Alignment
                                                                  𝐤


                                    Figure 2: Overview of the Planner Network

Alignment. To better align external knowledge with the current environment, we utilize the scaled
dot-product cross-attention mechanism to enable the Planner to attend between knowledge and
states. Specifically, we compute the query Q using the knowledge embeddings k̂ and compute
the key K and value V using the position-embedded state feature ŝ0 . In summary, the alignment
procedure can be formulated as:
                                                                  QK T

                          k̂s0 = Attention(Q, K, V ) = SoftMax √           V
                                                                     dk                       (3)
                     where Q = k̂WQ , K = ŝ0 WK , V = ŝ0 WV ,
where WQ ∈ Rdk ×dk , WK ∈ Rds ×dk and WV ∈ Rds ×dk are learnable projection matrices.
                                                                                                                                (1)   (2)           (n)
Forwarding. The cross-attention layer produces n context vectors k̂s0 = [k̂s0 , k̂s0 , . . . , k̂s0 ] that
aggregates critical information from both the knowledge set and the state, emphasizing knowledge
most relevant to the current state. Then, k̂s0 ∈ Rn×dk will be linear projected to n 1-dimensional
scales and go through a softmax layer, aiding the Planner in selecting the appropriate instruction for
the Actor.
                               πp (k|s0 , K; θ) = SoftMax(LN(k̂s0 )).                                  (4)

4.2     T RAINING ACTOR - SPECIFIC I NCREMENTAL S KILLS WITH E XTERNAL K NOWLEDGE

The Actor is a knowledge-conditioned policy parameterized as πa (at |p st , k; ω). Once the Planner
provides the Actor with suitable external knowledge, we aim for the Actor’s competence in two
key areas. First, like the Planner, the Actor must comprehensively grasp knowledge in its natural
language form. Second, we want the guiding knowledge to influence the state reached by the Ac-
tor, such that different knowledge leads to distinct skills. Accordingly, we seek to strengthen the
correlation between knowledge and state.
Encoding, Alignment & Forwarding. To master language comprehension and align knowledge
with current observable states, the Actor adopts a three-stage pipeline similar to the Planner: en-
coding, alignment, and forward. However, unlike the Planner, the Actor receives p st ∈ Rhw×c , a
partially observable state of size h × w, and k, a single piece of knowledge filtered by the Planner,
at each time step t. In the Encoding stage, due to the reduced information content of the input state
p
  st , we remove the shape-preserving convolution and directly add position information to state em-
beddings. Meanwhile, we also utilize the parameter-frozen language model to encode the existing
knowledge effectively:
                           p
                             ŝt = p st + epos       p
                                                       ŝt , p st , epos ∈ Rhw×c
                                                                                                  (5)
                              k̂ = Proj(LM(k))                         k̂ ∈ R1×dk
During the Alignment stage, we also incorporate the scaled dot-product cross-attention mechanism
to achieve the knowledge-state alignment.
                                                                   QK T

                       p
                         k̂ st = Attention(Q, K, V ) = SoftMax √           V
                                                                     dk                       (6)
                                            p             p
                    where Q = k̂WQ , K = ŝt WK , V = ŝt WV


                                                                   5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                                   Actor Architecture

                                  State Embedding                     Position
                                                          #𝑠           #𝐬                   Conv
      Partial Observation                                   !           %!
                                         BERT

                                                                         K              V
                                   Pre-trained LM                 Q                                                  𝝅𝒂 𝒂𝒕 𝒔𝒕 , 𝒌𝒕
          Pick up the blue key                                           Cross Attention
                                                                          CrossCross
                                                                                Attention
                                 Knowledge Embedding                                                Linear Forward
                                                                             Attention
      External Knowledge
                                                          𝑘"!   Knowledge-State Alignment

                                            Figure 3: Overview of the Actor Network
Moving on to the Forward stage, we aim to enhance the Actor’s attention to current state informa-
tion. To achieve this, we employ strided convolution to extract state information further. We then
concatenate this extracted information with the state-aligned knowledge, passing it through a Linear
and a softmax layer to generate the distribution over actions.
                                    πa (at |st , k; ω) = SoftMax(LN([Conv(p st ), p k̂ st ])).                                       (7)

Maximize the mutual information between knowledge and states. We utilize the mutual infor-
mation maximization objective to build on the idea that knowledge should dictate the states the agent
visits. Our approach maximizes the mutual information I(s; k) between knowledge and states. The
objective can be written as follows:
                                   I(s; k) = H(k) − H(k|s)
                                           = Ek∼p(k),s∼π [log p(k|s)] − Ek∼p(k) [log p(k)]                                           (8)
                                                ≥ Ek∼p(k),s∼π [log qϕ (k|s) − log p(k)] .
As we cannot compute p(k|s) exactly by integrating over all states and their associated knowledge,
we approximate p(k|s) using a trainable discriminative network qϕ (k|s). Previous work (Eysenbach
et al., 2018) has proved that maximizing the mutual information between s and k can translate into
maximizing the variational lower bound obtained by replacing p(k|s) with qϕ (k|s) (as shown in
Equation 8). From this variational lower bound, we give the mutual information rewards rM I used
to encourage the Actor to strengthen the connection between state and knowledge:
                                                        rI = log qϕ (k|p s) − log p(k).                                              (9)
                                                    p
The discriminative network qϕ (k| s) is optimized using a cross-entropy loss Lϕ , denoting as:
                                          X
                         Lϕ (p s, k) = −      (k ′ = k) · log(qϕ (k ′ |p s)).                  (10)
                                                                 k′ ∈K

In summary, the Planner samples a piece of knowledge k from the logits output by πp (k|s0 , K; θ)
and provides it to the Actor. The Actor employs the conditional network πa (at |p st , k; ω) to make
decisions in the environment guided by this knowledge k. The Actor is motivated to explore states
that offer higher rewards and have a close relationship with k. The discriminative network qϕ (k|s)
uses the k provided by the Planner as ground truth and updates through supervised learning to bet-
ter infer knowledge k from the visited states. p(k) is provided by the Planner’s policy network
πp (k|s0 , K; θ). More implementation details are shown in Appendix A.3. Algorithm 1 in Ap-
pendix A.4.1 summarizes our PAE procedure.

4.3    E VALUATION MECHANISM

Reinforcement learning in long-term and sparse reward tasks is often difficult and requires a lot of
trial and error. The standard solution to speed up this process is introducing additional reward signals
to better guide learning. Incorporating external knowledge offers a more straightforward approach
to reward shaping.
For the Actor, the external knowledge from the Planner serves as the missing signal in the envi-
ronment. In addition to the extrinsic reward for accomplishing the final task, the Actor receives an


                                                                             6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


additional intrinsic reward of +1 for each subtask completed per the Planner’s guidance. Conse-
quently, the total rewards for the Actor comprise three terms: environmental extrinsic rewards rex ,
the maximization of the mutual information term rM I , and intrinsic rewards rin :
                        ractor = rex + rin (I(πa (at |st , k; ω) 7→ k)) + αI rI ,                   (11)
where I is the indicator function, πa (at |p st , k; ω) 7→ k denotes that the Actor completed the subtask
following external knowledge guidance, αI > 0 is a scaling factor.
For the Planner, we follow the previous approach (Mu et al., 2022; Campero et al., 2020) of using
the Actor’s task completion as an intrinsic reward. This task is neither too easy (i.e., the knowledge
given by the Planner is too simple) nor impossible (i.e., the knowledge given by the Planner is too
complex) for the Actor to complete the current task, i.e., an automatic curriculum. Specifically,
we evaluate the Planner using the number of steps required for the Actor to follow the guidance
proposed by the Planner; if the number of steps required for the Actor to follow the guidance is
within the threshold t∗ , or if the guidance can not be followed until the end of the episode, the
Planner receives a reward of −β, otherwise, the Planner gets a reward of +α:
                                                    +α if t ≥ t∗

                   rplanner = rex + rin ; rin =                                                   (12)
                                                    −β if t < t∗ or t > tmax
For the value of t∗ , we use an adaptive but heuristic approach, where the threshold increases linearly
by one when the Actor successfully follows the guidance ten times.

5     E XPERIMENTAL E VALUATION
Our experimental evaluation aims to test our central hypothesis: that external knowledge improves
the exploration efficiency for RL algorithms in sparse reward environments. We conducted a series
of experiments organized as follows: 1) In Section 5.1, we quantitatively evaluate the exploratory
capabilities of the PAE by comparing it to various baseline methods. 2) In Section 5.2, we revealed
the underlying mechanisms of the PAE through ablation experiments. 3) In Section 5.3, we elucidate
the interpretability of PAE’s strategy by visualizing the agent’s learning process at different stages.
See Appendix A.5 for additional experimental results. More implementation details of PAE are
shown in Appendix A.3.
Environments: We evaluated our method across two task types, totaling six environments within the
BabyAI environment: Key Corridor tasks (K EY C ORR S3R3, K EY C ORR S4R3, K EY C ORR S5R3)
and Obstructed Maze tasks (O BSTR M AZE 1D L , O BSTR M AZE 2D LHB , O BSTR M AZE 1Q). The suf-
fix signifies the environment’s size; a larger environment increases the exploration difficulty in
the same type of task. To demonstrate PAE’s scalability, we extended our PAE approach to the
more challenging MiniHack tasks. MiniHack consists of procedurally generated tasks within a
roguelike game, offering a richer observation space than the BabyAI environment. Additionally, it
presents up to 75 dimensions of structured and context-sensitive action space. Our comparisons
of PAE with baseline methods encompassed five MiniHack environments: L AVAC ROSS -R ING ,
L AVAC ROSS -P OTION , L AVAC ROSS -F ULL , R IVER -M ONSTER, and M ULTI ROOM -N4-M ONSTER.
See Appendix A.2 for more details.
We follow the previous work (Mu et al., 2022) to introduce knowledge. In BabyAI, the Planner
receives a fully observed state and a set of 652 instructions from the BabyAI platform. Meanwhile,
the Actor gets a 7 × 7 representation of its field of view and a single instruction filtered by the
Planner. See Table 3 in Appendix A.2 for a list of knowledge provided by BabyAI. In MiniHack,
the Planner and Actor have the same field of view. Observations consist of a 21 × 79 matrix of glyph
identifiers, a 21-dimensional vector with the agent’s statistics (like location and health), and a series
of 256-character knowledge entries. The Planner accesses multiple knowledge entries, whereas the
Actor receives a selectively filtered entry from the Planner. See Table 4 in Appendix A.2 for a list
of knowledge provided by MiniHack.

5.1   Q UALITATIVE R ESULTS : C OMPARE TO BASELINES

We compare PAE with six baseline algorithms across three categories to highlight PAE’s advan-
tages. 1) Vanilla Baseline Algorithms: IMPALA (Espeholt et al., 2018), a standard asynchronous


                                                   7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


          KeyCorrS3R3              KeyCorrS4R3              KeyCorrS5R3                ObstrMaze1Dl


         ObstrMaze2Dlhb            ObstrMaze1Q             LavaCross-Ring             LavaCross-Potion


          LavaCross-Full        Multiroom-N4-Monster        River-Monster

                                                                                PAE (Ours)       L-NovelD

                                                                                L-AMIGo          AMIGo

                                                                                ICM              RND

                                                                                IMPALA


Figure 4: Performance of PAE, IMPALA, RND, ICM, AMIGo, L-AMIGo and L-NovelD in eleven
environments, with error regions to indicate standard deviation over five random seeds.
actor-critic method, focuses on rapid parallel training and learns only from raw environmental re-
wards, without any intrinsic motivation or external guidance. 2) Intrinsic Motivation Algorithms:
RND (Burda et al., 2018) uses a randomly initialized neural network to compute prediction errors,
which serve as intrinsic rewards for exploring new states. ICM (Pathak et al., 2017) encourages
exploration by predicting the outcomes of actions and generating intrinsic rewards from prediction
errors. AMIGo (Campero et al., 2020) pairs a goal-generating teacher with a goal-conditioned
student policy, enriching environmental rewards with intrinsic goals. 3) Language-Instructed Algo-
rithms: L-AMIGo (Mu et al., 2022) builds on AMIGo’s model, using language to spotlight relevant
abstract concepts in the environment. L-NovelD (Mu et al., 2022) combines natural language with
an intrinsic motivation approach to reward states described in natural language that transitions from
low to high novelty. While all the above baselines, except the vanilla ones, incorporate some form of
external guidance, L-AMIGo is the most similar to ours. However, it introduces language knowledge
solely at the level of external guidance without focusing on its integration with internal strategies.
The full hyperparameter sweep for PAE and all baselines is reported in Appendix A.3.4.
As shown in Figure 4, PAE achieves almost the fastest convergence across all eleven environments.
Notably, AMIGo, RND, ICM, and IMPALA fail to converge within the current step limit. Compared
to the best performance in non-knowledge-guided baseline methods (AMIGo, ICM, RND), our PAE
framework improves performance by an average of 148% and achieves convergence at least 40%
faster. Compared to baseline approaches using language guidance, the PAE framework exhibits
an average performance improvement of 13% and converges at least 31% faster. Tables 6 and 7
in Appendix A.5 give the quantitative performance of all models in the BabyAI and MiniHack
environments, respectively. Furthermore, we observe excellent training stability in PAE, especially
after convergence.

5.2   A BLATION E XPERIMENT AND A NALYSIS

To better understand the advantages PAE brings through introducing external knowledge, this sec-
tion compares the mechanisms for introducing external knowledge in removing or replacing imple-
mentations. Full-Model is the full version of PAE. In w/o Curriculum, the Planner attaches equal
weight to all external knowledge. w/o Planner eliminates the entire Planner’s guidance to the Ac-
tor. Table 1 displays the final mean extrinsic rewards and the number of steps (in millions) needed
for each model to converge. Each entry consists of two rows of results, with the top row being the
average extrinsic reward at the end of training and the bottom row being the minimal stable steps
to attain that reward. Lower bottom row values signify quicker convergence, and “> x” indicates a
lack of convergence within the maximum training steps “x”. Training curves for the ablation study
are provided in Appendix A.5.


                                                       8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                  Table 1: Comparison of PAE and ablation models.
                                    Key Corridor Tasks                                                Obstructed Maze Tasks
      Model       K EY C ORR S3R3     K EY C ORR S4R3        K EY C ORR S5R3     O BSTR M AZE 1D1      O BSTR M AZE 2D1 HB           O BSTR M AZE 1Q
                   0.89 ± 0.002             0.92 ± 0.005          0.94 ± 0.001     0.93 ± 0.004            0.87 ± 0.018                0.89 ± 0.006
    Full-Model
                        6M                      30M                   90M               6M                    150M                        150M
                   0.86 ± 0.020             0.00 ± 0.000          0.00 ± 0.000     0.93 ± 0.004            0.71 ± 0.324                0.85 ± 0.047
 w/o Curriculum
                       20M                     >60M                  >200M             12M                    >200M                       250M
                   0.00 ± 0.000             0.00 ± 0.000          0.00 ± 0.000     0.00 ± 0.000            0.00 ± 0.000                0.00 ± 0.000
    w/o Planner
                      >20M                     >60M                  >200M            >20M                    >200M                       >300M

We can see that the ‘w/o Curriculum,’ the Planner attaches equal weight to all external knowl-
edge, performs well in four of the six environments (K EY C ORR S3R3, O BSTR M AZE 1D L , O B -
STR M AZE 2D LHB , O BSTR M AZE 1Q) but requires at least 54% more training steps compared to
the FULL-MODEL in these four environments. ‘w/o Curriculum’ earned zero rewards in the other
two environments (K EY C ORR S4R3, K EY C ORR S5R3). We analyze this because tasks like Ob-
structedMaze require more robust exploration to unlock critical states, while tasks like KeyCorridor
emphasize easy-to-difficult completion of the final task. The ‘w/o Planner’ model earned no external
rewards in all six environments. The above results and analysis prove the critical role of introducing
external knowledge, especially of suitable difficulty, for exploration in sparse reward environments.

5.3     I NTERPRETABILITY

One advantage of PAE’s introduction of language knowledge is that it can provide insights into de-
veloping an agent’s abilities during training. We first show in Figure 5 (a) that PAE has a similar ca-
pability to the approach of the automatic curriculum: Planner generates an interpretable curriculum.
In the KeyCorridorS3R3 environment, the Planner first provides the Actor with easily achievable
external knowledge (open the door) and gradually increases the difficulty as training progresses (go
to the door, pick up the key), ultimately converging to the final goal (pick up a ball).

                      open the                                                      pick up the            pick up the
                      [C] door                                                      [C] key                [C] ball

                     go to the                      pick up the
                     [C] door                       [C] ball
                                                                                     go to the
                          pick up the                                                [C] key
                          [C] key
                                go to the                                                                                go to the
                                [C] key                                             open the                             [C] ball
                                                                                    [C] door

                                                                                          go to the
                                                                                          [C] door


                   (a) Planner, Knowledge curriculum                                   (b) Actor, Knowledge acquisition
Figure 5: Interpretation of knowledge-instructed exploration. The knowledge curriculum introduced
by the Planner (left) and the Actor’s knowledge acquisition process (right) are illustrated in the
KeyCorridorS3R3 environment.
In addition to generating a similar curriculum, Figure 5 (b) also visualizes the number of steps
required for the Actor to follow each external knowledge, offering insights into this incremental
capability acquisition. We can see that the Planner provides increasingly difficult knowledge during
the training process, reflected in a gradual increase in the probability of complex knowledge being
presented. Conversely, the Actor gradually improves his proficiency in mastering each knowledge
fragment during the training process, reflected in a gradual decrease in the required steps.

6     C ONCLUSION
In this work, we propose Planner-Actor-Evaluator (PAE), a knowledge-instructed reinforcement
learning framework for efficient exploration in sparse reward environments. PAE has several desir-
able properties: it achieves alignment and joint inference of external knowledge and internal agent
states and emerges as an interpretable curriculum. Moreover, PAE is algorithm agnostic, making it
compatible with any deep reinforcement learning algorithm.


                                                                          9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
This work was partly supported by the Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant No.
62222606 and 62076238.

R EFERENCES
Saurabh Arora and Prashant Doshi. A survey of inverse reinforcement learning: Challenges, meth-
  ods and progress. Artificial Intelligence, 297:103500, 2021.
Marc Bellemare, Sriram Srinivasan, Georg Ostrovski, Tom Schaul, David Saxton, and Remi Munos.
 Unifying count-based exploration and intrinsic motivation. Advances in Neural Information Pro-
 cessing Systems, 29, 2016.
Nicolas Bougie and Ryutaro Ichise. Deep reinforcement learning boosted by external knowledge.
  In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Symposium on Applied Computing, pp. 331–338, 2018.
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are
  few-shot learners. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:1877–1901, 2020.
Yuri Burda, Harrison Edwards, Amos Storkey, and Oleg Klimov. Exploration by random network
  distillation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.12894, 2018.
Andres Campero, Roberta Raileanu, Heinrich Küttler, Joshua B Tenenbaum, Tim Rocktäschel,
  and Edward Grefenstette. Learning with amigo: Adversarially motivated intrinsic goals. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2006.12122, 2020.
Thomas Carta, Pierre-Yves Oudeyer, Olivier Sigaud, and Sylvain Lamprier. Eager: Asking and
  answering questions for automatic reward shaping in language-guided rl. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 35:12478–12490, 2022.
Thomas Carta, Clément Romac, Thomas Wolf, Sylvain Lamprier, Olivier Sigaud, and Pierre-Yves
  Oudeyer. Grounding large language models in interactive environments with online reinforcement
  learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.02662, 2023.
Liting Chen, Lu Wang, Hang Dong, Yali Du, Jie Yan, Fangkai Yang, Shuang Li, Pu Zhao, Si Qin,
  Saravan Rajmohan, et al. Introspective tips: Large language model for in-context decision mak-
  ing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.11598, 2023.
Maxime Chevalier-Boisvert, Dzmitry Bahdanau, Salem Lahlou, Lucas Willems, Chitwan Saharia,
 Thien Huu Nguyen, and Yoshua Bengio. Babyai: A platform to study the sample efficiency of
 grounded language learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.08272, 2018.
Aakanksha Chowdhery, Sharan Narang, Jacob Devlin, Maarten Bosma, Gaurav Mishra, Adam
  Roberts, Paul Barham, Hyung Won Chung, Charles Sutton, Sebastian Gehrmann, et al. Palm:
  Scaling language modeling with pathways. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.02311, 2022.
Tanmoy Chowdhury, Chen Ling, Xuchao Zhang, Xujiang Zhao, Guangji Bai, Jian Pei, Haifeng
  Chen, and Liang Zhao. Knowledge-enhanced neural machine reasoning: A review. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2302.02093, 2023.
Felipe Codevilla, Matthias Müller, Antonio López, Vladlen Koltun, and Alexey Dosovitskiy. End-
  to-end driving via conditional imitation learning. In 2018 IEEE International Conference on
  Robotics and Automation, pp. 4693–4700. IEEE, 2018.
Cédric Colas, Tristan Karch, Nicolas Lair, Jean-Michel Dussoux, Clément Moulin-Frier, Peter
   Dominey, and Pierre-Yves Oudeyer. Language as a cognitive tool to imagine goals in curiosity
   driven exploration. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:3761–3774, 2020.
Cédric Colas, Tristan Karch, Clément Moulin-Frier, and Pierre-Yves Oudeyer. Language and culture
   internalization for human-like autotelic ai. Nature Machine Intelligence, 4(12):1068–1076, 2022.


                                                10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Marc-Alexandre Côté, Akos Kádár, Xingdi Yuan, Ben Kybartas, Tavian Barnes, Emery Fine, James
 Moore, Matthew Hausknecht, Layla El Asri, Mahmoud Adada, et al. Textworld: A learning
 environment for text-based games. In Computer Games: 7th Workshop, CGW 2018, pp. 41–75.
 Springer, 2019.

National Research Council et al. How people learn: Brain, mind, experience, and school: Expanded
  edition, volume 1. National Academies Press, 2000.

Yuqing Du, Olivia Watkins, Zihan Wang, Cédric Colas, Trevor Darrell, Pieter Abbeel, Abhishek
  Gupta, and Jacob Andreas. Guiding pretraining in reinforcement learning with large language
  models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.06692, 2023.

Lasse Espeholt, Hubert Soyer, Remi Munos, Karen Simonyan, Vlad Mnih, Tom Ward, Yotam
  Doron, Vlad Firoiu, Tim Harley, Iain Dunning, et al. Impala: Scalable distributed deep-rl with im-
  portance weighted actor-learner architectures. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
  pp. 1407–1416. PMLR, 2018.

Benjamin Eysenbach, Abhishek Gupta, Julian Ibarz, and Sergey Levine. Diversity is all you need:
  Learning skills without a reward function. arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.06070, 2018.

Ji He, Mari Ostendorf, and Xiaodong He. Reinforcement learning with external knowledge and
   two-stage q-functions for predicting popular reddit threads. arXiv preprint arXiv:1704.06217,
   2017.

Jonathan Ho and Stefano Ermon. Generative adversarial imitation learning. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 29, 2016.

Kelli D Humbird, J Luc Peterson, and Ryan G McClarren. Deep neural network initialization with
  decision trees. IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems, 30(5):1286–1295,
  2018.

Yiding Jiang, Shixiang Shane Gu, Kevin P Murphy, and Chelsea Finn. Language as an abstrac-
  tion for hierarchical deep reinforcement learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 32, 2019.

Leslie Pack Kaelbling, Michael L Littman, and Anthony R Cassandra. Planning and acting in
  partially observable stochastic domains. Artificial Intelligence, 101(1-2):99–134, 1998.

Alexander S Klyubin, Daniel Polani, and Chrystopher L Nehaniv. Empowerment: A universal
  agent-centric measure of control. In IEEE Congress on Evolutionary Computation, volume 1, pp.
  128–135. IEEE, 2005.

Heinrich Küttler, Nantas Nardelli, Thibaut Lavril, Marco Selvatici, Viswanath Sivakumar, Tim
  Rocktäschel, and Edward Grefenstette. Torchbeast: A pytorch platform for distributed rl. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1910.03552, 2019.

Heinrich Küttler, Nantas Nardelli, Alexander Miller, Roberta Raileanu, Marco Selvatici, Edward
  Grefenstette, and Tim Rocktäschel. The nethack learning environment. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 33:7671–7684, 2020.

Iou-Jen Liu, Xingdi Yuan, Marc-Alexandre Côté, Pierre-Yves Oudeyer, and Alexander Schwing.
  Asking for knowledge (afk): Training rl agents to query external knowledge using language. In
  International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 14073–14093. PMLR, 2022.

Jelena Luketina, Nantas Nardelli, Gregory Farquhar, Jakob Foerster, Jacob Andreas, Edward Grefen-
   stette, Shimon Whiteson, and Tim Rocktäschel. A survey of reinforcement learning informed by
   natural language. arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.03926, 2019.

Lina Mezghani, Piotr Bojanowski, Karteek Alahari, and Sainbayar Sukhbaatar. Think before you
  act: Unified policy for interleaving language reasoning with actions. In Workshop on Reincarnat-
  ing Reinforcement Learning at ICLR, 2023.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Candice M Mills, Cristine H Legare, Megan Bills, and Caroline Mejias. Preschoolers use questions
  as a tool to acquire knowledge from different sources. Journal of Cognition and Development, 11
  (4):533–560, 2010.
Suvir Mirchandani, Siddharth Karamcheti, and Dorsa Sadigh. Ella: Exploration through learned
  language abstraction. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:29529–29540,
  2021.
Volodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, David Silver, Alex Graves, Ioannis Antonoglou, Daan Wier-
  stra, and Martin Riedmiller. Playing atari with deep reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1312.5602, 2013.
Jesse Mu, Victor Zhong, Roberta Raileanu, Minqi Jiang, Noah Goodman, Tim Rocktäschel, and
  Edward Grefenstette. Improving intrinsic exploration with language abstractions. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:33947–33960, 2022.
Pierre-Yves Oudeyer, Frdric Kaplan, and Verena V Hafner. Intrinsic motivation systems for au-
  tonomous mental development. IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation, 11(2):265–
  286, 2007.
Deepak Pathak, Pulkit Agrawal, Alexei A Efros, and Trevor Darrell. Curiosity-driven exploration
  by self-supervised prediction. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 2778–2787.
  PMLR, 2017.
Vitchyr H Pong, Murtaza Dalal, Steven Lin, Ashvin Nair, Shikhar Bahl, and Sergey Levine. Skew-
  fit: state-covering self-supervised reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Ma-
  chine Learning, pp. 7783–7792, 2020.
Roberta Raileanu and Tim Rocktäschel.       Ride: Rewarding impact-driven exploration for
  procedurally-generated environments. arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.12292, 2020.
Machel Reid, Yutaro Yamada, and Shixiang Shane Gu. Can wikipedia help offline reinforcement
 learning? arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.12122, 2022.
Mikayel Samvelyan, Robert Kirk, Vitaly Kurin, Jack Parker-Holder, Minqi Jiang, Eric Hambro,
 Fabio Petroni, Heinrich Kuttler, Edward Grefenstette, and Tim Rocktäschel. Minihack the planet:
 A sandbox for open-ended reinforcement learning research. In Thirty-fifth Conference on Neural
 Information Processing Systems Datasets and Benchmarks Track, 2021.
Jürgen Schmidhuber. A possibility for implementing curiosity and boredom in model-building neu-
   ral controllers. In Proc. of the International Conference on Simulation of Adaptive Behavior:
   From animals to animats, pp. 222–227, 1991.
Mohit Shridhar, Xingdi Yuan, Marc-Alexandre Côté, Yonatan Bisk, Adam Trischler, and Matthew
 Hausknecht. Alfworld: Aligning text and embodied environments for interactive learning. arXiv
 preprint arXiv:2010.03768, 2020.
Andrew Silva and Matthew Gombolay. Encoding human domain knowledge to warm start rein-
  forcement learning. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 35,
  pp. 5042–5050, 2021.
David Silver, Aja Huang, Chris J Maddison, Arthur Guez, Laurent Sifre, George Van Den Driessche,
  Julian Schrittwieser, Ioannis Antonoglou, Veda Panneershelvam, Marc Lanctot, et al. Mastering
  the game of go with deep neural networks and tree search. Nature, 529(7587):484–489, 2016.
DJ Strouse, Kate Baumli, David Warde-Farley, Volodymyr Mnih, and Steven Stenberg Hansen.
  Learning more skills through optimistic exploration. In International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2021.
Hugo Touvron, Thibaut Lavril, Gautier Izacard, Xavier Martinet, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Timothée
  Lacroix, Baptiste Rozière, Naman Goyal, Eric Hambro, Faisal Azhar, et al. Llama: Open and
  efficient foundation language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.13971, 2023.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Jack Urbanek, Angela Fan, Siddharth Karamcheti, Saachi Jain, Samuel Humeau, Emily Dinan, Tim
  Rocktäschel, Douwe Kiela, Arthur Szlam, and Jason Weston. Learning to speak and act in a
  fantasy text adventure game. arXiv preprint arXiv:1903.03094, 2019.
Oriol Vinyals, Igor Babuschkin, Wojciech M Czarnecki, Michaël Mathieu, Andrew Dudzik, Juny-
  oung Chung, David H Choi, Richard Powell, Timo Ewalds, Petko Georgiev, et al. Grandmaster
  level in starcraft ii using multi-agent reinforcement learning. Nature, 575(7782):350–354, 2019.
Nicholas Waytowich, Sean L Barton, Vernon Lawhern, and Garrett Warnell. A narration-
  based reward shaping approach using grounded natural language commands. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1911.00497, 2019.
Yunqiu Xu, Meng Fang, Ling Chen, Yali Du, Joey Tianyi Zhou, and Chengqi Zhang. Deep rein-
  forcement learning with stacked hierarchical attention for text-based games. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 33:16495–16507, 2020.
Yifeng Zhang, Ming Jiang, and Qi Zhao. Query and attention augmentation for knowledge-based
  explainable reasoning. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
  Pattern Recognition, pp. 15576–15585, 2022.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A     A PPENDIX
The supplementary material provides additional results, discussions, and implementation details.

       • In Section A.1, we discuss the limitations of our PAE approach and provide insights on
         related work.
       • In Section A.2, we detail the BabyAI and MiniHack environments and the chosen testing
         tasks.
       • In Section A.3, we provide the implementation and training details for the PAE and the
         baseline algorithms.
       • In Section A.4, we describe our PAE algorithm and the baseline algorithms.
       • In Section A.5, we present additional experimental results and analysis.

A.1   L IMITATIONS AND D ISCUSSIONS

Limitations Despite the impressive results of our approach, we acknowledge at least two limitations.
Firstly, our framework relies on environments like BabyAI and MiniHack to provide knowledge.
This dependency means that applying PAE in environments lacking Oracle knowledge is challeng-
ing. However, we are fully committed to exploring the use of Large Language Models to provide
knowledge. Secondly, our current approach only accepts unimodal knowledge in natural language.
More exciting extensions will involve human interaction to provide more natural and multimodal
knowledge, which deserves further exploration.
Relationship with LLM-based frameworks LLM-based agents are gaining popularity in solving
RL tasks, and very recent studies have shown considerable potential (Carta et al., 2023; Chen et al.,
2023). There are currently two main categories of LLM-based agents for decision-making: 1. Fine-
tuning LLMs using RL for decision-making, and 2. Employing LLMs directly for decision-making
as plug-ins. These differ significantly from PAE, which uses external knowledge to enhance RL
algorithms. In contrast, recent LLM-based agent studies primarily showcase the abilities of LLMs
or expand their capabilities using RL methods. In our PAE approach, LLMs are a tool to aid agents
in understanding the semantics of knowledge.

A.2   E NVIRONMENT AND TASK D ETAILS

BabyAI and Minigrid The BabyAI platform enables research in grounded language learning in-
volving humans. In BabyAI, agents maximize rewards by completing tasks within limited steps,
guided by language instructions. The platform utilizes a grid world environment (Minigrid), a par-
tially observable 2D grid world housing agents and objects (available in 6 colors): boxes, balls,
doors, and keys. These entities occupy N × M tiled rooms interconnected by doors, which may be
locked or closed. Agents can pick up, drop, and move objects, while doors require color-matching
keys for unlocking. As shown in Figure 6, we evaluated our approach in the BabyAI across six
environments spanning two task types: the Key Corridor task (K EY C ORR S3R3, K EY C ORR S4R3,
K EY C ORR S5R3) and the Obstructed Maze task (O BSTR M AZE 1D L , O BSTR M AZE 2D LHB , O B -
STR M AZE 1Q). Table 2 illustrates critical properties of the Minigrid environment. Table 3 shows the
66 categories of templates provided by BabyAI, totaling 652 pieces of language knowledge.
Key Corridor In the Key Corridor task, the ‘S’ in the environment name’s suffix indicates the room’s
size, while ‘R’ signifies the number of rows. The agent must retrieve an item behind a locked door.
The key, concealed in a different room, must be found by the agent exploring the environment.
Figure 11 illustrates the flow chart for the agent to complete the Key Corridor tasks.
Obstructed Maze In the Obstructed Maze task, a small blue ball is concealed in a corner. With the
door locked and blocked by the ball, the key to unlock it is hidden inside a box. The agent must
execute a series of precise steps. Typically, this involves opening the box to obtain the correctly
colored key, using the key to unlock the door, and subsequently accessing the door to reach the
objective. Figure 12 illustrates the flow chart for the agent to complete the Obstructed Maze tasks.
MiniHack The MiniHack environment is a graphical adaptation of NetHack (Küttler et al., 2020),
featuring a richer observation space compared to BabyAI. It includes more symbols and supports


                                                 14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


          (a) KeyCorridorS3R3               (b) KeyCorridorS4R3                (c) KeyCorridorS5R3


          (d) ObstructedMaze-1Dl          (e) ObstructedMaze-2D1hb            (f) ObstructedMaze-1Q

            Figure 6: Six challenging environments in BabyAI we used to evaluate PAE.


up to 75 different actions. Observations comprise a 21 × 79 matrix of glyph identifiers, a 21-
dimensional vector detailing agent statistics, location and health, and real natural language messages
received during gameplay. As shown in Figure 7, we evaluate our approach in five environments
of MiniHack, including two task types: navigation tasks (R IVER -M ONSTER , M ULTI ROOM -N4-
M ONSTER) and skill acquisition tasks (L AVAC ROSS -R ING , L AVAC ROSS -P OTION , L AVAC ROSS -
F ULL). Navigation tasks in MiniHack challenge the agent program to navigate various obstacles,
like crossing a river by maneuvering boulders or traversing intricate or randomly generated mazes
to reach a specific destination. Skill Acquisition tasks leverage the extensive variety of NetHack’s
objects, monsters, and dungeon features, including their interplay. For instance, to wear a ring, the
agent must choose the PUTON action, select the ring from the inventory, and decide which hand to
wear it on. Table 2 details MiniHack’s main features, while Table 4 enumerates some real natural
language messages received by the agent during gameplay.
Knowledge in BabyAI and MiniHack (1) The knowledge presented in Table 3 for BabyAI and in
Table 4 for MiniHack can be regarded as target states. For example, in MiniGrid, the message “go
to the door” can be interpreted as “(in this state), go to the door.” In MiniHack, the message “the o is
killed!” can be interpreted as ”(in this state), kill the o!”. We can view these system text descriptions
as the required states that the Planner hopes the Actor will achieve after taking a series of actions.
Consequently, the Actor must either take the appropriate action to achieve these goals or extract
useful strategies from the actions (trajectories) previously taken toward these goals. (2) Much of
the knowledge in MiniHack does not directly contribute to task completion. Given that MiniHack’s
knowledge is derived from actual player feedback during gameplay, it naturally includes irrelevant or
emotional messages, such as “ouch!” and “never mind.” A rough estimate is provided here: an agent
capable of solving the Lavacross task will encounter approximately 80 messages, of which only
6-10 (8-13%) are necessary for a successful trajectory. This requires the Planner to semantically
understand these environment messages and filter and exclude those useless knowledge.

A.3     I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS

A.3.1    M ODEL ARCHITECTURE DETAILS OF P LANNER
This section provides more details of the Planner architecture used in our method. Planner consists
of three components, i.e., encoding, alignment, and forwarding of states and knowledge.
Encoding Following BabyAI, the environment observation is a symbolic H × W × 3 fully observed
representation, with N varying according to the environment’s size. Each cell in the H × W grid
has 3 features indicating the object’s type (e.g., boxes, balls, doors, keys), color (from 6 possible


                                                   15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


       Table 2: Examples of BabyAI and MiniHack environments and their entity labeling.

      Illustration                          Observation                           Other Properties
                                                                           Action:
                                Observation:        In BabyAI, the         Turn left, Turn right, Move for-
                                agent’s observation space is an ego-       ward, Pick up an object, Drop,
                  Goal          centric 7x7 grid representation ori-       Toggle, Done
                         Door
                                ented in the direction the agent           Reward:
                Door
                                faces. Each cell within this grid          A reward of ‘1 - 0.9 ×
           Agent
                         Box    has three defining features: object,       (step count / max steps)’ is
               Obstruction
                                color, and state. These features           given for success and 0 for fail-
                                identify the object in the cell, its       ure.
                                color, and its state (e.g., distinguish-   Termination:
                                ing between a locked and unlocked          The agent picks up the correct
                                door).                                     object.
                                                                           Timeout.
                                                                           Action:
                                Observation: In MiniHack, the
                                                                           MiniHack contains 75 actions,
                                agent’s observation consists of a
                                                                           including movement com-
                                21 × 79 matrix of glyph identifiers,
                                                                           mands, managing inventory,
                                a 21-dimensional vector with the
                                                                           casting spells, chopping wands,
                                agent’s statistics (like location and
                                                                           and more.
                                health), and a series of messages.
                                                                           Reward & Termination:
                                A “message” is the UTF-8 encod-
                                                                           MiniHack’s RewardManager
                                ing of the on-screen message dis-
                                                                           allows you to specify one or
                                played at the top of the screen, rep-
                                                                           more events that can yield
                                resented as a 256-dimensional vec-
                                                                           varying (positive or negative)
                                tor. Each glyph represents a com-
                                                                           rewards. It also enables you to
                                pletely unique entity, with integers
                                                                           control which subsets of events
                                ranging from 0 to MAX GLYPH
                                                                           are sufficient or required for
                                (5991).
                                                                           episode termination.


choices), and its state (like open or closed for doors). The Planner embeds these features into
type/color/state embeddings with dimensions of 5, 3, and 2, resulting in a visual embedding s0 of
size HW × 10. To process s0 , the Planner employs a 4-layer shape-preserving convolution neural
network interleaved with the Exponential Linear Units, where each convolution layer has 16 filters
with a size of 3times3, a stride of 1 and padding of 1. The convolution neural network’s output
ŝt provides an embedding layer sized HW × 16. The Planner integrates a randomly initialized,
trainable position embedding Epos with Conv(s0 ) to encapsulate the state’s content and spatial
features and make preparations for alignment.
Meanwhile, the Planner utilized a pre-trained BERT model with frozen parameters to understand
the semantics and encode knowledge. Specifically, we use the vector output of the encoder (in this
case, BERT) in the [CLS] position for the sentence embedding. This model encoded a set of n
natural language instructions, supplied by the Oracle, into instruction embeddings with dimensions
of n×768. Subsequently, a linear projection layer transformed these embeddings to produce outputs
with dimensions of n × 16, denoting as k̂.
Alignment To integrate the two types of input embeddings, ŝ0 ∈ RHW ×10 , k̂ ∈ Rn×16 , we employ
the scaled dot-product cross-attention mechanism. The query Q is computed using k̂WQ , and the
key and value are derived from ŝt WK and ŝt WV , respectively.
Forward After aligning knowledge and environment states, the cross-attention layer yields an out-
put, k̂s0 , which is a n × 16 context vector capturing the correlation between the knowledge set and
the current state. We project this context vector onto n-dimensional logits through a linear layer and
finally get the most suitable external knowledge for the Actor after softmax sampling.


                                                        16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 3: All knowledge is provided by BabyAI and covers 66 template categories totaling 652
entries. [C] is one of 6 possible colors: green, grey, yellow, blue, purple, and red.

           Go to the <Object>                 Open the <Object>                       Pick Up the <Object>
           go to the ball
           go to the box                                                               pick up the ball
           go to the door                     open the box                             pick up the box
           go to the key                      open the door                            pick up the key
           go to the <C> ball                 open the <C> box                         pick up the <C> ball
           go to the <C> box                  open the <C> door                        pick up the <C> box
           go to the <C> door                                                          pick up the <C> key
           go to the <C> key
                                     Put the <Object> Next to the <Object>
     put the ball next to the ball     put the ball next to the <C> ball
     put the ball next to the box      put the ball next to the <C> box
     put the ball next to the door     put the ball next to the <C> door       put the <C> box next to the <C> ball
     put the ball next to the key      put the ball next to the <C> key        put the <C> box next to the <C> box
     put the box next to the ball      put the box next to the <C> ball        put the <C> box next to the <C> door
     put the box next to the box       put the box next to the <C> box         put the <C> box next to the <C> key
     put the box next to the door      put the box next to the <C> door        put the <C> key next to the <C> ball
     put the box next to the key       put the box next to the <C> key         put the <C> key next to the <C> box
     put the key next to the ball      put the key next to the <C> ball        put the <C> key next to the <C> door
     put the key next to the box       put the key next to the <C> box         put the <C> key next to the <C> key
     put the key next to the door      put the key next to the <C> door
     put the key next to the key       put the key next to the <C> key


        (a) LavaCross-Ring               (b) LavaCross-Potion                          (c) LavaCross-Full


         (d) MultiRoom-N4-Monster                                          (e) River-Monster
           Figure 7: Five challenging environments in MiniHack we used to evaluate PAE.


A.3.2     M ODEL ARCHITECTURE DETAILS OF ACTOR
This section details the Actor architecture used in our approach. The Actor consists of a policy
network and a discriminative network.
The policy network adopts a similar network architecture as the Planner, with the difference that the
inputs to the policy network at each time step t are a partial observation of size 7 × 7 × 3 and a
single piece of knowledge k filtered by the Planner. Due to the reduction of the information content
of the input state, we remove the shape-preserving convolution and add the position information
directly to the state embedding p st , obtaining p ŝt of size (7 × 7) × 10. For the knowledge selected
by the Planner, we utilize the same parameter-frozen BERT model to get the knowledge embedding
k̂ of dimension 64 after a linear projection. We compute the cross attention of p ŝt and k̂ by using


                                                      17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 4: Some natural language messages in MiniHack. A “message” is the UTF-8 encoding of the
on-screen message displayed at the top of the screen.

              River-Monster                           MultiRoom-N4-Monster                                  LavaCross
 -the stairs are solidly fixed to the floor.    -in what direction?                            -what do you want to throw?
 -with great effort you move the boulder. -that hurts!                                         -you would burn to a crisp trying to pick
 -that was close.                               -it’s a wall.                                  things up.
 -it’s solid stone.                             -you see no door there.                        -what do you want to use or apply?
 -you don’t have anything to zap.               -you kick at empty space.                      -you move over some lava.
 -you hit the o.                                -you strain a muscle.                          -the flint stone falls down the stairs.
 -you try to crawl out of the water.            -this door is locked.                          -the flint stone hits another object.
 -your movements are slowed slightly            -dumb move!                                    -you see here a uncursed flint stone.
 because of your load.                          -ouch!                                         -sorry, i don’t know how to use that.
 -the o is killed!                              -as you kick the door, it crashes open!        -you float in the opposite direction.
 -you try to move the boulder but in vain. -this door is broken.                               -there is a staircase up here.
 -you pull free from the o.                     -you hear the wailing of the banshee…          -you don’t have anything to drink.
 -you are almost hit by a dart.                 - as you kick the door, it shatters to pieces! -in what direction?
 -the o picks up a food ration.                 -this doorway has no door.                     -it’s a wall.
 -you have a little trouble lifing i –a scroll. -what a strange direction!                     -there is nothing here to pick up.
 -you have a little trouble lifting j –a o      -your leg feels better.                        -you don’t have anything to use or apply.
 corpse.                                        -never mind.                                   -emile’s ghost touches you!
 -…                                             -…                                             -agent’s ghost touches you!
                                                                                               -…


k̂t to generate query Q, p ŝt for key K and value Q. Then, we used four strided convolution layers
to extract the state information to get 1 × 1 × 32 state embedding. Finally, we concatenated state
embedding and knowledge-state alignment embedding and passed it through one linear layer and
softmax layer to get the logit distribution over the seven actions.
The Actor uses a separate discriminative network qϕ (k|p st ) to infer the knowledge provided by
the Planner from the learned strategies. Intuitively, the Actor is motivated to bridge the connection
between knowledge and states and explore states with a close relationship with k. The discriminative
network qϕ (k|p st ) is optimized using a cross-entropy loss Lϕ , denoting as:
                                              X
                            Lϕ (p st , k) = −    (k ′ = k) · log(qϕ (k ′ |p st ))                (13)
                                                          k′ ∈K

Specifically, we employ a same-structure strided convolution network in the policy network to get
the state feature p s̃t , and knowledge embeddings k̂ similar to the Planner:

                                 s̃t = Conv(p st )                                         ∈ R1×32
                                                                                                                                    (14)
                                k̂a = Proj(LM([k (1) , k (2) , . . . , k (n) ]))           ∈ Rn×32
Then a dot-product operation between p s̃t and knowledge embeddings is performed, followed by a
softmax layer outputting qϕ (k|p st ):
                                                                              T
                                             qϕ (k|p st ) = SoftMax(k̂a · p˜st )                                                    (15)

Interestingly, whereas the discriminative network was initially derived from the definition of mutual
information, we find that the discriminative network can be viewed as predicting and modeling the
knowledge distribution of the planner from its perspective to strengthen the connection between
state and knowledge.

A.3.3      T RAINING DETAILS

Each model was trained using five independent seeds on a system with 112 Intel® Xeon® Platinum
8280 cores and 6 Nvidia RTX 3090 GPUs. Run times ranged from 10 hours (for O BSTRUCTED -
M AZE 1D L) to 100 hours (for the longest K EY C ORRIDOR S5R3 task).


                                                                  18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.3.4   H YPERPARAMETERS
For PAE, we ran a grid search over batch size ∈ {8, 32, 150}, unroll length ∈
{20, 40, 100, 200}, entropy cost for the Actor ∈ {0.0001, 0.0005, 0.001}, the Actor learning rate
∈ {0.0001, 0.0005, 0.001}, the Planner learning rate ∈ {0.0001, 0.0005, 0.001}, entropy cost for
the Planner ∈ {0.001, 0.005, 0.01}. Table 5 shows the best parameters obtained from the search.
For RND and ICM, we followed previous work (Raileanu & Rocktäschel, 2020) and used batch
size of 32, unroll length of 100, RMSProp optimizer learning rate of 0.0001 with ϵ = 0.01 and
momentum of 0, intrinsic reward coefficient of 0.1, and entropy coefficient of 0.0005, which were
the best values they found using grid searches in the same tasks.
For AMIGo and L-AMIGo, we followed previous work (Campero et al., 2020; Mu et al., 2022) and
used teacher policy batch size of 32, student policy batch size of 32, teacher grounder batch size
of 100, RMSProp optimizer learning rate of 0.0001 with ϵ = 0.01 and momentum of 0, intrinsic
reward coefficient of 1, unroll length of 100, value loss cost of 0.5, entropy cost of 0.0005, which
were the best values for the same tasks described in their paper.


                 Table 5: Hyperparameters of PAE adopted in all the experiments.
            Parameter                                                       Value
            Actor batch size B                                              32
            Planner batch size Bp                                           32
            Unroll Length                                                   100
            Discount                                                        0.99
            Value loss cost                                                 0.5
            Actor entropy cost                                              0.0005
            Planner entropy cost                                            0.5
            Actor mutual information cost αI                                0.0001
            Actor cross attention head number                               1
            Planner cross attention head number                             1
            Pretrained language model                                       Bert-base
            Pretrained language model output dim                            768
            Actor language embedding dim                                    64
            Planner language embedding dim                                  256
            Planner embedding projection dim                                16
            Actor learning rate                                             5e-4
            Planner learning rate                                           5e-4
            Adam betas                                                      (0.9, 0.999)
            Adam ϵ                                                          1e-8
            Clip gradient norm                                              40.0


                                                19
     Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


     A.4     A LGORITHMS D ETAILS

     A.4.1     A LGORITHMS DETAILS OF THE PAE
     Algorithm 1 illustrates the overall rollout process of PAE. We implemented the PAE and repro-
     duction baseline algorithms using TorchBeast2 (Küttler et al., 2019), an IMPALA-based PyTorch
     platform for rapid asynchronous parallel training in reinforcement learning.

   Algorithm 1: Asynchronous learning algorithm for PAE
   Input: Buffer B, Actor batch B, Planner batch Bp , Actor batch size B, Planner batch size Bp
   Initialize: B ← ∅, B ← ∅, Bp ← ∅, πa (at |st , k; ω) ← ω0 , πp (k|s0 , K; θ) ← θ0
                                               ∗                   ∗
 1 Function INTERACT (Actor Policy: πa , Planner Policy: πp , Buffer: B):
 2     {s0 , p s0 } ← Env.Reset(0)          ▷ s0 denotes full observation, p s0 denotes partial observation
 3     k ← πp∗ (k0 |s0 , K; θ ∗ )
 4     ksteps ← 0
 5     while True do
 6         at ← πa∗ (at |p st , k; ω ∗ )
 7         {st+1 , p st+1 , rt , kdone , sdone } ← Env.Step(at )          ▷ Interact with the environment
 8         ksteps ← ksteps + 1
 9         if sdone then
10               {s0 , p s0 } ← Env.Reset(0)                                     ▷ This episode is finished
11               k ← πp∗ (k0 |s0 , K; θ ∗ )
12               ksteps ← 0
13         end
14         if kdone then
15               k ← πp∗ (k|s0 , K; θ ∗ )       ▷ The Actor successfully followed the Planner’s guidance
16               ksteps ← 0
17         end
18         Update B                                 ▷ Update Buffer B using newly collected experience
19     end
20 end

21 Function MAIN():
22    πa∗ ← πa .copy()               ▷ Make a parameter-fixed copy of πa for environment interacting
23    πp∗ ← πp .copy()               ▷ Make a parameter-fixed copy of πp for environment interacting
24    T h ← Thread(INTERACT, πa∗ , πp∗ , B)             ▷ Create a thread for environment interacting
25    while not converged do
26        Update B ← B                                    ▷ Sample batch B of size B from Buffer B
27        Train πa (at |p st , k; ω) on B          ▷ Training policy πa using reinforcement learning
28        Train qϕ (k|p st ) on B ▷ Training discriminative network qϕ using supervised learning
29        Update πa∗ ← πa .copy()                                   ▷ Update πa∗ with latest model πa
30        Update Bp with {s0 , k, ksteps , sdone } from Bp
31        if |Bp | > Bp then
32             Train πp (k|s0 , K; θ) on Bp        ▷ Training policy πp using reinforcement learning
33             Bp ← ∅
34             Update πp∗ ← πp .copy()                              ▷ Update πp∗ with latest model πp
35        end
36    end
37    T h.join()                                             ▷ Stop interacting with the environment
38 end


        2
            https://github.com/facebookresearch/torchbeast


                                                       20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.4.2     D ETAILS OF THE BASELINE ALGORITHMS
Below, we describe the implementation details of the various baseline algorithms. IMPALA is an
off-policy actor-critic framework. The actor-critic agent maintains a policy πθ (a|x) and a value
function vθ (x), both parameterized by θ. Both the policy and value functions are refined using the
actor-critic update rule. IMPALA also incorporates an entropy regularization loss. The update is
derived from the gradient of a specific pseudo-loss function:
                                 X                  2
                    LValue (θ) =     (vs − Vθ (xs ))
                                 s∈T
                                     X
                   LPolicy (θ) = −         ρs log πθ (as |xs ) (rs + γvs+1 − Vθ (xs ))
                                     s∈T                                                          (16)
                                       XX
                   LEntropy (θ) = −             πθ (a|xs ) log πθ (a|xs )
                                       s∈T a
                   L(θ) = gv LValue (θ) + gp LPolicy (θ) + ge LEntropy (θ).

This decoupled architecture facilitates high throughput. Nonetheless, there can be a bias since the
policy generating the trajectory might lag several updates behind the learner’s policy when comput-
ing the gradient. IMPALA addresses this potential bias by employing the V-trace, which balances
the variance-contraction trade-off in these off-policy updates.
RND The main idea of RND is to calculate intrinsic reward based on the prediction error linked
to an agent’s transfer. RND employs two neural networks: a fixed, randomly initialized target
network that defines the prediction task and a predictor network trained on the agent’s collected
data. RND considers the prediction error from the predictor network, based on features produced
by the target network, as a reward for novel states. We followed AMIGo (Campero et al., 2020),
using a re-implemented version based on TorchBeast (Küttler et al., 2019) provided by (Raileanu &
Rocktäschel, 2020).
ICM utilizes curiosity as an intrinsic reward, defining it as the agent’s error in predicting its own
behavior’s consequences within a feature space learned through a self-supervised inverse dynamics
model. Specifically, ICM encodes states st and st+1 as features ϕ(st ) and ϕ(st+1 ), respectively,
trained to predict at (i.e., the inverse dynamics model). The forward model takes ϕ(st ) and at
as inputs and predicts the feature representation ϕ(st+1 ) for st+1 . The prediction error within the
feature space serves as a curiosity-driven intrinsic reward. We followed AMIGo (Campero et al.,
2020) using a re-implemented version of ICM provided by (Raileanu & Rocktäschel, 2020). based
on TorchBeast (Küttler et al., 2019).
AMIGo is a meta-learning method that automatically learns to self-propose adversarial motivational
intrinsic goals. AMIGo consists of two subsystems: a goal-conditioned student policy that outputs
the agent’s actions in the environment and a goal-generating teacher that guides the student’s train-
ing. These two components train in adversarial training, where the student maximizes rewards by
reaching the goal as quickly as possible, and the teacher maximizes rewards by proposing goals that
the student can reach but not too quickly. We use the open-source AMIGo (Campero et al., 2020)
code3 as a baseline for our PAE method.
L-AMIGo utilizes language as a generalized medium to emphasize relevant environmental abstrac-
tions. It is an extension of AMIGo where the teacher presents goals using language instead of
coordinates (x, y). The student is a conditional policy, receiving language goals gt instead of (x, y).
Specifically, the student network is decomposed into policy and grounding networks. The policy
network produces a distribution of goals based on the student’s state, while the grounding network
predicts the probability of achieving the goal.
L-NovelD combines natural language with an intrinsic motivation approach to reward states de-
scribed in natural language that transitions from low to high novelty. It is an extension of NovelD,
which includes two main terms. The first term measures the novelty of state transitions, encouraging
exploration without penalizing revisiting less novel states. The second term rewards the agent only
for first-time state visits in an episode.

   3
       https://github.com/facebookresearch/adversarially-motivated-intrinsic-goals


                                                    21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.5     A DDITIONAL R ESULTS

A.5.1       Q UANTITATIVE R ESULTS
Figure 4 shows the training curves of our PAE method alongside the IMPALA, RND, ICM, AMIGo,
L-NovelD, and L-AMIGo baseline algorithms. Each model was trained using five independent
random seeds. The results reported for each baseline and each environment are the best performance
configuration of the policy for that environment. Tables 6 and 7 give the quantitative results of these
comparison experiments in the BabyAI and MiniHack environments, respectively, and show the
average extrinsic reward and the number of steps (in millions) required for each model to converge.
Each entry consists of two rows of results, with the top row being the average extrinsic reward at
the end of training and the bottom row being the minimal stable steps to attain that reward. Lower
bottom row values signify quicker convergence, and “> x” indicates a lack of convergence within
the maximum training steps “x”.


               Table 6: Comparison of PAE and baseline methods in BabyAI environment
                                                 .
                                Key Corridor Tasks                                        Obstructed Maze Tasks
   Model      K EY C ORR S3R3      K EY C ORR S4R3   K EY C ORR S5R3   O BSTR M AZE 1D1    O BSTR M AZE 2D1 HB     O BSTR M AZE 1Q
                0.89 ± 0.002        0.92 ± 0.005        0.94 ± 0.001      0.93 ± 0.004         0.87 ± 0.018          0.89 ± 0.006
 PAE (Ours)
                     6M                 30M                 90M                6M                 150M                  150M
                0.86 ± 0.040        0.90 ± 0.011        0.93 ± 0.016      0.90 ± 0.030         0.23 ± 0.403          0.47 ± 0.029
  L-AMIGo
                    12M                 60M                160M               20M                 >200M                 >300M
                0.63 ± 0.097        0.15 ± 0.195        0.55 ± 0.484      0.79 ± 0.255         0.57 ± 0.164          0.60 ± 0.107
  L-NovelD
                   >20M                >60M                >200M             >20M                 >200M                 >300M
                0.43 ± 0.246        0.22 ± 0.343        0.43 ± 0.599      0.45 ± 0.366         0.10 ± 0.175          0.18 ± 0.023
   AMIGo
                   >20M                >60M                >200M             >20M                 >200M                 >300M
                0.04 ± 0.052        0.30 ± 0.511        0.00 ± 0.000      0.31 ± 0.542         0.00 ± 0.000          0.00 ± 0.000
      ICM
                   >20M                >60M                >200M              15M                 >200M                 >300M
                0.00 ± 0.000        0.00 ± 0.000        0.00 ± 0.000      0.00 ± 0.006         0.00 ± 0.000          0.00 ± 0.000
  IMPALA
                   >20M                >60M                >200M             >20M                 >200M                 >300M
                0.00 ± 0.000        0.00 ± 0.000        0.00 ± 0.000      0.00 ± 0.000         0.00 ± 0.000          0.00 ± 0.000
   RND
                   >20M                >60M                >200M             >20M                 >200M                 >300M


              Table 7: Comparison of PAE and baseline methods in MiniHack environment
                                                 .
   Model      L AVAC ROSS -R ING     L AVAC ROSS -P OTION    L AVAC ROSS -F ULL   M ULTIROOM -N4-M ONSTER         R IVER -M ONSTER
                 1.00 ± 0.001            0.99 ± 0.002           1.00 ± 0.001              0.72 ± 0.020              0.13 ± 0.018
 PAE (Ours)
                     22M                     35M                    24M                      >40M                      >20M
                 0.57 ± 0.223            0.58 ± 0.214           0.45 ± 0.111              0.31 ± 0.035              0.09 ± 0.016
  L-AMIGo
                    >40M                    >40M                   >40M                      >40M                      >20M
                 0.88 ± 0.197            0.99 ± 0.009           0.98 ± 0.015              0.51 ± 0.122              0.02 ± 0.017
  L-NovelD
                    >40M                     30M                    30M                      >40M                      >20M
                 0.46 ± 0.116            0.54 ± 0.048           0.44 ± 0.101              0.29 ± 0.026              0.08 ± 0.009
   AMIGo
                    >40M                    >40M                   >40M                      >40M                      >20M
                 0.00 ± 0.000            0.00 ± 0.000           0.00 ± 0.000              0.18 ± 0.199              0.12 ± 0.028
      ICM
                    >40M                    >40M                   >40M                      >40M                      >20M
                 0.00 ± 0.000            0.00 ± 0.000           0.00 ± 0.000              0.00 ± 0.000              0.00 ± 0.000
  IMPALA
                    >40M                    >40M                   >40M                      >40M                      >20M
                 0.00 ± 0.000            0.00 ± 0.000           0.00 ± 0.000              0.00 ± 0.000              0.00 ± 0.000
    RND
                    >40M                    >40M                   >40M                      >40M                      >20M



A.5.2       A BLATION E XPERIENTIAL R ESULTS
Figure 8 illustrates the effect of introducing external knowledge on PAE performance. Full-Model
is the full version of PAE. w/o Curriculum provides randomized guidance to the Actors through
external knowledge, while w/o Planner eliminates the Planner’s guidance.


                                                                 22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


           KeyCorrS3R3                          KeyCorrS4R3                 KeyCorrS5R3


           ObstrMaze1Dl                        ObstrMaze2Dlhb               ObstrMaze1Q


                           Full-Model (Ours)         w/o Curriculum   w/o Planner


                          Figure 8: Ablation of PAE’s external knowledge.


                                                   23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.5.3     Q UALITATIVE R ESULTS
Figure 9 shows an example of PAE completing a task in K EY C ORR S5R3. In this example, the Actor
first needs to explore the environment to find the key, then open the door of the corresponding color,
drop the key, and retrieve the item behind the door. Figure 10 shows the flow of the Planner forming
an automatic curriculum in KeyCorrS5R3 and the progressive acquisition of skills by the Actor.
Typically, in the early stages, the Planner provides easy guidance. As the training progresses and the
Actor’s ability increases, the Planner provides more hard guidance. We can see in the trajectory that
the Planner and Actor are progressing together and eventually complete the task successfully.

                    1                      2                       3                       4                       5


                    6                      7                       8                       9                      10


Figure 9: Example of PAE in completing a task in K EY C ORR S5R3. To save space, we only sampled
one sub-trajectory for display.



        Easy                                                                                                 Hard


   Go to the door       Open the door   Go to the purple door Open the grey door   Pick up the key   Pick up the ball

                                                    Curriculum


Figure 10: An illustration of the training process. The Planner forms an automatic curriculum as the
training progresses, and the Actor progressively masters the skills.


                                                          24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.6   F LOW C HART

Figure 11 and Figure 12 show flowcharts of the agent completing the Key Corridor task and the
Obstructed Maze task, respectively.

                                                            Ø Move forward
                                                            Ø Move forward
                                                            Ø Turn right
                                                            Ø Move forward                                         Begin
                                                            Ø Move forward
                                                            Ø Turn left
                                                            Ø …………                                           Go to the door
                                                            Ø Move forward

                                                                                               Yes                                         No
                                                                                                              Door locked?


            Ø Turn right
                                                                 Yes
            Ø Move forward                                                     Carrying key?                                               Open the door
            Ø …………                                                                                     No
            Ø Turn left
                                                    Open the [locked]                                                         Yes                                    No
            Ø Drop                                                                                                                          Find a ball?
                                                    door [using a key]
            Ø Turn left
            Ø Move forward
            Ø …………                                    Put down the key                                                                                         Yes                      No
                                                                                                                   Go to the ball                                         Find a key?
                                                  [in an appropriate place]
            Ø Move forward
            Ø Turn right
                                            Yes
                                                        Find a ball?                                              Pick up the ball                  Go to the key



                                Go to the ball                                                                         End                         Pick up the key



                               Pick up the ball



                                      End


                Figure 11: Flow chart of an agent completing Key Corridor tasks.


                                                                                                                      Begin



                                                                                                                  Go to the door


                                                                                                   Yes                                     No
                                                                                                                   Obstructed?
                                     Ø Turn right
                                     Ø Move forward                            Go to the [ball/box]
                                     Ø …………
                                     Ø Turn left
                                     Ø Drop                                   Pick up the [ball/box]
                                     Ø Turn left
                                     Ø Move forward
                                     Ø …………                                    Put down the [ball/box]
                                                                              [in an appropriate place]
                                     Ø Move forward
                                     Ø Turn right

                                                                                                   Yes                                     No
                                                                                                                   Door locked?


                                                                                                                                            Open the door
                                                              Yes                                           No
                                                                                   Carrying key?
                                                                                                                                   Yes                               No
                                                                                                                                                Find a ball?
                                Yes                                 No
                                             Color match?

                                                                                                                                                               Yes                      No
                  Open the [locked]                                                                                                                                       Find a key?
                                                                                                                  Go to the [color] ball
                  door [using a key]


                    Put down the key                                                  Yes
                [in an appropriate place]                                                          Color match?                                 Go to the [color] key


                                                  Yes                    Pick up the [color]                                                      Pick up the [color]
                      Find a ball?
                                                                                ball                                                                     key


                                                                                   End


              Figure 12: Flow chart of an agent completing Obstructed Maze tasks.


                                                                                                   25
