Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


O BJECT- CENTRIC ARCHITECTURES ENABLE EFFICIENT
CAUSAL REPRESENTATION LEARNING

 Amin Mansouri∗                          Jason Hartford∗               Yan Zhang
 Mila, Quebec AI Institute               Valence Labs                  Samsung - SAIT AI Lab, Montreal

 Yoshua Bengio
 Mila, Quebec AI Institute / U. Montreal / CIFAR



                                                A BSTRACT

          Causal representation learning has showed a variety of settings in which we can
          disentangle latent variables with identifiability guarantees (up to some reasonable
          equivalence class). Common to all of these approaches is the assumption that
          (1) the latent variables are represented as d-dimensional vectors, and (2) that
          the observations are the output of some injective generative function of these
          latent variables. While these assumptions appear benign, we show that when
          the observations are of multiple objects, the generative function is no longer
          injective and disentanglement fails in practice. We can address this failure by
          combining recent developments in object-centric learning and causal representation
          learning. By modifying the Slot Attention architecture (Locatello et al., 2020b),
          we develop an object-centric architecture that leverages weak supervision from
          sparse perturbations to disentangle each object’s properties. This approach is more
          data-efficient in the sense that it requires significantly fewer perturbations than
          a comparable approach that encodes to a Euclidean space and we show that this
          approach successfully disentangles the properties of a set of objects in a series of
          simple image-based disentanglement experiments.


1       I NTRODUCTION

Consider the image in Figure 1 (left). We can clearly see four different colored balls, each at a
different position. But asking, “Which is the first shape? And which is the second?” does not have a
clear answer: the image just depicts an unordered set of objects. This observation seems trivial, but it
implies that there exist permutations of the objects which leave the image unchanged. For example,
we could swap the positions of the two blue balls without changing a single pixel in the image.
In causal representation learning, the standard assumption is that our observations x are “rendered”
by some generative function g(·) that maps the latent properties of the image z to pixel space (i.e.
x = g(z)); the goal is to disentangle the image by finding an “inverse” map that recovers z from x
up to some irrelevant transformation. The only constraint on g(·) that is assumed by all recent papers
(for example Hyvarinen & Morioka, 2016; 2017; Locatello et al., 2020a; Khemakhem et al., 2020a;b;
Lachapelle et al., 2022; Ahuja et al., 2022a;b; 2023), is that g(·) is injective1 , such that g(z1 ) = g(z2 )
implies that z1 = z2 . But notice that if we represent the latents z as some d-dimensional vectors
in Euclidean space, then whenever we observe objects like those shown in Figure 1, this injectivity
assumption fails: symmetries in the objects’ pixel representation imply that there exist non-trivial
permutation matrices Π, such that g(z) = g(Πz). This is not just a theoretical inconvenience:
Figure 1 (right) shows that when the identity of the balls is not distinguishable, the disentanglement
performance of a recent approach from Ahuja et al. (2022b) is upper-bounded by 1/k where k is the
number of balls.
    ∗
     correspondence to amin.mansouri@mila.quebec or jason@valencelabs.com
    1
     Some papers place stronger constraints on g(·), such as linearity Hyvärinen & Oja, 2000; Squires et al.,
2023, sparsity Moran et al., 2022; Zheng et al., 2022, or constraints on g’s Jacobian Gresele et al., 2021; Brady
et al., 2023 but injectivity is the weakest assumption common to all approaches.


                                                       1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                 1.0

                                                                 0.8


                                                     MCC score
                                                                 0.6

                                                                 0.4
                                                                           Injective ResNet
                                                                 0.2       Non-injective ResNet
                                                                           Disentangled Slot Attention
                                                                 0.0
                                                                       1           2           3         4
                                                                                   Number of balls


Figure 1: (Left) An example image of simple objects. (Right) Mean correlation coefficient (MCC)
score which measures the correlation between inferred latent variables and their associated ground
truth values. Ahuja et al. (2022b)’s approach achieves almost perfect MCC scores (i.e. a score
≈ 1) when the ball color is used to make the generative function injective (“Injective ResNet”), but
achieves an MCC score of at most k1 where k is the number of objects when colors are selected
randomly (“Non-injective ResNet”). We show that it is possible to recover the injective performance
by disentangling object-centric representations (“Disentangled Slot Attention”).


In parallel to this line of work, there has been significant progress in the object-centric learning
literature (e.g. van Steenkiste et al., 2018a; Goyal et al., 2019; Locatello et al., 2020b; Goyal et al.,
2020; Lin et al., 2020; Zhang et al., 2023) that has developed a suite of architectures that allow us
to separate observations into sets of object representations. Two recent papers (Brady et al., 2023;
Lachapelle et al., 2023) showed that the additive decoders used in these architectures give rise to
provable object-wise disentanglement, but they did not address the task of disentangling the objects’
associated properties. In this paper we show that by leveraging object-centric architectures, we
effectively reduce the multi-object problem to a set of single-object disentanglement problems which
not only addresses injectivity failures, but also results in a significant reduction in the number of
perturbations we need to observe to disentangle properties using Ahuja et al. (2022b)’s approach. We
illustrate these results by developing a property disentanglement algorithm that combines Zhang et al.
(2023)’s SA-MESH object-centric architecture with Ahuja et al. (2022b)’s approach to disentangle-
ment and show that our approach is very effective at disentangling the properties of objects on both
2D and 3D synthetic benchmarks.
In summary, we make the following contributions:

    • We highlight two problems that arise from objects which violate standard assumptions used to
      identify latent variables (Section 3).
    • We show that these problems can be addressed by leveraging object-centric architectures, and
      that using object-centric architectures also enables us to use a factor of k fewer perturbations to
      disentangle properties, where k is the number of objects (Section 4).
    • We implement the first object-centric disentanglement approach that disentangles object proper-
      ties with identifiability guarantees (Section 5).
    • We achieve strong empirical results2 on both 2D and 3D synthetic benchmarks (Section 7).

2       BACKGROUND
Causal representation learning (Schölkopf et al., 2021) seeks to reliably extract meaningful latent
variables from unstructured observations such as images. This problem is impossible without
                                    R infinitely many latent distributions p(z) that are consistent with
additional structure because there are
the observed distribution, p(x) = p(x|z)dp(z), only one of which corresponds to the ground truth
distribution (Hyvärinen & Pajunen, 1999; Locatello et al., 2019). We therefore need to restrict the
solution space either through distributional assumptions on the form of the latent distribution p(z), or
through assumptions on the functional form of the generative function g : Z → X that maps from
the latent space to the observed space (Xi & Bloem-Reddy, 2023). A key assumption that (to the
    2
        The code to reproduce our results can be found at: https://github.com/amansouri3476/OC-CRL


                                                                 2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


best of our knowledge) is leveraged by all papers that provide identifiability guarantees, is that g(·)
is injective such that if we see identical images, the latents are identical (i.e. if g(z1 ) = g(z2 ) then
z1 = z2 ).
Given these restrictions, we can analyze the identifiability of latent variables for a given inference
algorithm by considering the set of optimal solutions that satisfy these assumptions. We say latent
variables are identified if the procedure will recover the latents exactly in the infinite data limit.
Typically, some irreducible indeterminacy will remain, so latent variables will be identified up to
some equivalence class A. For example, if the true latent vector is z, and we have an algorithm for
which all optimal solutions return a linear transformation of z such that, A = {A : ẑ = Az}, then we
say the algorithm is linearly identifies latent variables. We will call latent variables disentangled if the
learning algorithm recovers the true latent variables up to a permutation (corresponding to a relabeling
of the original variables), and element-wise transformation. That is, for all i, zi = hi (zπ(i) ), where
π is a permutation, and hi (·) is an element-wise function; for the results we consider in this paper
this function is simply a scaling and offset, fi (z) = ai zi + bi corresponding to a change of units of
measurement and intercept.
In this paper, we will build on a recent line of work that leverages paired samples from sparse
perturbations to identify latent variables (Locatello et al., 2020a; Brehmer et al., 2022; Ahuja et al.,
2022b). Our approach generalizes Ahuja et al. (2022b) to address the non-injectivity induced by
objects, so we will briefly review their main results. Ahuja et al. assume that they have access to
paired samples, (x, x′ ) where x = g(z), x′ = g(z ′ ), and zi is perturbed by a set of sparse offsets
∆ = {δ1 , . . . , δk }, such that zi′ = zi + δi for all i ∈ {1, . . . , k}. They show that if g(·) is an injective
analytic function from Rd → X , every δ ∈ ∆ is 1-sparse, and at least d linearly independent offsets
are observed, then an encoder, f that minimizes the following objective recovers the true z up to
permutations, scaling and an offset (Ahuja et al., 2022b, Theorem 1),
                                       h                          i
                                                                2
             fˆ ∈ arg minf ′ Ex,x′ ,δ (f ′ (x) + δ − f ′ (x′ ))          ⇒ fˆ(x) = ẑ = ΠΛz + c                (1)

where Π is a permutation matrix, Λ is an invertible diagonal matrix and c is an offset.


3    O BJECTS RESULT IN NON - IDENTIFIABILITY

We begin by formally characterizing the challenges that arise when images contain multiple objects.

Data generating process. We assume that a set Z := {zi }ki=1 of k objects is drawn from some joint
distribution, PZ . In order to compare set and vector representations, let vecπ (Z) denote a flattened
vector representation of Z ordered according to some permutation π ∈ Sym(k), the symmetric
group of permutations of k objects; when π is omitted, vec(Z) simply refers to an arbitrary default
ordering (i.e. the identity element of the group). Each object is described by a d-dimensional vector
of properties3 zi ∈ Rd , and hence vec(Z) ∈ Rkd . We say objects have shared properties if the
coordinates of zi have consistent meaning across objects. For example, the objects in Figure 1 (left),
each have x, y coordinates and a color which can be represented by its hue, so zi = [pix , piy , hi ]. In
general, the set of properties associated to an object can be different across objects, but for simplicity,
our discussion will focus on properties that are fully shared between all objects.

The non-injectivity problem. We observe images x which are generated via a generative function
g(·) that renders a set of object properties into a scene in pixel space, such that x = g(Z). While
g(·) is a set function, we can define an equivalent vector generative function, g, which, by definition,
produces the same output as g(Z); i.e. for all π ∈ Sym(k), g(vecπ (Z)) = g(Z). This generative
function g taking vectors as input is consistent with standard disentanglement assumptions except
that it is not injective:
Proposition 1. If g(vecπ (Z)) = g(Z) for all π ∈ Sym(k), then g(·) is not injective.
   3
     A natural extension of the perspective we take in this paper is to also treat properties as sets rather than
ordered vectors; for example, see Singh et al. (2023). We leave understanding the identifiability of these
approaches to future work.


                                                        3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Proof. The contrapositive of the definition of injectivity states that z1 ̸= z2 implies g(z1 ) ̸= g(z2 ),
but by definition of g(·), there exist z1 ̸= z2 such that g(z1 ) = g(z2 ). In particular, for any set Z and
permutations π1 ̸= π2 ∈ Sym(k), the vectors vecπ1 (Z) = z1 ̸= z2 = vecπ2 (Z).

This proposition simply states that if images are composed of sets of objects, then if we model the
generative function as a map from a Euclidean space, this map will not be injective by construction.
With the exception of Lachapelle et al. (2023), all of the causal representation learning papers cited in
section 6 assume the generative function g is injective. To see why injectivity is necessary in general,
consider an image with two objects. If the two objects are identical, then there are two disentangled
solutions corresponding to the two permutations, so it is not possible to identify a unique solution.

The object identity problem. When applying sparse perturbations on Z (see section 2), we are
effectively perturbing one coordinate of one object. However, how can we know which object of the
multiple possible objects in Z we have perturbed? In the case of injective mappings, this is simple:
since there is a consistent ordering for them, we know that a coordinate in vec(Z) corresponds to the
same object before and after the perturbation.
However, this is no longer the case in our setting. Since the objects are actually part of a set, we
cannot rely on their ordering: the perturbed object can, in principle, freely swap order with other
objects; there is no guarantee that the ordering before and after the perturbation remains the same. In
fact, we know that these ordering changes must be present due to the responsibility problem:
Proposition 2 (Zhang et al. (2020); Hayes et al. (2023)). If the data is generated according to the data
generating process described above with g(vecπ (Z)) := g(Z) and k > 1, then f (·) is discontinuous.


Proof Sketch. Consider Figure 2, notice that if we perform a 90◦ rotation in pixel space of the image,
the image is identical, but the latent space has been permuted, since each ball has swapped positions.
Because the image on the left and the image on the right are identical in pixel space, any encoder,
f : X → Rkd , will map them them to identical latents. There exists a continuous pixel-space rotation
from 0◦ to 90◦ , but it must entail a discontinous swap in which latent is responsible for which part of
pixel-space according to the encoder.

A general proof can be found in Hayes et al. (2023). These discontinuities manifest themselves as
changes in permutation from one vecπ1 (Z) to another vecπ2 ̸=π1 (Z). In disentanglement approaches
that leverage paired samples (e.g. Ahuja et al., 2022b; Brehmer et al., 2022), continuity enables the
learning algorithm to implicitly rely on the object identities to stay consistent. Without continuity,
one cannot rely on the fact that vec(Z) and vec(Z) + δ should be the same up to the perturbation
vector δ, because the perturbation may result in a discontinuous change of vec(Z) + δ when an
observation is encoded back to latent space. As a consequence, we lose track of which object we
have perturbed in the first place, so naı̈ve use of existing disentanglement methods fails.
Another challenge is that the encoder f (Equation 1) has to map observations to vec(Z) in a
discontinuous way, which is traditionally difficult to model with standard machine learning techniques.
In summary, the unordered nature of objects in Z results in non-injectivity, losing track of object
identities, and the need for learning discontinuous functions. These all contribute to the non-
identifiability of traditional disentanglement methods in theory and practice.


4    O BJECT- CENTRIC CAUSAL REPRESENTATION LEARNING

A natural solution to this problem is to recognize that the latent representations of multi-object
images are sets and should be treated as such by our encoders and decoders in order to enforce
invariance among these permutations. Both Brady et al. (2023) and Lachapelle et al. (2023) showed
that architectures that enforce an appropriate object-wise decomposition in their decoders provably
disentangle images into object-wise blocks of latent variables. These results do not disentangle the
properties of objects, but they solve an important precursor: the assumption that there exists an
object-wise decomposition of the generative function is sufficient to partition the latents into objects.


                                                    4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                      Rotate


               x = g([z1, z2, z3, z4])                                          x = g([z2, z3, z4, z1])
                      Original z                                                      Permuted z



Figure 2: An illustration of the object identity problem. Permuting the order of the latents
[z1 , z2 , z3 , z3 ] is equivalent to a 90 degree rotation in pixel-space.


Like these two papers, we will assume that natural images can be decomposed into objects,4 each of
which occupies a disjoint set of pixels. When this is the case, we say that an image is object-separable.
To define object separability formally, we will need to consider a partition P of an image into k
disjoint subsets of pixels P = {x(1) , . . . , x(k) } indexed by an index set IP = {1, . . . , k}; further,
denote an index set that indexes the set of latent variables Z as IZ . We can then say,
Definition 1. An image, x, is object-separable if there exists an object-wise partition P and a
bijection σ : IP → IZ that associates each subset of pixels in P with a particular element of the set
of latents, zi , such that each subset of pixels x(i) ∈ P is the output of an injective map with respect to
                                                       ′                                           ′
its associated latent zσ(i) . That is, for all i, (x(i) ⊂ g(Z ′ ), x(i) ⊂ g(Z)), we have that x(i) = x(i)
          ′
implies zσ(i)    = zσ(i) .

This definition says that an image can be separated into objects if it can be partitioned into parts such
that each part is rendered via an injective map from some latent zi . We can think of each x(i) as a
patch of pixels, with a bijection σ that relates each of the k patches of pixels in the partition {x(i) }ki=1
to a latent variable in Z = {zi }ki=1 . Each patch “depends” on its associated latent via an injective
map.
Brady et al. (2023) and Lachapelle et al. (2023) give two different formal characterizations of
partitions P that are consistent with our object-wise definition. Brady et al.’s characterization requires
that a differentiable generative function g is compositional, in the sense that each x(i) ∈ P only
functionally depends5 on a single zj ∈ Z, and irreducible in the sense no x(i) ∈ P can be further
decomposed into non-trivial subsets that have functionally independent latents. Lachapelle et al.’s
assumptionP   is weaker than ours in that they only require that the generative function is defined as
g(Z) = σ( zi ∈Z gi (zi )) where σ is an invertible function, and that g is a diffeomorphism that is
“sufficiently nonlinear” (see Assumption 2 Lachapelle et al., 2023); object-separable images are a
special case with σ as the identity function and each gi (·) rendering a disjoint subset of x, and hence
their results apply to our setting.

Disentangling properties with object-centric encoding. In section 3 we showed that the assump-
tions underlying sparse perturbation-based disentanglement approach are violated in multi-object
scenes. But, the results from Brady et al. (2023) and Lachapelle et al. (2023) show that the objects
can be separated into disjoint (but entangled) sets of latent variables. This suggests a natural approach
to disentangling properties in multi-object scenes:

   • we can reduce the multi-object disentanglement problem to a single-object problem with an
     object-wise partition of the image. Within each patch of pixels x(i) ∈ P injectivity holds, and
     so we no longer have multiple solutions at a patch level. This partition is identifiable and we
   4
      This is a pragmatic approximation that suffices for the purposes of this paper, but a careful treatment of
objects is far more subtle because what we interpret as an “object” often depends on a task or a choice of
hierarchy; for a more nuanced treatment, Smith (2019)’s Chapter 8 is an excellent introduction into the subtleties
around demarcating an “object”.
    5                                                                          i
      Functional dependence is defined by non-zero partial derivatives, i.e. ∂x
                                                                             ∂zj
                                                                                 ̸= 0.


                                                        5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


      can use an object-centric architecture to learn the object-wise partition. We require that this
      object-centric architecture can handle the responsibility problem.
    • we leverage Ahuja et al. (2022b)’s approach to using weak supervision to disentangle the
      properties of each object individually. Since we assume that properties between objects are
      shared, this requires a factor of k fewer perturbations in the perturbation set ∆, where k the
      number of objects.
    • we address the object identity problem where we lose track of object identities after perturbations
      through an explicit matching procedure that re-identifies the object being perturbed.

See section 5 for details of how we implement this. This approach not only addresses the challenges
outlined in Section 3, it also significantly reduces the number of perturbations that we have to apply
in order to disentangle shared properties.
Theorem 1 (informal). If a data generating process outputs observations with k objects that have
shared properties, then an object-centric architecture of the form F (x) := {f(x(i) )}x(i) ∈P where P
is an object-wise partition and f : X → Rd will disentangle in k times fewer perturbations than an
encoder of the form f : X → Rkd .

The proof is given in Appendix A. The main insight is that if we have an object-centric architecture
that learns an object-wise partition P and uses the same encoding function f on every patch, then
every perturbation provides weak supervision to every object, despite the fact that only one was
perturbed. As a result, we do not need to disentangle each object’s properties separately, and hence
we reduce the number of required interventions by a factor of k.

5     M ETHOD
Object-wise partitions There exist a number of ways to decompose an image into objects, but for
our purposes, pixel segmentation-based approaches (Greff et al., 2019; Locatello et al., 2020b; Zhang
et al., 2023) let us directly adapt existing disentanglement techniques to work with object-centric
encoders. A pixel segmentation encoder fˆ maps from images x to a set of slot vectors {s1 , . . . , sk },
each of which depends on a subset of the pixels x(i) ∈ P . Images are then reconstructed using a slot
decoder ĝ that maps from the set of slot representation back to pixel space. The dependence between
slots and patches of pixels is typically controlled by a soft-attention matrix, which will typically not
result in a partition of the pixels. In our implementation, we use Zhang et al.’s SA-MESH modification
of the original Locatello et al. slot attention architecture, which adds an entropy regularization term
to learn sparse attention matrices that do approximately partition the input by encouraging the subsets
of pixels x(i) to be disjoint (for details on the architectures, see Appendix B). Importantly for us,
Zhang et al. (2023) is exclusively multiset-equivariant (Zhang et al., 2022), which allows it to model
discontinuous functions, thus handling the responsibility problem.
Slot attention is usually trained with a reconstruction loss from relatively high-dimensional per-object
slot representations, si ∈ RD , but for the images that we work with, we want a relatively low
dimensional latent description (in the simplest case, just the two dimensions representing the (x, y)
coordinates of each object). To disentangle these high-dimensional slot representations, we simply
add a projection head, p̂ : si → ẑi , that is trained by a latent space loss.

Disentanglement via weak supervision with matching Ahuja et al. assume access to pairs of
images (x, x′ ) that differ by a sparse offset δ. They enforce this assumption via a disentanglement
loss that requires that the latent representations of this pair of images differ by δ, such that fˆ(x) + δ =
fˆ(x′ ). When using a slot attention architecture, we introduce a matching step to the loss to infer the
object to which the offset δ was applied. With 1-sparse δ vectors, the matching step reduces to a
                                                                    ′
simple minimization over a cost matrix that measures ∥ẑ(x (j) ) − (ẑ(x(i) ) + δ)∥2 for all pairs of
slots i, j. In Appendix D, we provide a more general matching procedure that applies to settings with
dense offsets δ. We jointly optimize the following reconstruction and disentanglement loss,


    fˆ, ĝ, p̂ ∈ arg min Ex [∥x − g(f (x))∥2 ] + Ex,x′ ,δ [min ∥(p(f (x′ )(j) ) − (p(f (x)(i) ) + δt )∥2 ]   (2)
                f,g,p                                       i,j



                                                       6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


The first term in this loss enforces that the encoder / decoder pair fˆ, ĝ capture enough information
in the slot representations si to reconstruct x. The second term contains the matching term and
ensures that the function that projects from slot representation to latents p̂ disentangles the slot
representations into individual properties. The offset δ could be known or unknown to the model,
and for the remainder of this paper, we focus on the more challenging and natural case of unknown
offsets. See appendix C for more details.


6    R ELATED WORK

Causal representation learning Our work builds on the nascent field of causal representation
learning (Schölkopf et al., 2021). In particular, our disentanglement approaches builds on ideas in
Ahuja et al. (2022b) which uses the same assumptions as Locatello et al. (2020a) but relaxes the
requirement that the latent variables are independently distributed. These approaches form part of a
larger body of recent work that shows the importance of sparsity and weak supervision from actions
in disentanglement (Lachapelle et al., 2022; Lachapelle & Lacoste-Julien, 2022; Brehmer et al., 2022;
Lippe et al., 2022; 2023b;a). In the appendix, we also show how known mechanisms from Ahuja
et al. (2022a) can be dealt with in our framework. A closely related, but more general setting, is the
recent progress on disentanglement from interventional distributions which do not require paired
samples (Ahuja et al., 2023; Buchholz et al., 2023; von Kügelgen et al., 2023); we believe a useful
extension of our approach would consider these settings. This literature builds on the foundational
work from the nonlinear independent component analysis (ICA) literature (Hyvarinen & Morioka,
2016; 2017; Hyvarinen et al., 2019; Khemakhem et al., 2020a).

Object-centric learning. Natural data can often be decomposed into smaller entities—objects—
that explain the data. The overarching goal of object-centric learning is to model such data in terms
of these multiple objects. The reason for this is simple: it is usually easier to reason over a small
set of relevant objects rather than, for example, a large grid of feature vectors. Representing data in
this way has downstream benefits like better robustness (Huang et al., 2020). An important line of
research in this area is how to obtain such objects from data like images and video in the first place.
Typically, a reconstruction setup is used: given an image input, the model learns the objects in the
latent space, which are then decoded back into the original image with a standard reconstruction
loss (Locatello et al., 2020b; van Steenkiste et al., 2018b). Nguyen et al. (2023) propose RSM,
a conceptually close idea to our work. They jointly learn object-centric representations with a
modular dynamics model by minimizing a rolled out reconstruction loss. However, they do not obtain
any disentanglement of object properties, and the form of our proposed weak-supervision provides
insights to the effectiveness of their method for improving generalization.
We use slot attention since it makes very few assumptions about the desired data. For instance, some
methods model foreground differently from background. Additionally, DINOSAUR (Seitzer et al.,
2022) shows recent success on more complex images, which demonstrates the versatility of the slot
attention approach. While in general object-centric models operate on image inputs and thus identify
visual objects, it is in principle applicable to other domains like audio (Reddy et al., 2023) as well.


7    E MPIRICAL EVALUATION

Setup. We evaluated our method on 2D and 3D synthetic image datasets that allowed us to carefully
control various aspects of the environment, such as the number of objects, their sizes, shapes, colors,
relative position, and dynamics. Examples of our 2D and 3D datasets are shown in figures 1,3
respectively. The object-wise true latents in either dataset consist of z = (px , py , h, s, r, ϕ), where
px , py denote the coordinates of the center of an object, followed by color hue h, shape s, size r, and
rotation angle ϕ about the z-axis. Therefore, we deal with both discrete and continuous properties.
For further details on the dataset generation, see appendix F.6.

Disentanglement Metrics. We compared ẑ—the projections of non-background slots—to the true
latents z of objects to measure the disentanglement of the properties in ẑ. We evaluated identifiability
of the learned representations either up to affine transformations or up to permutation and scaling.
These two metrics were computed by fitting a linear regression between z, ẑ and reporting the


                                                   7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 3: (Left) An example image before any perturbation. (Right) Possible perturbations in the
synthetic 3D dataset, i.e. change in size, orientation, color, position, and shape.


coefficient of determination R2 , and using the mean correlation coefficient (MCC) (Hyvarinen &
Morioka, 2016; 2017).


Table 1: Permutation Disentanglement (MCC) scores on 2D shapes test set under unknown fully
sparse perturbations. All results are averaged over 3 seeds except those requiring to train SA-MESH
from scratch that were trained only once. SA-LR (supervised) achieves a score of 1.0 in all settings.
                            posx , posy                       posx , posy , color, size, rotation
  Model          n=2              n=3             n=4              n=2             n=3              n=4
   Ours       1.00 ±0.01       1.00 ±0.01      0.98 ±0.01       0.95 ±0.01      0.93 ±0.00       0.94 ±0.01
  SA-RP          0.80             0.90            0.82             0.58            0.52             0.50
  SA-PC          1.00             1.00            1.00             0.86            0.85             0.84
  CNN†        0.96 ±0.02       0.99 ±0.01      0.98 ±0.02       0.91 ±0.01      0.89 ±0.01       0.90 ±0.01
   CNN        0.40 ±0.01       0.25 ±0.03      0.21 ±0.01       0.58 ±0.00      0.42 ±0.00       0.27 ±0.01


Table 2: LD scores on 3D shapes test set under unknown fully sparse perturbations. SA-LR achieves
a score of 1.0 in all settings.
                           posx , posy , color             posx , posy , color, size, rotation
   Model         n=2              n=3              n=4             n=2              n=3              n=4
    Ours      0.99 ±0.01       0.99 ±0.00       1.00 ±0.01      0.91 ±0.03       0.95 ±0.01       0.93 ±0.01
   SA-RP         0.67             0.58             0.58            0.51             0.56             0.60
   SA-PC         0.64             0.62             0.64            0.56             0.76             0.76


Baselines. Our baselines were selected to use a series of linear probes to evaluate how much of
the property information is already present in the slot representations si of a vanilla SA-MESH
implementation which was only trained for reconstruction. We compare this with our approach which
explicitly optimizes to disentangle the properties with the weakly supervised loss in Eq 2. For the
baselines, we mapped from the slot representations to a d-dimensional latent space with random
projections (RP)—which preserve distances in the projected space to obtain a crude estimate of
vanilla slot attention disentanglement—the first d principal components (PC), and linear regression
(LR) which provides a supervised upper-bound on what is achievable with linear maps. Finally,
we also included a standard ResNet18 (He et al., 2016) (denoted CNN) trained with Ahuja et al.
(2022b)’s procedure that does not address injectivity issues, and the same trained on a DGP which is
modified to be injective6 (denoted CNN† ).

2D Shapes. The results in Table 1 (with additional results in appendix E.1) confirmed that as long
as the generative function is injective we can empirically achieve identification (see CNN† ). But
    6
      We make g injective by using the properties that are not the target of disentanglement, i.e., if x, y are the
target properties, we will uniquely color each object based on its order in the default permutation. If x, y, c are
targets, we will use unique shapes for each object based on its order in the permutation. The same logic follows
for other property combinations.


                                                        8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 3: MCC scores on 3D shapes test set under unknown fully sparse perturbations. SA-LR achieves
a score of 1.0 in all settings.
                           posx , posy , color              posx , posy , color, size, rotation
    Model       n=2             n=3            n=4             n=2            n=3            n=4
     Ours    0.99 ±0.01      0.99 ±0.00     0.99 ±0.01      0.89 ±0.02     0.92 ±0.03     0.92 ±0.02
    SA-RP       0.62            0.54           0.54            0.49           0.50           0.46
    SA-PC       0.69            0.68           0.70            0.64           0.77           0.78


the moment we drop any ordering over the objects and render x via a non-injective function, then
identification via ResNet18, which is suited only to injective generative functions, fails disastrously
(see the row corresponding to CNN in table 4. On the other hand, we can see that our method has no
difficulty identifying object properties because it treats them as a set by leveraging slot attention and a
matching procedure. Additionally, the shared structure of learned latents in our method significantly
improves the sample efficiency for disentanglement (see appendix E.3). The strong performance of
the principal components of vanilla SA-MESH on the position disentanglement task likely results
from the positional encoding. On the more complex task that also involves color, size and rotation,
MCC performance drops for SA-PC, though it is still surprisingly high given that the model is just
trained for reconstruction. This is likely because these are very simple images with properties that
were selected independently, uniformly at random so the slot principal components align with the
ground-truth axes of variation in the data.

3D Shapes. Figure 3 shows examples of perturbations that the model observes and uses for
disentangling object properties in tables 2 and 3. We present the disentanglement scores for various
combinations of properties and environments with k = {2, 3, 4} number of objects in the scene.
Since non-injective CNN failed consistently in the simpler 2D dataset, we do not evaluate it with 3D
shapes. Results for our method are averaged over 3 seeds, but since the baselines require training
SA-MESH from scratch, they were trained only once as it is computationally expensive to obtain
excellent reconstructions with slot attention. These results essentially confirm our findings in the
simpler 2D dataset, and demonstrate how treating the scene as a set with our method results in perfect
disentanglement of object properties. For the results on other combinations of properties, please see
appendix E.2.


8    C ONCLUSION

This study establishes a connection between causal representation learning and object-centric learning,
and (to the best of our knowledge) for the first time shows how to achieve disentangled representations
in environments with multiple interchangeable objects. The importance of recognizing this synergy
is two-fold. Firstly, causal representation learning has largely ignored the subtleties of objects
in assuming injectivity and fixed Rd representations. Conversely, object-centric learning has not
dealt with the challenge of unsupervised disentanglement. Yet disentangled representations can
significantly improve a model’s generalization capabilities under distribution shifts, and could also
allow for learning parsimonious models of the dynamics when such proper representations are
achieved, which we deem as important avenues for future research. In this study we provided
empirical evidence showcasing the successful disentanglement of object-centric representations
through the fusion of slot attention with recent advances in causal representation learning.


9    ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The authors would like to thank Kartik Ahuja for the helpful discussions and feedback on the initial
directions of this work. This research was enabled by compute resources and technical support
provided by Mila, Quebec AI Institute (mila.quebec) as well as the Digital Research Alliance of
Canada, formerly known as Compute Canada. Amin Mansouri was supported in part by the support
from Canada CIFAR AI Chair Program, from the Canada Excellence Research Chairs Program, and
Microsoft.


                                                    9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Kartik Ahuja, Jason Hartford, and Yoshua Bengio. Properties from mechanisms: an equivariance
  perspective on identifiable representation learning. In International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2022a. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=g5ynW-jMq4M.

Kartik Ahuja, Jason Hartford, and Yoshua Bengio. Weakly supervised representation learning with
  sparse perturbations. In Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022b.

Kartik Ahuja, Divyat Mahajan, Yixin Wang, and Yoshua Bengio. Interventional causal representation
  learning, 2023.

Jack Brady, Roland S. Zimmermann, Yash Sharma, Bernhard Schölkopf, Julius von Kügelgen,
  and Wieland Brendel. Provably learning object-centric representations. arXiv preprint arXiv:
  2305.14229, 2023.

Johann Brehmer, Pim De Haan, Phillip Lippe, and Taco Cohen. Weakly supervised causal representa-
  tion learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.16437, 2022.

Simon Buchholz, Goutham Rajendran, Elan Rosenfeld, Bryon Aragam, Bernhard Schölkopf, and
  Pradeep Ravikumar. Learning linear causal representations from interventions under general
  nonlinear mixing, 2023.

Michael Chang, Thomas L. Griffiths, and Sergey Levine. Object representations as fixed points:
 Training iterative inference algorithms with implicit differentiation. In ICLR Workshop on Deep
 Generative Models for Highly Structured Data, 2022. URL https://openreview.net/
 forum?id=rV3Gon4dD-5.

Kyunghyun Cho, Bart van Merrienboer, Caglar Gulcehre, Dzmitry Bahdanau, Fethi Bougares, Holger
  Schwenk, and Yoshua Bengio. Learning phrase representations using rnn encoder-decoder for
  statistical machine translation. arXiv preprint arXiv: 1406.1078, 2014.

Marco Cuturi. Sinkhorn distances: Lightspeed computation of optimal transportation distances.
 NEURIPS, 2013.

Anirudh Goyal, Alex Lamb, Jordan Hoffmann, Shagun Sodhani, Sergey Levine, Yoshua Bengio, and
  Bernhard Schölkopf. Recurrent independent mechanisms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.10893, 2019.

Anirudh Goyal, Alex Lamb, Phanideep Gampa, Philippe Beaudoin, Sergey Levine, Charles Blundell,
 Yoshua Bengio, and Michael Mozer. Object files and schemata: Factorizing declarative and
  procedural knowledge in dynamical systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.16225, 2020.

Klaus Greff, Raphaël Lopez Kaufman, Rishabh Kabra, Nick Watters, Christopher Burgess, Daniel
  Zoran, Loic Matthey, Matthew Botvinick, and Alexander Lerchner. Multi-object representation
  learning with iterative variational inference. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
  2424–2433. PMLR, 2019.

Klaus Greff, Francois Belletti, Lucas Beyer, Carl Doersch, Yilun Du, Daniel Duckworth, David J Fleet,
  Dan Gnanapragasam, Florian Golemo, Charles Herrmann, Thomas Kipf, Abhijit Kundu, Dmitry
  Lagun, Issam Laradji, Hsueh-Ti (Derek) Liu, Henning Meyer, Yishu Miao, Derek Nowrouzezahrai,
  Cengiz Oztireli, Etienne Pot, Noha Radwan, Daniel Rebain, Sara Sabour, Mehdi S. M. Sajjadi,
  Matan Sela, Vincent Sitzmann, Austin Stone, Deqing Sun, Suhani Vora, Ziyu Wang, Tianhao Wu,
  Kwang Moo Yi, Fangcheng Zhong, and Andrea Tagliasacchi. Kubric: a scalable dataset generator.
  Computer Vision And Pattern Recognition, 2022.

Luca Gresele, Julius V Kügelgen, Valentin Stimper, Bernhard Schölkopf, and Michel Besserve.
  Independent mechanism analysis, a new concept? In Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 2021.

Ben Hayes, Charalampos Saitis, and György Fazekas. The responsibility problem in neural
  networks with unordered targets, 2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
  jd7Hy1jRiv4.


                                                10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image
  recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition,
  pp. 770–778, 2016.
Qian Huang, Horace He, Abhay Singh, Yan Zhang, Ser-Nam Lim, and Austin R.
  Benson.    Better set representations for relational reasoning. In NeurIPS,
  2020.       URL     https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2020/hash/
  09ccf3183d9e90e5ae1f425d5f9b2c00-Abstract.html.
Aapo Hyvarinen and Hiroshi Morioka. Unsupervised feature extraction by time-contrastive learning
  and nonlinear ica. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 29, 2016.
Aapo Hyvarinen and Hiroshi Morioka. Nonlinear ica of temporally dependent stationary sources. In
  Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 460–469. PMLR, 2017.
Aapo Hyvärinen and Petteri Pajunen. Nonlinear independent component analysis: Existence and
  uniqueness results. Neural Networks, 12(3):429–439, 1999. ISSN 0893-6080. doi: https:
  //doi.org/10.1016/S0893-6080(98)00140-3. URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/
  science/article/pii/S0893608098001403.
Aapo Hyvarinen, Hiroaki Sasaki, and Richard Turner. Nonlinear ica using auxiliary variables and
  generalized contrastive learning. In The 22nd International Conference on Artificial Intelligence
  and Statistics, pp. 859–868. PMLR, 2019.
A. Hyvärinen and E. Oja.     Independent component analysis: algorithms and applica-
  tions. Neural Networks, 13(4):411–430, 2000. ISSN 0893-6080. doi: https://doi.org/10.
  1016/S0893-6080(00)00026-5. URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
  article/pii/S0893608000000265.
Ilyes Khemakhem, Diederik Kingma, Ricardo Monti, and Aapo Hyvarinen. Variational autoencoders
   and nonlinear ica: A unifying framework. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence
   and Statistics, pp. 2207–2217. PMLR, 2020a.
Ilyes Khemakhem, Ricardo Monti, Diederik Kingma, and Aapo Hyvarinen. Ice-beem: Identifiable
   conditional energy-based deep models based on nonlinear ica. Advances in Neural Information
   Processing Systems, 33:12768–12778, 2020b.
Sebastien Lachapelle, Pau Rodriguez, Yash Sharma, Katie E Everett, Rémi LE PRIOL, Alexandre
  Lacoste, and Simon Lacoste-Julien. Disentanglement via mechanism sparsity regularization: A
  new principle for nonlinear ICA. In First Conference on Causal Learning and Reasoning, 2022.
  URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=dHsFFekd_-o.
Sébastien Lachapelle and Simon Lacoste-Julien. Partial disentanglement via mechanism sparsity,
   2022.
Sébastien Lachapelle, Divyat Mahajan, Ioannis Mitliagkas, and Simon Lacoste-Julien. Additive
   Decoders for Latent Variables Identification and Cartesian-Product Extrapolation, July 2023. URL
   http://arxiv.org/abs/2307.02598. arXiv:2307.02598 [cs, stat].
Zhixuan Lin, Yi-Fu Wu, Skand Vishwanath Peri, Weihao Sun, Gautam Singh, Fei Deng, Jindong
  Jiang, and Sungjin Ahn. SPACE: unsupervised object-oriented scene representation via spatial
  attention and decomposition. CoRR, abs/2001.02407, 2020. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/
  2001.02407.
Phillip Lippe, Sara Magliacane, Sindy Löwe, Yuki M Asano, Taco Cohen, and Efstratios Gavves.
  Citris: Causal identifiability from temporal intervened sequences. arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.03169,
  2022.
Phillip Lippe, Sara Magliacane, Sindy Löwe, Yuki M Asano, Taco Cohen, and Efstratios Gavves.
  Biscuit: Causal representation learning from binary interactions. In The 39th Conference on
  Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, 2023a. URL https://openreview.net/forum?
  id=VS7Dn31xuB.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Phillip Lippe, Sara Magliacane, Sindy Löwe, Yuki M. Asano, Taco Cohen, and Efstratios Gavves.
  Causal representation learning for instantaneous and temporal effects in interactive systems, 2023b.
Francesco Locatello, Stefan Bauer, Mario Lucic, Gunnar Raetsch, Sylvain Gelly, Bernhard Schölkopf,
  and Olivier Bachem. Challenging common assumptions in the unsupervised learning of disentan-
  gled representations. In international conference on machine learning, pp. 4114–4124. PMLR,
  2019.
Francesco Locatello, Ben Poole, Gunnar Rätsch, Bernhard Schölkopf, Olivier Bachem, and Michael
  Tschannen. Weakly-supervised disentanglement without compromises. In International Conference
  on Machine Learning, pp. 6348–6359. PMLR, 2020a.
Francesco Locatello, Dirk Weissenborn, Thomas Unterthiner, Aravindh Mahendran, Georg Heigold,
  Jakob Uszkoreit, Alexey Dosovitskiy, and Thomas Kipf. Object-centric learning with slot attention.
  CoRR, abs/2006.15055, 2020b. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2006.15055.
I. Loshchilov and F. Hutter. Decoupled weight decay regularization. International Conference on
   Learning Representations, 2017.
Gabriel E Moran, Dheevatsa Sridhar, Yining Wang, and David Blei. Identifiable deep generative
  models via sparse decoding. Transactions on Machine Learning Research, 2022.
Trang Nguyen, Amin Mansouri, Kanika Madan, Nguyen Duy Khuong, Kartik Ahuja, Dianbo Liu,
  and Yoshua Bengio. Reusable slotwise mechanisms. In Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
  CniUitfEY3.
P. Reddy, Scott Wisdom, Klaus Greff, J. Hershey, and Thomas Kipf. Audioslots: A slot-centric
   generative model for audio separation. IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech, and
   Signal Processing Workshops (ICASSPW), 2023. doi: 10.1109/ICASSPW59220.2023.10193208.
Bernhard Schölkopf, Francesco Locatello, Stefan Bauer, Nan Rosemary Ke, Nal Kalchbrenner,
  Anirudh Goyal, and Yoshua Bengio. Toward causal representation learning. Proceedings of the
  IEEE, 109(5):612–634, 2021.
Maximilian Seitzer, Max Horn, Andrii Zadaianchuk, Dominik Zietlow, Tianjun Xiao, Carl-Johann
 Simon-Gabriel, Tong He, Zheng Zhang, B. Scholkopf, T. Brox, and Francesco Locatello. Bridging
 the gap to real-world object-centric learning. International Conference on Learning Representa-
 tions, 2022. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2209.14860.
Pete Shinners. Pygame. http://pygame.org/, 2011.
Gautam Singh, Yeongbin Kim, and Sungjin Ahn. Neural systematic binder. In The Eleventh
  International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023. URL https://openreview.
  net/forum?id=ZPHE4fht19t.
Richard Sinkhorn and Paul Knopp. Concerning nonnegative matrices and doubly stochastic matrices.
  Pacific Journal of Mathematics, 21:343–348, 1967. URL https://api.semanticscholar.
  org/CorpusID:50329347.
Brian Cantwell Smith. The promise of artificial intelligence: reckoning and judgment. The MIT
  Press, 2019.
Christian Squires, Aryeh Seigal, Shreya S Bhate, and Caroline Uhler. Linear causal disentanglement
  via interventions. In International Conference on Machine Learning. PMLR, 2023.
Sjoerd van Steenkiste, Michael Chang, Klaus Greff, and Jürgen Schmidhuber. Relational neural
  expectation maximization: Unsupervised discovery of objects and their interactions. CoRR,
  abs/1802.10353, 2018a. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1802.10353.
Sjoerd van Steenkiste, Michael Chang, Klaus Greff, and Jürgen Schmidhuber. Relational neural
  expectation maximization: Unsupervised discovery of objects and their interactions. In Interna-
  tional Conference on Learning Representations, 2018b. URL https://openreview.net/
  forum?id=ryH20GbRW.


                                                 12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Julius von Kügelgen, Michel Besserve, Wendong Liang, Luigi Gresele, Armin Kekić, Elias Barein-
  boim, David M. Blei, and Bernhard Schölkopf. Nonparametric identifiability of causal representa-
  tions from unknown interventions, 2023.
Quanhan Xi and Benjamin Bloem-Reddy. Indeterminacy in generative models: Characterization
  and strong identifiability. In Francisco Ruiz, Jennifer Dy, and Jan-Willem van de Meent (eds.),
 Proceedings of The 26th International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, volume
  206 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 6912–6939. PMLR, 25–27 Apr 2023. URL
  https://proceedings.mlr.press/v206/xi23a.html.
Yan Zhang, Jonathon Hare, and Adam Prügel-Bennett. FSPool: Learning set representations with
  featurewise sort pooling. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2020. URL
  https://openreview.net/forum?id=HJgBA2VYwH.
Yan Zhang, David W Zhang, Simon Lacoste-Julien, Gertjan J Burghouts, and Cees GM Snoek.
  Multiset-equivariant set prediction with approximate implicit differentiation. In International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2022. URL https://openreview.net/forum?
  id=5K7RRqZEjoS.
Yan Zhang, David W Zhang, Simon Lacoste-Julien, Gertjan J. Burghouts, and Cees G. M. Snoek. Un-
  locking slot attention by changing optimal transport costs. In International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=FMomWFNh5d.
Yujia Zheng, Ignavier Ng, and Kun Zhang. On the identifiability of nonlinear ica: Sparsity and
  beyond. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:16411–16422, 2022.


A    P ROOF OF THEOREM 1
We want to compare the number of perturbations needed to disentangle shared properties with a
standard encoder to those needed by an object-centric encoder. Our strategy will be as follows,

      1. Setup a data generating process with multiple objects where injectivity holds by construction
         so that we can restate Theorem 1 from Ahuja et al. (2022b) to show they need k × d
         perturbations.
      2. Define an object-centric architecture in terms of the object-wise partitions that we defined in
         Definition 1.
      3. Restate an analog of Theorem 1 from Ahuja et al. based on the object-centric encoder.
      4. Theorem 1 in the main text will follow as a collary of the difference between the number of
         perturbations used in the two theorems above.

We begin by defining a data generating process such that g(vecπ (Z)) is injective by construction.
We can achieve this by appending an id, i, to each zi in Z, such that Z = {zi ⊕ [i]}ki=1 where ⊕
denotes concatenation, and then choosing g such that x depends on i (for example, each i could
be rendered in a different color). Like Ahuja et al., we assume we have data that is perturbed by
∆ := {{δi,j }dj=1 }ki=1 , a set of 1-sparse perturbations that perturbs each of the d properties from each
of the k objects. Taken together, we have the following data generating process (DGP),
Z = {zi ⊕[i]}ki=1 ∼ PZ , x := g(Z) z̃j,l := zj +δj,l ∀ δi,j ∈ ∆,       x̃j,l := g({z1 , . . . , z̃j,l , . . . , zk })
                                                                                                                 (3)
where each object has d shared properties, zi ∈ Rd , and zi,j and zi′ ,j are of the same type—e.g.
position x, hue, etc.— for all j. As before, assume g is injective, and define g ∗ = g(vecπ∗ (Z)) where
π ∗ is the permutation that sorts Z by the index i, so that g ∗ is injective by construction.
Now, Ahuja et al. show that if the encoder, fˆ : X → Rkd , is chosen to minimize the following loss,
                                                  h                            i
                                                                             2
                          fˆ ∈ arg minf ′ Ex,x′ ,δ (f ′ (x) + δ − f ′ (x′ ))                     (4)

and the following assumptions hold,


                                                   13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Assumption
            1. The dimension of the span of the perturbations in equation 3 is kd, i.e.,

dim span ∆ = kd.
Assumption 2. a(z) := f ◦ g ∗ (z) is an analytic function. For each component i ∈ {1, · · · , kd}
of a(z) and each component j ∈ {1, · · · , kd} of z, define the set S ij = {θ | ∇j ai (z + b) =
∇j ai (z) + ∇2j ai (θ)b, z ∈ Rkd }, where b is a fixed vector in Rkd . Each set S ij has a non-zero
Lebesgue measure in Rkd .

Then we have,
Theorem 2 ((Ahuja et al., 2022b)). Assume we have data from the DGP in equation 3 and assumption
1 and 2 hold and the number of perturbations per example equals the latent dimension, m = kd,
then the encoder that solves equation 3 identifies true latents up to permutation and scaling, i.e.
ẑ = ΠΛz + c, where Λ ∈ Rkd×kd is an invertible diagonal matrix, Π ∈ Rkd×kd is a permutation
matrix and c is an offset.

Proof. See Ahuja et al. for the proof.

Now, consider an object-centric architecture encoder of the form F (x) := {f(xi )}xi ∈P where P is
an object-wise partition and f : X → Rd . Let σ ∈ Σ denote a permutation of the latents from the set
of all k−permutations. Let:
                                                              ′
                   F̂ (x) ∈ arg min Ex,x′ ,δ [ min
                                               ′
                                                   ∥((f(x′ )σ (i) ) − ((f(x)(i) ) + δ)∥2 ]               (5)
                                f             σ ∈Σ

                                                                       ′
Note that since δ is non-zero for only one pair of patches x(i) , x(i) and zero otherwise, the minimizer
over Σ is almost surely unique. Assumptions 3 and 4 are analogs of 1 and 2 above, but make reference
to the dimensionality of the co-domain of f rather than f .
Assumption
            3. The dimension of the span of the perturbations in equation 3 is d, i.e.,

dim span ∆ = d.
Assumption 4. a(z) := f ◦ g ∗ (z) is an analytic function. For each component i ∈ {1, · · · , d}
of a(z) and each component j ∈ {1, · · · , d} of z, define the set S ij = {θ | ∇j ai (z + b) =
∇j ai (z) + ∇2j ai (θ)b, z ∈ Rd }, where b is a fixed vector in Rd . Each set S ij has a non-zero Lebesgue
measure in Rd .

With this setup, the following theorem follows directly from Theorem 2 as a reduction from the
multi-object to single-object setting,
Theorem 3. Assume we have data from the DGP in equation 3 and assumption 3 and 4 hold and
the number of perturbations per example equals the latent dimension, m = d, then the encoder that
solves equation 5 for an object-wise partition P , identifies true latents up to permutation and scaling,
i.e. ẑ = ΠΛz + c, where Λ ∈ Rkd×kd is an invertible diagonal matrix, Π ∈ Rkd×kd is a permutation
matrix and c is an offset.

Proof. Because P is an object-wise partition, the function that produces each x(i) ∈ P is injective
with respect to some zσ(i) (i.e. one of the object’s latents). Thus for each x(i) , the solution to equation
5 is equivalent to the single object setting with k = 1, and thus theorem 2 applies, which implies that
f(x(i) ) = ẑi = ΠΛzi + c for all i. Now let ẑ = vecπ ({ẑi }ki=1 ). Because each ẑi is identified up
to a permutation, scaling and offset, and for any π, there exists a Π such that ẑ = ΠΛz + c which
completes the result.
Corollary 1. If the assumptions for Theorem 2 and 3 hold and a data generating process outputs
observations containing k objects with shared properties, then an object-centric architecture of the
form F (x) := {f(x(i) }x(i) ∈P will disentangle in 1/k fewer perturbations than an encoder of the
form f : X → Rkd .

Proof. This follows directly from comparing the the number of perturbations required in Theorems 2
and 3.


                                                     14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B    BACKGROUND ON SLOT- ATTENTION - BASED ARCHITECTURES
Slot attention (Locatello et al., 2020b) is a neural network component that, intuitively, summarizes
the relevant information in the input set (most commonly, image features with position embeddings)
into a smaller set of so-called “slots”. Each slot is a feature vector that can be thought of as capturing
information about one “object” in the input set, which usually comprises multiple elements of the
input set. This is done by repeating cross-attention between the inputs and the slots to compute
per-slot updates.
In the traditional set-up, these slots are then used to reconstruct the input with an auto-encoder
objective: each slot is decoded into a separate image through a shared image decoder, which is
followed by merging these per-slot images into a single reconstructed image. Ideally, slot attention is
able to decompose the original image into distinct objects, each of which is modeled by a single slot.
More concretely, slot attention takes as input a matrix X ∈ Rn×c with n as the number of inputs and
c the dimensionality of each input. We also randomly initialize the slots Z(0) ∈ Rm×d . We start by
computing the query, key, and value matrices as part of cross-attention.
                             Q(t) = Z(t) WQ         K = XWK              V = XWV                            (6)
This is followed by the normalized cross-attention to determine the attention map A ∈ Rm×n , then a
GRU (Cho et al., 2014) to apply this update to the slots.
                                          A(t) = normalize(Q(t) K⊤ )                                        (7)
                                          (t+1)              (t)   (t)
                                      Z           = GRU(Z , A V)                                            (8)

The function normalize encourages slots to compete for inputs by applying a softmax over slots and
normalizing the weights for each input to sum to one. After T steps, the algorithm outputs Z(T ) , a
                              (T )
set of m embedding vectors {zi }m  i=1 that can be used as input to a shared image decoder.


SA-MESH. The specific version of slot attention we use in this paper is SA-MESH (Zhang et al.,
2023). It makes regular slot attention more powerful by giving it the ability to break ties between
slots more effectively. 7 In practice, this improves the quality of the individual slot representations
significantly due to less mixing of unrelated inputs into the same slot.
The key difference with regular slot attention is that it features an entropy minimization procedure to
approximate an optimal transport solution, which makes the attention map sparse. The connection to
optimal transport is made by the use of the standard Sinkhorn algorithm (Sinkhorn & Knopp, 1967;
Cuturi, 2013).
                               MESH(C) = arg min H(sinkhorn(C))                                             (9)
                                                    C

                                      A(t) = sinkhorn(MESH(Q(t) K⊤ ))                                      (10)
The optimization problem is solved by unrolling gradient descent, with a noisy initialization to ensure
that ties are broken.

C    A LTERNATIVE PERTURBATION MECHANISMS
Dense vs. Sparse. We can have a number of assumptions on the perturbation mechanisms and
the nature of model’s knowledge about those mechanisms. In the most general case, suppose
M = {m1 (·), m2 (·), ..., mk (·)} denotes the set of all possible perturbation mechanisms. To obtain
x′ , the perturbed variant of x, we then select a subset of k ′ ≤ k objects as targets that undergo
perturbations determined by a subset of k ′ mechanisms M′ ⊂ M from the set of all possible
perturbation mechanisms. The correspondence between the k ′ mechanisms and k ′ perturbed objects
is decided by a random permutation πtM , i.e. i = πtM [j] means that mechanism i governs the
                                              j
transition dynamics of object j to produce zt+1    (for objects that are not supposed to change from
   7
     Concretely, it makes the mapping from the initial slots to the final slots exclusively multiset-equivariant
(Zhang et al., 2022) rather than permutation-equivariant/set-equivariant.


                                                        15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


t → t + 1 a dummy mechanism with index −1 can be assumed which results in no change). A
mechanism mi (·) : Rd → Rd in M is a vector-valued function that operates on object-wise true
latents ztj and outputs zt+1
                         j
                             = ztj + δi such that i = πtM [j]. Perturbation vectors δi could be sparse or
not. The subset M′ can contain k ′ = k mechanisms to perturb all of the k objects in the environment,
and if none of the k ′ = k resulting perturbations is sparse, we denote the set M′ as fully dense
perturbations, i.e., all of the properties of all objects will change from t → t + 1. M′ can also
contain at least one object but not all of them (1 ≤ k ′ < k) with sparse or dense perturbations, or it
may consist of only a single object (k ′ = 1) that is perturbed by a fully sparse mechanism, one that
only alters a single property and leaves the rest unchanged. We denote this scenario as fully sparse
perturbation.

D     M ATCHING
Perturbations alter the properties of objects from t → t + 1 and the model has to infer which object’s
properties were perturbed to update its representations and minimize the latent loss equation 1. But
recall that the model has no direct access to objects. It receives the observations at t, t + 1 and
encodes each of them to a set of slots St , St+1 . These slots do not follow any fixed ordering, and
moreover, there is no guarantee that each slot binds to exactly one unique object. Slots can also
correspond to the background. Each perturbation δ i changes the properties of some object ztj , so the
model requires to find a pair of slots (sut , svt+1 ) that are bound to object z j at t and t + 1, respectively.
Once the model figures out such a matching, then the latent loss that results in disentanglement can
be computed via the projections of these slots ẑ:
                        m               ′
                                    π M [i]
                       X
                Lz =       ∥ẑti + δt t          i
                                            − ẑt+1   ∥2 ,       ẑti = p(sut ), ẑt+1
                                                                                   i
                                                                                       = p(svt )           (11)
                        i=1
 The problem of finding a correspondence between slot projections at t, t + 1 and the perturbations is
an instance of the 3-dimensional matching. However, recall that we use fully sparse perturbations for
our mechanisms, thus, the problem is significantly simplified.
When the model is presented with fully sparse perturbations, the 3-dimensional matching reduces
to finding the minimum element in a 1−d cost array of size |S|2 , where |S| is the number of slots.
The reason is that since only one property of a single object zti is being altered (and the model knows
perturbations are fully sparse), the model can apply that 1-sparse perturbation δt (or the transformed
version in the unknown setting) to all of slot projections ẑtj for j ∈ {1, . . . , |S|} at time t, and only
find one pair of slots from the set of |S|2 possible pairs at t, t + 1, which correspond to the perturbed
object:
                                                             ′       ′
                                                      j
                                  (i, j) = arg min ∥ẑt+1 − (ẑti + δt )∥2                                 (12)
                                              i′ ,j ′

However, this minimization can be made simpler if we use the slots obtained at t to initialize the slots
at t + 1. This way, in practice, the order of slots at t, t + 1 is very likely to be preserved, not only
since the slots at t + 1 are initialized with hints from t, but also the sparse perturbation makes it much
easier for all slots to bind to the same object as only a small subset of the scene needs to be readjusted
among the slots. Therefore the matching would reduce to a simple minimization over |S| elements:
                                                        ′        ′
                                                   i
                                    i = arg min ∥ẑt+1 − (ẑti + δt )∥2                                    (13)
                                             i′
Note however that we still would use all slot projections for evaluation, the only difference with this
matching scheme is that gradient signals are only propagated from the perturbed object (as they also
should, since there is no change in other slots, there is nothing there to be learned that could help
disentanglement.)

E     F URTHER E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS
E.1    2D S HAPES

Table 4 gives the linear disentanglement scores for the same experiment as that shown in table 1 in
the main text.


                                                        16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 4: Linear Disentanglement (LD) scores on 2D shapes test set under unknown fully sparse
perturbations. All results are averaged over 3 seeds except those requiring to train SA-MESH from
scratch that were trained only once. SA-LR, which is supervised by the ground truth latents, and is
an upper bound on the disentanglement performance, achieves a score of 1.0 in all settings.
                            posx , posy                      posx , posy , color, size, rotation
  Model         n=2            n=3            n=4            n=2            n=3            n=4
   Ours      1.00 ±0.00     1.00 ±0.00     1.00 ±0.00     0.95 ±0.01     0.93 ±0.01     0.94 ±0.02
  SA-RP         0.92           0.96           0.94           0.75           0.70           0.68
  SA-PC         1.00           1.00           1.00           0.93           0.88           0.86
  CNN†       0.94 ±0.05     0.99 ±0.00     0.96 ±0.03     0.87 ±0.01     0.84 ±0.01     0.86 ±0.01
   CNN       0.24 ±0.01     0.13 ±0.01     0.07 ±0.01     0.35 ±0.00     0.19 ±0.00     0.08 ±0.01


Tables 5,6 extend our results under unknown fully sparse perturbations on the 2D shapes dataset to
more combinations of disentanglement target properties. We can observe that our results stay very
close to the upper bound on the achievable performance which uses a supervised linear regression
from slot projections ẑ to ground truth latents z. These tables highlight once again the pivotal role
of the injectivity assumption in achieving identification with conventional encoders that ignore the
object-centricity of the environment (see the performance drop from CNN† to CNN, where the latter
drops the unrealistic injectivity assumption).


Table 5: Linear Disentanglement (LD) scores on 2D shapes test set under unknown fully sparse
perturbations. All results are averaged over 3 seeds except those requiring to train SA-MESH from
scratch that were trained only once. SA-LR achieves a score of 1.0 in all settings.
                          posx , posy , color                       posx , posy , shape
   Model        n=2            n=3             n=4            n=2            n=3            n=4
    Ours     1.00 ±0.01     0.98 ±0.01      0.99 ±0.00     1.00 ±0.01     0.98 ±0.01     0.99 ±0.01
   SA-RP        0.77           0.61            0.60           0.71           0.68           0.70
   SA-PC        0.97           0.98            0.99           0.80           0.66           0.87
   CNN†      1.00 ±0.00     0.99 ±0.01      0.98 ±0.00     1.00 ±0.00     1.00 ±0.00     0.99 ±0.00
    CNN      0.35 ±0.00     0.15 ±0.00      0.07 ±0.01     0.32 ±0.01     0.15 ±0.01     0.11 ±0.01

                                             posx , posy , color, shape
                          Model         n=2           n=3              n=4
                           Ours      0.99 ±0.00 0.98 ±0.01 0.99 ±0.00
                          SA-RP         0.69           0.73             0.60
                          SA-PC         0.74           0.75             0.52
                          CNN†       1.00 ±0.00 0.99 ±0.01 1.00 ±0.00
                           CNN       0.40 ±0.00 0.21 ±0.00 0.11 ±0.00


E.2   3D S HAPES

Quantitative Results. Tables 7, 8 extend our results under unknown fully sparse perturbations on
the 3D shapes dataset to more combinations of disentanglement target properties. Again, we can
observe the applicability of our method to this more complex 3D dataset that contains artifacts related
to depth, occlusion, and lighting, to name a few. Again our results stay very close to the upper bound
on the achievable performance which uses a supervised linear regression from slot projections ẑ to
ground truth latents z.

Qualitative Results. Figures 4-6 illustrate the learned disentangled (object-centric) representations.
Each figure shows a sequence of 3D samples evolving over 5 steps (shown on the left), and how
the learned representations respond to the perturbations (shown on the right). Perturbations include
changing the object’s posx , posy , color, ϕ (rotation). The model used here is trained with 3 slots, and
the learned representations are the result of a projection layer learned via our weakly-supervised
method applied to 64−dimensional object-centric representations. The projection maps each slot


                                                  17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 6: Permutation Disentanglement (MCC) scores on 2D shapes test set under unknown fully
sparse perturbations. All results are averaged over 3 seeds except those requiring to train SA-MESH
from scratch that were trained only once. SA-LR achieves a score of 1.0 in all settings.
                         posx , posy , color                         posx , posy , shape
   Model        n=2           n=3           n=4            n=2           n=3           n=4
    Ours     1.00 ±0.01    0.95 ±0.05    0.97 ±0.02     0.99 ±0.01    0.99 ±0.01    0.99 ±0.01
   SA-RP        0.74          0.60          0.60           0.66          0.63          0.59
   SA-PC        0.87          0.89          0.90           0.83          0.81          0.89
   CNN†      1.00 ±0.00    0.99 ±0.01    0.99 ±0.01     1.00 ±0.00    1.00 ±0.00    0.99 ±0.00
    CNN      0.55 ±0.01    0.35 ±0.01    0.24 ±0.01     0.52 ±0.02    0.33 ±0.02    0.28 ±0.02

                                           posx , posy , color, shape
                          Model       n=2           n=3              n=4
                           Ours    0.99 ±0.01 0.98 ±0.01 0.99 ±0.01
                          SA-RP       0.54           0.68             0.55
                          SA-PC       0.64           0.63             0.57
                          CNN†     1.00 ±0.00 0.99 ±0.01 1.00 ±0.00
                           CNN     0.61 ±0.00 0.43 ±0.00 0.30 ±0.00


Table 7: Linear Disentanglement (LD) scores on 3D shapes test set under unknown fully sparse
perturbations. All results are averaged over 3 seeds except those requiring to train SA-MESH from
scratch that were trained only once. SA-LR achieves a score of 1.0 in all settings.
                          posx , posy , size                   posx , posy , color, rotation
  Model        n=2            n=3           n=4           n=2           n=3            n=4
   Ours     0.98 ±0.01     0.98 ±0.01    0.98 ±0.00    0.98 ±0.00    0.97 ±0.01     0.98 ±0.01
  SA-RP        0.61           0.62          0.53          0.59          0.54           0.55
  SA-PC        0.78           0.84          0.78          0.70          0.72           0.69


Table 8: Permutation Disentanglement (MCC) scores on 3D shapes test set under unknown fully
sparse perturbations. All results are averaged over 3 seeds except those requiring to train SA-MESH
from scratch that were trained only once. SA-LR achieves a score of 1.0 in all settings.
                         posx , posy , size                     posx , posy , color, rotation
  Model        n=2            n=3           n=4           n=2           n=3            n=4
   Ours     0.96 ±0.02     0.96 ±0.05    0.96 ±0.03    0.98 ±0.01    0.98 ±0.02     0.97 ±0.01
  SA-RP        0.60           0.57          0.52          0.55          0.51           0.49
  SA-PC        0.87           0.90          0.86          0.73          0.76           0.74


                                                18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


from R64 → R4 , i.e., the disentanglement target space. In figures 4-6, the 4 dimensions of such
projections for object slots are presented over 5 steps, i.e., each set of colored lines shows the
evolution of the projection of a slot corresponding to the object with the same color. Please refer
to the figures for details of the perturbations. Lastly, we have kept the number of objects in these
scenes to two for clarity of the presentation, however tables 2,3, 7,8 show that we achieve similar
performances with other sets of properties and number of objects in the scene.


Figure 4: (Left) From top to bottom, each steps perturbs the posx coordinate of the red object by 0.2
in the ground-truth latent space, (Right) which is reflected (through an affine transform) as a linear
increase in posx , while the rest of the properties for both objects remain the same, demonstrating
that the learned representations are indeed disentangled. In generating these samples, camera has
some non-zero angle w.r.t. the origin, therefore, perturbations in the x direction appear as vertical
displacements.

E.3   C OMPARISON OF S AMPLE E FFICIENCY

Figure 7 demonstrates the sample efficiency of our object-centric model compared to a ResNet that
achieves disentanglement with an injective DGP. Both models are trained with varying number of
training samples that contain k = 4 objects for which posx , posy , color, shape are the disentanglement
target properties. Since we sample 1-sparse perturbations uniformly, the training dataset size could be
thought of as a proxy for the number of different perturbations a given configuration of objects would
encounter. Although according to theory, the injective ResNet should require at least k times more
perturbations to identify the latents up to affine transformations, we observe that the advantage of our
object-centric model in terms of sample efficiency is much more pronounced in practice. Our method
can achieve close to perfect disentanglement with as few as 100 training samples, while an injective
ResNet takes 100 times more samples to raise to a comparable performance. This highlights the
practical importance of exploiting the inherent set structure of objects in a scene for representation
learning.

F     I MPLEMENTATION AND E XPERIMENTAL D ETAILS
F.1   SA-MESH A RCHITECTURE

For the slot attention architecture, we closely follow Locatello et al. (2020b), in particular, we use the
same CNN encoder and decoder as they use for CLEVR, except for the initial resolution of the spatial


                                                   19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 5: (Left) From top to bottom, the objects are perturbed as follows; Red: Downward perturbation
so it sits at the same x coordinate as the Blue cube (1-2), Rotates counterclockwise along the z−axis
to be at the same orientation as the Blue cube (2-4), Further downward perturbation (2 times the
displacement from step 1 to 2). Blue: Rotates counterclockwise along the z−axis (4-5). (Right) Note
how the learned representations mapping correctly reflects the similar positions and rotations in the
ground-truth, i.e., both by having properties of objects coincide at the same value, and by preserving
the ratio of perturbations.



broadcast decoder with 3D shapes where we use 4 × 4 since we are dealing with 64 × 64 images. We
use a slot size of 64 and always use n + 1 number of slots, where n is the number of objects in the
scene. We use 3 iterations for the recurrent updates in SA-MESH. For details concerning SA-MESH
we follow Zhang et al. (2023). Additionally, we also truncate the backpropagation through slot
updates as suggested by Chang et al. (2022) to improve training stability.


F.2   D ISENTANGLEMENT H EADS

SA-MESH outputs n + 1 slots that are of size 64, yet we need to project each of these slots to a
d−dimensional space so we can leverage the disentanglement method from Ahuja et al. (2022a;b).
We can simply achieve this projection by a single MLP, however, we decided to allocate more
parameters for this projection and use d separate projection heads mapping 64-dimensional vectors to
d separate scalars. This way identification of different properties will not affect one another due to
model capacity constraints. We stack the layers shown in table 9 to obtain a projection head per each
property. The same set of d projections will be shared among all slots.


                    Table 9: Layers in a projection head for disentanglement.
                     Layer     Input Size Output Size Bias Activation
                   Linear (1)      64             32        True      ReLU
                   Linear (2)      32             32        True      ReLU
                   Linear (3)      32             16        False     ReLU
                   Linear (4)      16              1        False     ReLU



                                                 20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 6: (Left) From top to bottom, the objects are perturbed as follows; Since the objects change
color, let us call the red cube in the top frame to be object 1, and the blue one to be object 2. Object 1:
The color is perturbed to be equal to object 2 (1-2), Moves to the right as its posy is perturbed by
0.2 (2-3), The color hue is once again perturbed to become purple (3-4). Object 2: Moves toward
right (perturbation in posy by 0.2) to be at the same y coordinate as object 1 (1-2), The color hue is
decreased so now the colors of objects 1,2 are swapped (2-3). Moves by 0.2 in the y direction to align
with the other object once again (3-4), Change its color hue twice the previous color perturbation with
the opposite sign to match the color of the other object (4-5). (Right) Red curves correspond to object
1, and the blue curves correspond to object 2. Again, notice the sections where the curves coincide,
as well as the ratio of jumps in the properties, showing consistency of the learned representations
with the ground-truth causal representation that gives rise to these observations.


F.3   C ONV N ET BASELINE

As a baseline for injective scenarios, we use a ResNet18 (He et al., 2016) with an output width of
128 that is passed through LeakyReLU activation, which is then followed by d linear projection
heads (for the same reason we use separate disentanglement heads) that map the 128-dimensional
output of the CNN encoder to d separate 1-dimensional scalars that should correspond to the target
d−dimensional space.

F.4   T RAINING

For each k and for each set of disentanglement target properties, we first train SA-MESH for 2000
epochs with a batch size of 64 for 2D shapes (as the images are 128 × 128), and a batch size of
128 for 3D shapes (since images are 64 × 64) on a single A100 GPU with 40GB of memory. We
used a fixed schedule for the learning rate at 2 × 10−4 , and we used AdamW (Loshchilov & Hutter,
2017) with a weight decay of 0.01 along with ϵ = 10−8 , β1 = 0.9, β2 = 0.999. SA-MESH was
first solely trained by minimizing reconstruction error on the training set, then its disentanglement
performance was reported on the test set for projection-based baselines (RP, PC, LR). Due to the high
number of combinations of target disentanglement properties and k, we just trained SA-MESH for
each configuration only once.
Unsupervised disentanglement with our method has an additional stage which takes the aforemen-
tioned pre-trained SA-MESH models and jointly minimizes the loss in equation 2. Note that at this
stage, the SA-MESH model is not frozen, so the gradients flow through its network as well and help
adjust the slot representations with the signal from the latent loss. Under known perturbations, we


                                                    21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 7: Comparing the disentanglement performance of an injective ResNet vs. our object-centric
method based on the number of training samples. The dataset contains four 2D objects in which
posx , posy , color, shape can vary.



use the actual perturbations from the DGP as δt to guide the model via equation 2, however, under
unknown perturbations setting, we replace all perturbations δt by a hyperparameter C (see section 5).
CNN baselines were trained similar to SA-MESH but for much shorter, i.e., 200 epochs, and usually
converge very fast in less than 50 epochs.


F.5   H YPERPARAMETER O PTIMIZATION

We started around the hyperparameters used by Locatello et al. (2020b) and Zhang et al. (2023) where
applicable, and tuned on small subsets of the 2D shapes training data based on linear and permutation
disentanglement metrics. We considered 5 values for the learning rate [2 × 10−3 , 2 × 10−4 , 10−4 , 6 ×
10−5 , 2 × 10−5 ]. Larger batch sizes were always better and we were only constrained by memory
in the case of 128 × 128 images of the 2D shapes dataset. We considered 2 values [0.1, 0.5] for |C|,
the fixed value representing all unknown perturbations, and found |C| = 0.1 to perform better. We
also considered slot sizes [64, 128] on a small subset of the 2D shapes training dataset. Lastly we
considered 9 combinations for the relative importance of latent loss and reconstruction loss when
training the disentanglement heads, i.e., we considered all combinations of wlatent ∈ {1, 10, 100},
wrecons ∈ {1, 10, 100}, and found the combination of wrecons = 100, wlatent = 10 to strike the optimal
balance between maintaining good reconstructions and allowing the slot representations to give rise
to disentangled projections.


F.6   DATASETS

2D Shapes. We use pygame engine (Shinners, 2011) for generating multi-object 2D scenes. Object
properties in both datasets include px , py , color, shape, size, and rotation angle. Based on object
properties, they are each rendered and placed on a white background (for the 2D dataset) or placed
on a floor that is illuminated by source lights and is being visited from somewhere above the floor
(for the 3D dataset), and then aggregated to produce xt . We discretized the range of color hues in
order to test the model’s ability to obtain disentangled representations in the simultaneous presence
of both continuous (position, size, and rotation angle) and discrete properties (color and shape).
In the 2D dataset:


                                                  22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


       • px , py are generated randomly and uniformly in the [0, 1] range, i.e., the boundaries of
         the scene, such that no two objects overlap and no object falls even partially outside the
         boundaries. Positional coordinates can be perturbed by any value in [−0.2, 0.2].
       • For color, we use HSV color representations and fix saturation (S) and value (V) at
         0.6 and choose hue (H) from a set of values predefined before training (for instance
         [0.0, 0.25, 0.5, 0.75]). We adopted this 1-d representation to be consistent and have each
         property be represented by a scalar. Additionally we wanted to test the model’s capacity
         when dealing with mixed discrete properties. Also, training Slot Attention or SA-MESH
         with discrete colors is computationally advantageous since the model will not have to deal
         with reconstructing all colors. However it should be noted that HSV is a cylindrical geometry
         with color hues being the angular dimension which results in values that have a distance
         of 1.0 being exactly the same color (given a fixed saturation and value). That is why a list
         of color hues such as [0.0, 0.33, 0.66, 1.00] would not work since 0.0 and 1.0 are the same
         color, yet our model interprets the difference as a perturbation with the amount of 1.0, which
         is clearly wrong. A change of color from color i to j where i, j index the list of color hues
         H would be provided to the model as a perturbation in the amount of (H[j] − H[i])/|H|,
         where |H| denotes the number of colors in H.
       • Shape is also clearly discrete and is selected at random uniformly from the following set
         of shapes S = {circle, square, triangle, heart, diamond}. Note however, that the effects
         of perturbations need to be visible in the pixel space, and we should be wary of the dis-
         entanglement target properties; for instance if the rotation angle ϕt is a property we aim
         to disentangle with perturbations, then we should exclude circle from the set of possible
         shapes since a circle does not reflect in the pixel space the angle perturbations. A shape
         transformation from shape i to j where i, j index S, would be provided to the model as a
         perturbation with the amount of (j − i)/|S|.
       • Size is a continuous property in the range [0.12, 0.24] of the height or width of the image
         which is 1. It can be perturbed by any amount in [−0.02, 0.02].
       • Rotation angle is also another continuous property in [0, π/4]. Similar to color hues, since
         this property is also angular, we have limited the range not to encounter situations that
         appear the same in the pixel space but have very different rotation angles (a square that is
         rotated π/2 clockwise seems unaltered, or π/4 and 3π/4 rotations both look the same for a
         square.). Angular perturbations can vary in the [−0.2, 0.2] range.

We generate samples in pairs corresponding to t, t + 1. For fully dense perturbations, we generate
k vectors of dimension d, where k is the number of objects. We repeat the generation until the
conditions of non-overlapping objects and non-identifiability are met, i.e., no two objects at either
t or t + 1 should overlap (before and after the perturbations), no object should fall in whole or
partially out of the scene, and no two objects should be perturbed by d-dimensional offsets that
are closer than some ϵ. The last condition is necessary for fully dense perturbations as otherwise
the matching has no way of distinguishing which perturbation to assign to which object since the
matching solely relies on the difference between t, t + 1. For fully sparse perturbations, we are
not constrained by the latter, and we only need to choose perturbations that do not push the chosen
object out of boundaries, or make it overlap with another object. For any experiment we can have a
subset of {posx , posy , color, shape, size, rotation angle} as the properties we wish to disentangle by
observing perturbations in the pixel space, and we call them disentanglement target properties. In
the generation process, any non-target property will be fixed for all objects in the whole dataset to
avoid introducing unwanted variance to the disentanglement of target properties, i.e., if we choose
{posx , posy , color, shape, rotation angle} as target properties, then all the objects in all samples would
have the same fixed size. Lastly, we can choose to make a DGP injective or not. If we choose to make
a DGP injective, we would index the objects and choose a property to be set for objects according to
the indices, i.e., we can choose to make the DGP injective by color; Suppose k = 4 and the list of our
color hues is [0.0, 0.25, 0.5, 0.75]. We would color the objects, which are now ordered according to
some index set I, according to I. Non-target properties (excluding the injectivity imposing property)
will again be kept fixed for the whole dataset, and target properties are generated according to fully
dense or fully sparse perturbation schemes. The perturbations to all properties are signed, and this is
especially crucial for discrete properties such as shape. The reason is that disentanglement is achieved
through observing relative distances in the pixel space, and having only positive or only negative
perturbations deprives the model of having a reference for each property.


                                                    23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


For training we generate 1000 pair per target property such that the model on average sees at
least 500 samples for either positive or negative perturbations to each property, i.e., if we choose
{posx , posy , color} as target properties, we will generate 3000 samples for training. The validation
and test sets always have 1000 samples. For the 2D dataset, we generate 128 × 128 images for better
visual quality that is not distorted due to artifacts caused by perturbations. We then normalize and
clip the image features (RGB values) to be in [−1, 1] range.

3D Shapes. For generating the 3D datasets we leverage kubric library (Greff et al., 2022) to
obtain realistic scenes which we can highly customize. Objects sit on a floor, a perspective camera
is situated at (2.5, 0, 3.0) and looks at (0.0, 0.0, 0.0). Directional light illuminates the scene from
(1.0, 0.0, 1.0) towards the center. The set of possible target properties are similar to 2D shapes, and
the range of properties in which each object is spawned is as follows:

       • posx , posy are generated randomly and uniformly in the [−1.5, 1.5] and [−1.0, 1.0] ranges
         respectively, such that no two objects overlap and no object falls even partially outside the
         boundaries. Note however, by overlap we mean that objects are spawned such that they do
         not mutually fill a volume in the 3D space, and we only prevent such occurrences, but we
         do allow occlusions from the perspective of the camera, which adds to the complexity of
         this synthetic dataset. posz is never a disentanglement target property and is always set such
         that objects sit on the floor (except when rotated). The reason for fixing the z coordinate is
         that any possible perturbation to the 3D coordinates is always going to be interpreted on a
         2D scene that is observed by a camera that is placed somewhere above the floor. Therefore,
         introducing a third coordinate in the DGP and target properties has no point. Positional
         coordinates can be perturbed by offsets in [−0.3, 0.3] range.
       • color is similarly parameterized by a scalar in HSV format as in 2D.
       • Shape can be any of {sphere, cube, cylinder, cone}. Again, since the effects of perturbations
         need to be visible in the pixel space, we will not use spheres if the rotation angle ϕ is a
         property we aim to disentangle with perturbations, as sphere rotations do not reflect in the
         pixel space. For rotation in the 3D space we choose the z-axis as the axis of rotation so that
         angular perturbations are maximally visible (w.r.t. the perspective camera’s location).
       • Size is a continuous property in the range [0.3, 0.7] and can be perturbed by offsets in
         [−0.15, 0.15] range.
       • Rotation angle follows the convention of 2D shapes DGP, except that the rotations are
         around the z-axis for better visual quality.

Since kubric already generates high fidelity images, we use 64 × 64 images to lower the computa-
tional burden of SA-MESH autoencoder. The number of samples is always fixed at 20, 000 regardless
of the target properties since the 3D dataset is more complex. We use a similar transformation as in
2D, and normalize and clip the image features (RGB values) to be in [−1, 1] range.

F.7   L IMITATIONS

Our study focuses on showing when disentanglement is possible when treating object-centric envi-
ronments as a set of representations instead of fixed-size vectors. We have analyzed the performance
of our model comprehensively on two synthetic datasets that are relatively limited in capturing the
complexities of real-world scenarios. Yet, we believe and showed such analysis is a necessary first
step to identify the intricacies involved in making our algorithm work. Our analysis has been limited
in a number of directions. First, while we do consider a wide range of continuous and discrete
properties to be disentangled, the number of objects we use is rather low, which ideally should be
scaled to real-world scenes containing more objects. Second, although our experiments include
artifacts related to occlusion, depth, and lighting, in all of our experiments we simplify the problem by
having the objects situated on homogeneous backgrounds, whereas real-world scenes would comprise
more complex backgrounds. Such decisions were mainly due to (1) generating datasets of size more
than 5k for each combination of properties being a computationally heavy task on its own, (2) training
SA-MESH from scratch for each combination of properties and number of objects would quickly
add up as each training takes ∼ 12 hours on a single A100 GPU to achieve nice reconstructions, (3)
details related to the background and the number of objects are tangential to the focus of this study,
which is to demonstrate how to disentangle the causal factors in an object-centric environment.


                                                   24
