Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


S2 AC: E NERGY-BASED R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING
WITH S TEIN S OFT ACTOR C RITIC
    Safa Messaoud1† , Billel Mokeddem1⇤ , Zhenghai Xue2⇤ , Linsey Pang3 , Bo An4,2 ,
    Haipeng Chen5† , Sanjay Chawla1†
 1
   Qatar Computing Research Institute, Hamad Bin Khalifa University, 2 School of Computer Science and
 Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, 3 SalesForce, 4 Skywork AI, 5 Data Science, William & Mary
 {smessaoud,bmokeddem,schawla}@hbku.edu.qa, zhenghai001@e.ntu.edu.sg
 panglinsey@gmail.com, boan@ntu.edu.sg, hchen23@wm.edu
 ⇤
   Equal contribution † Corresponding authors

                                                     A BSTRACT
           Learning expressive stochastic policies instead of deterministic ones has been
           proposed to achieve better stability, sample complexity, and robustness. Notably, in
           Maximum Entropy Reinforcement Learning (MaxEnt RL), the policy is modeled
           as an expressive Energy-Based Model (EBM) over the Q-values. However, this
           formulation requires the estimation of the entropy of such EBMs, which is an open
           problem. To address this, previous MaxEnt RL methods either implicitly estimate
           the entropy, resulting in high computational complexity and variance (SQL), or
           follow a variational inference procedure that fits simplified actor distributions (e.g.,
           Gaussian) for tractability (SAC). We propose Stein Soft Actor-Critic (S2 AC), a
           MaxEnt RL algorithm that learns expressive policies without compromising effi-
           ciency. Specifically, S2 AC uses parameterized Stein Variational Gradient Descent
           (SVGD) as the underlying policy. We derive a closed-form expression of the en-
           tropy of such policies. Our formula is computationally efficient and only depends
           on first-order derivatives and vector products. Empirical results show that S2 AC
           yields more optimal solutions to the MaxEnt objective than SQL and SAC in the
           multi-goal environment, and outperforms SAC and SQL on the MuJoCo bench-
           mark. Our code is available at: https://github.com/SafaMessaoud/
           S2AC-Energy-Based-RL-with-Stein-Soft-Actor-Critic

1    I NTRODUCTION
MaxEnt RL (Todorov, 2006; Ziebart, 2010; Haarnoja et al.,
2017; Kappen, 2005; Toussaint, 2009; Theodorou et al.,                                     S! AC
2010; Abdolmaleki et al., 2018; Haarnoja et al., 2018a;              Explicit entropy
                                                                       evaluation
                                                                                           (ours)  Num. SVGD steps = 0

Vieillard et al., 2020) has been proposed to address chal-
lenges hampering the deployment of RL to real-world                   SQL                                  SAC
applications, including stability, sample efficiency (Gu (Haarnoja et al., ICML 17)               (Haarnoja et al., ICML 18)


et al., 2017), and robustness (Eysenbach & Levine, 2022).
Instead of learning a deterministic policy, as in classical Figure 1:          Comparing S2 AC to SQL and
RL (Sutton et al., 1999; Schulman et al., 2017; Silver et al., SAC. S AC with a parameterized pol-
                                                                          2

2014; Lillicrap et al., 2015), MaxEnt RL learns a stochas- icy is reduced to SAC if the number of
tic policy that captures the intricacies of the action space. SVGD steps             is 0. SQL becomes equiva-
This enables better exploration during training and even-      lent to  S  2
                                                                              AC      if the entropy is evaluated
tually better robustness to environmental perturbations at     explicitly      with     our derived formula.
test time, i.e., the agent learns multimodal action space distributions which enables picking the next
best action in case a perturbation prevents the execution of the optimal one. To achieve this, MaxEnt
RL models the policy using the expressive family of EBMs (LeCun et al., 2006). This translates
into learning policies that maximize the sum of expected future reward and expected future entropy.
However, estimating the entropy of such complex distributions remains an open problem.
To address this, existing approaches either use tricks to go around the entropy computation or make
limiting assumptions on the policy. This results in either poor scalability or convergence to suboptimal
solutions. For example, SQL (Haarnoja et al., 2017) implicitly incorporates entropy in the Q-function
computation. This requires using importance sampling, which results in high variability and hence
poor training stability and limited scalability to high dimensional action spaces. SAC (Haarnoja


                                                            1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                     !!   !"
                                                                                         π("|$! )


                                                                                         π("|$" )
                                                                      !
                    SAC                      SQL                     S  AC
                                                                     STAC
Figure 2: S AC learns a more optimal solution to the MaxEnt RL objective than SAC and SQL. We
            2

design a multigoal environment where an agent starts from the center of the 2-d map and tries to
reach one of the three goals (G1 , G2 , and G3 ). The maximum expected future reward (level curves)
is the same for all the goals but the expected future entropy is different (higher on the path to G2 /G3 ):
the action distribution ⇡(a|s) is bi-modal on the path to the left (G2 and G3 ) and unimodal to the
right (G1 ). Hence, we expect the optimal policy for the MaxEnt RL objective to assign more weights
to G2 and G3 . We visualize trajectories (in blue) sampled from the policies learned using SAC, SQL,
and S2 AC. SAC quickly commits to a single mode due to its actor being tied to a Gaussian policy.
Though SQL also recovers the three modes, the trajectories are evenly distributed. S2 AC recovers
all the modes and approaches the left two goals more frequently. This indicates that it successfully
maximizes not only the expected future reward but also the expected future entropy.
et al., 2018a), on the other hand, follows a variational inference procedure by fitting a Gaussian
distribution to the EBM policy. This enables a closed-form evaluation of the entropy but results
in a suboptimal solution. For instance, SAC fails in environments characterized by multimodal
action distributions. Similar to SAC, IAPO (Marino et al., 2021) models the policy as a uni-modal
Gaussian. Instead of optimizing a MaxEnt objective, it achieves multimodal policies by learning
a collection of parameter estimates (mean, variance) through different initializations for different
policies. To improve the expressiveness of SAC, SSPG (Cetin & Celiktutan, 2022) and SAC-NF
(Mazoure et al., 2020) model the policy as a Markov chain with Gaussian transition probabilities
and as a normalizing flow (Rezende & Mohamed, 2015), respectively. However, due to training
stability issues, the reported results in Cetin & Celiktutan (2022) show that though both models learn
multi-modal policies, they fail to maximize the expected future entropy in positive rewards setups.
We propose a new algorithm, S2 AC, that yields a more optimal solution to the MaxEnt RL objective.
To achieve expressivity, S2 AC models the policy as a Stein Variational Gradient Descent (SVGD)
(Liu, 2017) sampler from an EBM over Q-values (target distribution). SVGD proceeds by first
sampling a set of particles from an initial distribution, and then iteratively transforming these particles
via a sequence of updates to fit the target distribution. To compute a closed-form estimate of the
entropy of such policies, we use the change-of-variable formula for pdfs (Devore et al., 2012). We
prove that this is only possible due to the invertibility of the SVGD update rule, which does not
necessarily hold for other popular samplers (e.g., Langevin Dynamics (Welling & Teh, 2011)). While
normalizing flow models (Rezende & Mohamed, 2015) are also invertible, SVGD-based policy is
more expressive as it encodes the inductive bias about the unnormalized density and incorporates a
dispersion term to encourage multi-modality, whereas normalizing flows encode a restrictive class of
invertible transformations (with easy-to-estimate Jacobian determinants). Moreover, our formula is
computationally efficient and only requires evaluating first-order derivatives and vector products. To
improve scalability, we model the initial distribution of the SVGD sampler as an isotropic Gaussian
and learn its parameters, i.e., mean and standard deviation, end-to-end. We show that this results in
faster convergence to the target distribution, i.e., fewer SVGD steps. Intuitively, the initial distribution
learns to contour the high-density region of the target distribution while the SVGD updates result in
better and faster convergence to the modes within that region. Hence, our approach is as parameter
efficient as SAC, since the SVGD updates do not introduce additional trainable parameters.
Note that S2 AC can be reduced to SAC when the number of SVGD steps is zero. Also, SQL becomes
equivalent to S2 AC if the entropy is computed explicitly using our formula (the policy in SQL is
an amortized SVGD sampler). Beyond RL, the backbone of S2 AC is a new variational inference
algorithm with a more expressive and scalable distribution characterized by a closed-form entropy
estimate. We believe that this variational distribution can have a wider range of exciting applications.
We conduct extensive empirical evaluations of S2 AC from three aspects. We start with a sanity
check on the merit of our derived SVGD-based entropy estimate on target distributions with known
entropy values (e.g., Gaussian) or log-likelihoods (e.g., Gaussian Mixture Models) and assess its


                                                     2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


sensitivity to different SVGD parameters (kernel, initial distribution, number of steps and number
of particles). We observe that its performance depends on the choice of the kernel and is robust to
variations of the remaining parameters. In particular, we find out that the kernel should be chosen to
guarantee inter-dependencies between the particles, which turns out to be essential for invertibility.
Next, we assess the performance of S2 AC on a multi-goal environment (Haarnoja et al., 2017) where
different goals are associated with the same positive (maximum) expected future reward but different
(maximum) expected future entropy. We show that S2 AC learns multimodal policies and effectively
maximizes the entropy, leading to better robustness to obstacles placed at test time. Finally, we test
S2 AC on the MuJoCo benchmark (Duan et al., 2016). S2 AC yields better performances than the
baselines on four out of the five environments. Moreover, S2 AC shows higher sample efficiency as it
tends to converge with fewer training steps. These results were obtained from running SVGD for
only three steps, which results in a small overhead compared to SAC during training. Furthermore, to
maximize the run-time efficiency during testing, we train an amortized SVGD version of the policy
to mimic the SVGD-based policy. Hence, this reduces inference to a forward pass through the policy
network without compromising the performance.
2     P RELIMINARIES
2.1   S AMPLERS FOR E NERGY- BASED M ODELS
In this work, we study three representative methods for sampling from EBMs: (1) Stochastic Gradient
Langevin Dynamics (SGLD) & Deterministic Langevin Dynamics (DLD) (Welling & Teh, 2011),
(2) Hamiltonian Monte Carlo (HMC) (Neal et al., 2011), and (3) Stein Variational Gradient Descent
(SVGD) (Liu & Wang, 2016). We review SVGD here since it is the sampler we eventually use in
S2 AC, and leave the rest to Appendix C.1. SVGD is a particle-based Bayesian inference algorithm.
Compared to SGLD and HMC which have a single particle in their dynamics, SVGD operates on a set
of particles. Specifically, SVGD samples a set of m particles {aj }m      j=1 from an initial distribution q
                                                                                                             0

which it then transforms through a sequence of updates to fit the target distribution. Formally, at every
iteration l, SVGD applies a form of functional gradient descent f that minimizes the KL-divergence
between the target distribution p and the proposal distribution q l induced by the particles, i.e., the
update rule for the ith particles is: al+1
                                        i ⇥ = ai + ✏ f (ai ) with
                                                l            l
                                                                                           ⇤
                        f (ai ) = Ealj ⇠ql k(ai , aj )ralj log p(alj ) + ralj k(ali , alj ) .
                            l                 l    l
                                                                                                          (1)
Here, ✏ is the step size and k(·, ·) is the kernel function, e.g., the RBF kernel: k(ai , aj ) = exp(||ai
aj ||2 /2 2 ). The first term within the gradient drives the particles toward the high probability regions
of p, while the second term serves as a repulsive force to encourage dispersion.
2.2 M AXIMUM -E NTROPY RL
We consider an infinite horizon Markov Decision Process (MDP) defined by a tuple (S, A, p, r),
where S is the state space, A is the action space and p : S ⇥ A ⇥ S ! [0, 1] is the state transition
probability modeling the density of the next state st+1 2 S given the current state st 2 S and
action at 2 A. Additionally, we assume that the environment emits a bounded reward function
r 2 [rmin , rmax ] at every iteration. We use ⇢⇡ (st ) and ⇢⇡ (st , at ) to denote the state and state-action
marginals of the trajectory distribution induced by a policy ⇡(at |st ). We consider the setup of
continuous action spaces Lazaric et al. (2007); Lee et al. (2018); Zhou & Lu (2023). MaxEnt
RL (Todorov, 2006; Ziebart, 2010; Rawlik et al., 2012) learns a policy ⇡ ⇤ (at |st ), that instead of
maximizing the expected future reward, maximizes the sum of the expected future reward and entropy:
                                       X                    ⇥                           ⇤
                       ⇡ ⇤ = arg max⇡        t
                                               E(st ,at )⇠⇢⇡ r(st , at ) + ↵H(⇡(·|st )) ,                 (2)
                                           t
where ↵ is a temperature parameter controlling the stochasticity of the policy and H(⇡(·|st )) is the
entropy of the policy at state st . The conventional RL objective can be recovered for ↵ = 0. Note
that the MaxEnt RL objective above is equivalent to approximating the policy, modeled as an EBM
over Q-values, by a variational distribution ⇡(at |st ) (see proof of equivalence in Appendix D), i.e.,
                                   X          ⇥                                      ⇤
                ⇡ ⇤ = arg min⇡         Est ⇠⇢⇡ DKL ⇡(·|st )k exp(Q(st , ·)/↵)/Z ,                   (3)
                                       t
where DKL is the KL-divergence and Z is the normalizing constant. We now review two landmark
MaxEnt RL algorithms: SAC (Haarnoja et al., 2018a) and SQL (Haarnoja et al., 2017).
SAC is an actor-critic algorithm that alternates between policy evaluation, i.e., evaluating the Q-values
for a policy ⇡✓ (at |st ):
                                                         ⇥                                     ⇤
          Q (st , at )     r(st , at ) + Est+1 ,at+1 ⇠⇢⇡✓ Q (st+1 , at+1 ) + ↵H(⇡✓ (·|st+1 ))         (4)


                                                      3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


and policy improvement, i.e., using the updated Q-values to compute a better policy:
                                  X                 ⇥                             ⇤
                 ⇡✓ = arg max✓          Est ,at ⇠⇢⇡✓ Q (at , st ) + ↵H(⇡✓ (·|st )) .                    (5)
                                         t

SAC models ⇡✓ as an isotropic Gaussian, i.e., ⇡✓ (·|s) = N (µ✓ , ✓ I). While this enables computing
a closed-form expression of the entropy, it incurs an over-simplification of the true action distribution,
and thus cannot represent complex distributions, e.g., multimodal distributions.
SQL goesR around the entropy computation, by defining a soft version of the value function V =
↵ log A exp ↵1 Q (st , a0 ) da0 . This enables expressing the Q-value (Eq (4)) independently from
the entropy, i.e., Q (st , at ) = r(st , at ) + Est+1 ⇠p [V (st+1 )]. Hence, SQL follows a soft value
iteration which alternates between the updates of the “soft” versions of Q and value functions:
                       Q (st , at )   r(st , at ) + Est+1 ⇠p [V (st+1 )], 8(st , at )                   (6)
                                              R
                          V (st )     ↵ log A exp ↵1 Q (st , a0 ) da0 , 8st .                           (7)
Once the Q and V functions converge, SQL uses amortized SVGD Wang & Liu (2016) to learn a
stochastic sampling network f✓ (⇠, st ) that maps noise samples ⇠ into the action samples from the
EBM policy distribution ⇡ ⇤ (at |st ) = exp ↵1 (Q⇤ (st , at ) V ⇤ (st )) . The parameters ✓ are obtained
by minimizing the loss J✓ (st ) = DKL ⇡✓ (·|st )|| exp ↵1 (Q⇤ (st , ·) V ⇤ (st )) with respect to ✓.
Here, ⇡✓ denotes the policy induced by f✓ . SVGD is designed to minimize such KL-divergence
without explicitly computing ⇡✓ . In particular, SVGD provides the most greedy direction as a
functional f✓ (·, st ) (Eq (1)) which can be used to approximate ⇥ the gradient @J✓ /@at .⇤Hence, the
gradient of the loss J✓ with respect to ✓ is: @J✓ (st )/@✓ / E⇠ f✓ (⇠, st )@f✓ (⇠, st )/@✓ . Note that
the integral in Eq (7) is approximated via importance sampling, which is known to result in high
variance estimates and hence poor scalability to high dimensional action spaces. Moreover, amortized
generation is usually unstable and prone to mode collapse, an issue similar to GANs. Therefore, SQL
is outperformed by SAC Haarnoja et al. (2018a) on benchmark tasks like MuJoCo.
3    A PPROACH
We introduce S2 AC, a new actor-critic MaxEnt RL algorithm that uses SVGD as the underlying
actor to generate action samples from policies represented using EBMs. This choice is motivated
by the expressivity of distributions that can be fitted via SVGD. Additionally, we show that we can
derive a closed-form entropy estimate of the SVGD-induced distribution, thanks to the invertibility
of the update rule, which does not necessarily hold for other EBM samplers. Besides, we propose
a parameterized version of SVGD to enable scalability to high-dimensional action spaces and non-
smooth Q-function landscapes. S2 AC is hence capable of learning a more optimal solution to the
MaxEnt RL objective (Eq (2)) as illustrated in Figure 2.
3.1 S TEIN S OFT ACTOR C RITIC
Like SAC, S2 AC performs soft policy iteration which alternates between policy evaluation and policy
improvement. The difference is that we model the actor as a parameterized sampler from an EBM.
Hence, the policy distribution corresponds to an expressive EBM as opposed to a Gaussian.
Critic. The critic’s parameters      are obtained by minimizing the Bellman loss as traditionally:
                              ⇤
                                                          ⇥                  ⇤
                                 = arg min E(st ,at )⇠⇢⇡✓ (Q (st , at ) ŷ)2 ,                       (8)
                                                      ⇥                                  ⇤
with the target ŷ = rt (st , at ) + E(st+1 ,at+1 )⇠⇢⇡ Q ¯(st+1 , at+1 ) + ↵H(⇡(·|st+1 )) . Here ¯ is an
exponentially moving average of the value network weights (Mnih et al., 2015).
Actor as an EBM sampler. The actor is modeled as a sampler from an EBM over the Q-values.
To generate a set of valid actions, the actor first samples a set of particles {a0 } from an initial
distribution q 0 (e.g., Gaussian). These particles are then updated over several iterations l 2 [1, L],
i.e., {al+1 }    {al } + ✏h({al }, s) following the sampler dynamics characterized by a transformation
h (e.g., for SVGD, h = f in Eq (1)). If q 0 is tractable and h is invertible, it’s possible to compute a
closed-form expression of the distribution of the particles at the lth iteration via the change of variable
                                                                                         1
formula Devore et al. (2012): q l (al |s) = q l 1 (al 1 |s) det(I + ✏ral h(al , s))        , 8l 2 [1, L]. In
this case, the policy is represented using the particle distribution at the final step L of the sampler
dynamics, i.e., ⇡(a|s) = q L (aL |s) and the entropy can be estimated by averaging log q L (aL |s) over
a set of particles (Section 3.2). We study the invertibility of popular EBM samplers in Section 3.3.

                                                     4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Parameterized initialization. To reduce the                         " ! (!|%)


number of steps required to converge to the tar-                         !!!                      " ! (!|%)



get distribution (hence reducing computation
cost), we further propose modeling the initial                                  !!"!
                                                                                                              !!!
                                                                                                                    !!#!



distribution as a parameterized isotropic Gaus-
sian, i.e., a0 ⇠ N (µ✓ (s), ✓ (s)). The parame-
terization trick is then used to express a0 as a                 S AC(")               !
                                                                                          S AC(", $)     !

function of ✓. Intuitively, the actor would learn
                                                     Figure 3: S2 AC( , ✓) achieves faster conver-
✓ such that the initial distribution is close to the
                                                     gence to the target distribution (in orange) than
target distribution. Hence, fewer steps are re- 2
                                                     S AC( ) by parameterizing the initial distribution
quired to converge, as illustrated in Figure 3.
                                                     N (µ✓ , ✓ ) of the SVGD sampler.
Note that if the number of steps L = 0, S AC is
                                             2

reduced to SAC. Besides, to deal with the non-smooth nature of deep Q-function landscapes which
might lead to particle divergence in the sampling process, we bound the particle updates to be within
a few standard deviations (t) from the mean of the learned initial distribution, i.e., t ✓  al✓  t ✓ ,
8l 2 [1, L]. Eventually, the initial distribution q✓0 learns to contour the high-density region of the
target distribution and the following updates refine it by converging to the spanned modes. Formally,
the parameters ✓ are computed by minimizing the expected KL-divergence between the policy q✓L
induced by the particles from the sampler and⇥ the EBM of     ⇤ the Q-values:
                  ✓⇤ =arg max✓ Est ⇠D,aL✓ ⇠⇡✓ Q (st , aL  ✓ )   + ↵Est ⇠D [H(⇡✓ (·|st ))]
                  s.t.    t ✓  al✓  t ✓ ,        8l 2 [1, L].                                                             (9)
Here, D is the replay buffer. The derivation is in Appendix E. Note that the constraint does not
truncate the particles as it is not an invertible transformation which then violates the assumptions of
the change of variable formula. Instead, we sample more particles than we need and select the ones
that stay within the range. We call S2 AC( , ✓) and S2 AC( ) as two versions of S2 AC with/without the
parameterized initial distribution. The complete S2 AC algorithm is in Algorithm 1 of Appendix A.
3.2   A C LOSED -F ORM E XPRESSION OF THE P OLICY ’ S E NTROPY
A critical challenge in MaxEnt RL is how to efficiently compute the entropy term H(⇡(·|st+1 )) in
Eq (2). We show that, if we model the policy as an iterative sampler from the EBM, under certain
conditions, we can derive a closed-form estimate of the entropy at convergence.
Theorem 3.1. Let F : Rn ! Rn be an invertible transformation of the form F (a) = a + ✏h(a).
We denote by q L (aL ) the distribution obtained from repeatedly applying F to a set of samples {a0 }
from an initial distribution q 0 (a0 ) over L steps, i.e., aL = F F · · · F (a0 ). Under the condition
✏||rali h(ai )||1 ⌧ 1, 8l 2 [1, L], the distribution of the particles at the Lth step is:
                                                         XL 1
                   log q L (aL ) ⇡ log q 0 (a0 )     ✏                   Tr(ral h(al )) + O(✏2 dL).                        (10)
                                                              l=0
 Here, d is the dimensionality of a, i.e., a 2 R and O(✏ dL) is the order of approximation error.
                                                     d                     2
Proof Sketch: As F is invertible, we apply the change of variable formula (Appendix C.2) on the trans-
                                                                     PL 1
formation F F · · · F and obtain: log q L (aL ) = log q 0 (a0 )        l=0 log det(I + ✏ral h(a )) . Un-
                                                                                                   l

der the assumption ✏||rai h(ai )||1 ⌧ 1, we apply the corollary of Jacobi’s formula (Appendix C.3)
and get Eq. (10). The detailed proof is in Appendix F. Note that the condition ✏||rai h(ai )||1 ⌧ 1
can always be satisfied when we choose a sufficiently small step size ✏, or the gradient of h(a) is
small, i.e., h(a) is Lipschitz continuous with a sufficiently small constant.
It follows from the theorem above, that the entropy of a policy modeled as an EBM sampler (Eq (9))
can be expressed analytically as:
                          h                i            h                  XL 1 ⇣                  ⌘i
  H(⇡✓ (·|s)) = Ea0✓ ⇠q✓0 log q✓L (aL✓ |s)   ⇡ E  0   0
                                                 a✓ ⇠q✓   log q 0 0
                                                                ✓ (a |s) ✏       Tr r  l
                                                                                      a✓ h(a l
                                                                                             ✓ , s)   . (11)
                                                                                           l=0
In the following, we drop the dependency of the action on ✓ for simplicity of the notation.
3.3 I NVERTIBLE P OLICIES
Next, we study the invertibility of three popular EBM samplers: SVGD, SGLD, and HMC as well as
the efficiency of computing the trace, i.e., Tr(ral h(al , s)) in Eq (10) for the ones that are invertible.
Proposition 3.2 (SVGD invertibility). Given the SVGD learning rate ✏ and RBF kernel k(·, ·) with
variance , if ✏ ⌧ , the update rule of SVGD dynamics defined in Eq (1) is invertible.


                                                          5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                                  SVGD               DLD


    Initial Distribution
                                                                                                                    m


                                                                                                                        ℋ(#! )
                                                                      ℋ(#! )
                                ℋ(#! ) = 3.5     ℋ(#! ) = −25.93

                                   SGLD              HMC
                                                                                                                                                     (!, ")=
                                                                                                                                                     (!, ")=
      #" = /(0, 63)                                                                                                                                  (!, ")=
                                                                                                                                                     (!, ")=


                               ℋ(#! ) = −11.57   ℋ(#! ) = −54.5                        Kernel variance %                              Target Distribution

       (a) Recovering the GT entropy                                           (b) Effect of           on H(q L )       (c) Effect of m and L on H(q L )
                                                                   Figure 4: Entropy evaluation results.
Proof Sketch: We use the explicit function theorem to show that the Jacobian ra F (a, s) of the update
rule F (a, s) is diagonally dominated and hence invertible. This yields invertibility of F (a, s). See
detailed proof in Appendix G.3.
Theorem 3.3. The closed-form estimate of log q L (aL |s) for the SVGD based sampler with an RBF
kernel k(·, ·) is                  L
                                   X1 X   m             ⇣                                          ⌘
                                                          ✏                                                                      ↵
 log q L (aL |s) ⇡ logq 0 (a0 |s)+                                                     k(alj , al ) (al alj )> ral Q(s, alj )+        kal alj k2 d↵ .
                                                         m 2                                                        j             2
                                                                     l=0 j=1,al 6=al
                                                                                   j

Here, (·) denotes the transpose of a matrix/vector. Note that the entropy does not depend on any
                           >

matrix computation, but only on vector dot products and first-order vector derivatives. The proof is in
Appendix H.1. Intuitively, the derived likelihood is proportional to (1) the concavity of the curvature
of the Q-landscape, captured by a weighted average of the neighboring particles’ Q-value gradients
and (2) pairwise-distances between the neighboring particles (⇠ kali alj k2 · exp (kali alj k2 )), i.e.,
the larger the distance the higher is the entropy. We elaborate on the connection between this formula
and non-parametric entropy estimators in Appendix B.
Proposition 3.4 (SGLD, HMC). The SGLD and HMC updates are not invertible w.r.t. a.
Proof Sketch: SGLD is stochastic (noise term) and thus not injective. HMC is only invertible if
conditioned on the velocity v. Detailed proofs are in Appendices G.1-G.2.
From the above theoretic analysis, we can see that SGLD update is not invertible and hence is not
suitable as a sampler for S2 AC. While the HMC update is invertible, its derived closed-form entropy
involves calculating Hessian and hence computationally more expensive. Due to these considerations,
we choose to use SVGD with an RBF kernel as the underlying sampler of S2 AC.
4           R ESULTS
We first evaluate the correctness of our proposed closed-form entropy formula. Then we present the
results of different RL algorithms on multigoal and MuJoCo environments.
4.1 E NTROPY E VALUATION
This experiment tests the correctness of our entropy formula. We compare the estimated entropy
for distributions (with known ground truth entropy or log-likelihoods) using different samplers and
study the sensitivity of the formula to different samplers’ parameters. (1) Recovering the ground
truth entropy. In Figure 4a, we plot samples (black dots) obtained by SVGD, SGLD, DLD and
HMC at convergence to a Gaussian with ground truth entropy H(p) = 3.41, starting from the same
initial distribution (leftmost sub-figure). We also report the entropy values computed via Eq.(11).
Unlike SGLD, DLD, and HMC, SVGD recovers the ground truth entropy. This empirically supports
Proposition 3.4 that SGLD, DLD, and HMC are not invertible. (2) Effect of the kernel variance.
Figure 4b shows the effect of different SVGD kernel variances , where we use the same initial
Gaussian from Figure 4a. We also visualize the particle distributions after L SVGD steps for the
different configurations in Figure 9 of Appendix I. We can see that when the kernel variance is too
small (e.g., = 0.1), the invertibility is violated, and thus the estimated entropy is wrong even at
convergence. On the other extreme when the kernel variance is too large (e.g., = 100), i.e., when the
particles are too scattered initially, the particles do not converge to the target Gaussian due to noisy
gradients in the first term of Eq.(1). The best configurations hence lie somewhere in between (e.g.,
  2 {3, 5, 7}). (3) Effect of SVGD steps and particles. Figure 4c and Figure 10b (Appendix. I) show
the behavior of our entropy formula under different configurations of the number of SVGD steps
and particles, on two settings: (i) GMM M with an increasing number of components M , and (ii)
distributions with increasing ground truth entropy values, i.e., Gaussians with increasing variances .
Results show that our entropy consistently grows with an increasing M (Figure 4c) and increasing
(Figure 10b), even when a small number of SVGD steps and particles is used (e.g., L = 10, m = 10).

                                                                                           6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                                                                       '!   '"
4.2                 M ULTI - GOAL E XPERIMENTS                                                    Multigoal Environment


                                                                                                                             ! = 0.2
To check if S2 AC learns a better solution to the max-entropy objective
(Eq (2)), we design a new multi-goal environment as shown in Figure 5.
The agent is a 2D point mass at the origin trying to reach one of the goals
(in red). Q-landscapes are depicted by level curves. Actions are bounded
in [ 1, 1] along both axes. Critical states for the analysis are marked


                                                                                                                             !=1
with blue crosses. It is built on the multi-goal environment in Haarnoja
et al. (2017) with modifications such that all the goals have (i) the same
maximum expected future reward (positive) but (ii) different maximum


                                                                                                                             ! = 10
expected future entropy. This is achieved by asymmetrically placing the Figure 5: (Multigoal
                                                                                          ,(     (
                                                                                                     env.
                                                                                                        '   (            )


goals (two goals on the left side and one on the right, leading to a higher
expected future entropy on the left side) while assigning the same final rewards to all the goals.
The problem setup and hyperparameters are detailed in Appendix J. (1) Multi-modality. Figure 6


                                                                                                                             ! = 20
visualizes trajectories (blue lines) collected from 20 episodes of S2 AC( , ✓), S2 AC( ), SAC, SQL
and SAC-NF (SAC with a normalizing flow policy, Mazoure et al. (2020)) agents (rows) at test time
for increasing entropy weights ↵ (columns). S2 AC and SQL consistently cover all the modes for
all ↵ values, while this is only achieved by SAC and SAC-NF for large ↵ values. Note that, in the
case of SAC, this comes at the expense of accuracy. Although normalizing flows are expressive
enough in theory, they are known to quickly collapse to local optima in practice Kobyzev et al. (2020).
The dispersion term in S2 AC encodes an inductive bias to mitigate this issue. (2) Maximizing the
expected future entropy. We also see that with increasing ↵, more S2 AC and SAC-NF trajectories
converge to the left goals (G2 /G3 ). This shows both models learn to maximize the expected future
entropy. This is not the case for SQL whose trajectory distribution remains uniform across the
goals. SAC results do not show a consistent trend. This validates the hypothesis that the entropy
term in SAC only helps exploration but does not lead to maximizing future entropy. The quantified
distribution over reached goals is in Figure 12 of Appendix J. (3) Robustness/adaptability. To assess
the robustness of the learned policies, we place an obstacle (red bar in Figure 7) on the path to G2 .
We show the test time trajectories of 20 episodes using S2 AC, SAC, SQL and SAC-NF agents trained
with different ↵’s. We observe that, for S2 AC and SAC-NF, with increasing ↵, more trajectories
reach the goal after hitting the obstacles. This is not the case for SAC, where many trajectories hit the
obstacle without reaching the goal. SQL does not manage to escape the barrier even with higher ↵.
Additional results on the (4) effect of parameterization of q 0 , and the (5) entropy’s effect on the
learned Q-landscapes are respectively reported in Figure 11 and Figure 14 of Appendix J.
                     & = 0.2   &=1    & = 10     & = 20                        & = 0.2   &=1   & = 10           & = 20
                                                                 S! AC(", %)
      S! AC(", %)


                                                                 S! AC(")
      S! AC(")


                                                                  SAC
       SAC


                                                                  SQL
       SQL


                                                                  SAC-NF
       SAC-NF


Figure 6: S2 AC and SAC-NF learn to maxi-                     Figure 7: S2 AC and SAC-NF are more robust to
mize the expected future entropy (biased towards              perturbations. Obstacle O is placed diagonally
G2 /G3 ) while SAC and SQL do not. S2 AC con-                 at [ 1, 1]. Trajectories that did and did not reach
sistently recovers all modes, while SAC-NF with               the goal after hitting O are in green and red,
smaller ↵’s does not, indicating its instability.             respectively.



                                                          7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         3000                                                                             4000
                     3500                                                                             4000                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             PPO
                                                                                                      3500                                                                             8000                                                                              2500                                                                             3500         SAC-NF
                     3000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       DDPG
                                                                                                      3000                                                                                                                                                               2000                                                                             3000
                     2500
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       SAC
                                                                                                                                                                                       6000
                                                                                                      2500                                                                                                                                                               1500
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          2500         S2AC(¡, µ, √)


    Average Return


                                                                                     Average Return


                                                                                                                                                                      Average Return


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Average Return


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Average Return
                     2000                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              S2AC(¡, µ)
                                                                                                      2000                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                2000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1000
                                                                                                                                                                                       4000                                                                                                                                                                            S2AC(¡)
                     1500
                                                                                                      1500
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          500
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1500         SQL
                     1000
                                                                                                      1000                                                                             2000                                                                                                                                                               1000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0
                      500                                                                              500                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 500
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         °500
                                                                                                                                                                                          0
                        0                                                                                0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0
                            0.0   0.5   1.0   1.5   2.0     2.5   3.0   3.5   4.0                            0.0   0.5   1.0   1.5   2.0     2.5   3.0   3.5   4.0                            0.0    0.5   1.0   1.5   2.0     2.5   3.0   3.5   4.0                            0.0   0.5   1.0   1.5   2.0     2.5   3.0   3.5   4.0                            0.0    0.5   1.0   1.5   2.0     2.5   3.0   3.5   4.0
                                                    Steps                     £105                                                   Steps                     £105                                                    Steps                     £105                                                   Steps                     £105                                                    Steps                     £105

                                        (a) Hopper-v2                                                                (b) Walker2d-v2                                                                (c) HalfCheetah-v2                                                                      (d) Ant-v2                                                                 (e) Humanoid-v2


                                                      (f) Median                                                           (g) IQM                                                        (h) Mean                                   (i) Optimality Gap                                                                     (j) P(X>Y)

Figure 8: (a)-(e): Performance curves on the MuJoCo benchmark (training). S2 AC outperforms SQL
and SAC-NF on all environments and SAC on 4 out of 5 environments. (f)-(i): Comparison of Median,
IQM, Mean, and Optimality Gap between S2 AC and baseline algorithms. (j): The probabilities of
S2 AC outperforming baseline algorithms.

4.3                               M UJOCO E XPERIMENTS
We evaluate S2 AC on five environments from MuJoCo (Brockman et al., 2016): Hopper-v2, Walker2d-
v2, HalfCheetah-v2, Ant-v2, and Humanoid-v2. As baselines, we use (1) DDPG (Gu et al., 2017), (2)
PPO (Schulman et al., 2015), (3) SQL (Haarnoja et al., 2017), (4) SAC-NF (Mazoure et al., 2020),
and (5) SAC (Haarnoja et al., 2018a). Hyperparameters are in Appendix K.
(1) Performance and sample efficiency. We train five different instances of each algorithm with
different random seeds, with each performing 100 evaluation rollouts every 1000 environment steps.
Performance results are in Figure 8(a)-(e). The solid curves correspond to the mean returns over the
five trials and the shaded region represents the minimum and maximum. S2 AC( , ✓) is consistently
better than SQL and SAC-NF across all the environments and has superior performance than SAC in
four out of five environments. Results also show that the initial parameterization was key to ensuring
the scalability (S2 AC( ) has poor performance compared to S2 AC( , ✓)). Figure 8(f)-(j) demonstrate
the statistical significance of these gains by leveraging statistics from the rliable library (Agarwal
et al., 2021) which we detail in Appendix K.
(2) Run-time. We report the run-time of action
selection of SAC, SQL, and S2 AC algorithms in                     Hopper Walker2d HalfCheetah Ant
Table 1. S AC( , ✓) run-time increases linearly
            2
                                                     Action dim        3       6           6        8
with the action space. To improve the scalability,    State dim       11       17          17      111
we train an amortized version that we deploy            SAC         0.723    0.714       0.731    0.708
at test-time, following (Haarnoja et al., 2017).         SQL        0.839    0.828       0.815    0.836
Specifically, we train a feed-forward deepnet        S2 AC( , ✓)    3.267    4.622       4.583    5.917
f (s, z) to mimic the SVGD dynamics during S2 AC( , ✓, ) 0.850               0.817       0.830    0.837
testing, where z is a random vector that allows
mapping the same state to different particles. Table 1: Action selection run-time on MuJoCo.
Note that we cannot use f (s, z) during training
as we need to estimate the entropy in Eq (11), which depends on the unrolled SVGD dynamics
(details in Appendix K). The amortized version S2 AC( , ✓, ) has a similar run-time to SAC and
SQL with a slight tradeoff in performance (Figure 8).

5                       R ELATED W ORK
MaxEnt RL (Todorov, 2006; Ziebart, 2010; Rawlik et al., 2012) aims to learn a policy that gets high
rewards while acting as randomly as possible. To achieve this, it maximizes the sum of expected
future reward and expected future entropy. It is different from entropy regularization (Schulman et al.,
2015; O’Donoghue et al., 2016; Schulman et al., 2017) which maximizes entropy at the current time
step. It is also different from multi-modal RL approaches (Tang & Agrawal, 2018) which recover
different modes with equal frequencies without considering their future entropy. MaxEnt RL has
been broadly incorporated in various RL domains, including inverse RL (Ziebart et al., 2008; Finn
et al., 2016), stochastic control (Rawlik et al., 2012; Toussaint, 2009), guided policy search (Levine &
Koltun, 2013), and off-policy learning (Haarnoja et al., 2018a;b). MaxEnt RL is shown to maximize
a lower bound of the robust RL objective (Eysenbach & Levine, 2022) and is hence less sensitive


                                                                                                                                                                                                                       8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


to perturbations in state and reward functions. From the variational inference lens, MaxEnt RL
aims to find the policy distribution that minimizes the KL-divergence to an EBM over Q-function.
The desired family of variational distributions is (1) expressive enough to capture the intricacies
of the Q-value landscape (e.g., multimodality) and (2) has a tractable entropy estimate. These two
requirements are hard to satisfy. SAC (Haarnoja et al., 2018a) uses a Gaussian policy. Despite having
a tractable entropy, it fails to capture arbitrary Q-value landscapes. SAC-GMM (Haarnoja, 2018)
extends SAC by modeling the policy as a Gaussian Mixture Model, but it requires an impractical
grid search over the number of components. Other extensions include IAPO (Marino et al., 2021)
which also models the policy as a uni-modal Gaussian but learns a collection of parameter estimates
(mean, variance) through different initializations. While this yields multi-modality, it does not
optimize a MaxEnt objective. SSPG (Cetin & Celiktutan, 2022) and SAC-NF (Mazoure et al., 2020)
respectively improve the policy expressivity by modeling the policy as a Markov chain with Gaussian
transition probabilities and as a normalizing flow. Due to training instability, the reported multi-goal
experiments in (Cetin & Celiktutan, 2022) show that, though both models capture multimodality,
they fail to maximize the expected future entropy in positive reward setups. SQL (Haarnoja et al.,
2017), on the other hand, bypasses the explicit entropy computation altogether via a soft version of
value iteration. It then trains an amortized SVGD (Wang & Liu, 2016) sampler from the EBM over
the learned Q-values. However, estimating soft value functions requires approximating integrals via
importance sampling which is known to have high variance and poor scalability. We propose a new
family of variational distributions induced by a parameterized SVGD sampler from the EBM over
Q-values. Our policy is expressive and captures multi-modal distributions while being characterized
by a tractable entropy estimate.
EBMs (LeCun et al., 2006; Wu et al., 2018) are represented as Gibbs densities p(x) = exp     R E(x)/Z,
where E(x) 2 R is an energy function describing inter-variable dependencies and Z = exp E(x)
is the partition function. Despite their expressiveness, EBMs are not tractable as the partition
function requires integrating over an exponential number of configurations. Markov Chain Monte
Carlo (MCMC) methods (Van Ravenzwaaij et al., 2018) (e.g., HMC (Hoffman & Gelman, 2014),
SGLD (Welling & Teh, 2011)) are frequently used to approximate the partition function via sampling.
There have been recent efforts to parameterize these samplers via deepnets (Levy et al., 2017; Gong
et al., 2018; Feng et al., 2017) to improve scalability. Similarly to these methods, we propose a
parameterized variant of SVGD (Liu & Wang, 2016) as an EBM sampler to enable scalability to high-
dimensional action spaces. Beyond sampling, we derive a closed-form expression of the sampling
distribution as an estimate of the EBM. This yields a tractable estimate of the entropy. This is opposed
to previous methods for estimating EBM entropy which mostly rely on heuristic approximation, lower
bounds Dai et al. (2017; 2019a), or neural estimators of mutual information (Kumar et al., 2019).
The idea of approximating the entropy of EBMs via MCMC sampling by leveraging the change of
variable formula was first proposed in Dai et al. (2019b). The authors apply the formula to HMC
and LD, which, as we show previously, violate the invertibility assumption. To go around this, they
augment the EBM family with the noise or velocity variable for LD and HMC respectively. But the
derived log-likelihood of the sampling distribution turns out to be –counter-intuitively– independent
of the sampler’s dynamics and equal to the initial distribution, which is then parameterized using a
flow model (details in Appendix B.2). We show that SVGD is invertible, and hence we sample from
the original EBM, so that our derived entropy is more intuitive as it depends on the SVGD dynamics.
SVGD-augmented RL (Liu & Wang, 2016) has been explored under other RL contexts. Liu et al.
(2017) use SVGD to learn a distribution over policy parameters. While this leads to learning diverse
policies, it is fundamentally different from our approach as we are interested in learning a single
multi-modal policy with a closed-form entropy formula. Castanet et al. (2023); Chen et al. (2021)
use SVGD to sample from multimodal distributions over goals/tasks. We go beyond sampling and
use SVGD to derive a closed-form entropy formula of an expressive variational distribution.
6    C ONCLUSION
We propose S2 AC, an actor-critic algorithm that yields a more optimal solution to the MaxEnt RL
objective than previously proposed approaches. S2 AC achieves this by leveraging a new family
of variational distributions characterized by SVGD dynamics. The proposed distribution has high
expressivity, i.e., it is flexible enough to capture multimodal policies in high dimensional spaces,
and a tractable entropy estimate. Empirical results show that S2 AC learns expressive and robust
policies while having superior performance than other MaxEnt RL algorithms. For future work, we
plan to study the application of the proposed variational distribution to other domains and develop
benchmarks to evaluate the robustness of RL agents.


                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Bo An is supported by the National Research Foundation Singapore and DSO National Laboratories
under the AI Singapore Programme (AISGAward No: AISG2-GC-2023-009). Haipeng Chen is
supported by William & Mary FRC Faculty Research Grants.

R EFERENCES
Abbas Abdolmaleki, Jost Tobias Springenberg, Yuval Tassa, Remi Munos, Nicolas Heess, and Martin
  Riedmiller. Maximum a posteriori policy optimisation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1806.06920, 2018.
Rishabh Agarwal, Max Schwarzer, Pablo Samuel Castro, Aaron Courville, and Marc G Bellemare.
  Deep reinforcement learning at the edge of the statistical precipice. NeurIPS, 2021.
I. Ahmad and Pi-Erh Lin. A nonparametric estimation of the entropy for absolutely continuous
   distributions (corresp.). IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, 1976.
Jan Beirlant and M.C.A van Zuijlen. The empirical distribution function and strong laws for functions
  of order statistics of uniform spacings. J. Multivar. Anal., 1985.
Jan Beirlant, Edward J Dudewicz, László Györfi, Edward C Van der Meulen, et al. Nonparametric
  entropy estimation: An overview. IJSRMSS, 1997.
Laura T Bernhofen, Edward J Dudewicz, Janos Levendovszky, and Edward C van der Meulen.
  Ranking of the best random number generators via entropy-uniformity theory. AJMMS, 1996.
Peter J. Bickel and Leo Breiman. Sums of Functions of Nearest Neighbor Distances, Moment Bounds,
  Limit Theorems and a Goodness of Fit Test. Ann. Probab., 1983.
Greg Brockman, Vicki Cheung, Ludwig Pettersson, Jonas Schneider, John Schulman, Jie Tang, and
  Wojciech Zaremba. Openai Gym. arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.01540, 2016.
Giuseppe Carleo and Matthias Troyer. Solving the quantum many-body problem with artificial neural
  networks. Science, 2017.
Nicolas Castanet, Olivier Sigaud, et al. Stein variational goal generation for adaptive exploration in
  multi-goal reinforcement learning. 2023.
Edoardo Cetin and Oya Celiktutan. Policy gradient with serial markov chain reasoning. NeurIPS,
  2022.
Jiayu Chen, Yuanxin Zhang, Yuanfan Xu, Huimin Ma, Huazhong Yang, Jiaming Song, Yu Wang,
   and Yi Wu. Variational automatic curriculum learning for sparse-reward cooperative multi-agent
   problems. NeurIPS, 2021.
Thomas M Cover. Elements of information theory. John Wiley & Sons, 1999.
Noel Cressie. Power results for tests based on high-order gaps. Biometrika, 1978.
Bo Dai, Hanjun Dai, Arthur Gretton, Le Song, Dale Schuurmans, and Niao He. Kernel exponential
  family estimation via doubly dual embedding. In AISTAT, 2019a.
Bo Dai, Zhen Liu, Hanjun Dai, Niao He, Arthur Gretton, Le Song, and Dale Schuurmans. Exponential
  family estimation via adversarial dynamics embedding. NeurIPS, 2019b.
Zihang Dai, Amjad Almahairi, Philip Bachman, Eduard Hovy, and Aaron Courville. Calibrating
  energy-based generative adversarial networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1702.01691, 2017.
Jay L Devore, Kenneth N Berk, Matthew A Carlton, et al. Modern mathematical statistics with
  applications. Springer, 2012.
Yan Duan, Xi Chen, Rein Houthooft, John Schulman, and Pieter Abbeel. Benchmarking deep
  reinforcement learning for continuous control. In ICML, 2016.
Edward J Dudewicz and Edward C Van Der Meulen. Entropy-based tests of uniformity. JASA, 1981.


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Benjamin Eysenbach and Sergey Levine. Maximum entropy rl (provably) solves some robust rl
  problems. In ICLR, 2022.
Yihao Feng, Dilin Wang, and Qiang Liu. Learning to draw samples with amortized stein variational
  gradient descent. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06626, 2017.
Chelsea Finn, Sergey Levine, and Pieter Abbeel. Guided cost learning: Deep inverse optimal control
  via policy optimization. In ICML, 2016.
Ruiqi Gao, Yang Song, Ben Poole, Ying Nian Wu, and Diederik P Kingma. Learning energy-based
  models by diffusion recovery likelihood. arXiv preprint arXiv:2012.08125, 2020.
Xun Gao and Lu-Ming Duan. Efficient representation of quantum many-body states with deep neural
  networks. Nature communications, 2017.
Wenbo Gong, Yingzhen Li, and José Miguel Hernández-Lobato. Meta-learning for stochastic gradient
 mcmc. arXiv preprint arXiv:1806.04522, 2018.
Shixiang Gu, Timothy Lillicrap, Zoubin Ghahramani, Richard E Turner, and Sergey Levine. Q-prop:
  Sample-efficient policy gradient with an off-policy critic. In ICLR, 2017.
László Györfi and Edward C. van der Meulen. Density-free convergence properties of various
  estimators of entropy. CSDA, 1987.
Tuomas Haarnoja. Acquiring diverse robot skills via maximum entropy deep reinforcement learning
  (Ph.D. thesis). University of California, Berkeley, 2018.
Tuomas Haarnoja, Haoran Tang, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Reinforcement learning with
  deep energy-based policies. In ICML, 2017.
Tuomas Haarnoja, Aurick Zhou, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Soft actor-critic: Off-policy
  maximum entropy deep reinforcement learning with a stochastic actor. In ICML, 2018a.
Tuomas Haarnoja, Aurick Zhou, Kristian Hartikainen, George Tucker, Sehoon Ha, Jie Tan, Vikash
  Kumar, Henry Zhu, Abhishek Gupta, Pieter Abbeel, et al. Soft actor-critic algorithms and
  applications. arXiv preprint arXiv:1812.05905, 2018b.
Peter Hall. On powerful distributional tests based on sample spacings. JMVA, 1986.
Hideitsu Hino and Noboru Murata. A conditional entropy minimization criterion for dimensionality
  reduction and multiple kernel learning. Neural Comput., 2010.
Matthew D Hoffman and Andrew Gelman. The No-U-Turn sampler: Adaptively setting path lengths
 in hamiltonian monte carlo. JMLR, 2014.
Aleksandr Vasil’evich Ivanov and MN Rozhkova. On properties of the statistical estimate of the
  entropy of a random vector with a probability density. Problemy Peredachi Informatsii, 1981.
Harry Joe. Estimation of entropy and other functionals of a multivariate density. Ann. Inst. Stat.
 Math., 1989.
Hilbert J Kappen. Path integrals and symmetry breaking for optimal control theory. JSTAT, 2005.
Ivan Kobyzev, Simon JD Prince, and Marcus A Brubaker. Normalizing flows: An introduction and
  review of current methods. PAMI, 2020.
Lyudmyla F Kozachenko and Nikolai N Leonenko. Sample estimate of the entropy of a random
  vector. Problemy Peredachi Informatsii, 1987.
Rithesh Kumar, Anirudh Goyal, Aaron Courville, and Yoshua Bengio. Engan: Latent space mcmc
  and maximum entropy generators for energy-based models. ICLR, 2019.
Alessandro Lazaric, Marcello Restelli, and Andrea Bonarini. Reinforcement learning in continuous
  action spaces through sequential monte carlo methods. NeurIPS, 2007.


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Erik G Learned-Miller and John W Fisher III. Ica using spacings estimates of entropy. JMLR, 2003.
Yann LeCun, Sumit Chopra, Raia Hadsell, M Ranzato, and Fujie Huang. A tutorial on energy-based
  learning. Predicting Structured Data, 2006.
Kyowoon Lee, Sol-A Kim, Jaesik Choi, and Seong-Whan Lee. Deep reinforcement learning in
  continuous action spaces: a case study in the game of simulated curling. In ICML, 2018.
Sergey Levine and Vladlen Koltun. Guided policy search. In ICML, 2013.
Daniel Levy, Matthew D Hoffman, and Jascha Sohl-Dickstein. Generalizing hamiltonian monte carlo
  with neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1711.09268, 2017.
Timothy P Lillicrap, Jonathan J Hunt, Alexander Pritzel, Nicolas Heess, Tom Erez, Yuval Tassa,
  David Silver, and Daan Wierstra. Continuous control with deep reinforcement learning. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1509.02971, 2015.
Haozhe Liu, Bing Li, Haoqian Wu, Hanbang Liang, Yawen Huang, Yuexiang Li, Bernard Ghanem,
  and Yefeng Zheng. Combating mode collapse in gans via manifold entropy estimation. AAAI,
  2022.
Qiang Liu. Stein variational gradient descent as gradient flow. NeurIPS, 2017.
Qiang Liu and Dilin Wang. Stein variational gradient descent: a general purpose bayesian inference
  algorithm. In NeurIPS, 2016.
Yang Liu, Prajit Ramachandran, Qiang Liu, and Jian Peng. Stein variational policy gradient. UAI,
  2017.
Jan R Magnus and Heinz Neudecker. Matrix differential calculus with applications in statistics and
  econometrics. John Wiley & Sons, 2019.
Shie Mannor, Dori Peleg, and Reuven Rubinstein. The cross entropy method for classification. In
  ICML, 2005.
Joseph Marino, Alexandre Piché, Alessandro Davide Ialongo, and Yisong Yue. Iterative amortized
  policy optimization. NeurIPS, 2021.
Bogdan Mazoure, Thang Doan, Audrey Durand, Joelle Pineau, and R Devon Hjelm. Leveraging
  exploration in off-policy algorithms via normalizing flows. In CoRL, 2020.
Roger G Melko, Giuseppe Carleo, Juan Carrasquilla, and J Ignacio Cirac. Restricted boltzmann
  machines in quantum physics. Nature Physics, 2019.
Safa Messaoud. Toward More Scalable Structured Models. PhD thesis, University of Illinois
  Urbana-Champaign, 2021.
Safa Messaoud, David Forsyth, and Alexander G Schwing. Structural consistency and controllability
  for diverse colorization. In ECCV, pp. 596–612, 2018.
Safa Messaoud, Maghav Kumar, and Alexander G Schwing. Can we learn heuristics for graphical
  model inference using reinforcement learning? In CVPR Workshops, pp. 766–767, 2020.
Volodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, David Silver, Andrei A Rusu, Joel Veness, Marc G Bellemare,
  Alex Graves, Martin Riedmiller, Andreas K Fidjeland, Georg Ostrovski, et al. Human-level control
  through deep reinforcement learning. Nature, 2015.
Radford M Neal et al. Mcmc using hamiltonian dynamics. Handbook of Markov Chain Monte Carlo,
  2011.
Brendan O’Donoghue, Remi Munos, Koray Kavukcuoglu, and Volodymyr Mnih. Combining policy
  gradient and q-learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1611.01626, 2016.
Bo Pang, Tianyang Zhao, Xu Xie, and Ying Nian Wu. Trajectory prediction with latent belief
  energy-based model. In CVPR, pp. 11814–11824, 2021.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Liam Paninski. Estimation of entropy and mutual information. Neural Comput., 2003.
Fernando Pérez-Cruz. Estimation of information theoretic measures for continuous random variables.
  In NeurIPS, 2008.
Konrad Rawlik, Marc Toussaint, and Sethu Vijayakumar. On stochastic optimal control and rein-
  forcement learning by approximate inference. Proceedings of Robotics: Science and Systems VIII,
  2012.
Danilo Rezende and Shakir Mohamed. Variational inference with normalizing flows. In ICML.
  PMLR, 2015.
Édgar Roldán, Jérémie Barral, Pascal Martin, Juan MR Parrondo, and Frank Jülicher. Quantifying
  entropy production in active fluctuations of the hair-cell bundle from time irreversibility and
  uncertainty relations. New J. Phys., 2021.
Reuven Y. Rubinstein and Dirk P. Kroese. The Cross Entropy Method: A Unified Approach To Com-
  binatorial Optimization, Monte-Carlo Simulation (Information Science and Statistics). Springer-
  Verlag, 2004.
Ruslan Salakhutdinov, Andriy Mnih, and Geoffrey Hinton. Restricted boltzmann machines for
  collaborative filtering. In ICML, 2007.
John Schulman, Sergey Levine, Pieter Abbeel, Michael Jordan, and Philipp Moritz. Trust region
  policy optimization. In ICML, 2015.
John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy
  optimization algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347, 2017.
Claude Elwood Shannon. A mathematical theory of communication. ACM SIGMOBILE, 2001.
David Silver, Guy Lever, Nicolas Heess, Thomas Degris, Daan Wierstra, and Martin Riedmiller.
  Deterministic policy gradient algorithms. In ICML, 2014.
Richard S Sutton, David McAllester, Satinder Singh, and Yishay Mansour. Policy gradient methods
  for reinforcement learning with function approximation. NeurIPS, 1999.
Yunhao Tang and Shipra Agrawal. Boosting trust region policy optimization by normalizing flows
  policy. arXiv preprint arXiv:1809.10326, 2018.
F.P. Tarasenko. On the evaluation of an unknown probability density function, the direct estimation of
   the entropy from independent observations of a continuous random variable, and the distribution-
   free entropy test of goodness-of-fit. Proceedings of the IEEE, 1968.
Evangelos Theodorou, Jonas Buchli, and Stefan Schaal. A generalized path integral control approach
  to reinforcement learning. JMLR, 2010.
Emanuel Todorov. Linearly-solvable markov decision problems. In NeurIPS, 2006.
Giacomo Torlai, Guglielmo Mazzola, Juan Carrasquilla, Matthias Troyer, Roger Melko, and Giuseppe
  Carleo. Neural-network quantum state tomography. Nature Physics, 2018.
Marc Toussaint. Robot trajectory optimization using approximate inference. In ICML, 2009.
Don Van Ravenzwaaij, Pete Cassey, and Scott D Brown. A simple introduction to markov chain
  monte–carlo sampling. Psychon. Bull. Rev., 2018.
Oldrich Vasicek. A Test for Normality Based on Sample Entropy. JSTOR, 2015.
Nino Vieillard, Olivier Pietquin, and Matthieu Geist. Munchausen reinforcement learning. In
  NeurIPS, 2020.
Dilin Wang and Qiang Liu. Learning to draw samples: With application to amortized mle for
  generative adversarial learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1611.01722, 2016.


                                                 13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Max Welling and Yee W Teh. Bayesian learning via stochastic gradient langevin dynamics. In ICML,
 2011.
Ying Nian Wu, Jianwen Xie, Yang Lu, and Song-Chun Zhu. Sparse and deep generalizations of the
  frame model. Annals of Mathematical Sciences and Applications, 2018.
Markus Wulfmeier, Peter Ondruska, and Ingmar Posner. Maximum entropy deep inverse reinforce-
 ment learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1507.04888, 2015.
Jianwen Xie, Yang Lu, Ruiqi Gao, Song-Chun Zhu, and Ying Nian Wu. Cooperative training of
   descriptor and generator networks. IEEE PAMI.
Jianwen Xie, Yang Lu, Song-Chun Zhu, and Yingnian Wu. A theory of generative convnet. In ICML,
   2016.
Jianwen Xie, Zilong Zheng, Ruiqi Gao, Wenguan Wang, Song-Chun Zhu, and Ying Nian Wu.
   Generative voxelnet: learning energy-based models for 3d shape synthesis and analysis. IEEE
   Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 44(5), 2020.
Jianwen Xie, Zilong Zheng, Xiaolin Fang, Song-Chun Zhu, and Ying Nian Wu. Learning cycle-
   consistent cooperative networks via alternating mcmc teaching for unsupervised cross-domain
   translation. In AAAI, volume 35, pp. 10430–10440, 2021a.
Jianwen Xie, Zilong Zheng, and Ping Li. Learning energy-based model with variational auto-encoder
   as amortized sampler. In AAAI, 2021b.
Jianwen Xie, Yaxuan Zhu, Jun Li, and Ping Li. A tale of two flows: Cooperative learning of langevin
   flow and normalizing flow toward energy-based model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.06924, 2022.
Yang Zhao, Jianwen Xie, and Ping Li. Learning energy-based generative models via coarse-to-fine
  expanding and sampling. In ICLR, 2021.
Zilong Zheng, Jianwen Xie, and Ping Li. Patchwise generative convnet: Training energy-based
  models from a single natural image for internal learning. In CVPR, pp. 2961–2970, June 2021.
Mo Zhou and Jianfeng Lu. Single timescale actor-critic method to solve the linear quadratic regulator
 with convergence guarantees. JMLR, 2023.
Brian D Ziebart. Modeling purposeful adaptive behavior with the principle of maximum causal
  entropy. Carnegie Mellon University, 2010.
Brian D Ziebart, Andrew L Maas, J Andrew Bagnell, Anind K Dey, et al. Maximum entropy inverse
  reinforcement learning. In AAAI, 2008.


                                                 14
