Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


F INE - GRAINED T EXT- TO -I MAGE S YNTHESIS WITH S E -
MANTIC R EFINEMENT

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review
    Stable Diffusion           Ours          Stable Diffusion        Ours            Stable Diffusion          Ours          Stable Diffusion         Ours


                                               A whimsical garden with a white         A cat with eyeglasses and black        A peaceful countryside scene with a
     A white dog and a kid with blue T
                                               gazebo, blooming purple flowers           hat sitting on a brown sofa          red barn, grazing cows and a fence
    shirt and hat are sitting on the lawn.
                                                 and a pond with a fountain.                    reading a book.                 made of wooden posts and wire.
 (a)

                                                                                         A girl with blue
                                                                                         eyes, long curly
        A tree is covered
                                                                                         blond hair and
        with yellow fruit
                                                                                         bangs has rosy
         and a red bird.
                                                                                        cheeks opens her
                                                                                             mouth.


 (b)                                                              + Semantic 1                                                                    + Semantic 1
                            w/o Refinement     + Semantic 1                                                 w/o Refinement     +Semantic 1
                                                                  + Semantic 2                                                                    + Semantic 2

Figure 1: (a) Comparison between stable diffusion (Rombach et al., 2022) and our method, where
stable diffusion fails to meet some detailed requirements (e.g., highlighted text) given lengthy text
prompt. (b) Fine-grained text-conditioned image synthesis with semantic refinement, where users
are allowed to regularize the generation with some semantic details of their interests. Note that our
approach supports emphasizing an arbitrary number of semantics at one time instead of performing
refinement step by step. Thus, for each triplet in (b), the last two columns are not refined from their
previous one, instead, all samples are produced independently.

                                                                      A BSTRACT

                Recent advance in text-to-image synthesis greatly benefits from large-scale vision-
                language models such as CLIP. Despite the capability of producing high-quality
                and creative images, existing methods often struggle in capturing details of the
                text prompt, especially when the text is lengthy. We reveal that such an issue is
                partially caused by the imperfect text-image matching using CLIP, where fine-
                grained semantics may get obscured by the dominant ones. This work presents
                a new diffusion-based method that favors fine-grained synthesis with semantic
                refinement. Concretely, instead of getting a synthesis using the entire descrip-
                tive sentence as the prompt, users can emphasize some specific words of their
                own interests. For this purpose, we incorporate a semantic-induced gradient as a
                reference input in each denoising step to help the model understand the selected
                sub-concept. We find out that our framework supports the combination of multiple
                semantics by directly adding up their corresponding gradients. Extensive results
                on various datasets suggest that our approach outperforms existing text-to-image
                generation methods by synthesizing semantic details with finer granularity.


1       I NTRODUCTION

The advent of large-scale vision-language models (Radford et al., 2021), together with the success
of diffusion models (Ho et al., 2020; Song et al., 2020; Lu et al., 2022; Nichol & Dhariwal, 2021;
Watson et al., 2021), facilitates the development of text-to-image synthesis (Ramesh et al., 2021;
Zhou et al., 2022; Nichol et al., 2021; Ramesh et al., 2022b; Rombach et al., 2022; Sun et al., 2022).
These models enable the generation of diverse, high-quality images that match textual prompts, even
incorporating fantastic artistic styles (Hertz et al., 2022; Ruiz et al., 2022; Couairon et al., 2022; Gal
et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2022; Kawar et al., 2022). Despite the remarkable achievement, existing


                                                                                 1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


methods have been found to perform poorly when the description has rich details (as shown in
Figure 1a), which appears as an incomplete match with the description.
To look into the cause of this issue, we revisit
the working mechanism of vision-language            Texts
                                                                       19.51×     17.70×
                                                                                             A man with
                                                     𝑺𝑺𝟏𝟏    22.43√                           eyeglasses
models by taking the popular CLIP (Radford                                                    is singing

et al., 2021) model as an example. We find           𝑺𝑺𝟐𝟐    17.50 ×   18.83 √    17.39×        A man
                                                                                             with  beard
                                                                                              is serious
that, given a text, CLIP may not always as-
                                                     𝑫𝑫𝟏𝟏    16.34×    15.70×     16.84√
sign the best matching image with the highest                                                  Serious

score, especially when the text is long. For
                                                     𝑫𝑫𝟐𝟐    14.41 ×   15.43×     17.61√        Beard
example, although CLIP successfully pairs S1
and I1 in Figure 2, S2 is mistakenly paired to
                                                                                                Face
I2 , which is neither “with beard” nor “serious”.                                            Images
                                                                 𝑰𝑰𝟏𝟏       𝑰𝑰𝟐𝟐        𝑰𝑰𝟑𝟑
But at the same time, I3 has high responses to
both “serious” and “beard”. This phenomenon Figure 2: Matching scores between texts and im-
implies that, from the viewpoint of an imper- ages predicted by CLIP. Image I3 fails to be paired
fectly learned vision-language model, the de- with sentence S2 , but responds highly to the de-
tailed information within a text may get con- tails (i.e., D1 and D2 ) within S2 .
cealed by some other key concepts in the de-
scription, such as “man” in S2 , making the text-image matching score unreliable.
Inspired by the above analysis, we come up with a new diffusion-based generative model to facilitate
fine-grained text-to-image synthesis. Our motivation is intuitive: since the one-time matching with
CLIP scores may fail to capture every detail within the text condition, we aim to highlight some
semantics (e.g., words and phrases) to help guide the generation more accurately. We call such a
process as semantic refinement, which is illustrated in Figure 1b. For this purpose, we redesign
the denoising pipeline of diffusion models. Concretely, in each denoising step, the network takes
a semantic-induced gradient as a reference input, alongside the image denoised from the previous
step, to refine the generation from the semantic perspective. In this way, users can easily rectify
the coarse-grained synthesis, which is predicted based on the entire sentence, with the gradients
obtained from their selected words.
We evaluate our approach, termed as SeReDiff, on a range of datasets. Compared to existing alter-
natives, our approach is capable of producing fine-grained synthesis that better meets the input text
condition without harming the image quality. The two examples provided in Figure 1b also demon-
strate the flexibility of our method in customizing and combining multiple semantics. Furthermore,
we show that our approach does not rely on any paired data or text annotations for training, but can
still achieve fine-grained text-conditioned synthesis in the inference phase.


2   R ELATED W ORK

Text-to-Image Synthesis. The diffusion model (Ho et al., 2020; Song et al., 2020; Dhariwal &
Nichol, 2021) has garnered considerable attention for its potential in image generation, particu-
larly in the field of text-to-image synthesis. Previous works, such as GLIDE (Nichol et al., 2021)
and DALLE2 (Ramesh et al., 2022b), have harnessed the power of CLIP (Radford et al., 2021) as
an encoder to produce images with high text-matching accuracy. However, these models are lim-
ited in their ability to generate only low-resolution (64x64) images, necessitating additional super-
resolution diffusion models (Saharia et al., 2022) for high-quality image generation. To address this
limitation, latent-diffusion (Rombach et al., 2022) has been proposed, which involves pretraining
an autoencoder and training a diffusion model in the latent space. These models have generated
high-quality images using limited computational resources. Nevertheless, due to the constraints of
CLIP, they tend to disregard details in the input text. Imagen (Ramesh et al., 2022a) uses a large,
general-purpose language model (Raffel et al., 2020) to encode the text, improving the quality and
consistency of text-to-image generation. Despite these improvements, current approaches still lack
the ability to generate images with the desired level of detail. Our approach provides a significant
improvement in generating high-quality images that closely align with the input text while also
offering users more control over the level of detail in the generated images.
Conditional Diffusion Model. A diffusion model (Ho et al., 2020) consists of two processes: the
forward process and the reverse process. The forward process is an explicit Markov process that


                                                   2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


adds Gaussian noise to the real data distribution x0 ∼ q(x0 ) in a step-by-step manner:
                                                p
                     q(xt+1 |xt ) := N (xt+1 ; 1 − βt xt , βt I), t ∈ [0, T ].                                                                       (1)
Here, β1 , . . . , βT are fixed constants, and T is the number of time steps that is as large as possi-
ble to destroy the signal. The reverse process aims to approximate the posterior pθ (xt−1 |xt ) :=
                                                                                         2
N (xt−1 ; µθ (xt ), Σθ (xt )) by training a model ϵθ with the training objective |ϵθ − ϵ| . Some meth-
ods (Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015; Vahdat et al., 2021; Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021) show that a pre-
trained diffusion model can be guided by a classifier by adding its gradient to the mean value of
images. GLIDE (Nichol et al., 2021) achieves text-conditioned image generation using a pre-trained
noisy CLIP as the classifier:
                                      µˆθ (xt |c) = µθ (xt |c) + sΣθ (xt |c)∇(f (xt ) · g(c)),                                                       (2)
where s is the guidance scale, f (·) and g(·) are CLIP image and text encoders respectively. GLIDE
also uses classifier-free guidance (Ho & Salimans, 2022) by replacing the condition c with a null
condition randomly during training, and the reverse process is impelled close to µθ (xt |c) and away
from µθ (xt |∅) by:
                          µˆθ (xt |c) = µθ (xt |c) + s · (µθ (xt |c) − µθ (xt |∅)).               (3)

                       (a) Training Process                                                         (b) Sampling Process
     Database                                               Source image
                                                                                                                                            Database
                                                             embeddings
                   Retrieval                                                      A white dog
                                                                                  with golden
                                                                                                Split   Golden Red              Query
                                                            Reference image
                                                              embeddings          crown and             crown collar
                                                 Noising                           red collar
                                                             Network flow
           Query
    𝒙𝟎                                                                                                                          Retrieval
                                                             Preprocessing



                                    Semantic-
                                                               Gradient            Prior/                    Semantic-
                                                             computation
                                     induced                                      Retrieval                   induced
                                    Gradient                                                                 Gradient
    𝒙𝒕#𝟏                       "𝒕
                               𝒙                                   𝒙𝒕             𝒙𝒕#𝟏                  "𝒕
                                                                                                        𝒙                                       𝒙𝒕
                   𝒄                                 𝒄                                          𝒄                           𝒄
                   U-Net                            U-Net                                       U-Net                        U-Net

                                      Semantic Refinement                                                     Semantic Refinement


Figure 3: Overview of our proposed SeReDiff, which is based on diffusion models and adopts a
language-free training strategy together with a two-stage denoising process. Given a source image
x0 , we first retrieve some reference images from the database, which are used to help the model
better understand the semantics in x0 . The CLIP embeddings from x0 and the retrieved images
are used as the condition of the first-stage denoising to generate a coarse image xet . Then, we
compute semantic-induced gradient (see Section 3.3) from xet and the noised version of reference
images, and employ such gradient as an addition input for the second-stage denoising, i.e., serving
as semantic refinement. At the inference stage, we replace the image-based retrieval with text-image
score matching w.r.t. the sementics of interests.


3        M ETHOD

3.1        OVERALL F RAMEWORK

Training Process. Our method aims to generate a high-quality image that accurately captures the
highlighted details from the input sentence. To achieve this, we propose a novel diffusion-based
generation framework, named SeReDiff. In a typical diffusion denoising process, the current image
xt is directly predicted from the next image xt+1 using a U-Net with a given condition c. To improve
this process, as shown in Figure 3 (a), we expand the input space of the U-Net from 3 channels to 6
channels and split the denoising process into two stages. In the first stage, a null image of the same
size as xt+1 is concatenated with the image from the previous time step xt+1 to predict a coarse
image xet = fθ (xt+1 , ∅, t, c), where fθ (·) denotes the U-Net, whose weights are shared in the two
stages. In the second stage, the coarse image xet is concatenated with the gradient to predict the
denoised image xt , i.e., xt = fθ (xet , g, t, c). Here, g denotes the semantic-induced gradient, which
is computed as described in Sec 3.3.


                                                                              3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Sampling Process. During the sampling process, as shown in Figure 3 (b), we aim to generate an
image that aligns well with a given text description, while also incorporating the highlighted details.
Firstly, we use the entire sentence to obtain a source image embedding by either using a prior or
retrieving it from a database. Next, we employ the highlighted details to retrieve reference images,
and concatenate the embeddings of the source image and reference images. By using concise terms
to search for reference images, we ensure a strong alignment with the textual description. These
concatenated embeddings serve as the conditions for the U-Net to synthesize the coarse image xet . In
the second stage, we compute the semantic-induced gradient using a noised version of the reference
images and the coarse image xet . We then use this gradient, in conjunction with the coarse image, to
generate the image xt . This process continues from time step T until the final image is synthesized,
with all semantics employed to guide the sampling simultaneously.

3.2   S EMANTIC R EFINEMENT WITH G RADIENT C ONDITION

Why using gradient? Recall that our objective is to guide the diffusion sampling process toward
specific semantic directions. One intuitive approach is to directly concatenate the words extracted
from the input sentence into the cross-attention module of the U-Net and use a classifier for guidance
to generate the composite image. However, this approach has limitations in producing images with
all fine-grained details, as different conditions have varying degrees of semantic relevance, and the
more salient ones may dominate over the less prominent ones. Since the gradient has the same size
as the generated image and implies a change in desired semantic direction, we can leverage it as a
condition to guide the generation of the composite image. Previous works (Selvaraju et al., 2017;
Fu et al., 2020) have shown that fine-grained details can be obtained from the gradient of a classifier.
Therefore, we explore the potential of using the gradient as a condition to expand the 3-channel
image space into a 6-channel gradient and image space in the diffusion model, with the goal of
generating images with fine-grained details while maintaining semantic coherence.
How does gradient facilitate semantic refinement? Given a text prompt c as condition, the condi-
tional diffusion process (Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021) can be expressed as:
                             Pθ,φ (xt |xt+1 , c) = ZPθ (xt |xt+1 ) · Pφ (c|xt ).                        (4)
Here, Z is a constant, Pθ (xt |xt+1 ) represents the original diffusion process as a Gaussian distribu-
tion, Pφ (c|xt ) is the posterior distribution for the condition c, which we will analyze in detail in the
following.
Assuming the classifier posterior distribution Pφ (c|xt ) is smooth with respect to variable xt , this
highly-nonlinear term can thus be further decomposed into a more tractable form: the combination
of a linear term and a quadratic term. This decomposition serves as our key insight in designing
Semantic Refinement with gradient condition. By applying Taylor expansion at xt = µ, we can get
                                                            1
log Pφ (c|xt ) = C0 + (xt − µ)∇xt log Pφ (c|xt )|xt =u + (xt − µ)T ∇xt 2 log Pφ (c|xt )|xt =ϵ (xt − µ),
                                                            2
                                                                                                      (5)
where both C0 and log Pφ (c|xt )|xt =u are constant, ϵ ∈ [µ, xt ] is a variable, ∇xt and ∇2xt denote
the gradient and Hessian operator w.r.t. variable xt , respectively. For simplicity, in the following we
denote ∇xt log Pφ (c|xt )|xt =u as g and ∇xt 2 log Pφ (c|xt )|xt =ϵ as G(xt , g).
Thus, Equation 4 can be represented as
                                                       1
          log(Pθ (xt |xt+1 ) · Pφ (c|xt )) = log p(z) + g T Ψg + C1 , z ∼ N (µ + Ψg, Ψ−1 ),             (6)
                                                       2
where Ψ denotes (Σ−1 − G(xt , g))−1 and C1 is a constant. Please refer to appendix A.1 for a
detailed derivation. A key insight of Equation 6 is that, for a given xt , the term 12 g T Ψg is constant at
each timestep. Thus, the entire conditional transition distribution can be approximated as a Gaussian
distribution, where the variance is denoted as Ψ−1 and the mean is represented as:
                                       µ̂(xt |c) = µθ (xt |c) + Ψg,                                     (7)
This formulation represents an advancement over classical results (Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015;
Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021), which only considered the first linear term to capture the conditional
transition. Whereas our method incorporates the second order term elegantly due to the Gaussian
nature of the mathematics involved and can capture the conditional transition more efficiently.


                                                     4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Given that Ψg is related to both xt and g, the mean value in Equation 7 can be modeled as a neural
network:
                          µ̂(xt |c) = ϕθ (xt−1 , t, g, c) = µθ (xt |c) + ψθ (g),               (8)
where µθ (xt |c) predicts the mean of the unconditional process and ψθ (g) is used to capture Ψg.
Property of using gradient. Benefiting from the intrinsic linearity of the gradient operator, our
method presents a valid compositional performance. Given multiple semantic c1 , c2 , ..., cn as con-
ditions (Hinton, 2002), the conditional probability can then be factored as
                                                                                                        n
                                                                                                        Y
Pθ,φ (xt |xt+1 , c1 , c2 , ..., cn ) = ZPθ (xt |xt+1 )·Pφ (c1 , c2 , ..., cn |xt ) = ZPθ (xt |xt+1 )·         Pφ (ci |xt ).
                                                                                                        i=1
                                                                                                    (9)
Here, gi denotes the gradient of the ith condition.
                                                Pn  Using Equation 6, we  can compute   the conditional
probability of multiple conditions as N (µ+Ψ i=1 gi , Ψ−1 ). This approach allows for the efficient
and accurate implementation of the conditional diffusion process, facilitating fine-grained generation
under multiple semantics.

3.3    S EMANTIC - INDUCED G RADIENT

To leverage gradient as a guiding signal in the diffusion sampling process, it is necessary to com-
pute it efficiently and effectively. Previous work on this topic, such as GLIDE (Nichol et al., 2021),
computes the dot product of noised image features and corresponding text features. However, this
approach requires pre-training of noised CLIPs for images at each time step, which is computa-
tionally expensive and time-consuming. Instead, we use a loss function of negative dot similarity
between CLIP embeddings of a generated image xet and reference images xref   t . The gradient of this
loss w.r.t. the generated image embedding is computed to obtain the semantic-induced gradient:

                                            g = ∇xet f (xet ) · f (xref
                                                                    t ),                                             (10)
where f (·) denotes the CLIP image encoder. This way, we can efficiently guide the diffusion process
towards specific semantic directions without pre-training noisy CLIPs
To ensure that CLIP can work well with                 0.90
noised images, we introduce a metric called                                             FFHQ
the Preservation Ratio of Representation Topol-        0.88                             ImageNet
ogy. This metric measures the extent to which
                                                           Preservation Ratio


                                                       0.86
image feature similarity is maintained as the
time step increases during the diffusion pro-          0.84
cess. Specifically, for an image S0 , we calcu-        0.82
late its CLIP similarity between A0 and B0 . If
f (S0 ) · f (A0 ) > f (S0 ) · f (B0 ) and this con-    0.80
dition holds at time step t such that f (St ) ·        0.78
f (At ) > f (St ) · f (Bt ), we consider A0 at time         0   200     400       600  800     1000
                                                                          Time Step
step t as “preserved” (and “not preserved” oth- Figure 4: Analysis on preservation ratio of repre-
erwise). We evaluate the Preservation Topology sentation topology, which is obtained by comput-
Ratio on a random sample of 1000 images from ing CLIP feature similarity extracted from 1000
FFHQ and ImageNet datasets. The statistical image pairs from each dataset. We compute their
results in Figure 4 demonstrate that even at time similarity by gradually destroying each image pair
step 1000, the Preservation Topology Ratio for via adding noise, the same as the diffusion process
ImageNet is still about 80%, and over 82% for in diffusion models.
FFHQ dataset. Moreover, we observed that the
similarity scores for images considered as “not preserved” are close to each other even at time step
0. This finding supports the feasibility of computing the semantic-induced gradient directly from
two noised images, as an alternative to calculating it from image-text pairs.
Language-free training. The proposed semantic-induced gradient makes our training free of
text annotations and allows for a language-free training pipeline where only pure images partic-
ipate in the training process. Specifically, given an initial image x0 , we first extract its CLIP
embedding e with CLIP image encoder and retrieve its K-nearest neighbors e1 , e2 , ..., ek from
the training database. Then we concatenate all the CLIP embeddings to form the condition


                                                          5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


c = concat(e, e1 , e2 , ..., ek ). The retrieved images corresponding to these embeddings serve
as reference images x1 , x2 , ..., xk . We use the noised versions of reference images x1t , x2t , ..., xkt to
compute the gradients g1 , g2 , ..., gk with Equation 10. Finally, we add the gradients to get the final
gradient g according to Equation 9.


4     E XPERIMENTS

4.1   E XPERIMENTAL S ETUPS

Datasets. In this section, we compare our method with state-of-the-art approaches (Zhou et al.,
2022; Xia et al., 2021a; Xu et al., 2018; Nichol et al., 2021; Liu et al., 2022) on various datasets
containing fine-grained text descriptions, including Mulit-Modal CelebA-HQ (MM HQ) (Xia et al.,
2021b) and CUB (Wah et al., 2011). For open-world results, we train our model on LAION-5b
dataset (Schuhmann et al., 2022). To demonstrate the independence of our method from text-image
pairs, we also present qualitative results obtained by training on AFHQ (Choi et al., 2020) and
LHQ (Skorokhodov et al., 2021).
Evaluation metrics. To evaluate the visual quality of our proposed method, we use the Fréchet
Inception Distance (FID) (Heusel et al., 2017) as a quantitative metric. However, since FID may not
always align with human perception and does not necessarily reflect the semantic consistency be-
tween the image and text, we additionally conduct a user study to assess the photorealism, text align-
ment, and detail matching of the generated images. Specifically, users are given a text description
that includes marked attributes and the corresponding generated image, and they are asked to rate
the photorealism and text alignment of the image and calculate the number of matching attributes
between the text and image. We evaluate our approach against several state-of-the-art methods,
including TediGAN (Xia et al., 2021a), LAFITE (Zhou et al., 2022), AttnGAN (Xu et al., 2018),
GLIDE (Nichol et al., 2021), Composable Diffusion (Liu et al., 2022) and Stable Diffusion (Rom-
bach et al., 2022). Additionally, we use two baselines for ablation: (1) one-stage diffusion model
without semantic refinement (Baseline) with identical parameter settings and training steps, and
(2) Baseline model with classifier guidance (BaselineC ). For further details regarding implemen-
tation and evaluation settings, please refer to Appendix A.2 and A.3.

4.2   Q UANTITATIVE R ESULTS

We quantitatively compare our proposed method with state-of-the-art benchmarks on MM-HQ (Lee
et al., 2020) CUB (Wah et al., 2011) and Laion-5b (Schuhmann et al., 2022) datasets for fine-
grained text-to-image generation. For the MM-HQ dataset, we compare our method with StyleGAN-
based (Karras et al., 2019) methods LAFITE (Zhou et al., 2022) and TediGAN (Xia et al., 2021a). As
shown in Table 1, our method outperforms the StyleGAN-based methods in terms of image quality,
achieving the lowest FID score of 37.81 among all compared methods. Additionally, our method
achieves the highest performance in Text Alignment and Detail Matching, with a matching score
of over 90%, indicating that most fine-grained details described in the corresponding sentence are
generated. However, our method is slightly inferior to TediGAN (Xia et al., 2021a) in terms of pho-
torealism. The main reason is that our method only generates images with a resolution of 256×256
compared to TediGAN’s 1024×1024 resolution. Note that analytical results have shown that users
prefer higher resolution images. For CUB dataset, we compare our method with AttnGAN (Xu
et al., 2018) and LAFITE (Zhou et al., 2022), and we find that our method outperforms them in all
evaluation metrics.

4.3   Q UALITATIVE R ESULTS

Comparison with State-of-The-Art methods. Figure 5 displays the visual results of face images
generated by previous methods. LAFITE (Zhou et al., 2022) can produce coarse-grained attributes
such as “gender” and “hair style”, but fails to capture fine-grained attributes like “sad”, “green
eyes”, and “bushy beard”. The quality of the generated images also degrades significantly when
irregular attributes like “red beard” are involved. In contrast, TediGAN (Xia et al., 2021a) can
generate high-quality images, but the semantics of the generated images do not always match the
corresponding text descriptions. Our method outperforms both LAFITE and TediGAN, as it can


                                                      6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 1: Quantitative comparison of different methods on MM-HQ (Lee et al., 2020) and CUB (Wah
et al., 2011) Dataset. ↓ means smaller number is better, while ↑ means larger number is better.
   Dateset                   MM-HQ (Lee et al., 2020)                         CUB (Wah et al., 2011)
                             Photo       Text       Detail                  Photo       Text         Detail
   Method          FID ↓            ↑           ↑           ↑     FID ↓            ↑            ↑           ↑
                            realism   Alignment    Matching                realism   Alignment     Matching
   TediGAN          40.48     4.23        4.15       77.48%         -           -          -            -
   AttnGAN            -          -          -           -         23.98      1.65        4.02        71.30%
   LAFITE           39.06     3.26        4.54       89.00%       31.15      1.50        3.66        63.05%
   Baseline         39.74     3.99        4.49       87.83%       22.03      1.50        3.27        50.35%
   BaselineC        39.76     3.79        4.46       86.32%       21.62      1.73        3.19        48.85%
   Ours             37.81     4.00        4.59      90.45%        17.66      4.32        4.10        74.10%



synthesize high-quality images with fine-grained details that accurately reflect the meaning of the
given text descriptions. Additionally, our method generates more realistic and natural results, such
as “square face”, “hat”, and “red beard”. Figure 6 showcases the visual results of bird images, where
our method stands out in terms of photo-realism and text alignment compared to other methods.


                            TediGAN        LAFITE      Baseline       BaselineC       w/o Refinement    SeReDiff

 A little girl with short
  straight yellow hair
 and bangs has green
     eyes looks sad .


   An old man with
    eyeglasses and
     bushy beard
   wearing a hat .


     A middle aged
   man with big nose
  and square face and
   short hair has red
        beard .

Figure 5: Qualitative comparisons on MM-HQ dataset (Lee et al., 2020). This first colume shows the
input text prompt as the condition, while the remaining columns are samples produced by various
methods. The highlighted words indicated the semantics to be strengthened.


                                 AttnGAN      LAFITE     Baseline         BaselineC    w/o Refinement   SeReDiff
   Small round body with
   friendly look and green
  gray back and head with
  bars of yellow and dark
   gray on wings and tail .

     This bird is one of the
   most unique i have seen,
 small head, black mask face
  with many different shades
    of orange as feathers .


   A black and white bird
   with a white crown and
    black pointed beak .


Figure 6: Qualitative comparisons on CUB dataset (Wah et al., 2011). This first colume shows the
input text prompt as the condition, while the remaining columns are samples produced by various
methods. The highlighted words indicated the semantics to be strengthened in our approach.


                                                        7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 2: Quantitative comparison on composable text-to-image generation. Compose+X denotes
the implementation of composable diffusion using method X.
                                                                              Photo                Text             Detail
                                    Method ↓                                         ↑                    ↑                 ↑
                                                                             Realism            Alignment          Matching
                                    Compose+GLIDE                              4.81                 3.86            75.23%
                                    Compose+stable diffusion                   4.81                 3.89            75.52%
                                    Structure diffusion                        4.78                 3.81            71.06%
                                    Ours                                       4.85                 4.62            91.69%


Open-world Text-to-Image Generation. We trained our model on LAION-5b (Schuhmann et al.,
2022) dataset and pre-trained a prior for mapping CLIP text features into image features to facili-
tate open-world generation. To evaluate our approach, we compare it with the pre-trained models
released by GLIDE (Nichol et al., 2021), Composable-Diffusion (Liu et al., 2022), and Stable Dif-
fusion (Rombach et al., 2022). Figure 7 presents the visual results of the different methods. The
results indicate that GLIDE (Nichol et al., 2021) is only capable of synthesizing a portion of the
semantics, as demonstrated by the example in which the description is “A blue bird and a flower,”
and GLIDE only synthesized “a blue bird” while neglecting “a flower”. Similarly, Composable-
Diffusion (Liu et al., 2022) generates images with mixed-up semantics, such as a furry couch gen-
erated from the description “A couch and a dog sitting in the living room.” While Stable Diffusion
produces higher-quality visuals, it still fails to capture fine-grained details such as “golden crown”
and “stars”. Interestingly, our method successfully generates images that compose all the semantics,
including counter-intuitive ones such as “A panda eats French fries with a red hat on the grassland.”
     GLIDE
 Diffusion
  Stable
     SeReDiff


                 A white dog with      A pink sky and                            A panda eats        An abandoned         A white church
                                    Cherry Blossoms in                                                                  sitting on a hill and    A couch and a
                  a golden crown                           A blue bird and     French fries with    red vehicle and a
                                   front of the mountain
                                                                               a red hat on the
                                                                                                                        Stars in the sky and    dog sitting in the
                and red collar and and a blue mountain       a flower .                              forest covered     bare trees are beside
                                                                                  grassland .                                                    living room .
                 the garden lawn .    in the horizon .                                                with snow .           the church .


Figure 7: Illustrations of open-world text-to-image synthesis. The last row represents the input texts
with semantics of interest highlighted, while the rest rows shows the results of different methods.

4.4             C OMPOSABLE T EXT- TO -I MAGE G ENERATION .

Our method supports composable text-to-image generation, which allows users to combine multiple
textual descriptions into a single image. To evaluate the performance of our method in synthesizing
fine-grained details, we compare it with two state-of-the-art composable text-to-image synthesis
methods: Composable diffusion (Liu et al., 2022) and Structure-diffusion (Feng et al., 2022). Since
different training sets are employed by these methods, we cannot directly compare the FID scores
with them. Therefore, we mainly rely on human evaluations, which are presented in Table 2. Our
method outperforms the others in Photo Realism, Text Alignment and Detail Matching, achieving a
91.69% rate for Detail Matching, which is a 16.46% improvement over the best existing method.
The qualitative results of different methods are shown in Figure 8. All of the prompts are selected
from the paper of Structure-diffusion. The results of Composable diffusion (Liu et al., 2022) show
low quality and entangled concepts. For example, in the prompt “A yellow cat and wearing a blue


                                                                                 8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


plastic”, our method clearly separates the cat and blue plastic, while Composable-diffusion mixes
them together. Our method generates comparable results to Structure-diffusion (Feng et al., 2022)
in image quality but shows better disentanglement of concepts. For instance, in the prompt “A gold
clock and a green bench”, Sturcture-diffusion produces a gold-green clock.
                A yellow cat and      A red car and   A gold clock and   A blue bird and   A black goat and two   A red bird and
              wearing a blue plastic    a white sheep     a green bench       a brown bowl           white goats       a green apple
      Compose+GLIDE


                   baseball hat
      Compose+SD
 Structure
 Diffusion
      Ours


Figure 8: Illustration of different methods on composable text-to-image generation. Compose+X
denotes the implementation of composable diffusion using method X.
4.5                   A BLATION S TUDIES

Quantitative Evaluates. As presented in Table 1, our approach outperforms the baseline across
multiple metrics, including Image Quality, Text Alignment, and Detail Matching. Specifically, our
method achieves significant improvements in Image Quality, Text Alignment, and Detail Matching,
particularly on the CUB dataset, where Photorealism increases from 1.50 to 4.10, and the Detail
Matching is improved by 23.75%. While using classifier guidance (BaselineC ) only slightly im-
proves the image quality. The poor results in Text Alignment and Detail Matching demonstrate the
limitations of this method.
Qualitative Evaluates. The qualitative results of our method and ablations are presented in Figure 5
and Figure 6. The Baseline method neglects fine-grained details, such as “square face” and “red
beard” in face images, and produces overall blurry results. Although BaselineC performs better
in modeling image details with sharper textures, the image distribution is severely damaged. In
contrast, our method without Semantic Refinement produces results that are visually plausible and
compatible with the conditioned texts. By incorporating the Semantic Refinement technique, we can
obtain more fine-grained results, as shown in the rightmost column of the figures. Additionally, the
semantics of the generated samples are enhanced, such as “hat,” and “red beard” in Figure 5 and
“white crown” and “black mask face” in Figure 6.

5          C ONCLUSION AND D ISCUSSION
In this paper, we propose a new method called SeReDiff that addresses the limitations of existing
text-to-image methods in generating fine-grained images. Our approach uses a coarse-to-fine frame-
work, generating a coarse-grained image first and refining it with a Semantic Refinement module
that leverages multiple semantics. Our method offers language-free training and outperforms state-
of-the-art methods on multiple datasets. It also allows users to emphasize desired semantics for
flexible and customizable image synthesis.


                                                                      9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Wenhu Chen, Hexiang Hu, Chitwan Saharia, and William W Cohen. Re-imagen: Retrieval-
 augmented text-to-image generator. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.14491, 2022.
Yunjey Choi, Youngjung Uh, Jaejun Yoo, and Jung-Woo Ha. Stargan v2: Diverse image synthesis
  for multiple domains. In IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recog., pp. 8188–8197, 2020.
Guillaume Couairon, Jakob Verbeek, Holger Schwenk, and Matthieu Cord. Diffedit: Diffusion-
  based semantic image editing with mask guidance. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.11427, 2022.
Prafulla Dhariwal and Alexander Nichol. Diffusion models beat gans on image synthesis. Adv.
  Neural Inform. Process. Syst., pp. 8780–8794, 2021.
Weixi Feng, Xuehai He, Tsu-Jui Fu, Varun Jampani, Arjun Akula, Pradyumna Narayana, Sugato
 Basu, Xin Eric Wang, and William Yang Wang. Training-free structured diffusion guidance for
 compositional text-to-image synthesis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.05032, 2022.
Ruigang Fu, Qingyong Hu, Xiaohu Dong, Yulan Guo, Yinghui Gao, and Biao Li. Axiom-
  based grad-cam: Towards accurate visualization and explanation of cnns. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2008.02312, 2020.
Rinon Gal, Yuval Alaluf, Yuval Atzmon, Or Patashnik, Amit H Bermano, Gal Chechik, and Daniel
  Cohen-Or. An image is worth one word: Personalizing text-to-image generation using textual
  inversion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.01618, 2022.
Amir Hertz, Ron Mokady, Jay Tenenbaum, Kfir Aberman, Yael Pritch, and Daniel Cohen-Or.
 Prompt-to-prompt image editing with cross attention control. arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.01626,
 2022.
Martin Heusel, Hubert Ramsauer, Thomas Unterthiner, Bernhard Nessler, and Sepp Hochreiter.
 Gans trained by a two time-scale update rule converge to a local nash equilibrium. Adv. Neural
 Inform. Process. Syst., 30, 2017.
G. E. Hinton. Training products of experts by minimizing contrastive divergence. Neural computa-
  tion, 14(8):1771–1800, 2002.
Jonathan Ho and Tim Salimans.           Classifier-free diffusion guidance.     arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2207.12598, 2022.
Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. Adv. Neural
  Inform. Process. Syst., 33:6840–6851, 2020.
Tero Karras, Samuli Laine, and Timo Aila. A style-based generator architecture for generative
  adversarial networks. In IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recog., pp. 4401–4410, 2019.
Bahjat Kawar, Shiran Zada, Oran Lang, Omer Tov, Huiwen Chang, Tali Dekel, Inbar Mosseri,
  and Michal Irani. Imagic: Text-based real image editing with diffusion models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2210.09276, 2022.
Cheng-Han Lee, Ziwei Liu, Lingyun Wu, and Ping Luo. Maskgan: Towards diverse and interactive
  facial image manipulation. In IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recog., 2020.
Nan Liu, Shuang Li, Yilun Du, Antonio Torralba, and Joshua B Tenenbaum. Compositional visual
  generation with composable diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.01714, 2022.
Cheng Lu, Yuhao Zhou, Fan Bao, Jianfei Chen, Chongxuan Li, and Jun Zhu. Dpm-solver: A
  fast ode solver for diffusion probabilistic model sampling in around 10 steps. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2206.00927, 2022.
Alex Nichol, Prafulla Dhariwal, Aditya Ramesh, Pranav Shyam, Pamela Mishkin, Bob McGrew,
  Ilya Sutskever, and Mark Chen. Glide: Towards photorealistic image generation and editing with
  text-guided diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.10741, 2021.


                                              10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Alexander Quinn Nichol and Prafulla Dhariwal. Improved denoising diffusion probabilistic models.
  In Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., pp. 8162–8171, 2021.
Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual
  models from natural language supervision. In Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., pp. 8748–8763, 2021.
Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Katherine Lee, Sharan Narang, Michael Matena, Yanqi
  Zhou, Wei Li, and Peter J Liu. Exploring the limits of transfer learning with a unified text-to-text
  transformer. J. Mach. Learn. Res., 21(1):5485–5551, 2020.
Aditya Ramesh, Mikhail Pavlov, Gabriel Goh, Scott Gray, Chelsea Voss, Alec Radford, Mark Chen,
  and Ilya Sutskever. Zero-shot text-to-image generation. In Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., pp. 8821–
  8831, 2021.
Aditya Ramesh, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alex Nichol, Casey Chu, and Mark Chen. Hierarchical text-
  conditional image generation with clip latents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.06125, 2022a.
Aditya Ramesh, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alex Nichol, Casey Chu, and Mark Chen. Hierarchical text-
  conditional image generation with clip latents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.06125, 2022b.
Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer. High-
  resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
  Recog., pp. 10684–10695, 2022.
Nataniel Ruiz, Yuanzhen Li, Varun Jampani, Yael Pritch, Michael Rubinstein, and Kfir Aberman.
  Dreambooth: Fine tuning text-to-image diffusion models for subject-driven generation. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2208.12242, 2022.
Chitwan Saharia, Jonathan Ho, William Chan, Tim Salimans, David J Fleet, and Mohammad
  Norouzi. Image super-resolution via iterative refinement. IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell.,
  2022.
Christoph Schuhmann, Romain Beaumont, Richard Vencu, Cade Gordon, Ross Wightman, Mehdi
  Cherti, Theo Coombes, Aarush Katta, Clayton Mullis, Mitchell Wortsman, et al. Laion-5b:
  An open large-scale dataset for training next generation image-text models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2210.08402, 2022.
Ramprasaath R Selvaraju, Michael Cogswell, Abhishek Das, Ramakrishna Vedantam, Devi Parikh,
  and Dhruv Batra. Grad-cam: Visual explanations from deep networks via gradient-based local-
  ization. In Int. Conf. Comput. Vis., pp. 618–626, 2017.
Ivan Skorokhodov, Grigorii Sotnikov, and Mohamed Elhoseiny. Aligning latent and image spaces to
  connect the unconnectable. In IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recog., pp. 14144–14153, 2021.
Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Eric Weiss, Niru Maheswaranathan, and Surya Ganguli. Deep unsupervised
  learning using nonequilibrium thermodynamics. In Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., pp. 2256–2265, 2015.
Jiaming Song, Chenlin Meng, and Stefano Ermon. Denoising diffusion implicit models. arXiv
   preprint arXiv:2010.02502, 2020.
Jianxin Sun, Qiyao Deng, Qi Li, Muyi Sun, Min Ren, and Zhenan Sun. Anyface: Free-style text-to-
   face synthesis and manipulation. In IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recog., pp. 18687–18696,
   2022.
Arash Vahdat, Karsten Kreis, and Jan Kautz. Score-based generative modeling in latent space. Adv.
  Neural Inform. Process. Syst., pp. 11287–11302, 2021.
Catherine Wah, Steve Branson, Peter Welinder, Pietro Perona, and Serge Belongie. The caltech-ucsd
  birds-200-2011 dataset. 2011.
Daniel Watson, William Chan, Jonathan Ho, and Mohammad Norouzi. Learning fast samplers for
  diffusion models by differentiating through sample quality. In Int. Conf. Learn. Represent., 2021.


                                                 11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Weihao Xia, Yujiu Yang, Jing-Hao Xue, and Baoyuan Wu. Towards open-world text-guided face
 image generation and manipulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.08910, 2021a.
Weihao Xia, Yujiu Yang, Jing-Hao Xue, and Baoyuan Wu. Tedigan: Text-guided diverse face image
 generation and manipulation. In IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recog., 2021b.
Tao Xu, Pengchuan Zhang, Qiuyuan Huang, Han Zhang, Zhe Gan, Xiaolei Huang, and Xiaodong
  He. Attngan: Fine-grained text to image generation with attentional generative adversarial net-
  works. In IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recog., pp. 1316–1324, 2018.
Yufan Zhou, Ruiyi Zhang, Changyou Chen, Chunyuan Li, Chris Tensmeyer, Tong Yu, Jiuxiang Gu,
  Jinhui Xu, and Tong Sun. Towards language-free training for text-to-image generation. In IEEE
  Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recog., pp. 17907–17917, 2022.


A     A PPENDIX
A.1   D ETAILED F ORMULATION OF S EMANTIC R EFINEMENT

In this section, we present a detailed formulation of semantic refinement. We begin by expressing
the conditional diffusion transition as follows:
                          Pθ,φ (xt |xt+1 , c) = ZPθ (xt |xt+1 ) · Pφ (c|xt ).                    (a)
Here, Pθ (xt |xt+1 ) is a Gaussian distribution with mean µ and covariance matrix Σ, given by:
                              Pθ (xt |xt+1 ) = N (µ, Σ),                                         (b)
                                                 1
                         log(Pθ (xt |xt+1 )) = − (xt − µ)T Σ−1 (xt − µ).                         (c)
                                                 2
Moreover, the classifier posterior distribution Pφ (c|xt ) can be expanded around xt = µ using a
Taylor series expansion as follows:
                                                        1
log Pφ (c|xt ) = C0 + (xt − µ)∇xt log Pφ (c|xt )|xt =u + (xt − µ)T ∇xt 2 log Pφ (c|xt )|xt =ϵ (xt − µ),
                                                        2
                                                                                                  (d)
To simplify the notation, we use g and G(xt , g) to denote ∇xt log Pφ (c|xt )|xt =u and
∇xt 2 log Pφ (c|xt )|xt =ϵ , respectively.
        log(Pθ (xt |xt+1 ) · Pφ (c|xt ))
             1                                  1
        = − (xt − µ)T Σ−1 (xt − µ) + (xt − µ)g + (xt − µ)T G(xt , g)(xt − µ) + C1
             2                                  2
             1          T     −1
        = − (xt − µ) (Σ − G(xt , g))(xt − µ) + (xt − µ)g + C1
             2
             1                                  1
        = − (xt − µ − Ψg)T Ψ−1 (xt − µ − Ψg) + g T Ψg + C1
             2                                  2
                       1 T
        = log p(z) + g Ψg + C1 , z ∼ N (µ + Ψg, Ψ−1 ).                                           (e)
                       2
In this equation, Ψ = (Σ−1 − G(xt , g)) and C1 is a constant.

A.2   I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS

In our experimental setup, we employ 8 A100 GPUs to conduct experiments on various datasets such
as FFHQ (Karras et al., 2019), CUB (Wah et al., 2011), AFHQ (Karras et al., 2019), and LHQ (Sko-
rokhodov et al., 2021). Additionally, we use 48 A100 GPUs to perform experiments on the Laion-
5b (Schuhmann et al., 2022) dataset. To extract features, we utilize a ViT-L/14@336px (Radford
et al., 2021) CLIP image encoder and text encoder.
For training the diffusion model, we adopt the U-Net architecture used in the Dalle2 (Ramesh et al.,
2022b) decoder. The input and output dimensions of the U-Net are set to 6 and 3, respectively, but


                                                  12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


we scale the model width to 196 channels. The attention layer consists of 64 head channels with
an attention resolution of 8, 16, and 32. We set the learning rate to 1.2e − 4. During training, we
randomly set the condition and gradient to ∅ with probabilities of 10% and 50%, respectively. We
set the total diffusion timesteps to 1000. We also train a prior on Laion-5b dataset with parameters
introduced in (Ramesh et al., 2022b). During the sampling stage, we adopted the DDIM sampling
strategy with a sampling step of 50. Additionally, we incorporated classifier guidance with a guid-
ance scale of 3.

A.3       H UMAN E VALUATION D ETAILS

In our user study, we conduct a human evaluation to assess the performance of different image gen-
eration methods on the CUB and MM-HQ datasets. We use three evaluation metrics: Photorealism,
Text Alignment, and Detail Matching. Fifty individuals participated in the evaluation process.
To evaluate Photorealism and Text Alignment, users are presented with a sample image and its
corresponding text description. They are then asked to rate the Photorealism and Text Alignment
of the image on a scale of 1 to 5. To simplify the evaluation process, we divide Photorealism into
three levels: Completely broken image (1 point), Image with artifact or blur (3 points), and Image
without artifact and blur (5 points). Similarly, for Text Alignment, we divide the evaluation into four
levels: Complete mismatch (1 point), Mismatch with most of the semantics (2 points), Match with
most of the semantics (4 points), and Complete match (5 points). For Detail Matching, we mark out
the details in the text description, and users are asked to indicate the number of details satisfied in
the sample image. The percentage of matched details is then calculated. Finally, we calculate the
average rating for each method based on all user ratings, which served as the final score.

A.4       L ANGUAGE -F REE G ENERATION .

Our approach leverages a language-free training strategy, enabling it to be trained on datasets without
text annotations, including AFHQ (Choi et al., 2020) and LHQ (Skorokhodov et al., 2021) datasets.
The upper row of Figure 9 displays some LHQ-generated samples. As observed in the odd columns,
our method without semantic refinement can generate the general semantics of the input text de-
scriptions. However, fine-grained details such as “pool,” “mountains,” and “streams” are missing.
In contrast, the proposed method with semantic refinement, shown in the even columns, largely re-
plenish these missing details. In the lower row of Figure 9, we demonstrate samples generated from
the AFHQ dataset. Our method captures the color of hair, ear shapes, and eye and mouth states
accurately.


  There is a fast flowing waterfall is in the middle of   The lake is very peaceful, the water is very clear,
                                                                                                                A photo of scene with steams flowing at the foot
  the rock, the rock is covered with green vegetation,    the white clouds in the sky and the surrounding
                                                                                                                 of the mountains and green trees on the hills .
 and there is a small pool of water next to the rock .        mountains are reflected in the water .


       An orange cat with a white mouth, and               A dog has short orange hair and long pointed              A white cheetah with its mouth wide
           pointed ears closed its eyes .                         ears sticking out its tongue .                            open shows its fangs .


Figure 9: Language-free training results of SeReDiff trained on LHQ (upper row) and AFHQ (lower
row). The odd columns show the images conditioned on the entire sentence, while the even columns
present the results produced after semantic refinement.



                                                                                 13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.5   E FFECTIVENESS OF S EMANTIC R EFINEMENT.

We demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed Semantic Refinement mechanism in enhancing
fine-grained details by progressively incorporating semantics, as shown in Figure 10. As more se-
mantics are incorporated, the generated images become increasingly refined and better aligned with
the given text description. Additionally, fine-grained details, such as “pointed nose” and “beard” are
emphasized.

                        A man with
                      brown hair and
                       pointed noise
                     wearing eyeglasses
                        and beard .


                           A red
                       butterfly sits
                        on a yellow
                         follower .



                       A man with a
                       yellow T shirt
                      black pants and
                        white shoes .

                                                                        + Semantic 1
                                          w/o Refinement + Semantic 1
                                                                        + Semantic 2


  Figure 10: Illustration of the refinement process by emphasizing varying number of semantics.


A.6   D IVERSE RESULTS .

To demonstrate the capability of our method in generating diverse outputs based on a given text de-
scription, we conducted further experiments on several datasets, including Laion-5b, LHQ, FFHQ,
and AFHQ. The results of our qualitative analysis are presented in Figure 11, Figure 12, and Fig-
ure 13.


                                                     14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 A robot ballerina
 dancing in a flower
 field at night with
 the moon in the
 background


 a white dog and a
 kid with blue T
 shirt and hat are
 sitting on the lawn.


 At sunset,
 abandoned boats
 sit on the beach
 and flocks of birds
 fly across the sky


 The Totoro bus is
 driving on the
 water



 An yellow dog
 with eagel's
 wings is flying
 over the sea


 An airship shaped
 like a pig floating
 over a wheat field,
 the tractor on the
 ground



Figure 11: Illustrations of diverse open-world results. The left column represents the text descrip-
tions, and the rest of column are generated results with given text.


                                                15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 a scenic picture with white
 clouds in the sky and dense
 forests reflected in the water
 is a delight to the eyes



 a picture of snow covered
 peaks towering into the
 clouds


 a picture of a sunset with
 snow falling on the trees


 On the calm sea, there is a
 towering rock, and the
 sunset in the distance
 reflects the beautiful light


 Under the blue sky is a
 white snowy mountain, and
 the reflection of the snow
 capped mountain is
 reflected on the calm lake

 mist shrouds the forest,
 the sun casts a little
 shimmer, and only a few
 leaves float on the trunks
 of the trees



Figure 12: Illustrations of diverse results trained on LHQ dataset. The left column represents the
text descriptions, and the rest of column are generated results with given text.


                                               16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 A little boy with a
 cute hat is smiling,
 showing his
 uneven teeth


 A middle aged
 man with goatee
 and bangs


 A young girl with long
 straight black hair and
 lipsticks is slightly smiling,
 she has bags under eyes



 A male lion has long
 hair and a big mouth
 with fangs leaking out


 A cat with white face
 and black ears


 A cat with green eyes
 and extremely long ears


Figure 13: Illustrations of diverse results trained on FFHQ and AFHQdataset. The left column
represents the text descriptions, and the rest of column are generated results with given text.


                                              17
