R ANDOM SPARSE LIFTS : CONSTRUCTION , ANALYSIS
AND CONVERGENCE OF FINITE SPARSE NETWORKS

 David A. R. Robin                   Kevin Scaman                        Marc Lelarge
 INRIA - ENS Paris                  INRIA - ENS Paris                   INRIA - ENS Paris
 PSL Research University            PSL Research University             PSL Research University



                                             A BSTRACT

         We present a framework to define a large class of neural networks for which, by
         construction, training by gradient flow provably reaches arbitrarily low loss when
         the number of parameters grows. Distinct from the fixed-space global optimality
         of non-convex optimization, this new form of convergence, and the techniques
         introduced to prove such convergence, pave the way for a usable deep learning
         convergence theory in the near future, without overparameterization assumptions re-
         lating the number of parameters and training samples. We define these architectures
         from a simple computation graph and a mechanism to lift it, thus increasing the
         number of parameters, generalizing the idea of increasing the widths of multi-layer
         perceptrons. We show that architectures similar to most common deep learning
         models are present in this class, obtained by sparsifying the weight tensors of usual
         architectures at initialization. Leveraging tools of algebraic topology and random
         graph theory, we use the computation graphвҖҷs geometry to propagate properties
         guaranteeing convergence to any precision for these large sparse models.


1    I NTRODUCTION
We consider the supervised learning task, of infering a function f вӢҶ : X вҶ’ Y from pairs of samples
(x, f вӢҶ (x)) вҲҲ X Г— Y, with x following a distribution D. We restrict our attention to the case X = Rd
and Y = Rk , with a parametric model F : Rm Г— Rd вҶ’ Rk , approximating the           target function  as
F (ОёвӢҶ , В·) : Rd вҶ’ Rk for a fixed parameter ОёвӢҶ вҲҲ Rm . The loss L : Оё 7вҶ’ E(x,y) вҲҘF (Оё, x) вҲ’ yвҲҘ22 is
used to вҖңlearnвҖқ the parameter Оё : R+ вҶ’ Rm by a gradient flow вҲӮt Оё = вҲ’вҲҮL(Оё) from Оё0 вҲҲ Rm .
In the context of deep learning, contrary to more generic non-convex optimization, we are not
intrinsically interested in global minima of the fixed-dimension parametric loss L, or in this model
F specifically. This optimization is only a means to the end of finding, among a family of models
Fm : Rm Г— Rd вҶ’ Rk of varying sizes m вҲҲ N, one model-parameter pair (Fm , ОёвӢҶ вҲҲ Rm ) such
that Fm (ОёвӢҶ , В·) вүҲ f вӢҶ . The ability of families of models, given as neural networks, to вҖңscale upвҖқ to
consistently avoid optimization issues is what the present theory aims to explain and predict.
Challenges. The class of models empirically known to reach near-zero loss when scaled up is large,
and it remains unclear whether it is possible to construct a formalism both sufficiently flexible to cover
all such neural networks and sufficiently rigid to allow non-trivial claims. For two-layer networks
of width h with parameters Оё вҲҲ RdГ—h Г— RhГ—k , Cybenko (1989) and Barron (1993) have shown for
various non-linearities Пғ that for any continuous f вӢҶ : X вҶ’ Rk with compact domain X вҠҶ Rd , and
any threshold Оө вҲҲ RвҲ—+ , as h вҶ’ +вҲһ, there exists Оё such that supx вҲҘfОё (x) вҲ’ f вӢҶ (x)вҲҘ2 вүӨ Оө. We call
the minimal such width h the approximation number h0 (f вӢҶ , Оө) вҲҲ N. This existence result does not
imply that a gradient flow will converge to such a parameter. Nonetheless, the question of whether
a given architecture enjoys similar approximation properties has sparked much interest over the
following decades, with extensions to more layers Leshno et al. (1993), more non-linearities (Pinkus,
1999), convolutional architectures (Cohen & Shashua, 2016), graph-processing (Xu et al., 2019;
BrГјel Gabrielsson, 2020) and outside Euclidean geometry (Kratsios & Bilokopytov, 2020), and with
investigations of the link between width and depth (Poggio et al., 2017; Johnson, 2019), and handling
of symmetries (Lawrence, 2022). For the harder question of convergence, with two layers, Robin
et al. (2022, Proposition 4.6) shows that for any Оө вҲҲ RвҲ—+ and Оҙ вҲҲ ]0, 1[, there exists a learning number
h1 (f вӢҶ , Оө, Оҙ) вҲҲ N such that if h вүҘ h1 , then under standard initialization schemes, a gradient flow will


                                                    1
converge to a loss value below Оө with probability greater than (1 вҲ’ Оҙ). Note that earlier infinite-width
results hinted at the existence of this number (without assumptions on the sample count), e.g. Chizat
& Bach (2018). The problem of focusing on only approximation is that the corresponding learning
number could be orders of magnitude larger than the approximation number, since it corresponds to a
much stronger property: the target function is not only representable with a model, it is learnable
with this model. Universal approximation is insufficient to predict which models will perform better
in practice, because it fails to quantify the learning number h1 , which could be intractably larger
than the approximation number h0 ; in which case at all tractable sizes h вҲҲ N with h0 вүӨ h < h1 , we
would observe models not reaching low loss despite the existence of parameters in dimension h with
lower loss. We seek to upper-bound learning numbers when approximation has been established. This
size-varying gradient flow point of view is meant to model practical deployment of neural networks,
in contrast with works that aim to find a global minimum of fixed size by e.g. convex reformulations
of two and three layers ReLU networks (Ergen & Pilanci, 2021; Wang et al., 2021).
To curb the difficulty of constructing bounds for learning numbers with more than two layers, many
attempts have focused on the simpler setting of a fixed dataset X вҲҲ X n of n вҲҲ N training samples
and growing model size, and provided (typically asymptotic) bounds for this X, independently of
f вӢҶ , by leveraging positive-definiteness of the neural tangent kernel (NTK) matrix under sufficient
overparameterization (Jacot et al., 2018; Du et al., 2018; Ji & Telgarsky, 2020; Chen et al., 2021).
This allows viewing functions X вҶ’ R as finite-dimensional vectors in Rn , by restriction to X. In
contrast, our objective is to derive bounds for fixed f вӢҶ independently of n (thus infinite dimension),
to avoid overparameterization assumptions relating number of parameters and samples, so our bounds
depend on a (model-specific) вҖңcomplexityвҖқ of f вӢҶ , but do not diverge with infinitely many samples.
Related formalizing works. We obtain convergence guarantees for broad classes of вҖңneural networksвҖқ
when вҖңliftedвҖқ, by formalizing a precise meaning for these terms, usable in rigorous proofs. The class
of neural networks that can be described with this theory is more expressive than the Tensor Programs
of Yang & Littwin (2021), in particular because it allows non-linear weight manipulations, and
distinct вҖңscaling dimensionsвҖқ (e.g. embedding dimension versus hidden layer width in transformers,
which need not be related). In that sense, the core idea is much closer to the description with Named
Tensors of Chiang et al. (2023). Thus the focus is on large but finite-size networks, contrary to
infinite-width limits. However, the convergence shown applies only to sparse networks (in the sense
of ErdГ¶s-Renyi, different from the Lottery Ticket (Frankle & Carbin, 2019) use of the term вҖңsparseвҖқ).
Several ideas used in our proofs are inspired by Pham & Nguyen (2021), which вҖ” in the context
of non-quantitative mean-field convergence вҖ” introduce tools to show that throughout training, the
distribution of weights, albeit finitely supported, has positive density in a neighbourhood of any point.
Contributions. We discuss the tangent approximation property in Section 2, and show how it implies
probably approximately correct convergence when the model size grows. We introduce in Section 3 a
formalism to build architectures having by construction a way to lift, and recover usual architectures
in this form. We show in Section 4 that when such systems are sparsified at initialization in a specific
way, then tangent approximation is satisfied, thus PAC-convergence of gradient flows when lifting.

2    C ONVERGENCE BY TANGENT APPROXIMATION

Let X вҠҶ Rd be a compact set, and let Y = Rk . Let F be the set of continuous functions from X to
Y. Let D be a distribution  on X . Let f вӢҶ : X  вҶ’ Y be a continuous function. Let L : F вҶ’  R+ be the
function L : f 7вҶ’ ExвҲјD вҲҘf (x) вҲ’ f вӢҶ (x)вҲҘ22 . We write for shortness вҲҘВ·вҲҘ2D : f 7вҶ’ ExвҲјD вҲҘf (x)вҲҘ22 .


Let (S, вӘҜ) be an infinite partially ordered set. For s вҲҲ S, let Gs be a finite set representing вҖңsize-s
architecturesвҖқ, and let Оҳs be a finite-dimensional vector space with an inner product, of corresponding
вҖңweightsвҖқ. For every s вҲҲ S, let Ns be a distribution on Gs Г— Оҳs . For every s вҲҲ S and g вҲҲ Gs , let
F(s,g) : Оҳs вҶ’ F be a differentiable function. Let S0 вҠҶ S be an infinite set, called вҖңadmissible setвҖқ.
We will illustrate constructions with two examples, of (possibly sparse) two-and three-layer networks
without biases to learn a function Rd вҶ’ R. For two layers, S = N is the number of hidden nodes
and Gs = {0, 1}dГ—s Г— {0, 1}sГ—1 the sparsity pattern of the layers. For three layers, S = N2 is the
number of hidden nodes of each layer, and Gs0 ,s1 = {0, 1}dГ—s0 Г— {0, 1}s0 Г—s1 Г— {0, 1}s1 Г—1 the
corresponding pattern. A choice of admissible subset вҖ” e.g. S0 = {(s0 , s1 ) вҲҲ N2 | s0 вүӨ s1 } of
networks whose width increases with depth вҖ” rules out potentially ill-behaved sizes, to formulate
statements like "all networks (not ill-behaved) above a given size (w.r.t. вӘҜ on S) have property P ".


                                                   2
For s вҲҲ S, g вҲҲ Gs , and any (Оә, Оө) вҲҲ R+ Г— RвҲ—+ , let As,g (Оә, Оө) вҠҶ Оҳs be the set defined as
                                                                                      2
              Оё вҲҲ As,g (Оә, Оө) вҮ”        inf        F(s,g) (Оё) + dF(s,g) (Оё) В· u вҲ’ f вӢҶ D < Оө
                                  uвҲҲОҳs , вҲҘuвҲҘвүӨОә

The function As,g ( В· , Оө) is easily seen to be increasing.
Let us flesh out some intuition about it. If As,g (0, Оө) Мё= вҲ…,
then there exists a choice of weights Оё at size s such that
                                                                                         fвӢҶ
F(s,g) (Оё) approximates f вӢҶ to error Оө. This does not guar-                      fОё вӢҶ
antee however that such weights are вҖңlearnableвҖқ. The                                   fОё + dfОё В· u
construction As,g (Оә, Оө) with a tiny non-zero Оә allows for                fОё
some flexibility: the target is approximable by a lineariza-
tion of F(s,g) with a tiny (вҲҘuвҲҘ вүӨ Оә) variation of weights.
Hence, As,g (Оә, Оө) is much larger than As,g (0, Оө), but un-
der some regularity conditions on Fs,g there should always        {fОё | Оё вҲҲ Оҳ}
be a small ball around a point of As,g (0, Оө) that is included
in As,g (Оә, Оө) (see Figure 1 for instance). This regularity Figure 1: Tangent approximation to Оө
is irrelevant for universal approximation theorems, but error (Оө-ball depicted by a dotted line)
crucial for learning theorems. The following property is for fixed s вҲҲ S, g вҲҲ Gs with f = F(s,g) .
sufficient to get convergence to low loss with high prob- If вҲҘfОёвӢҶ вҲ’ f вӢҶ вҲҘ2 < Оө, then ОёвӢҶ вҲҲ A(0, Оө).
                                                                            D
ability. Intuitively, we need tangent approximation with In contrast, Оё вҲҲ A(вҲҘuвҲҘ, Оө) \ A(0, Оө).
tangent radius Оә, not for a point Оё0 , but an entire ball
around Оё0 , with a tangent radius allowed to grow affinely
with the ball radius. Write Bs (Оё0 , R) = {Оё вҲҲ Оҳs | вҲҘОё вҲ’ Оё0 вҲҘ вүӨ R} the R-ball in Оҳs around Оё0 .
Condition C1 (Tangent approximation with high probability). Let (Оө, Оҙ) вҲҲ RвҲ—+ Г— ]0, 1].
There exists c вҲҲ R+ (a constant intercept) such that for any R вҲҲ R+ (a maximal radius), there exists
s1 вҲҲ S (a threshold size) such that for all s вҲҲ {s вҲҲ S0 | s вӘ° s1 } (admissible sizes above threshold),

                      P(g,Оё)вҲјNs вҲҖr вүӨ R, Bs (Оё, r) вҠҶ As,g (c + r, Оө) вүҘ (1 вҲ’ Оҙ)
In words, with a three-layer network, this is satisfied if for an arbitrarily large radius R, there exists a
threshold size s1 = (H0 , H1 ) вҲҲ N2 such that if s0 = (h0 , h1 ) is any network size satisfying h0 вүӨ h1
(i.e. s0 вҲҲ S0 ) and h0 вүҘ H0 and h1 вүҘ H1 (i.e. both hidden layers are above the threshold size), then
with high probability over a random weight Оё, an entire ball Bs (Оё, R) around this initialization has
tangent approximation. We expect in this setting that we canвҖҷt say anything for networks whose
width is not increasing with depth (they could be ill-behaved), but other than that, any configuration
above the threshold size has (with high probability) the desirable property of tangent approximation
at initialization and on a large ball around the randomly drawn initialization. Therefore if this
holds, we can expect that a gradient flow will have some desirable properties (granted by tangent
approximation) for a long time after initialization, until it eventually exits the ball. The desirable
property in question is a вҖңsufficient decreaseвҖқ property of the loss, materialized by a local separable
Kurdyka-ЕҒojasiewicz inequality. Indeed, by a parallelogram identity, вҲ’2вҹЁ dF (Оё) В· u, F (Оё) вҲ’ f вӢҶ вҹ© =
вҲҘ dF (Оё) В· uвҲҘ2 + вҲҘF (Оё) вҲ’ f вӢҶ вҲҘ2 вҲ’ вҲҘF (Оё) + dF (Оё) В· u вҲ’ f вӢҶ вҲҘ2 . Moreover, for a gradient flow
вҲӮt Оё = вҲ’вҲҮв„“(Оё), we have вҲӮt (в„“ в—Ұ Оё) = вҲ’вҲҘвҲҮв„“(Оёt )вҲҘ22 . Leveraging the variational form of the в„“2 -norm,
we get вҲ’вҲӮt (L в—Ұ F ) = вҲ’ supu 4вҹЁ dF (Оё) В· u, F (Оё) вҲ’ f вӢҶ вҹ©2 /вҲҘuвҲҘ22 вүҘ вҲ’(L в—Ұ F вҲ’ Оө)2+ /(c + вҲҘОё вҲ’ Оё0 вҲҘ)2 for
as long as Оё вҲҲ Bs (Оё0 , R). The separable structure of this bound with respect to L в—Ұ F and вҲҘОё вҲ’ Оё0 вҲҘ,
together with the ability to choose R arbitrarily large, is sufficient to conclude.
To get a feeling of why this assumption might be satisfied, picture a large sparse network with a
вҖңdiverse enoughвҖқ sparsity pattern (the clarification of what this means is the subject of this paper).
If there exists a network, sparse or not, of small size that approximates the target function, then at
initialization, there should be a myriad of small subnetworks identical to that approximator inside the
large network. If the last layer is linear, then вҖңselectingвҖқ a convex combination of these outputs is
sufficient to reach low loss. Although the output of the large network may differ from the target, there
is a modification of its last-layer weights that approximates the target function. Lastly, if there are
many such subnetworks, then a small modification of parameters cannot substantially modify them
all if the large network is large enough. The following theorem ensures that tangent approximation is
indeed sufficient, the rest of the paper gives a precise meaning to the intuitions of this first section.
Convergence Criterion 1. Let Оҳ be a vector space. The pair (L : Оҳ вҶ’ R+ , Оё0 вҲҲ Оҳ) satisfies this
criterion with limit error Оө вҲҲ R+ and constant Оә вҲҲ RвҲ—+ if for all Оё : R+ вҶ’ Оҳ such that Оё(0) = Оё0
satisfying вҲӮt Оё = вҲ’вҲҮL(Оё), it holds вҲҖt вҲҲ RвҲ—+ , L (Оёt ) вүӨ Оө + 1/ 3 Оә t + 1/c where c = L(Оё0 )3 вҲҲ R+ .
                                                                 p


                                                     3
Theorem 2.1 (Probably approximately correct convergence in loss). Let (Оө0 , Оҙ0 ) вҲҲ RвҲ—+ Г— ]0, 1].
If for (g, Оё0 ) вҲј Ns the variable L в—Ұ F(s,g) (Оё0 ) вҲҲ R+ is bounded uniformly in s with high probability,
and if Condition C1 is satisfied for parameters (Оө0 , Оҙ0 ), then for any Оө > Оө0 and Оҙ > Оҙ0 , there exists
Оә вҲҲ RвҲ—+ and s1 вҲҲ S such that for all s вҲҲ S0 satisfying s вӘ° s1 and (g, Оё0 ) вҲј Ns , with probability at
least (1 вҲ’ Оҙ), the pair (L в—Ұ F(s,g) , Оё0 ) satisfies Convergence Criterion 1 with error Оө and constant Оә.
This statement is a slight extension of Robin et al. (2022, Proposition 4.6) with nearly identical
proof. The main contribution of this paper is the construction of the sparsification in the distribution
Ns satisfying by construction the tangent approximation condition when lifting. This includes
architectures such as multi-layer perceptrons, convolutional networks, and attention-like mechanisms.

3     P ERCEPTRON MODULES
                                                                       `
For consistency and shorter notations, we use the co-product
                                                     `         symbol
                                                                 S        for disjoint unions. Formally,
for a family of sets (Ac )c indexed by c вҲҲ C, define cвҲҲC Ac = cвҲҲC {(c, a) | a вҲҲ Ac }. A surjective
function p : Y вҶ’ V from a set Y to a finite set V induces a partition of `Y into Yv = pвҲ’1 (v) indexed
by v вҲҲ V , i.e. there is a bijection (a.k.a an isomorphism of sets) Y вүҲ vвҲҲV Yv . It is equivalent to
                                                                                                  1
specify p or the partition of Y . Given Y , a choice of one element in each part (called a section
                                                                                            Q       ) is a
function s : V вҶ’ Y such that вҲҖv, s(v) вҲҲ Yv (i.e. p в—Ұ s = IdV ). This is also written s вҲҲ vвҲҲV Yv .
Definition 3.1 (Euclidean bundle` over a finite set). Let V be a finite set. A Euclidean bundle over
V is a set Y and a partition vвҲҲV Yv , such that for any v вҲҲ V , the set Yv has the structure of a
finite-dimensional R-vector-space equipped with an inner product (i.e. Yv is a Euclidean space).
The simplest example of a Euclidean bundle is Y = V Г— R, which вҖңattachesвҖқ to each v вҲҲ V the
Euclidean space Yv = R. The interesting property    of these objects is that all attached vector spaces
need not have the same dimension, e.g. Rn RkГ—m with V = {0, 1} is a Euclidean bundle, whose
                                             `
sections are pairs (u, w) вҲҲ Rn Г— RkГ—m . We will thus use these objects to describe parameter spaces.
                                                             `
Definition 3.2 (Pullbacks of bundles and sections). Let Y = vвҲҲV Yv be a Euclidean bundle   ` over V ,
and let U be a finite set. Any function ПҖ : U вҶ’ V defines a Euclidean bundle ПҖ вҲ— Y = uвҲҲU YПҖ(u) ,
and a function ПҖ вҲ— : vвҲҲV Yv вҶ’ uвҲҲU YПҖ(u) , called a pullback of sections, ПҖ вҲ— : s 7вҶ’ sПҖ(u) uвҲҲU
                     Q            Q

We will use pullbacks to describe how to вҖңmake copiesвҖқ of a space with a function ПҖ : U вҶ’ V . This
is illustrated in Fig. 2, where from a bundle Y we construct
                                                       Q a new bundle
                                                                 Q having a varying number of
copies of each space. ПҖ вҲ— also transports a choice s вҲҲ vвҲҲV Yv to uвҲҲU YПҖ(u) by вҖңcopying overвҖқ.

                    R            R2                RkГ—k                       `
                                                                        Y =       vвҲҲV Yv

                                                                       ПҖ:U вҶ’V
                                                                        (ПҖ вҲ— Y ) =
                                                                                     `
                                                                                         uвҲҲU YПҖ(u)
                R       R            2       kГ—k       kГ—k       kГ—k
                                 R       R         R         R

Figure 2: Illustration of the construction of a pullback bundle, with ПҖ : U вҶ’ V indicated by arrows.
 The top row is a set V with 3 elements pictured as circles, and bottom row is U with 6 elements.
    The vector spaces attached to each element are depicted next to each corresponding circle.

3.1   G ENERALIZING MULTI - LAYER PERCEPTRONS TO ARBITRARY COMPUTATION GRAPHS

We use the definition of a (finite directed) graph G = (V, E) as a finite set V and a set E вҠҶ V Г— V .
We write G(вҲ’, v) the parents of v вҲҲ V in G, and G(v, вҲ’) its children, see Appendix A for a summary
of notations and Appendix C for details on graphs. With the idea of describing neural networks, we
take a computation graph whose vertices indicate variables in a program, and specify a set of вҖңinitialвҖқ
vertices I corresponding to inputs, and вҖңterminalвҖқ vertices T corresponding to outputs. Then, attach
to each vertex v a vector space Yv of вҖңactivations at vвҖқ, and to each edge (u, v) a vector space W(u,v)
of вҖңweightsвҖқ of the connection from u to v. For more generality, we also use a vector space Z(u,v) of
pre-activations to represent the intermediary variables before the non-linearity Пғv associated to v.
   1
     The nomenclature is that of algebraic topology, where these objects are common, but no prior knowledge is
assumed. The names bundle and section serve only to distinguish products / co-products with words.


                                                        4
Definition 3.3 (Perceptron module). Let B = (V, E) be a finite directed acyclic graph.
A perceptron module over B is a tuple B = ((I, T ), (Y, Z, W), (M, Пғ)) composed of
 вҖў A subset I вҠҶ V such that v вҲҲ I вҮ’ B(вҲ’, v) = вҲ…, and a subset T вҠҶ V .
                                   `                  `                   `
 вҖў Three Euclidean bundles, Y = vвҲҲV Yv , and W = eвҲҲE We , and Z = eвҲҲE Ze
 вҖў A family of functions (Me )eвҲҲE such that M(u,v) : W(u,v) Г— Yu вҶ’ Z(u,v)
                                                   Q
 вҖў A family of functions (Пғv )vвҲҲV \I such that Пғv : uвҲҲB(вҲ’,v) Z(u,v) вҶ’ Yv
                       Q
We write Param(B) = eвҲҲE We , and PMod(B) the set of perceptron modules over B.
The definition of perceptron modules (and later their lifts in Def. 3.5) is not restricted to multi-layer
perceptrons, and is chosen very general precisely to tackle advanced computation graphs (e.g. Fig. 6).
In most simple instances, the M map would be a regular multiplication    P (a, b) вҲҲ R Г— R 7вҶ’ ab вҲҲ R,
and the Пғ map an addition and non-linearity, e.g. Пғ : z вҲҲ Rk 7вҶ’ tanh ( i zi ), summing over parents.
Definition 3.4 (Activation map, or вҖңforwardвҖқ function, of a perceptron module). Let B = (V, E).
A perceptron module B = ((I, T ), (Y, Z, W), (M, Пғ)) вҲҲ PMod(B) comes equipped with a map
                                        Y          Y           Y
                                F[B] :     We Г—         Yv вҶ’       Yv
                                        eвҲҲE         vвҲҲI        vвҲҲV
with (F[B] : (w, ОҰ) 7вҶ’ f ) defined inductively over v вҲҲ V by fv = ОҰv if v вҲҲ I, and for v вҲҲ
                                                                                         / I as

                             fv = Пғv M(u,v) w(u,v) , fu uвҲҲB(вҲ’v)

In general, to be usable, it is also mandatory to describe how the inputs are connected. For instance in
Fig. 4b with a function c : I вҶ’ {r, g, b} to ensure x 7вҶ’ F[B](w, cвҲ— x) has inputs in R{r,g,b} , not RI .
With the Euclidean bundles W = E Г— R and Y = V Г— R, the restriction to T of this function
(w, ОҰ) 7вҶ’ (F[B](w, ОҰ))|T has type Rm Г— Rd вҶ’ Rk , where m = #E вҲҲ N is the number of
parameters, d = #I вҲҲ N the number of inputs, and k = #T вҲҲ N the number of outputs. The
notation with products will become more interesting when the dimension of weights are more unusual.
Blueprint notation. Instead of depicting the acyclic graph
B, with lots of annotations, we use the following graphical
convention.We draw vertices as circles, edges as squares,
with horizontal arrows to indicate vertex-edge incidence,
                                                                           Wuv
and vertical arrows from small circles to indicate weights. u      Yu        Zuv              Yv
                                                                                      v
We annotate each arrow with a vector space (W from a
small circle to a square, Y from a circle to a square, Z                Muv           Пғv
from a square to a circle), and each shape (circle or square)
вҖ” except initial vertices вҖ” with a function (respectively Пғ   Figure 3: Generic blueprint notation
and M ) whose domain and codomain matches the spaces
defined by the incoming and outgoing arrows, cf. Figure 3. We depict terminal (resp. initial) vertices
with a continuous (resp. dashed) double circle.

3.2   L IFTING PERCEPTRON MODULES THROUGH HOMOMORPHISMS

This theory describes complicated functions by constructing a вҖңbaseвҖқ perceptron module B, and
then applying a вҖңliftвҖқ operation (Def. 3.5) to build a more powerful module G, impossible to draw
due to its large size. The intuition for how to do so is depicted in Fig. 4 with the example of the
multi-layer perceptron (MLP), вҖңreplicatingвҖқ vertices vertically to increase the вҖңwidthвҖқ. Fig. 4a depicts
a perceptron module corresponding to an MLP architecture with two hidden layers, with activation
bundle Y = V Г— R and weights W = E Г— R, parent summation and non-linearity Пғ : R вҶ’ R, and
maps M(u,v) : R Г— R вҶ’ R the multiplication (a, b) 7вҶ’ ab. No matrices appear on this blueprint.
Specifying this module, a вҖңwidthвҖқ for each layer, and the connection of inputs, uniquely defines the
MLP. Thus we annotate each vertex with an integer in Fig. 4a, to specify the width of the layer in
Fig. 4b. The parameter space after lifting becomes R3Г—5 Г— R5Г—6 Г— R6Г—4 . Note how the weight
matrices W(0,1) вҲҲ R3Г—5 , W(1,2) вҲҲ R5Г—6 and W(2,3) вҲҲ R6Г—4 arise from the lift. Similarly, for a
convolution operation for which we would use this lift operation to construct more channels, we
expect a weight space W(u,v) = V вүҲ Rk to give rise to tensors W(u,v) вҲҲ V nu Г—nv вүҲ RkГ—nu Г—nv ,
corresponding to nu input-channels and nv output-channels for that convolution.


                                                   5
We will give a general definition of (sparse)
lifts first, the fully-connected example is           3        R    5     R     6       R       4
recovered as a subcase later. Intuitively,               R       R    R     R      R      R         R
from the same base module of Fig. 4a, we                     Г—      Пғ    Г—      Пғ     Г—        IdR
want to construct the MLP with underlying
graph G (from Figure 5a) as a perceptron (a) Blueprint notation of the base module B and lift annotation
module. This is done by вҖңcopyingвҖқ nodes n : VB вҶ’ N above vertices (see Definition 3.6) for MLPs
to construct a layer of hidden nodes in G
from the single node in B that is copied
over. How to perform this copy (i.e. how r
many times to copy every node and how to g                                                          ПҖ
connect the copied nodes) is specified by
G and a homomorphism ПҖ : G вҶ’ B. The            b
vertex map ПҖ : VG вҶ’ VB indicates the
number of copies (v вҲҲ VB yields nodes
ПҖ вҲ’1 (v) вҠҶ VG ), and the connectivity pat- (b) Graph notation of the fully-connected lift G, the homo-
tern is indicated by the structure of the morphism ПҖ : G вҶ’ B is given by vertical projection to (a)
graph G (which may be sparse) and the                                                   {r,g,b}
induced edge map ПҖ : EG вҶ’ EB . This Figure 4: MLP representing functions R                       вҶ’ R4
coincides with the transformation depicted
in Fig. 4 (dense) and Fig. 5a (sparse). The condition that ПҖ is a homomorphism of graphs ensures that
this construction is well-defined. When there are many incoming connections to a vertex v вҲҲ EG ,
mapped by ПҖ to a single edge e вҲҲ EB , such as in Fig. 4b and Fig. 5, the corresponding pre-activation
values z(u,v) for (u, v) вҲҲ ПҖ вҲ’1 (e) are summed before the computation of the non-linearity.

                                                                   r
                                                                   g
      r
                                                                   b
      g
      b                                                      (b) Smaller sparse lift with the same base module
                                                             B as above. This smaller network (b) is вҖңcontainedвҖқ
                                                             (strongly, extracted by fibration, in the vocabulary of
(a) Sparse lift similar to the multi-layer perceptron.       Section 4) in the larger network (a). The inclusion is
                                                             denoted by a (dark) red coloring of the nodes in (a).

   Figure 5: Sparse lift graphs, denoted G in the more general Def. 3.5, not covered by Def. 3.6.
Definition 3.5 (Lift of perceptron modules). Let G = (VG , EG ) and B = (VB , EB ) be graphs. A
homomorphism of graphs ПҖ : G вҶ’ B defines a function ПҖ вҲ— : PMod(B) вҶ’ PMod(G) called вҖңliftвҖқ,

     ПҖ вҲ— : (I, T ), (Y, Z, W), (M, Пғ) 7вҶ’ (ПҖ вҲ’1 (I), ПҖ вҲ’1 (T )), (ПҖ вҲ— Y, ПҖ вҲ— Z, ПҖ вҲ— W), (MМ„ , ПғМ„)
where for e вҲҲ EG , MМ„e = MПҖ(e) , and for v вҲҲ VG \ ПҖ вҲ’1 (I), ПғМ„v : uвҲҲG(вҲ’,v) ZПҖ(u,v) вҶ’ YПҖ(v) is
                                                                 Q
                                      пЈ«пЈ«                       пЈ¶              пЈ¶
                                              X
                     ПғМ„v : z 7вҶ’ ПғПҖ(v) пЈӯпЈӯ                z(u,v) пЈё
                                      пЈ¬                                       пЈ·
                                                                              пЈё
                                              uвҲҲПҖ вҲ’1 (a)вҲ©G(вҲ’,v)             aвҲҲB(вҲ’,ПҖ(v))

Let C be a finite set and pC : C вҶ’ I. Define LiftPMod(B, C) as the set of tuples (G, ПҖ, c) where
ПҖ : G вҶ’ B is a graph homomorphism, and c : ПҖ вҲ’1 (I) вҶ’ C an injection such that pC в—Ұ c = ПҖ|ПҖвҲ’1 (I) .

                             Q functions toQG = (G, ПҖ, c) вҲҲ LiftPMod(B, C) by defining the
We extend the notation of forward
function F[G] : Param(G) Г— uвҲҲC YpC (u) вҶ’ vвҲҲVG Yv as F[G] : (w, x) 7вҶ’ F[ПҖ вҲ— B](w, cвҲ— x).

        ` the bundle Y is equivalent to a family (Yv )vвҲҲVB of Euclidean spaces, so the the pullback
Recall that
ПҖ вҲ— Y = vвҲҲVG YПҖ(v) is equivalent to a family ((ПҖ вҲ— Y)v = YПҖ(v) )vвҲҲVG , consistent with the intuition
of вҖңcopyingвҖқ activation spaces when replicating nodes (and similarly for Z and W indexed by edges).
Validity of this definition (e.g. well-definition of the z-sum) is easy to check, details in Appendix K.1.
Our later convergence theorem will only apply to particular sparse lifts, but most common deep
learning architectures use a lift which is maximally connected, yielding dense weight tensors.


                                                         6
Definition 3.6 (Fully-connected lift). Let B = (VB , EB ) be a directed acyclic graph.
Let n : VB вҶ’ N be a function, called the вҖңlifting dimensionвҖқ. Define the graph C = (VC , EC ) as
    VC = { (b, i) | b вҲҲ VB , i вҲҲ [nb ] }          and EC = { (u, v) вҲҲ VC Г— VC | (ПҖ(u), ПҖ(v)) вҲҲ EB }
with ПҖ : VC вҶ’ VB projection to the first coordinate. We call C the fully-connected lift of B along n.
                                       вҲ—
       ` if B вҲҲ PMod(B), we call ПҖ B вҲҲ PMod(C) the fully-connected lift of B along n.
Similarly
If C = bвҲҲIB [nb ] (i.e. an order of inputs has been chosen), then (C, ПҖ, IdC ) вҲҲ LiftPMod(B, C).

We can check that the forward function of the lifted module from Fig. 4 is the usual perceptron
forward. Indeed, for a vertex v вҲҲ VB \ IB , and i вҲҲ [nv ], we get the activation f(v,i) вҲҲ Yv = R as
               пЈ«                                               пЈ¶      пЈ«                            пЈ¶
                       X                                                  X
   f(v,i) = Пғv пЈӯ                 M(u,v) w(u,j),(v,i) , f(u,j) пЈё = Пғv пЈӯ         f(u,j) w(u,j),(v,i) пЈё
                       (u,j)вҲҲC(вҲ’,(v,i))                                               jвҲҲ[nu ]

with u the unique parent of v in B in the last part. In matrix notation, fv = Пғv fu В· W(u,v) вҲҲ Rnv



A more interesting example. Using the operation AddSoftMul : (Rn Г— Rn ) Г— RnГ—n вҶ’ Rn ,
((x, y), A) 7вҶ’ x+softmax(A)В·y, where the softmax is taken over each row (and potentially masked),
we recover modules similar to the transformer blocks of Vaswani et al. (2017) (see Figure 6).


       q                         R2          AddSoftMul                           R                      Add
                   R   n               Rn Г— Rn      Rn                                        Rn            Rn
                               вҠ—                       k                                                   s
               n
           R               R2            d                       R            h                 R
                            Rn Г— R n         R   nГ—n
                                                                     R   n
                                                                                      R   n
                                                                                                    Rn
                   вҠ—                     вҠ—                                   ReLU

 Figure 6: MixingTransformer : X вҲҲ RnГ—q 7вҶ’ Y вҲҲ RnГ—s , weights (top-to-bottom, left-to-right):
(MA , WV ) вҲҲ RqГ—k Г— RqГ—k          kГ—s
                         , MB вҲҲ R , (WQ , W   K ) вҲҲ R
                                                      qГ—d
                                                          Г— RqГ—d , H0 вҲҲ RkГ—h , H1 вҲҲ RhГ—s ,
                                                           T
Z = X В· MA + softmax (X В· WQ ) В· (X В· WK ) В· (X В· WV ), Y = Z В· MB + Пғ(Z В· H0 ) В· H1
The first block (X 7вҶ’ Z) is a usual self-attention when q = k and the mixing matrix is MA = Iq , the
 second block (Z 7вҶ’ Y ) is a residual MLP block when k = s and the mixing matrix is MB = Ik .


4    R ANDOM SPARSE LIFTS AND CONVERGENCE OF SPARSE PERCEPTRONS
We start by reviewing the proof ideas for the convergence theorem, to give intuition for the definitions.
Split setup & easy recombination. To analyse a large neural network with linear last layer, we split
it into a composition, first of a perceptron module computing deep features (whose number will scale)
followed by a linear recombination function (whose input dimension will scale, but output dimension
remains fixed). With fixed features, learning the last layer is easy by convexity, in particular if
вҖңoptimal featuresвҖқ are present then the global optimum of the last layer must have optimal loss.
Coverage property. If the perceptron module representing the features is sufficiently large, it should
вҖңcontainвҖқ a sub-network computing near-optimal features. The usual way to understand this term for
a directed graph G = (VG , EG ) is to select a вҖңsubgraphвҖқ, which is a graph S = (VS , ES ) such that
VS вҠҶ VG and ES вҠҶ EG . This is for instance the way such a вҖңsub-networkвҖқ is understood in the
lottery ticket hypothesis (Frankle & Carbin, 2019). In the language of graph theory, this corresponds
to an extraction by homomorphism (because the inclusion О№ : VS вҶ’ VG induces a homomorphism of
graphs from S to G). These вҖңsub-networksвҖқ are in general very different from the larger network, and
do not necessarily compute the same functions (it is the lottery ticket hypothesis that they actually do
learn similar functions, by a yet-unexplained mechanism). There is in graph theory (and algebraic
topology more generally) a different way to extract what we could call a вҖңstrong sub-graphвҖқ, by


                                                           7
fibration instead of homomorphism. The inclusion map О№ : VS вҶ’ VG is a fibration of graphs if the
following two conditions hold: first, if (u, v) вҲҲ VS Г— VS and (u, v) вҲҲ EG then (u, v) вҲҲ ES (no
вҖңremoval of edgesвҖқ); also, if v вҲҲ VS , then G(вҲ’, v) вҠҶ VS (no вҖңremoval of parentsвҖқ). Intuitively, if
S and G are viewed as computation graphs, then removing an incoming edge or removing a parent
will change the computation, while removing a child does not. Thus if S is вҖңstrong sub-graphвҖқ of G,
extracted by fibration, we can extract the subgraph then perform a computation in the subgraph and
isolate an activation, or we could equivalently perform the computation in the larger graph and then
extract the activations associated to the subgraph and isolate the activation of the target vertex. When
multi-layer perceptrons are constructed with dense linear layers, a network of width 2n does not
contain (in the sense of вҖңstrong sub-graphsвҖқ extracted by fibration) a sub-network of width n. This is
because the number of terms in each sum is 2n in the large nework, one for each parent of the node
considered, which is fully connected to every node of the previous layer. However, fibrations preserve
the number of parents, and the smaller network has n terms in each sum, again one for each parent, but
there are only n such parents at width n. Nonetheless, we can easily construct networks that do have
this property of containing smaller sub-networks by construction, by simply sparsifying the dense
layers, similarly to a dropout masking operation that would be performed at initialization and whose
mask is held constant throughout training. In these sparse networks, increasing model size cannot
hurt (provably) because a large network вҖңcontainsвҖқ (strongly) a small sub-network that is computing
the same thing as a smaller model. The coverage property that we need is only very slightly stronger:
there needs to be a certain fraction (or вҖңvolumeвҖқ) of sub-networks that are near-optimal, not just one,
the precise details are in the formal statements of Appendix H.
Local stability of coverage. The existence of sub-networks computing interesting features at
initialization is insufficient for a convergence proof, because we intend to train the weights of the
large network, and thus we expect the weights to move and have no guarantee that the sub-network
will continue to perform a similar computation throughout training. The last ingredient we require is
that the large network has a low вҖңoutgoing degreeвҖқ (i.e. each vertex in the directed graph has few
children), such that there is no vertex whose activation is re-used too much by later vertices, no single
point of failure that could perturb the entire network if its weights move slightly too much in the
wrong direction. Coupled with a covering in volume, this low-degree property implies that there is an
entire region of parameters around initialization where we can guarantee that there is a sub-network
with near-optimal features, rather than only at the single point of initialization. This implies that
at initialization of a very large sparse network, we expect a large number of sub-networks to be
near-optimal, and throughout training the number of near-optimal sub-networks can only decrease
slowly (due to the low outgoing degree): if a sub-network is perturbed enough to no longer be close to
an optimal feature, then the last layer can simply switch the associated weight of this sub-network to
a similar but un-perturbed sub-network to recover optimality (acceptable due to easy recombination).

4.1   R ANDOM SPARSE LIFTS OF PERCEPTRONS MODULES

From now on, we will only ever consider a single base module with various lifts. Therefore, let
B = (VB , EB ) be a finite directed acyclic graph. Let B вҲҲ PMod(B) be a perceptron module, and
write its components B = ((IB , TB ), (Y, Z, W), (M, Пғ)). We will also keep fixed the number of
lifted inputs
          ` (comparing   modules with different inputs is not very`useful anyway). Let n0 : IB вҶ’ N,
                 0
and C = bвҲҲIB [nb ] (without loss of generality on a finite set C = bвҲҲIB Cb after ordering Cb вүҲ [n0b ]).
The first ingredient needed is the presence of a linear last layer with fixed output dimension even
when the number of nodes in the perceptron module computing the вҖңdeep featuresвҖқ tends to infinity.
Definition 4.1 (Perceptron with linear readout). Let G = (G, ПҖ, c) вҲҲ LiftPMod(B, C), and k вҲҲ N.
Let LinReadout(G, k) = vвҲҲT (G) YПҖ(v) k with LinReadout(G, k) Г— vвҲҲV (G) YПҖ(v) вҶ’ Rk
                          Q                                             Q
                                   пЈ®       s                                  пЈ№
                                     X           1      X
                 (a, x) 7вҶ’ a В· x = пЈ°                           вҹЁai,v , xv вҹ©Yb пЈ»
                                             #ПҖ вҲ’1 (b)
                                      bвҲҲTB                вҲ’1
                                                          vвҲҲПҖ   (b)              iвҲҲ[k]

We can now describe the sparsification procedure. Note that the following definition is equivalent to
using a fully-connected lift and a random dropout mask m, drawn at initialization and fixed during
training. We expect the probability distribution chosen on weights We to be a normal distribution in
all applications (thus write it N ), but we will only require the assumption that it has full support.


                                                   8
Definition 4.2 (Random sparse lift). Let n : VB вҶ’ N be such that nb = n0b for all b вҲҲ IB .
Let О» : EB вҶ’ R+ , and for every e вҲҲ EB , let Ne be a probability distribution on We .
Let C = (VC , EC ) be the fully-connected lift of B along n, with homomorphism ПҖ : C вҶ’ B.
Let (m : EC вҶ’ {0, 1}, w : EC вҶ’ ПҖ вҲ— W) be independent random variables with distributions
m(u,v) вҲј Bern(О»ПҖ(u,v) /nПҖ(u) ) Bernoulli for any (u, v) вҲҲ EC , and with we вҲј NПҖ(e) for e вҲҲ EC .
The random sparse lift of B along (n, О») with distribution N is the tuple (G, w|E ), where G = (V, E)
is the random graph with V = VC , E = {e вҲҲ EC | me = 1}, G is the lifted perceptron module
G = (G, ПҖ, IdC ) вҲҲ LiftPMod(B, C) and w|E вҲҲ Param(G).
For an architecture for which universal approximation has been established (i.e. the approximation
вҖңnumberвҖқ h0 (f вӢҶ , Оө) is finite), we show that we can construct random sparse lifts for which the learning
вҖңnumberвҖқ h1 (f вӢҶ , Оө, Оҙ) is also finite for failure probabilities Оҙ > 0 arbitrarily close to zero. However,
in general this вҖңnumberвҖқ is not an integer but an element of Nk , where k вҲҲ N is the number of scaling
dimensions (one per vertex of B). We refer to the network approximating the target function as the
witness network, since it is a witness for the universal approximation theorem at a given precision.

4.2    C ONVERGENCE OF SPARSE PERCEPTRONS

Let X вҠҶ uвҲҲC YpC (u) be compact, D a distribution on X , and let f вӢҶ : X вҶ’ Rk with вҲҘf вӢҶ вҲҘ2D < вҲһ.
          Q
For any G вҲҲ LiftPMod(B, C), define the loss L[G] : Param(G) Г— LinReadout(G, k) вҶ’ R+ as
                        L[G] : (w, a) 7вҶ’ ExвҲјD вҲҘa В· F[G](w, x) вҲ’ f вӢҶ (x)вҲҘ22


Let О» : EB вҶ’ RвҲ—+ . For e вҲҲ EB , let Ne be a full-support distribution on We . Additionally, de-
fine S0 = {n : VB вҶ’ N | вҲҖb вҲҲ IB , nb = n0b , вҲҖ(a, b) вҲҲ EB , nb вүҘ na log na }, where n0b = #pвҲ’1  C (b).
We assume B has (M, Пғ) maps that are continuously differentiable, to ensure gradients exist and have
finite norm. Finally, we assume that for (a, b) вҲҲ EB if a вҲҲ IB then О»(a,b) вүӨ min{n0a /2, (n0a /3)1/2 }.
Theorem 4.3 (Probable approximate correctness of random sparse lifts under gradient flow).
Let (Оө, Оҙ) вҲҲ RвҲ—+ Г— ]0, 1]. If there exists GвӢҶ вҲҲ LiftPMod(B, C) a lifted perceptron module, and
parameters (wвӢҶ , aвӢҶ ) вҲҲ Param(GвӢҶ ) Г— LinReadout(GвӢҶ , k) such that L[GвӢҶ ](wвӢҶ , aвӢҶ ) < Оө, then there
exists Оә вҲҲ RвҲ—+ and N1 : VB вҶ’ N (a size threshold) such that the following proposition holds:
For all n вҲҲ S0 such that n вӘ° N1 , with probability at least (1 вҲ’ Оҙ) over (G, w) a random sparse
lift of B along (n, О») with distribution N , and a = 0 вҲҲ LinReadout(G, k), the pair (L[G], (w, a))
satisfies Convergence Criterion 1 with limit error Оө and constant Оә.
We give in Appendix J a quantitative version with bounds on N1 and Оә as a function of the witness
network structure and choice of parameters, allowing for future quantitative research in this direction.
Note that this is immediately extended to a loss f 7вҶ’ E(x,y) [вҲҘf (x) вҲ’ yвҲҘ22 ] with E(x,y) [вҲҘyвҲҘ22 ] < вҲһ.
Indeed, that is equal to вҲҘf вҲ’ f вӢҶ вҲҘ2D + E[V[Y |X]] for f вӢҶ : x 7вҶ’ E(X,Y )вҲјD [Y |X = x]. Moreover, note
that this theorem holds for any Оө вҲҲ RвҲ—+ and not only near zero. This statement thus truly matches what
it means to converge to the infimum of the LiftPMod(B, C) class with large lifts, which should prove
most interesting when that architecture is restricted to respect certain symmetries by construction.
We believe that the conditions here are interesting because they are easy to verify. (1) The condition
that the architecture is obtained as a random sparse lift can be satisfied by construction with little
restriction on architecture search. (2) The condition that any lift (sparse or dense) with low loss exists
can be obtained by universal approximation, or empirically because any network with low loss can
serve as witness. Proving or disproving a similar result for dense lifts is left as future work.
We modeled dynamics in continuous-time, and considered only convergence in loss. Convergence of
parameters will require more assumptions, see e.g. Patel et al. (2022, Section 2). Discrete time results
will also require more assumptions, but are often obtained by extending continous-time results, see e.g.
Even et al. (2023, Theorem 1). We did not assume that D is finitely supported, to facilitate extensions
in online learning with test-loss bounds from stochastic gradient estimates on finite samples.
Conclusion. We have shown PAC-convergence of large random sparse lifts under gradient flow to
the infimum over all lifts, by introducing a strong formalism to define a large class of neural networks
and the tools to track their activations across training to show tangent approximation properties for a
long enough time. We believe that this direction constitutes a promising route to a strong convergence
theory for deep learning, with a principled architecture design and testable empirical predictions.


                                                    9
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors acknowledge support from the French government under management of the Agence
Nationale de la Recherche, reference ANR-19-P3IA-0001 (PRAIRIE 3IA Institute).

R EFERENCES
Andrew Barron. Universal approximation bounds for superpositions of a sigmoidal function. ieee
  trans. on information theory 39, 930-945. Information Theory, IEEE Transactions on, 39:930 вҖ“
  945, 06 1993. doi: 10.1109/18.256500.
Rickard BrГјel Gabrielsson. Universal function approximation on graphs. In H. Larochelle,
  M. Ranzato, R. Hadsell, M.F. Balcan, and H. Lin (eds.), Advances in Neural In-
  formation Processing Systems, volume 33, pp. 19762вҖ“19772. Curran Associates, Inc.,
  2020.    URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2020/
  file/e4acb4c86de9d2d9a41364f93951028d-Paper.pdf.
Zixiang Chen, Yuan Cao, Difan Zou, and Quanquan Gu. How much over-parameterization is
  sufficient to learn deep relu networks? In International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2021. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=fgd7we_uZa6.
David Chiang, Alexander M Rush, and Boaz Barak. Named tensor notation. Transactions on Machine
  Learning Research, 2023. ISSN 2835-8856. URL https://openreview.net/forum?
  id=hVT7SHlilx.
LГ©naГҜc Chizat and Francis Bach. On the global convergence of gradient descent for over-parameterized
  models using optimal transport. In S. Bengio, H. Wallach, H. Larochelle, K. Grauman, N. Cesa-
  Bianchi, and R. Garnett (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 31.
  Curran Associates, Inc., 2018. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_
  files/paper/2018/file/a1afc58c6ca9540d057299ec3016d726-Paper.pdf.
Nadav Cohen and Amnon Shashua. Convolutional rectifier networks as generalized tensor decom-
  positions. In Proceedings of the 33rd International Conference on International Conference on
  Machine Learning - Volume 48, ICMLвҖҷ16, pp. 955вҖ“963. JMLR.org, 2016.
George V. Cybenko. Approximation by superpositions of a sigmoidal function. Mathematics of
  Control, Signals and Systems, 2:303вҖ“314, 1989.
Simon S Du, Xiyu Zhai, Barnabas Poczos, and Aarti Singh. Gradient descent provably optimizes
  over-parameterized neural networks. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2018.
Tolga Ergen and Mert Pilanci. Global optimality beyond two layers: Training deep relu networks via
  convex programs. In International Conference on Machine Learning. PMLR, 2021.
Mathieu Even, Scott Pesme, Suriya Gunasekar, and Nicolas Flammarion. (s)gd over diagonal linear
 networks: Implicit regularisation, large stepsizes and edge of stability, 2023.
Jonathan Frankle and Michael Carbin. The lottery ticket hypothesis: Finding sparse, trainable
  neural networks. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2019. URL https:
  //openreview.net/forum?id=rJl-b3RcF7.
Arthur Jacot, Franck Gabriel, and ClГ©ment Hongler. Neural tangent kernel: convergence and
  generalization in neural networks. In Proceedings of the 32nd International Conference on Neural
  Information Processing Systems, pp. 8580вҖ“8589, 2018.
Ziwei Ji and Matus Telgarsky. Polylogarithmic width suffices for gradient descent to achieve
  arbitrarily small test error with shallow relu networks. In International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2020. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=HygegyrYwH.
Jesse Johnson. Deep, skinny neural networks are not universal approximators. In International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2019. URL https://openreview.net/forum?
  id=ryGgSsAcFQ.


                                                10
Anastasis Kratsios and Ievgen Bilokopytov. Non-euclidean universal approximation. In
  H. Larochelle, M. Ranzato, R. Hadsell, M.F. Balcan, and H. Lin (eds.), Advances in Neu-
  ral Information Processing Systems, volume 33, pp. 10635вҖ“10646. Curran Associates, Inc.,
  2020.    URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2020/
  file/786ab8c4d7ee758f80d57e65582e609d-Paper.pdf.
Hannah Lawrence. BarronвҖҷs theorem for equivariant networks. In NeurIPS 2022 Workshop on
  Symmetry and Geometry in Neural Representations, 2022. URL https://openreview.
  net/forum?id=1G_dwmEKX-w.
Moshe Leshno, Vladimir Ya. Lin, Allan Pinkus, and Shimon Schocken. Multilayer feed-
 forward networks with a nonpolynomial activation function can approximate any func-
 tion. Neural Networks, 6(6):861вҖ“867, 1993. ISSN 0893-6080. doi: https://doi.org/10.
 1016/S0893-6080(05)80131-5. URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
 article/pii/S0893608005801315.
Wolfgang Mulzer. Five proofs of chernoffвҖҷs bound with applications, 2018. URL https://page.
 mi.fu-berlin.de/mulzer/pubs/chernoff.pdf.
Vivak Patel, Shushu Zhang, and Bowen Tian. Global convergence and stability of stochastic gra-
  dient descent. In S. Koyejo, S. Mohamed, A. Agarwal, D. Belgrave, K. Cho, and A. Oh (eds.),
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 35, pp. 36014вҖ“36025. Curran Asso-
  ciates, Inc., 2022. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/
  2022/file/ea05e4fc0299c27648c9985266abad47-Paper-Conference.pdf.
Huy Tuan Pham and Phan-Minh Nguyen. Global convergence of three-layer neural networks in
  the mean field regime. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021. URL
  https://openreview.net/forum?id=KvyxFqZS_D.
Allan Pinkus. Approximation theory of the mlp model in neural networks. Acta Numerica, 8:143 вҖ“
  195, 1999. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:16800260.
Tomaso Poggio, Hrushikesh Mhaskar, Lorenzo Rosasco, Brando Miranda, and Qianli Liao. Why and
  when can deep-but not shallow-networks avoid the curse of dimensionality: a review. International
  Journal of Automation and Computing, 14(5):503вҖ“519, 2017.
David A. R. Robin, Kevin Scaman, and Marc Lelarge.        Convergence beyond the
  over-parameterized regime using rayleigh quotients. In S. Koyejo, S. Mohamed,
  A. Agarwal, D. Belgrave, K. Cho, and A. Oh (eds.), Advances in Neural Infor-
  mation Processing Systems, volume 35, pp. 10725вҖ“10736. Curran Associates, Inc.,
  2022.    URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2022/
  file/45d74e190008c7bff2845ffc8e3facd3-Paper-Conference.pdf.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez,
  ЕҒ ukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. In I. Guyon, U. Von
  Luxburg, S. Bengio, H. Wallach, R. Fergus, S. Vishwanathan, and R. Garnett (eds.), Ad-
  vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 30. Curran Associates, Inc.,
  2017.   URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2017/
  file/3f5ee243547dee91fbd053c1c4a845aa-Paper.pdf.
Yifei Wang, Jonathan Lacotte, and Mert Pilanci. The hidden convex optimization landscape of
  regularized two-layer relu networks: an exact characterization of optimal solutions. In International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.
Robin J. Wilson. Introduction to Graph Theory. Prentice Hall/Pearson, New York, 2010. ISBN
  027372889X 9780273728894. URL https://www.maths.ed.ac.uk/~v1ranick/
  papers/wilsongraph.pdf.
Keyulu Xu, Weihua Hu, Jure Leskovec, and Stefanie Jegelka. How powerful are graph neural
  networks? In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2019. URL https:
  //openreview.net/forum?id=ryGs6iA5Km.
Greg Yang and Etai Littwin. Tensor programs iib: Architectural universality of neural tangent kernel
  training dynamics. In ICML, volume 139 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp.
  11762вҖ“11772. PMLR, 2021.


                                                  11
A     S UMMARY OF NOTATIONS

                        Table 1: Summary of principal notations used in this document

B = (VB , EB )                                                      The base graph, for the base perceptron module
G = (VG , EG )                                                      The lifted graph when there is only one, the graph
                                                                    of the random sparse lift in the last theorem
GвӢҶ = (VвӢҶ , EвӢҶ )                                                     The graph of the witness network, the lifted per-
                                                                    ceptron module achieving the loss threshold.

G(вҲ’, v) = {u вҲҲ VG | (u, v) вҲҲ EG } for v вҲҲ VG                        The parents (direct ancestors) of vertex v in G.
G(v, вҲ’) = {u вҲҲ VG | (v, u) вҲҲ EG } for v вҲҲ VG                        The children (direct descendants) of v in G.

B = ((IB , TB ), (Y, Z, W), (M, Пғ))                                 The base perceptron module (Definition 3.3). The
                                                                    functions (M, Пғ) are continuously differentiable.
      a
C=           Cb    or   pC : C вҶ’ IB                                 The вҖңmeaningful namesвҖқ of input connections.
      bвҲҲIB                                                          This is вҖңsimplifiedвҖқ to Cb = {0, . . . #Cb вҲ’ 1} in
                                                                    the proof without loss of generality, but leaves
                                                                    room for easier implementations. For instance,
                                                                    for single input type IB = {img}, lifted to three
                                                                    channels (one per RGB color), meaningful names
                                                                    can be Cimg = {r, g, b}, instead of {0, 1, 2}.
       Y Y
X вҠҶ                Yb                                               A compact subset of inputs accessed вҖңby nameвҖқ.
      bвҲҲIB cвҲҲCb                                                     With two input types IB = {img, text}, lifted as
                                                                    above for the image and to TQвҲҲ N tokens
                                                                                                         Q for the
                                                                    text with Ctext = [T ], then bвҲҲIB cвҲҲCb Yb =
                                                                    Yimg {r,g,b} Г— Ytext T . The spaces Yb can be dis-
                                                                    tinct, e.g. Yimg = R256Г—256 and Ytext = Rk
                                                                    with k вҲҲ N an arbitrary embedding dimension.

(G, ПҖ, c) вҲҲ LiftPMod(B, C)                                          A lifted perceptron module (Definition 3.5). The
                                                                    homomorphism ПҖ : G вҶ’ B encodes the struc-
                                                                    ture of the lift, the map c provides the connection
                                                                    to inputs (e.g. which vertex is the r-channel, etc.)
                   Y
Param(B) =                We                                        The parameter space of the base perceptron
                   eвҲҲEB                                             module B вҲҲ PMod(B). There is one (multi-
                                                                    dimensional) weight per edge in the base module.
                                                                    All spaces We need not have the same dimension.
                    Y                 Y         Y
Param(G) =                WПҖ(e) =                      We           The parameter space of a lifted perceptron mod-
                   eвҲҲEG               eвҲҲEB f вҲҲEG                    ule G = (G, ПҖ, c) вҲҲ LiftPMod(B, C). There is
                                           ПҖ(f )=e                  one copy of We per edge f вҲҲ EG with ПҖ(f ) = e.
                                                                    The number of edges will grow when scaling up,
                                                                    the dimension of the spaces We remain fixed.
         Y                  Y                   Y
F[G] :            WПҖ(e) Г—         YpC (u) вҶ’            YПҖ(v)        Forward function of a lifted perceptron module
         eвҲҲEG               uвҲҲC                 vвҲҲVG                G = (G, ПҖ, c) вҲҲ LiftPMod(B, C) over G =
                                                                    (VG , EG ) with homomorphism ПҖ : G вҶ’ B.
                               Y
LinReadout(G, k) =                    YПҖ(v) k                       Linear readout of a perceptron module (i.e. linear
                            vвҲҲT (G)                                 last layer), see Definition 4.1.


                                                               12
Throughout this paper, we use the french notation conventions, in particular 0 вҲҲ N, the open and
half-open intervals are noted ]a, b[ = {u вҲҲ R | a < u < b} and [a, b[ = {u вҲҲ R | a вүӨ u < b}. We
use liberally parenthesis or brackets to group factors in our proofs, for readability and without any
particular distinction. We write вҖңlogвҖқ for the natural (or base-e) logarithm, i.e. вҲҖu, log exp(u) = u.
For time-dependent quantities, we rarely distinguish between index notation and application, so for
Оё : R+ вҶ’ Rd a function, we write Оёt = Оё(t) either in index or between parenthesis and use whichever
is more readable depending on context (only exception is when both Оё a function and Оё0 a constant
are defined at the same time, but we take both to coincide anyway). The normp notation вҲҘВ·вҲҘ is used
only in finite dimension and always  indicates the Euclidean norm  вҲҘvвҲҘ V  =    вҹЁv, vвҹ©V , a.k.a. в„“2 -norm:
вҲҘuвҲҘ2 = i u2i in an orthonormal basis. On products of Euclidean spaces
         P
                                                                        p V  and W the corresponding
norm is the induced Euclidean norm on the product вҲҘ(v, w)вҲҘV Г—W = вҲҘvвҲҘ2V + вҲҘwвҲҘ2W .

                   Table 2: Summary of advanced notations used mostly in the appendix

T (G) = ПҖ вҲ’1 (TB ) and I(G) = ПҖ вҲ’1 (IB )                    The initial and terminal nodes of a lifted percep-
                                                            tron module G = (G, ПҖ, c) вҲҲ LiftPMod(B, C).
V (G) = VG and E(G) = EG                                    The vertices and edges of the underlying graph
                                                            G = (VG , EG ) in a lifted perceptron module
                                                            G = (G, ПҖ, c) вҲҲ LiftPMod(B, C).

H = (VH , EH )                                              The other lifted graph when there are two.
S = (VS , ES )                                              The subgraph of G extracted by fibration.

Ga (вҲ’, v) = ПҖ вҲ’1 (a) вҲ© G(вҲ’, v)                              The вҖңtype-aвҖқ parents of v вҲҲ VG , with a вҲҲ VB
                                                            a vertex of the base graph, and ПҖ : G вҶ’ B is
                                                            the homomorphism indicating вҖңtypesвҖқ. In MLPs,
                                                            the вҖңtypeвҖқ is the index or depth of the correspond-
                                                            ing layer. In more general perceptron modules,
                                                            the notions of layer and depth cease to be well-
                                                            defined, they are replaced by the pre-image by ПҖ
                                                            of a given vertex or edge in the base module.
            a
ПҖвҲ— Y =            YПҖ(v)                                     Pullback bundle of activations for a lift
           vвҲҲVG                                             (G, ПҖ, c) вҲҲ LiftPMod(B, C), see Definition 3.2.
            a                           a
ПҖвҲ— W =             WПҖ(e) ,     ПҖвҲ— Z =          ZПҖ(e)        Pullback bundles for weights and pre-activations.
            eвҲҲEG                        eвҲҲEG
             Y                       Y
(ПҖ вҲ— w) вҲҲ          WПҖ(e) for w вҲҲ           Wb               Pullback of sections (here, weights). This corre-
            eвҲҲEG                    bвҲҲEB                    sponds to an intuitive copy, i.e. (ПҖ вҲ— w)e = wПҖ(e) .

ПҶвҲ— :
       Q                  Q
           hвҲҲVH Yh вҶ’          gвҲҲVG YПҶ(g)                    Pullback of activations by a map ПҶ : VG вҶ’ VH .

(S, ПҶ) : G вҮҖ H                                              The partial fibration from graph G to graph H,
                                                            i.e. a subgraph S of G such that the inclusion
                                                            О№ : S вҶ’ G is a fibration, together with a fibration
                                                            ПҶ : S вҶ’ H, see Definition H.1.
(S, ПҶ) : (G, ПҖ, c) вҮҖ (GвӢҶ , ПҖвӢҶ , cвӢҶ )                        The LiftPMod(B, C)-morphism from the ran-
                                                            dom sparse lift to the witness. See Definition F.1.


                                                       13
B     O RGANISATION OF THE APPENDIX
Appendix C recalls the usual definitions for graphs and various types of morphisms between them.
Appendix D studies the effect of the constants in the definition of Convergence Criterion 1 to give
some early intuition. Appendix E gives the proof of the probably approximately correct convergence
Theorem 2.1, showing how tangent approximation properties are sufficient to get convergence.
Appendix F introduces the concept of morphisms of lifted perceptrons. Appendix G shows how
to track activations even when weights can move, by leveraging the aforementionned morphisms.
Appendix H shows how the tangent approximation property can be obtained from a covering property.
Appendix I shows that the covering property previously defined is satisfied with high probability in
random sparse lifts. Appendix J ties everything together in a quantitative version of Theorem 4.3.
Appendix K provides all the more cumbersome proofs of well-definition of all concepts introduced in
the document. Finally, Appendix L provides the proof of several small technical lemmas for bounding
random variables that were used to alleviate the proofs of previous sections.

C     G RAPH DEFINITIONS AND LEMMAS
C.1   G RAPH DEFINITIONS

We consider the language of graphs known to the reader, see Wilson (2010) for a thorough introduction
otherwise. All graphs we consider are finite directed (see Wilson (2010, Chapter 7) more precisely)
and acyclic. We use the following definitions in our proofs.
Definition C.1 (Graph). A (directed) graph is a couple (V, E) of a finite set V and a set E вҠҶ V Г— V .

The set V is called the set of вҖңverticesвҖқ, and E the set of вҖңedgesвҖқ. When G = (V, E) is a graph,
and v вҲҲ V , we write G(v, вҲ’) = { u вҲҲ V | (v, u) вҲҲ E } the set of out-neighbours of v (also called
children), and G(вҲ’, v) = { u вҲҲ V | (u, v) вҲҲ E } the set of in-neighbours of v (also called parents).
Definition C.2 (Homomorphism). Let G = (VG , EG ) and H = (VH , EH ) be graphs. A function
ПҶ : VG вҶ’ VH is a homomorphism of graphs if (u, v) вҲҲ EG вҮ’ (ПҶ(u), ПҶ(v)) вҲҲ EH

We write homomorphisms as ПҶ : G вҶ’ H, by extending naturally the function of vertices to a function
of edges ПҶ : EG вҶ’ EH , (u, v) 7вҶ’ (ПҶ(u), ПҶ(v)).
It is immediate from the definition that the composition of homomorphisms is also a homomorphism.
For our purposes, a directed graph G = (V, E) is acyclic if there exists a total order вүә on V such
that (u, v) вҲҲ E вҮ’ u вүә v. This is equivalent to the definition of acyclicity as being вҖңwithout cyclesвҖқ.
Definition C.3 (Fibration). A fibration from a graph G = (V, E) to a graph H is a homomorphism
ПҶ : G вҶ’ H such that for all v вҲҲ V, the restriction ПҶ|G(вҲ’,v) : G(вҲ’, v) вҶ’ H(вҲ’, ПҶ(v)) is bijective.

In words, a fibration is a homomorphism that is also an isomorphism of in-neighbourhoods.

C.2   F IBRATIONS ARE CLOSED UNDER COMPOSITION

Proposition C.4. If ПҶ : G вҶ’ H and ПҲ : H вҶ’ K are fibrations, then ПҲ в—Ұ ПҶ : G вҶ’ K is a fibration.

Proof. A fibration is a homomorphism that is an isomorphism of in-neighbourhoods. Therefore,
since ПҲ в—Ұ ПҶ is a homomorphism by composition, it suffices to show that it is an isomorphism of
in-neighbourhoods. Write G = (VG , EG ), H = (VH , EH ) and K = (VK , EK ). Let vK вҲҲ VK , and
vG вҲҲ VG such that (ПҲ в—Ұ ПҶ)(vG ) = vK . Write vH = ПҶ(vG ) вҲҲ VH . By the fibration property of ПҲ,
there exists a bijection s : H(вҲ’, vH ) вҶ’ K(вҲ’, vK ) with s = ПҲ|H(вҲ’,vH ) . By the fibration property
of ПҶ, there exists a bijection t : G(вҲ’, vG ) вҶ’ H(вҲ’, vH ) with t = ПҶ|G(вҲ’,vG ) . The composition
s в—Ұ t : G(вҲ’, vG ) вҶ’ K(вҲ’, vK ) is a bijection as a composition of bijections, it remains to check that it
coincides with (ПҲ в—Ұ ПҶ), which is immediate since (s в—Ұ t)(u) = s(t(u)) = s(ПҶ(u)) = ПҲ(ПҶ(u)).


                                                  14
D     C ONVERGENCE C RITERION 1 : DEPENDENCY ON PARAMETERS
Proposition D.1 (Convergence Criterion weakening).
Let Оә0 вҲҲ R+ and Оө0 вҲҲ R+ . Let Оә1 вҲҲ R+ and Оө1 вҲҲ R+ be such that Оә1 вүӨ Оә0 and Оө1 вүҘ Оө0 .
If (L : Оҳ вҶ’ R+ , Оё0 вҲҲ Оҳ) satisfies Convergence Criterion 1 with limit error Оө0 and constant Оә0 , then
(L, Оё0 ) also satisfies Convergence Criterion 1 with limit error Оө1 and constant Оә1 .

This is consistent with the intuition that in Convergence Criterion 1, the constant Оә is a form of
вҖңspeedвҖқ (higher speed is more impressive) and Оө a form of вҖңerrorвҖқ (lower error is more impressive).

Proof of Proposition D.1. For any t вҲҲ R+ , let St : R+ Г— R+ Г— RвҲ—+ вҶ’ R+ be the function
                                                               1
                                     St : (Оә, Оө, c) 7вҶ’ Оө + q
                                                           3
                                                             Оә t + 1c

Let us show that St is increasing with respect to Оө, decreasing with respect to Оә and increasing with
respect to c. Let (Оә, Оө, c) вҲҲ R2+ Г— RвҲ—+ . Compute the following derivatives and observe their sign
                          вҲӮОө St (Оә, Оө, c) = +1                                вүҘ0
                                              1               вҲ’4/3
                          вҲӮОә St (Оә, Оө, c) = вҲ’ (t) (Оә t + 1/c)                 вүӨ0
                                              3
                                              1 вҲ’1                 вҲ’4/3
                          вҲӮc St (Оә, Оө, c) = вҲ’          (Оә t + 1/c)            вүҘ0
                                              3 c2

Now to conclude, let (L, Оё0 ) be a pair satisfying Convergence Criterion 1 with limit error Оө0 and
constant Оә0 . Let Оё : R+ вҶ’ Оҳ be such that Оё(0) = Оё0 and вҲӮt Оё = вҲ’вҲҮL(Оё). Let c0 = L(Оё0 )3 and
t вҲҲ R+ . By assumption, L(Оёt ) вүӨ St (Оә0 , Оө0 , c0 ). By the study of variations above, St (Оә0 , Оө0 , c0 ) вүӨ
St (Оә1 , Оө0 , c0 ) вүӨ St (Оә1 , Оө1 , c0 ). Thus for t вҲҲ R+ , it holds L(Оёt ) вүӨ St (Оә1 , Оө1 , c0 ), which is the
definition of Convergence Criterion 1 with limit error Оө1 and constant Оә1 , and concludes the proof.

Bonus: Note that we have also shown increase of St with respect to c, so in later proofs it is sufficient
to show L(Оёt ) вүӨ St (Оә, Оө, c) with an inequality c вүӨ L(Оё0 )3 rather than equality.

Definition D.2 (Extended Convergence Criterion). Let Оө вҲҲ R+ . The pair (L : Оҳ вҶ’ R+ , Оё0 вҲҲ Оҳ)
satisfies the extended Convergence Criterion with limit error Оө and constant Оә = +вҲһ if for all
Оё : R+ вҶ’ Оҳ such that Оё(0) = Оё0 , satisfying вҲӮt Оё = вҲ’вҲҮL(Оё), it holds вҲҖt вҲҲ R+ , L(Оёt ) вүӨ Оө.

It is immediately observed by the previous proposition вҖ” and the fact that [St (Оә, Оө, c) вҶ’ Оө] when
[Оә вҶ’ +вҲһ] вҖ” that this statement is equivalent to вҖңConvergence Criterion 1 is satisfied with constant
+вҲһ if it is satisfied with all finite constants Оә вҲҲ R+ вҖқ. This is also consistent with the intuition that
the statement of a flow reaching a loss Оө with вҖңspeedвҖқ Оә can be naturally extended to a statement with
вҖңinfinite speedвҖқ if the flow just reaches loss Оө instantly. Because of this consistency with the previous
criterion, we do not in the following distinguish this extension from Convergence Criterion 1.


                                                     15
E    P ROBABLE APPROXIMATE CORRECTNESS BY TANGENT APPROXIMATION
Lemma E.1 (Convergence criterion by integration of a separable Kurdyka-ЕҒojasiewicz inequality).
 Let Оҳ be a vector space, L : Оҳ вҶ’ R+ a differentiable function, and Оё0 вҲҲ Оҳ. Let Оө вҲҲ RвҲ—+ , R вҲҲ R+ ,
c вҲҲ RвҲ—+ . If for all Оё вҲҲ Оҳ such that вҲҘОё вҲ’ Оё0 вҲҘ вүӨ R, it holds вҲҘвҲҮL(Оё)вҲҘ вүҘ (L(Оё) вҲ’ Оө)+ /(вҲҘОё вҲ’ Оё0 вҲҘ + c),
Then the pair (L, Оё0 ) satifies Convergence Criterion 1 with limit error Оө0 = П„ В·L(Оё0 )+(1вҲ’П„ )В·Оө вҲҲ R+
where П„ = c/(R + c) вҲҲ ]0, 1], and with constant Оә = 3 cвҲ’2 (L(Оё0 ) вҲ’ Оө)вҲ’2     + вҲҲ R+ вҲӘ {+вҲһ},
                                                                  p
Since Convergence Criterion 1 uses a bound L(Оёt ) вүӨ Оө0 + 1/ 3 Оә t + 1/C0 for which the right hand
side is strictly decreasing with respect to Оә, we can naturally extend its definition to Оә = +вҲһ if the
convergence criterion is satisfied for all positive finite Оә, which is also equivalent to simply a bound
of вҲҖt, L(Оёt ) вүӨ Оө0 . Those are not the most interesting cases anyway, but this stresses the fact that this
statement is well-defined in all edge cases. Note also that for fixed c, this statement has Оө0 вҲ’вҶ’ Оө.
                                                                                                           RвҶ’вҲһ


Proof. Let Оё : R+ вҶ’ Оҳ be a differentiable curve such that Оё(0) = Оё0 and вҲӮt Оё = вҲ’вҲҮL(Оё). Note that
if L(Оё0 ) вүӨ Оө then the conclusion is immediate because L(Оё0 ) вүӨ Оө0 and the loss is non-increasing
since вҲӮt (L в—Ұ Оё)t = вҲҮL(Оёt ) В· вҲӮt Оёt = вҲ’вҲҘвҲҮL(Оёt )вҲҘ2 вүӨ 0. It remains to tackle only the other case,
thus for the remainder of the proof, letTus assume L(Оё0 ) > Оө, and in particular Оө вүӨ Оө0 , then define
T = inf ({ t вҲҲ R+ | вҲҘОёt вҲ’ Оё0 вҲҘ вүӨ R } { t вҲҲ R+ | L(Оёt ) > Оө }).
                                                                                           Rt
Radius upper-bound by separable KЕҒ integration. Define r : [0, T [вҶ’ R+ as r : t 7вҶ’ 0 вҲҘвҲӮt Оёu вҲҘ du.
Observe that for all t вүӨ T , by triangle inequality it holds вҲҘОёt вҲ’ Оё0 вҲҘ вүӨ r(t). Therefore,
                                     вҲҘвҲҮL(Оёt )вҲҘ2             вҲҘвҲҮL(Оёt )вҲҘ2                    вҲ’вҲӮt (L в—Ұ Оё)t
   вҲӮt rt = вҲҘвҲӮt Оёt вҲҘ = вҲҘвҲҮL(Оёt )вҲҘ =                  вүӨ      1                    = (rt + c)
                                (S1) вҲҘвҲҮL(Оёt )вҲҘ (S2)           (L(Оё t ) вҲ’ Оө) + (S3)         L(Оёt ) вҲ’ Оө
                                                        rt +c
where (S1) is valid because вҲҘвҲҮL(Оёt )вҲҘ > 0 by the initial assumption and restriction to L(Оёt ) > Оө,
and (S2) is the initial assumption again, and (S3) uses вҲӮt (L в—Ұ Оё)t = вҲ’вҲҘвҲҮL(Оёt )вҲҘ2 and L(Оёt ) > Оө.
This corresponds to the inequality вҲӮt (ОЁ в—Ұ r) вүӨ вҲӮt (ОҰ в—Ұ L в—Ұ Оё) where ОЁ : s 7вҶ’ log(s + c) and
ОҰ : s 7вҶ’ вҲ’ log(s вҲ’ Оө). Integrating the inequality between 0 and t < T yields the inequality
                         h
                rt + c                    it h                    it        L(Оё0 ) вҲ’ Оө
          log            = log(ru + c) вүӨ вҲ’ log (L(Оёu ) вҲ’ Оө) = log
                0+c                        0                       0         L(Оёt ) вҲ’ Оө
Thus after taking exponentials on both sides,
                                                   L(Оё0 ) вҲ’ Оө
                                        rt + c вүӨ c                                          (1)
                                                   L(Оёt ) вҲ’ Оө
Radius bound injection and reintegration. Define the Оө-discounted loss LОө : Оҳ вҶ’ R+ as
LОө : Оё 7вҶ’ (L(Оё) вҲ’ Оө)+ . Injecting the radius bound inequality (1) into the initial assumption,
                                                                                2                      4
                                                                   (LОө (Оёt ))             (LОө (Оёt ))
          вҲӮt (LОө в—Ұ Оё)t = вҲӮt (L в—Ұ Оё)t = вҲ’вҲҘвҲҮL(Оёt )вҲҘ2 вүӨ вҲ’                      2       вүӨ вҲ’                2
                       (S1)                                 (S2) (rt + c) (S3) (c LОө (Оё0 ))
where (S1) is because for all t < T , it holds L(Оёt ) = LОө (Оёt ) + Оө by definition of T , (S2) is the initial
assumption coupled with rt вүҘ вҲҘОёt вҲ’ Оё0 вҲҘ, and (S3) is the injection of the radius bound inequality.
                                   2
Therefore, let Оә = 3/ (c LОө (Оё0 )) вҲҲ RвҲ—+ , and Оһ : u 7вҶ’ вҲ’1/u3 . We have shown the inequality
                                                          вҲӮt (LОө в—Ұ Оё)t
                                вҲӮt (Оһ в—Ұ LОө в—Ұ Оё)t = +3            4 вүӨ вҲ’Оә
                                                      (LОө (Оёt ))
Integrating between 0 and t < T , this yields вҲ’LОө (Оёt )вҲ’3 + LОө (Оё0 )вҲ’3 вүӨ вҲ’Оәt, thus after inverting Оһ,
                                                                     вҲ’1/3
                            вҲҖt < T, LОө (Оёt ) вүӨ LОө (Оё0 )вҲ’3 + Оәt                                    (2)

Conclusion. We are now ready to conclude by case disjunction. If T = +вҲһ, Eq (2) immediately
implies Convergence Criterion 1. If T < +вҲһ, there are two cases to tackle. First, if L(ОёT ) вүӨ Оө,
then the bound of Eq (2) holds for t < T and is extended to all t вүҘ T by the non-increasing property
L(Оёt ) вүӨ L(ОёT ) вүӨ Оө вүӨ Оө0 , which concludes. Lastly, if вҲҘОёT вҲ’ Оё0 вҲҘ = R, then by inequality (1) we get
               c
L(ОёT ) вҲ’ Оө вүӨ R+c  (L(Оё0 ) вҲ’ Оө). Therefore L(ОёT ) вүӨ П„ В· L(Оё0 ) + (1 вҲ’ П„ ) В· Оө = Оө0 where П„ = c/(R + c).
We conclude this case again by non-increasing extension, which completes the proof.


                                                     16
Theorem E.2 (Quantitative version of Theorem 2.1). Let (Оө, Оҙ) вҲҲ RвҲ—+ Г— ]0, 1].
If there exists
                C : ]0, 1] вҶ’ R + such that for any s вҲҲ S0 and for any Оҙ вҲҲ ]0, 1] it holds
P(g,Оё)вҲјNs L в—Ұ F(s,g) (Оё) вүӨ C(Оҙ) вүҘ 1 вҲ’ Оҙ, and if there exists constants Оө0 < Оө and Оҙ0 < Оҙ such that
Condition C1 is satisfied with parameters (Оө0 , Оҙ0 ), then let c вҲҲ R+ be the corresponding intercept, let
s1 вҲҲ S be the threshold size associated by Condition C1 to radius R = c (C(Оҙ вҲ’ Оҙ0 ) вҲ’ Оө0 )/(Оө вҲ’ Оө0 ),
and let Оә = 3 cвҲ’2 C(Оҙ вҲ’ Оҙ0 )вҲ’2 вҲҲ RвҲ—+ .
It holds for all s вҲҲ S0 satisfying s вӘ° s1 , that if (g, Оё0 ) вҲј Ns , then the pair (L в—Ұ F(s,g) , Оё0 ) satisfies
Convergence Criterion 1 with limit error Оө and constant Оә with probability at least (1 вҲ’ Оҙ).

Note that Theorem 2.1 is a direct consequence of Theorem E.2, it thus suffices to prove the latter.

Proof of Theorem E.2. Let s вҲҲ S0 such that s вӘ° s1 . Let (g, Оё0 ) вҲј Ns . Let A be the event:
[вҲҖr вүӨ R, B(Оё0 , r) вҠҶ As,g (c + r, Оө0 )]. By Condition C1, P(A) вүҘ (1 вҲ’ Оҙ0 ). Let B be the
event: [L в—Ұ F(s,g) (Оё0 ) вүӨ C(Оҙ вҲ’ Оҙ0 )]. By boundedness assumption, P(B) вүҘ 1 вҲ’ (Оҙ вҲ’ Оҙ0 ).
Therefore, by union bound, P(A вҲ© B) вүҘ 1 вҲ’ P(В¬A) вҲ’ P(В¬B) вүҘ 1 вҲ’ Оҙ. Let S be the event
[(L в—Ұ F(s,g) , Оё0 ) satisfies Convergence Criterion 1 with limit error Оө and constant Оә]. It only remain
to show that S вҠҶ A вҲ© B, since that will imply P(S) вүҘ P(A вҲ© B) вүҘ 1 вҲ’ Оҙ.
We will do so by leveraging Lemma E.1. Write for shortness C = C(Оҙ вҲ’ Оҙ0 ). Let (g, Оё0 ) вҲҲ Gs Г— Оҳs
be such that вҲҖr вүӨ R, B(Оё0 , r) вҠҶ As,g (c + r, Оө0 ), and L в—Ұ F(s,g) (Оё0 ) вүӨ C (i.e. both events A
and B are realised). Let Оё вҲҲ B(Оё0 , R), and let us show that the separable Kurdyka-ЕҒojasiewicz
bound вҲҘвҲҮ(L в—Ұ F(s,g) )(Оё)вҲҘ вүҘ (L в—Ұ F(s,g) (Оё) вҲ’ Оө0 )+ /(вҲҘОё вҲ’ Оё0 вҲҘ + c) holds. Let r = вҲҘОё вҲ’ Оё0 вҲҘ. Since
Оё вҲҲ As,g (c+r, Оө0 ), let u вҲҲ Оҳs be such that вҲҘuвҲҘ вүӨ c+r and вҲҘF(s,g) (Оё)+ dF(s,g) (Оё)В·uвҲ’f вӢҶ вҲҘ2D < Оө0 .
First, note that if L в—Ұ F(s,g) (Оё) вүӨ Оө then the bound holds immediately since the right-hand side is null,
thus we can assume in the following that L в—Ұ F(s,g) (Оё) > Оө0 . By the variational form of the в„“2 -norm,
                                                                  2                                 2
                                       ( d(L в—Ұ F (s, g))(Оё) В· v)   (вҲ’ d(L в—Ұ F (s, g))(Оё) В· u)
       вҲҘвҲҮ(L в—Ұ F(s,g) )(Оё)вҲҘ2 = sup                    2
                                                                 вүҘ                                        (3)
                                  vвҲҲОҳs           вҲҘvвҲҘ                         вҲҘuвҲҘ2
Then since L(f ) = вҲҘf вҲ’ f вӢҶ вҲҘ2D , we can expand the derivative to

вҲ’ d(L в—Ұ F(s,g) )(Оё) В· u = вҲ’ dL(F(s,g) (Оё)) В· dF(s,g) (Оё) В· u
                         = вҲ’2 dF(s,g) (Оё) В· u, F(s,g) (Оё) вҲ’ f вӢҶ D
                                                                  2                                              2
                          = L в—Ұ F(s,g) (Оё) + dF(s,g) (Оё) В· u D вҲ’ F(s,g) (Оё) + dF(s,g) (Оё) В· u вҲ’ f вӢҶ D
                         (S1)

                          вүҘ L в—Ұ F(s,g) (Оё) + 0 вҲ’ Оө0
                         (S2)

where (S1) is the parallelogram indentity вҲ’2вҹЁa, bвҹ© = вҲҘaвҲҘ2 + вҲҘbвҲҘ2 вҲ’ вҲҘa + bвҲҘ2 with the definition of
L, and (S2) is the approximation inequality defining u. Using the positive part (В·)+ : s 7вҶ’ max{0, s},
we can thus bound the square of this quantity irrespectively of its sign, as follows
                                                  2                         2
                          вҲ’ d(L в—Ұ F(s,g) )(Оё) В· u вүҘ L в—Ұ F(s,g) (Оё) вҲ’ Оө0 +

Observing that вҲҘuвҲҘ вүӨ c + r and injecting both of these bounds into Eq (3) concludes the proof of the
separable Kurdyka-ЕҒojasiewicz bound.
Applying now Lemma E.1, this implies that the pair (L в—Ұ F(s,g) , Оё0 ) satisfies Convergence Criterion 1
with limit error Оө1 = П„ В· L в—Ұ F(s,g) (Оё0 ) + (1 вҲ’ П„ ) В· Оө0 for П„ = c/(R + c) and constant Оә1 =
                             2
3 cвҲ’2 L в—Ұ F(s,g) (Оё0 ) вҲ’ Оө0 + . By decrease with respect to Оә and increase with respect to Оө of the
Convergence Criterion 1 bound, it now only     remains to show that Оө1 вүӨ Оө and Оә1 вүҘ Оә. The latter is
immediate because L в—Ұ F(s,g) (Оё0 ) вҲ’ Оө0 + вүӨ L в—Ұ F(s,g) (Оё0 ) вүӨ C, thus Оә1 вүҘ 3 cвҲ’2 CвҲ’2 = Оә. Then,


use the fact that П„ = c/(R+c) = (ОөвҲ’Оө0 )/(CвҲ’Оө0 ) to get Оө1 вүӨ П„ C+(1вҲ’П„ ) Оө0 = П„ (CвҲ’Оө0 )+Оө0 = Оө.
Thus the pair (L в—Ұ F(s,g) , Оё0 ) satisfies Convergence Criterion 1 with limit error Оө and constant Оә,
which completes the proof that S вҠҶ A вҲ© B and thus concludes the proof of Theorem E.2.


                                                     17
F     M ORPHISMS OF LIFTED PERCEPTRON MODULES TO TRACK ACTIVATIONS

Definition F.1 (Morphism of lifted perceptrons). Let (G, ПҖG , cG ) вҲҲ LiftPMod(B, C) and
(H, ПҖH , cH ) вҲҲ LiftPMod(B, C). A morphism of lifted perceptrons ПҶ : (G, ПҖG , cG ) вҶ’ (H, ПҖH , cH )
is a fibration ПҶ : G вҶ’ H such that ПҖG = ПҖH в—Ұ ПҶ and cG = cH в—Ұ ПҶ.

In other words, a morphism of lifted perceptrons G to H is a correspondance ПҶ between the underlying
graphs G and H that preserves the activation-defining вҖңtypesвҖқ ПҖ of vertices and edges, and the input
connections c, i.e. such that the following three diagrams commute
                     ПҶ                              ПҶ                             ПҶ
              VG         VH                    EG        EH                  IG       IH
               ПҖG        ПҖH                    ПҖG        ПҖH                  cG       cH
                    VB                              EB                            C

In the example of Figure 4 and Figure 5 of multi-layer perceptron with three layers, the base graph
has VB = {0, 1, 2, 3}, and a lifted vertex v вҲҲ V has ПҖ(v) = k вҲҲ VB if the vertex v is located
in layer k. The condition that ПҶ preserves ПҖ means that a vertex of layer k in G must be mapped
to a vertex of layer k in H. Mapping across layers would not make much sense, because it would
not be compatible with the definition of the forward function. Similarly for this example, we have
C = {r, g, b} indicating which of the lifted inputs corresponds to each channel. The mapping ПҶ must
also preserve these connections (map the r channel of G to the r channel of H, etc.).
Proposition F.2 (LiftPMod-morphisms preserve activations).
Let G вҲҲ LiftPMod(B, C) and H вҲҲ LiftPMod(B, C). If ПҶ : G вҶ’ H is a LiftPMod(B, C)-morphism,
then for all wG вҲҲ Param(G) and wH вҲҲ Param(H), it holds
                    h           i   h                                 i
                      wG = ПҶвҲ— wH вҮ’ F[G] (wG , В·) = ПҶвҲ— в—Ұ F[H] (wH , В·)


Thus one can transform the graph and weights, then compute the forward, or compute the forward
first, then transform the activations and input connections. This property of compatibility of the
forward operator and the morphisms of LiftPMod corresponds to the following commutative diagram
                                                    ПҶвҲ—
                                    (G, wG )               (H, wH )

                              F[В·](В·, вҲ’)                        F[В·](В·, вҲ’)
                                                    ПҶвҲ—
                                  F[G] (wG , В·)          F[H] (wH , В·)

The proof of this proposition is deferred to Appendix F.1. Intuitively, this proposition states that a
fibration of graphs compatible with the lift and preserving the weights means that the lifted perceptron
modules вҖңcompute the same thingвҖқ. Fibrations are crucial for this property to hold, a homomorphism
of graphs for ПҶ would not suffice, thus the restriction to fibrations in the previous definition.

F.1   P ROOF THAT MORPHISMS PRESERVE ACTIVATIONS

Proof of Proposition F.2. Let G = (G, ПҖG , cG ) вҲҲ LiftPMod(B, C) and H = (H, ПҖH , cH ) вҲҲ
LiftPMod(B, C). Let ПҶ : G вҶ’ H be a fibration such that (ПҖG = ПҖH в—Ұ ПҶ) : VG вҶ’ VB and
                                                                                     вҲ—
(cG = cH в—Ұ ПҶ) : I(G) вҶ’ C. Let wG вҲҲ Param(G) and   Q wH вҲҲ Param(H),
                                                                Q be such that wG = ПҶ wH .
                                 вҲ—
Let us show that F[G](wG , В·) = ПҶ в—Ұ F[H](wH , В·) : uвҲҲC YpC (u) вҶ’ vвҲҲVG YПҖG (v) .
Let us check first that these
                          Q expressions are allQwell defined. As a function of sets ПҶ : VG вҶ’ VH
induces a pullback ПҶвҲ— : uвҲҲV (H) YПҖH (u) вҶ’ vвҲҲV (G) YПҖH (ПҶ(v)) = vвҲҲV (G) YПҖG (v) . Therefore,
                                                                     Q

the expression ПҶвҲ— в—Ұ F[H](wH , В·) isQwell-defined and has the correct type signature. Similarly for
the weights, wH вҲҲ Param(H) = eвҲҲEH WПҖH (e) . As a function of sets, ПҶ : EG вҶ’ EH defines a
pullback ПҶвҲ— : eвҲҲEH WПҖH (e) вҶ’ eвҲҲEG WПҖH (ПҶ(e)) = eвҲҲEG WПҖG (e) = Param(G), where the
                 Q                 Q                     Q
first equality follows from ПҖG = ПҖH в—Ұ ПҶ. Therefore the assumption wG = ПҶвҲ— wH is well-formed.


                                                    18
        Q
Let x вҲҲ uвҲҲC YpC (u) . We will proceed by induction on a topological ordering вүә over VG (available
since G is acyclic). Let U вҠҶ VG be the set of vertices such that
                          v вҲҲ U вҮ” [F[G](wG , x)]v Мё= [ПҶвҲ— F[H](wH , x)]v

Let us show that U = вҲ…. By contradiction, if U is not empty, then let v вҲҲ U be minimal for the
total order вүә. Proceed by case disjunction on (IG , VG \ IG ). For the first case, if v вҲҲ U вҲ© IG , then
ПҶ(v) вҲҲ IH . Therefore by definition of the activation map, we get the contradiction
[F[G](wG , x)]v = [cвҲ—G x]v = xcG (v) = xcH (ПҶ(v)) = [F[H](wH , x)]ПҶ(v) = [ПҶвҲ— F[H](wH , x)]v
                (S1)         (S2)          (S3)           (S4)                          (S5)

where (S1) is the definition of the activation map of lifts (Definition 3.5 and Definition 3.4) for
v вҲҲ IG , (S2) is the definition of the pullback cвҲ—G , (S3) follows from cG = cH в—Ұ ПҶ, (S4) is the same
argument as (S1) for ПҶ(v) вҲҲ IH , and (S5) the definition of ПҶвҲ— , which concludes this first case.
For the second case, assume v вҲҲ U вҲ© (VG \ IG ). Write for shortness g = F[G](wG , x) and
h = F[H](wH , x). The fact that v вҲҲ U implies that gv Мё= hПҶ(v) , but the assumption that v is
minimal in U implies that for all u вҲҲ VG , if u вүә v, then gu = hПҶ(u) (otherwise u вҲҲ U by
                                                             вҲ’1
definition, and thus v is not minimal). Writing Ga (вҲ’, v) = ПҖG   (a) вҲ© G(вҲ’, v) for shortness (resp.
              вҲ’1
Ha (вҲ’, t) = ПҖH (a) вҲ© H(вҲ’, t)), by definition of activation maps (Def. 3.4) and lift (Def. 3.5),
                            пЈ«пЈ«                                      пЈ¶              пЈ¶
                                   X
              gv = ПғПҖG (v) пЈӯпЈӯ            MПҖG (u,v) [wG ](u,v) , gu пЈё
                            пЈ¬                                                      пЈ·
                                                                                   пЈё
                                uвҲҲGa (вҲ’,v)
                                                                              aвҲҲB(вҲ’,ПҖG (v))

Now, by definition, ПҶ : G вҶ’ H being a fibration implies that ПҶ|G(вҲ’,v) : G(вҲ’, v) вҶ’ H(вҲ’, ПҶ(v)) is
a bijection (Definition C.3). Moreover, the fact that ПҖG = ПҖH в—Ұ ПҶ implies that for all a вҲҲ VB , the
restriction of ПҶ is also a bijection Ga (вҲ’, v) вҶ’ Ha (вҲ’, ПҶ(v)). Therefore, we can replace the terms in
the sum one-by-one (note that this is not possible with a homomorphism, we need a fibration to do
this), as follows. Write ПҲ = ПҶ|G(вҲ’,v) the bijection, and rewrite the previous equality
                пЈ«пЈ«                                          пЈ¶           пЈ¶
                         X
gv = ПғПҖG (v) пЈӯпЈӯ                  MПҖG (u,v) [wG ](u,v) , gu пЈё
                пЈ¬                                                       пЈ·
                                                                        пЈё
   (S1)
                   uвҲҲGa (вҲ’,v)
                                                             aвҲҲB(вҲ’,ПҖG (v))
              пЈ«пЈ«                                                                    пЈ¶                 пЈ¶
                        X
    = ПғПҖG (v) пЈӯпЈӯ                    MПҖG (ПҲвҲ’1 (u),v) [wG ](ПҲвҲ’1 (u),v) , gПҲвҲ’1 (u) пЈё
              пЈ¬                                                                                       пЈ·
                                                                                                      пЈё
   (S2)
                   uвҲҲHa (вҲ’,ПҶ(v))
                                                                                    aвҲҲB(вҲ’,ПҖG (v))
                 пЈ«пЈ«                                                                          пЈ¶                    пЈ¶
                           X
    = ПғПҖH (ПҶ(v)) пЈӯпЈӯ                    MПҖH (ПҶ(ПҲвҲ’1 (u),v)) [wG ](ПҲвҲ’1 (u),v) , gПҲвҲ’1 (u) пЈё
                 пЈ¬                                                                                                пЈ·
                                                                                                                  пЈё
   (S3)
                       uвҲҲHa (вҲ’,ПҶ(v))
                                                                                               aвҲҲB(вҲ’,ПҖH (ПҶ(v)))
                 пЈ«пЈ«                                                       пЈ¶                       пЈ¶
                           X
    = ПғПҖH (ПҶ(v)) пЈӯпЈӯ                    MПҖH (u,ПҶ(v)) [wH ](u,ПҶ(v)) , hu пЈё
                 пЈ¬                                                                                пЈ·
                                                                                                  пЈё
   (S4)
                       uвҲҲHa (вҲ’,ПҶ(v))
                                                                          aвҲҲB(вҲ’,ПҖH (ПҶ(v)))

    = hПҶ(v)
   (S5)

where (S1) is by definition of g, (S2) is the rewriting of terms reindexed by the bijection, (S3) uses
ПҖG = ПҖH в—Ұ ПҶ, (S4) is the assumption that ПҲ вҲ’1 (u) вҲҲ      / U by minimality of v and ПҶ(ПҲ вҲ’1 (u)) = u,
applied to gПҲвҲ’1 (u) = hПҶ(ПҲвҲ’1 (u)) = hu and rewriting of wG = ПҶвҲ— wH . Finally (S5) is the definition
of h, constitutes the contradiction for the second case, thus concludes the induction and the proof.


                                                    19
G    T RACKING ACTIVATIONS ACROSS DEFORMATIONS OF WEIGHTS
Definition G.1 (Quantitative continuity). Let G = (VG , EG ) be a graph.
Let G = ((I, T ), (Y, W, Z), (M, Пғ)) вҲҲ PMod(G) and w0 вҲҲ Param(G). Let X вҠҶ vвҲҲI Yv .
                                                                                 Q
                                                      Q
For any v вҲҲ VG , write Fv = Пғv в—Ұ M(u,v) uвҲҲG(вҲ’,v) : uвҲҲG(вҲ’,v) W(u,v) Г— Yu вҶ’ Yv .
Write g 0 = F[G](w0 , В·) such that for x вҲҲ X and v вҲҲ VG , we have gv0 (x) = F[G](w0 , x) v вҲҲ Yv .


For any О· вҲҲ RвҲ—+ and x вҲҲ X , define L(О·, x) : VG 7вҶ’ R+ inductively as follows from [L(О·, x)]b = 0
for b вҲҲ I and propagated to v вҲҲ VG \ I as
     [L(О·, x)]v =        Q
                                sup                    Q
                                                            sup          Fv (w, g) вҲ’ Fv (w0 , g 0 (x))
                    wвҲҲ       uвҲҲG(вҲ’,v) W(u,v)      gвҲҲ       uвҲҲG(вҲ’,v) Yv
                                 0                  0
                    вҲҖu,вҲҘw(u,v) вҲ’w(u,v) вҲҘвүӨО· вҲҖu,вҲҘgu вҲ’gu (x)вҲҘвүӨ[L(О·,x)]u

Then write L[G, w0 ](О·, X ) = supxвҲҲX maxvвҲҲVG [L(О·, x)]v . If X is compact, this constant is finite.

This notion will be used in conjunction
                                    h     with Proposition F.2, which is the reason this convoluted
                                                                                               i
definition is chosen instead of just supxвҲҲX supвҲҘwвҲ’w0 вҲҘвҲһ вүӨО· вҲҘF[G](w, x) вҲ’ F[G](w0 , x)вҲҘвҲһ , which
is much more simply stated. The construction of Definition G.1 is such that the constant L is preserved
by morphisms, thus if we start with two networks with similar weights and a morphism between
them, we can track the evolution of all activations with a single constant.
Proposition G.2 (Tracking activations through morphisms and across weight deformations).
Let G = (G, ПҖ, c) вҲҲ LiftPMod(B, C) and wG вҲҲ Param(G)   Qfor underlying graph G = (VG , EG ).
Let H вҲҲ LiftPMod(B, C) and wG вҲҲ Param(H). Let X вҠҶ uвҲҲC YПҖC (u) .
Let О· вҲҲ R+ . Assume ПҶ : G вҶ’ H is a LiftPMod(B, C)-morphism such that
                                      вҲҖe вҲҲ EG , вҲҘ[wG ]e вҲ’ [ПҶвҲ— wH ]e вҲҘ вүӨ О·

Then for any v вҲҲ VG it holds supxвҲҲX [F[G](wG , x)]v вҲ’ [F[H](wH , x)]ПҶ(v) вүӨ L[H, wH ](О·, X )

Proof of Proposition G.2. To avoid confusions, write the lifted modules G = (G, ПҖG , cG ) and H =
(H, ПҖH , cH ), for the underlying graphs G = (VG , EG ) and H = (VH , EH ). For vH вҲҲ VH , we
use the notation [L(О·, x)]vH associated to vertices VH by Definition G.1 in the construction of
L[H, wH ](О·, X ). Let x вҲҲ X . For shortness, define g = F[G](wG , x) and h = F[H](wH , x). Let us
show by induction on v вҲҲ VG that вҲҘgv вҲ’ hПҶ(v) вҲҘ вүӨ [L(О·, x)]ПҶ(v) .
To that end, let v вҲҲ VG be the minimal vertex satisfying вҲҘgv вҲ’ hПҶ(v) вҲҘ > [L(О·, x)]ПҶ(v) , for a
topological ordering of G. If ПҖG (v) вҲҲ IB , then by definition of a lift and forward (resp. Def. 3.5
and Def. 3.4) it holds gv = xcG (v) = xcH (ПҶ(v)) = hПҶ(v) which constitutes the contradiction. For
                                     вҲ’1
the remaining case of v вҲҲ VG \ ПҖG       (IB ), let ПҲ = ПҶ|G(вҲ’,v) be the bijection between parents
ПҲ : G(вҲ’, v) вҶ’ H(вҲ’, ПҶ(v)) (existence and bijectvity follow from the fact that ПҶ is a fibration). Thus,

             gv = ПғПҖG (v)     MПҖG (u,v) [wG ](u,v) , gu
                                                           uвҲҲG(вҲ’,v)

                 = ПғПҖH (ПҶ(v))    MПҖH (s,ПҶ(v)) [wG ](ПҲвҲ’1 (s),v) , gПҲвҲ’1 (s)
                                                                                sвҲҲH(вҲ’,ПҶ(v))

However by assumption we have вҲҘ[wG ]ПҲвҲ’1 (s),v вҲ’ [wH ]s,ПҶ(v) вҲҘ вүӨ О·, and by minimality of v it holds
вҲҘgПҲвҲ’1 (s) вҲ’ hs вҲҘ вүӨ [L(О·, x)]s , thus by definition of [L(О·, x)]ПҶ(v) as the supremum over such values,
we get вҲҘgv вҲ’ hПҶ(v) вҲҘ вүӨ [L(О·, x)]ПҶ(v) , which consitutes the contradiction and concludes the induction.
Finally, observing that [L(О·, x)]ПҶ(v) вүӨ L[H, wH ](О·, X ) concludes the proof.


                                                       20
H      F ROM A COVERING PARTIAL MORPHISM TO TANGENT APPROXIMATION
H.1     PARTIAL MORPHISMS , A STRONG MEANING OF вҖң SUB - NETWORK вҖқ

Definition H.1 (Partial fibration). A partial fibration (S, ПҶ) : G вҮҖ H is a subgraph S of G such
that the inclusion map О№ : S вҶ’ G is a fibration, together with a fibration ПҶ : S вҶ’ H.

A subgraph S of G such that the inclusion О№ : S вҶ’ G is a fibration will lead to an вҖңextractionвҖқ of a
perceptron module from a larger module, compatible with forward functions.
Definition H.2 (Partial morphisms of LiftPMod).
Let (G, ПҖG , cG ) вҲҲ LiftPMod(B, C) and (H, ПҖH , cH ) вҲҲ LiftPMod(B, C). A partial morphism
of LiftPMod(B, C) is a partial fibration of graphs (S, ПҶ) : G вҮҖ H, such that the inclusion
О№ : S вҶ’ G induces a LiftPMod(B, C)-morphism О№ : (S, ПҖG |S , cG |S ) вҶ’ (G, ПҖG , cG ), and the
fibration ПҶ : S вҶ’ H induces a LiftPMod(B, C)-morphism ПҶ : (S, ПҖG |S , cG |S ) вҶ’ (H, ПҖH , cH ).
Definition H.3 (Covering partial matchings).
Let G = (G, ПҖG , cG ) вҲҲ LiftPMod(B, C) and wG вҲҲ Param(G).
Let H = (H, ПҖH , cH ) вҲҲ LiftPMod(B, C) and wH вҲҲ Param(H), over graph H = (VH , EH ).
Let Оұ : VH вҶ’ [0, 1] and О· вҲҲ RвҲ—+ . A partial LiftPMod(B, C)-morphism (S, ПҶ) : G вҮҖ H is said to
be an (Оұ, О·)-covering if it satsfies the following conditions:
                               вҲҖe вҲҲ E(S),           вҲҘ[О№вҲ— wG ]e вҲ’ [ПҶвҲ— wH ]e вҲҘ вүӨ О·
                                                                        вҲ’1
                                    вҲҖv вҲҲ VH ,       #ПҶвҲ’1 (v) вүҘ Оұ(v) В· #ПҖG  (ПҖH (v))

We write MОұ  О· [(G, wG ), (H, wH )] the set of such partial morphisms from G to H. Additionally, we
say that (G, wG ) has (Оұ, О·)-cover of (H, wH ) if the set of such partial morphisms is not empty.

H.2     TANGENT APPROXIMATION BY SUBNETWORK - MATCHING

Let us show that the tangent approximation property at a point can be reduced to a covering property.
Proposition H.4.
Let G вҲҲ LiftPMod(B, C), and let Оё0 = (w0 , a0 ) вҲҲ Param(G) Г— LinReadout(G, k). Define the
shorthands Оҳ = Param(G) Г— LinReadout(G, k) and F : Оҳ вҶ’ (X вҶ’ Rk ) the forward function
                                                                     2
F : (w, a) 7вҶ’ a В· F[G](w, вҲ’), with norm вҲҘ(w, a)вҲҘ2Оҳ = eвҲҲEG вҲҘwe вҲҘ + iвҲҲ[k],vвҲҲT (G) вҲҘai,v вҲҘ2 .
                                                       P                 P

Let GвӢҶ = (GвӢҶ , ПҖвӢҶ , cвӢҶ ) вҲҲ LiftPMod(B, C) and (wвӢҶ , aвӢҶ ) вҲҲ Param(GвӢҶ ) Г— LinReadout(GвӢҶ , k) over
GвӢҶ = (VвӢҶ , EвӢҶ ). Let О· вҲҲ R+ , and Оұ : VвӢҶ вҶ’ ]0, 1]. If (G, w0 ) has (Оұ, О·)-cover of (GвӢҶ , wвӢҶ ), then
      inf   F (Оё0 ) + dF (Оё0 ) В· u вҲ’ f вӢҶ D вүӨ                aвӢҶ В· F[GвӢҶ ](wвӢҶ , В·) вҲ’ f вӢҶ D + C вӢҶ В· L[GвӢҶ , wвӢҶ ](О·, X )
    uвҲҲОҳ
  вҲҘuвҲҘОҳ вүӨОә
                                                                          r
        вӢҶ                                 вҲҘaвӢҶ
                                            i,v вҲҘ                  0                                     вҲҘaвӢҶ
                                                                                                           i,v вҲҘ
                                                                                                                 2
                                    вҲҡ
            P           P                                                     P           P
with C =        iвҲҲ[k]       vвҲҲV вӢҶ                        and Оә = вҲҘa вҲҘ +           iвҲҲ[k]       vвҲҲV вӢҶ Оұ(v)В·#ПҖвӢҶвҲ’1 (ПҖвӢҶ (v)) .
                                        #ПҖвӢҶвҲ’1 (ПҖвӢҶ (v))

Since L[GвӢҶ , wвӢҶ ](О·, X ) вҲ’вҶ’ 0, this bound tends to вҲҘaвӢҶ В· F[GвӢҶ ](wвӢҶ , В·) вҲ’ f вӢҶ вҲҘD in the limit О· вҶ’ 0.
                              О·вҶ’0

This should be fairly straightforwardly connected to the tangent approximation property at Оё0 . Indeed
if вҲҘF[GвӢҶ ](wвӢҶ , В·) вҲ’ f вӢҶ вҲҘ2D вүӨ Оө then this property will constitute tangent approximation at Оё0 with any
error Оө1 > Оө provided О· is taken sufficiently small. The tangent radius Оә also has a manageable form.
Note that this is consistent with the intuition given by Frankle & Carbin (2019): the Lottery Ticket
Hypothesis postulates that if a large enough network contains a smaller network which achieves low
loss (a Lottery Ticket), then the larger network will achieve low loss. The principal distinction with
the present discussion вҖ” apart from the added generality of generic perceptron modules instead of
just multi-layer perceptrons вҖ” is that Frankle & Carbin (2019) considered dense networks whose
вҖңsub-networksвҖқ were extracted by homomorphism, whereas our proof is restricted to extractions
by fibration, which is much more restrictive. The overarching intuition carries over even if the
details donвҖҷt match, largely because these early postulates were intentionally fuzzy in nature to guide
intuition, whereas our proofs are rigid by design in order to yield precise empirical predictions.


                                                              21
Proof of Proposition H.4. Note first that the function F : (w, a) 7вҶ’ a В· F[G](w, вҲ’) is linear with
respect to a, therefore for any b вҲҲ LinReadout(G, k), it holds dF (w, a) В· (0, b) = b В· F[G](w, вҲ’).
Then, from (S, ПҶ) : G вҮҖ GвӢҶ a partial fibration with (Оұ, О·)-cover, construct
                                                                   q        u вҲҲ LinReadout(G, k)
defined for v вҲҲ T (G) by uv = aвӢҶПҶ(v) /sv , where sv = #ПҶвҲ’1 (ПҶ(v))          #ПҖвӢҶвҲ’1 (ПҖ(v))/#ПҖ вҲ’1 (ПҖ(v)).
           вҲҘF (w0 , a0 ) + dF (w0 , a0 ) В· (0, u вҲ’ a0 ) вҲ’ f вӢҶ вҲҘD
             = вҲҘ dF (w0 , a0 ) В· (0, u) вҲ’ f вӢҶ вҲҘD = вҲҘu В· F[G](w0 , вҲ’) вҲ’ f вӢҶ вҲҘD
            (S1)                                    (S2)                                                (4)
                     вӢҶ       вӢҶ     вӢҶ        вӢҶ                      0       вӢҶ           вӢҶ   вӢҶ
             вүӨ вҲҘa В· F[G ](w , вҲ’) вҲ’ f вҲҘD + вҲҘu В· F[G](w , вҲ’) вҲ’ a В· F[G ](w , вҲ’)вҲҘD
            (S3)

where (S1) is the fact that for any a, we have F (w0 , a) = a В· F[G](w0 , вҲ’) = dF (w0 , a0 ) В· (0, a),
together with linearity of the differential, (S2) is the simplification of the differential, and (S3) is
subadditivity of the semi-norm вҲҘВ·вҲҘD on the space (X вҶ’ Rk ) (see Proposition K.2). Let us show
that this is valid upper-bound for the infimum in the claim, because вҲҘ(0, u вҲ’ a0 )вҲҘОҳ вүӨ Оә. Indeed, by
subadditivity of the norm вҲҘ(0, u вҲ’ a0 )вҲҘОҳ вүӨ вҲҘ(0, u)вҲҘОҳ + вҲҘ(0, a0 )вҲҘОҳ = вҲҘuвҲҘ + вҲҘa0 вҲҘ. Moreover,
                  X X                    X X             X
        вҲҘuвҲҘ2 =               вҲҘui,v вҲҘ2 =                       вҲҘaвӢҶu вҲҘ2 /s2v
                   iвҲҲ[k] vвҲҲT (G)           iвҲҲ[k] uвҲҲT (GвӢҶ ) vвҲҲПҶвҲ’1 (u)
                   X      X            X       вҲҘaвӢҶu вҲҘ2 #ПҖ вҲ’1 (ПҖвӢҶ (u))
              =
                   iвҲҲ[k] uвҲҲT (GвӢҶ ) vвҲҲПҶвҲ’1 (u)
                                             #ПҶвҲ’1 (ПҶ(v))2 #ПҖвӢҶвҲ’1 (ПҖвӢҶ (u))
                   X      X         вҲҘaвӢҶu вҲҘ2 #ПҖ вҲ’1 (ПҖвӢҶ (u))   X X                  вҲҘaвӢҶu вҲҘ2
              =                                            вүӨ
                   iвҲҲ[k] uвҲҲT (GвӢҶ )
                                   #ПҶ (u) #ПҖвӢҶ (ПҖвӢҶ (u)) (S1) iвҲҲ[k] uвҲҲT (GвӢҶ ) Оұ(u) #ПҖвӢҶвҲ’1 (ПҖвӢҶ (u))
                                      вҲ’1        вҲ’1


where (S1) is the covering property ensuring that #ПҶвҲ’1 (ПҶ(v)) вүҘ ОұПҶ(v) #ПҖ вҲ’1 (ПҖ(v)). Now to bound
the second term in Eq. (4), let us show a more convenient        rewriting of u В· F[G](w0 , x). Write for
shortness for any u вҲҲ T (G ) the average Fu (x) = vвҲҲПҶвҲ’1 (u) F[G](w0 , x)v /#ПҶвҲ’1 (u).
                            вӢҶ
                                                     P
                             пЈ®                                                        пЈ№
                                X        1          X
       u В· F[G](w0 , x) = пЈ°         p                       вҹЁui,v , F[G](w0 , x)v вҹ©пЈ»
                        (S1)          #ПҖ  вҲ’1 (b)
                               bвҲҲTB              vвҲҲПҖ вҲ’1 (b)
                                                                                        iвҲҲ[k]
                             пЈ®                                                                    пЈ№
                                X X            X               1         вҹЁaвӢҶi,u , F[G](w0 , x)v вҹ©
                         = пЈ°                                                                      пЈ»
                                                                                 #ПҶвҲ’1 (u)
                                                       q
                        (S2)                                    вҲ’1
                               bвҲҲTB uвҲҲПҖвӢҶ (b) vвҲҲПҶ (u)
                                       вҲ’1        вҲ’1        #ПҖвӢҶ (b)
                                                                                                    iвҲҲ[k]
                             пЈ®                                                пЈ№
                                X X                1
                         = пЈ°                 q              вҹЁaвӢҶi,u , Fu (x)вҹ©пЈ»
                        (S3)                        вҲ’1
                               bвҲҲTB uвҲҲПҖвӢҶ (b)
                                       вҲ’1       #ПҖвӢҶ (b)
                                                                               iвҲҲ[k]
where (S1) is by defintion of the action, (S2) by definition of uv , and (S3) by linearity. Next, by
P roposition G.2 and subadditivity, we have вҲҘFu (x) вҲ’ F[GвӢҶ ](wвӢҶ , x)вҲҘ вүӨ L[GвӢҶ , wвӢҶ ](О·, X ). Thus,
                                                пЈ®                                                           пЈ№
                                                                                                          2
                                                                          вӢҶ                вӢҶ    вӢҶ
                                        2       пЈҜ X X X вҹЁai,u , Fu вҲ’ F[G ](w , x)вҹ© пЈә
 u В· F[G](w0 , вҲ’) вҲ’ aвӢҶ В· F[GвӢҶ ](wвӢҶ , вҲ’) D = Ex пЈ°                                 q                          пЈ»
                                                  iвҲҲ[k] bвҲҲTB uвҲҲПҖвӢҶвҲ’1 (b)              #ПҖвӢҶвҲ’1 (b)
                                                  пЈ®                                                                пЈ№
                                                                                                                 2
                                                                             вӢҶ                   вӢҶ     вӢҶ
                                                    X      X      X       вҲҘa i,u вҲҘ В· вҲҘF u вҲ’ F[G    ](w   , x)вҲҘ
                                            вүӨ Ex пЈ°
                                                  пЈҜ                                                                пЈә
                                                                                      q                            пЈ»
                                           (S1)                                             вҲ’1
                                                    iвҲҲ[k] bвҲҲTB uвҲҲПҖвӢҶвҲ’1 (b)                #ПҖвӢҶ (b)
                                                пЈ®                                                              пЈ№
                                                                                                             2
                                                                                                   вӢҶ
                                                                                               вҲҘa вҲҘ
                                                                                             q i,u
                                                  X                         X         X
                                           вүӨ Ex пЈ°       L[GвӢҶ , wвӢҶ ](О·, X)
                                                пЈҜ                                                              пЈә
                                                                                                               пЈ»
                                                  iвҲҲ[k]                    bвҲҲTB uвҲҲПҖвӢҶвҲ’1 (b)     #ПҖвӢҶвҲ’1 (b)
where (S1) is the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality in YПҖвӢҶ (u) . Thus taking square roots and using the
inequality вҲҘВ·вҲҘ2 вүӨ вҲҘВ·вҲҘ1 , we get u В· F[G](w0 , вҲ’) вҲ’ aвӢҶ В· F[GвӢҶ ](wвӢҶ , вҲ’) D вүӨ C вӢҶ В· L[GвӢҶ , wвӢҶ ](О·, X ).
Reinjecting this inequality into the first bound Eq. (4) concludes the proof.


                                                      22
I   C OVERAGE OF RANDOM SPARSE LIFTS
Definition I.1 (Оұ parameter of a perceptron module).
Let GвӢҶ = (GвӢҶ , ПҖвӢҶ , cвӢҶ ) вҲҲ LiftPMod(B, C) and wвӢҶ вҲҲ Param(GвӢҶ ), with graph GвӢҶ = (VвӢҶ , EвӢҶ ).
Let О» : EB вҶ’ RвҲ—+ . For e вҲҲ EB , let Ne be a full support distribution on We . Let О· вҲҲ RвҲ—+ .
Define ОұО· : VвӢҶ вҶ’ ]0, 1], inductively over v вҲҲ VвӢҶ , from ОұО· (u) = 1/#ПҖ вҲ’1 (ПҖ(u)) for u вҲҲ I(GвӢҶ ), and
propagated, with the notation Kv = 21+#B(вҲ’,ПҖвӢҶ (v)) В· #ПҖвӢҶвҲ’1 (ПҖвӢҶ (v)), as follows to v вҲҲ VвӢҶ \ I(GвӢҶ )
               пЈ«                                       пЈ¶пЈ«                                     пЈ¶
             1 пЈӯ      Y                                       Y
                                                                               вӢҶ

  ОұО· (v) =                     P ka (v); О»(a,ПҖвӢҶ (v)) пЈё пЈӯ           pПҖвӢҶ (u,v) w(u,v) , О· ОұО· (u)пЈё
            Kv                                                 вӢҶ
                   aвҲҲB(вҲ’,ПҖвӢҶ (v))                                uвҲҲG (вҲ’,v)

where ka (v) = # GвӢҶ (вҲ’, v) вҲ© ПҖвӢҶвҲ’1 (a) вҲҲ N is the number of вҖңtype-aвҖқ parents of vertex v in GвӢҶ ,


P(k; О») = eвҲ’О» О»k /k! is the Poisson density, and for e вҲҲ EB , we write pe : We Г— RвҲ—+ вҶ’ RвҲ—+ the
volume of a ball as measured by Ne , i.e. pe : (s, П„ ) 7вҶ’ PwвҲјNe (вҲҘw вҲ’ sвҲҘWe вүӨ П„ ).

Validity of this definition (e.g. image of the function Оұ) is detailled in Appendix K.2. The form of
Оұ at vertex v (forgetting Kv ) is intuitively the probability of guessing the correct degree, then the
probability that for each parent, both the weight and the corresponding subnetwork match the witness.
Based on the results of Appendix E, we know that it is sufficient for convergence to show tangent
approximation on a large ball around initialization. For a given lift and choice of parameters, we
now know from Appendix H.2 that it is sufficient to show existence of a witness extraction (a partial
morphism such that weights approximatively match) on that ball. Let us start by showing that at the
initial point, there exists a witness extraction with high probability, we will extend this to balls later.
Proposition I.2 (Large random sparse lifts are covering with high probability).
Let О» : EB вҶ’ RвҲ—+ . For e вҲҲ EB , let Ne be a distribution on We with full support.
Let GвӢҶ = (GвӢҶ , ПҖвӢҶ , cвӢҶ ) вҲҲ LiftPMod(B, C) and wвӢҶ вҲҲ Param(GвӢҶ ), over graph GвӢҶ = (VвӢҶ , EвӢҶ ).
Let О· вҲҲ R+ . Define ОұО· : VвӢҶ вҶ’ ]0, 1] the Оұ-parameter associated to (GвӢҶ , wвӢҶ ) by Definition I.1
Let n : VB вҶ’ N such that if b вҲҲ IB then nb = #pвҲ’1      C (b). Let (G, w) be a random sparse lift of B
along (n, О») with distribution N . If for all (a, b) вҲҲ EB , na вүҘ 2 max(О»(a,b) , О»2(a,b) / log(2)), then
                                                   пЈ«                                           пЈ¶
                                                                                2

                                            Y               X             П„ (v)
       P MОұ   О·             вӢҶ   вӢҶ
             О· [(G, w), (G , w )] вүҘ
                                                   пЈӯ1 вҲ’           exp вҲ’           nb В· Оұ(v) пЈё
                                                                             4
                                         bвҲҲVB \IB            вҲ’1
                                                             vвҲҲПҖвӢҶ (b)                              +

                                          1
where П„ : VвӢҶ вҶ’ [0, 1] is П„ : v 7вҶ’ 1 вҲ’ nПҖ (v)

                                             Оұ(v)            which tends to 1 when nПҖвӢҶ (v) Оұ(v) вҶ’ +вҲһ.
                                              вӢҶ          +

We will write GвӢҶa (вҲ’, v) = GвӢҶ (вҲ’, v) вҲ© ПҖвӢҶвҲ’1 (a) with a вҲҲ VB in index because this will appear often
in this proof. Similarly for the graph G, we write Ga (вҲ’, v) = G(вҲ’, v) вҲ© ПҖ вҲ’1 (a) for v вҲҲ V.
For any vertex v вҲҲ VB , define the set Av = {u вҲҲ VB , u вӘҜ v} (of вҖңancestorsвҖқ of v). Define the
filtration (Fb )bвҲҲVB induced by the strict total order вүә on VB as the Пғ-algebra
                                       пЈ«                              пЈ¶
                                      пЈ¬       [          [                 пЈ·
                               Fb = Пғ пЈ¬
                                      пЈӯ                          {me , we }пЈ·
                                                                           пЈё
                                          (x,y)вҲҲEB   eвҲҲEC
                                             yвүәb   ПҖ(e)=(x,y)

Conditioning on the Пғ-algebra Fb will вҖңfreezeвҖқ the random variables corresponding to the subset
{v вҲҲ V | ПҖ(v) вҲҲ Ab \ {b}}, and allow the study in isolation of what happens when adding b вҲҲ VB .

Proof of Proposition I.2. We will proceed by induction on VB , the vertices of the base graph, using a
strict total topological order вүә on VB (i.e. such that (u, v) вҲҲ EB вҮ’ u вүә v), available by acyclicity.
We use the notations from Definition 4.2 of random sparse lifts, with the bernoulli random variables
m(u,v) вҲј B(О»ПҖ(u,v) /nПҖ(u) ) and weights w(u,v) вҲј NПҖ(u,v) for all (u, v) вҲҲ EC , where C = (VC , EC )
is the fully-connected lift of B along n (Definition 3.6) to define the random sparse lift (G, w, a).


                                                    23
Induction hypothesis . For any subset U вҠҶ VB , define M(U ) the set of LiftPMod(B, C)-partial-
morphism (S, ПҶ) : G вҶ’ GвӢҶ such that VS вҠҶ ПҖ вҲ’1 (U ), and the following two conditions hold:
                                                     вӢҶ
                            вҲҖe вҲҲ E(S),        вҲҘwe вҲ’ wПҶ(e) вҲҘWПҖ(e) вүӨ О·
                         вҲҖv вҲҲ ПҖвӢҶвҲ’1 (U ),      #ПҶвҲ’1 (v) вүҘ Оұ(v) В· #ПҖ вҲ’1 (ПҖвӢҶ (v))
The first condition is identical to the definition of covering matchings, the second is quantified
differently (on ПҖвӢҶвҲ’1 (U ) not VвӢҶ ), but coincides with the definition when U = VB .
By contradiction, if the claimed inequality does not hold, then let b вҲҲ VB be the minimal vertex (for
the вүә topological order) such that the following inequality holds
                                           пЈ«                                           пЈ¶
                                                                          2

                                    Y               X               П„ (v)
            P (M(Ab ) Мё= вҲ…) <              пЈӯ1 вҲ’            exp вҲ’            na В· Оұ(v) пЈё           (5)
                                                                       4
                                   aвҲҲAb \IB          вҲ’1
                                                    vвҲҲПҖвӢҶ (a)                               +

Let us show a contradiction (thus that there is no vertex such that this condition holds, thus the inverse
inequality holds for any b and in particular it holds for M(VB ) which matches the claim exactly).

Induction intialization. Let us proceed by case disjunction. If b вҲҲ IB first, then let us show a
contradiction. First, to tackle the edge case, note that M(вҲ…) Мё= вҲ… almost surely because it contains
(S, ПҶ) a partial morphism with S the empty graph (no vertices and no edges). Then, let us show that
P(M(Ab ) Мё= вҲ…) вүҘ P(M(Ab \ {b}) Мё= вҲ…) by the almost-sure extension that follows. Recall for
that matter that the function pC : C вҶ’ IB partitions C into subsets pвҲ’1
                                                                      C (u) вҠҶ C indexed by u вҲҲ IB .
Moreover, by construction of a random sparse lift, for any u вҲҲ IB , we have ПҖ вҲ’1 (u) = pвҲ’1
                                                                                        C (u). Thus,
if (S, ПҶ) вҲҲ M(Ab \ {b}) for a graph S = (VS , ES ), construct the extension ((VS + , ES ), ПҶ+ ) as
VS + = VS вҲӘ cвӢҶ (ПҖвӢҶвҲ’1 (b)) with ПҶ+ |VS = ПҶ and for v вҲҲ VS + \ VS , let ПҶ+ (v) = cвҲ’1            вҲ’1
                                                                                     вӢҶ (v) вҲҲ ПҖвӢҶ (b).
                                                             вҲ’1
This construction is well-defined by injectivity of cвӢҶ : ПҖвӢҶ (IB ) вҶ’ C. It is also immediately
verified that ПҶ+ is a fibration because elements of VS + \ VS have no parents (more formally,
v вҲҲ VS + \ VS вҮ’ ПҖ(v) = b вҮ’ G(вҲ’, v) = вҲ…). The homomorphism ПҖS : VS + вҶ’ VB is obtained
by restriction ПҖS = ПҖ|VS + . Additionally, for every u вҲҲ ПҖвӢҶвҲ’1 (u), we have #(ПҶ+ )вҲ’1 (u) = 1 =
Оұ(u) В· #ПҖвӢҶвҲ’1 (ПҖвӢҶ (u)) = Оұ(u) В· #ПҖSвҲ’1 (ПҖвӢҶ (u)) by definition of Оұ. Thus ((VS + , ES ), ПҶ+ ) вҲҲ M(Ab ).
This concludes the proof that P(M(Ab ) Мё= вҲ…) вүҘ P(M(Ab \ {b}) Мё= вҲ…). Let us now show
why this contradicts the definition of b. If Ab \ {b} = вҲ…, then the inequality Eq. (5) contradicts
P(M(вҲ…) Мё= вҲ…) = 1. If on the other hand there is a вҲҲ Ab such that a вүә b, then a must also satisfy
the condition Eq. (5), which contradicts minimality of b. This concludes the case b вҲҲ IB .

Induction propagation by morphism extension. The case b вҲҲ IB has been tackled. Therefore
let us assume for the remainder of the proof that b вҲҲ VB \ IB . The idea is roughly the same as for
the previous case, we will work conditionally on Fb and show that we can extend partial morphisms
from M(Ab \ {b}) to M(Ab ) with a high-enough probability, and use it to form a contradiction.
Intuitively, if (S, ПҶ) вҲҲ M(Ab \{b}), we want to construct for every i вҲҲ ПҖвӢҶвҲ’1 (b) a set Ei (ПҶ) вҠҶ ПҖ вҲ’1 (b)
such that j вҲҲ Ei (ПҶ) if we can extend ПҶ into a partial fibration by mapping j to i, and if this extension
continues to satisfy both the type conditions and the weight-matching condition. We do so by
considering parents one at a time, then take intersections, and finally show that Ei (ПҶ) is sufficiently
large with a sufficiently high probability.

Extension (a): single-parent compatibility. For every (S, ПҶ) вҲҲ M(Ab \ {b}) a partial morphism
with S = (VS , ES ), and every a вҲҲ B(вҲ’, b), let Eia (ПҶ) вҠҶ ПҖ вҲ’1 (b) be the subset of V defined as
                                  пЈұ
                                  пЈІGa (вҲ’, j) вҠҶ VS
                                  пЈҙ
                        a
                  j вҲҲ Ei (ПҶ) вҮ” ПҶ(Ga (вҲ’, j)) = GвӢҶa (вҲ’, i)
                                  пЈівҲҖu вҲҲ Ga (вҲ’, j), вҲҘw              вӢҶ
                                                        (u,j) вҲ’ w(ПҶ(u),i) вҲҘ вүӨ О·
                                  пЈҙ

With the previous notation of P(k; О») = eвҲ’О» О»k /k! and pe (w, О·) = PuвҲјNe (вҲҘu вҲ’ wвҲҘ вүӨ О·), define
                        1                       Y
                Вөi,a = P #GвӢҶa (вҲ’, i); О»(a,b)                       вӢҶ
                                                           p(a,b) w(u,i) , О· В· Оұ(u)
                        2                           вӢҶuвҲҲGa (вҲ’,i)



                                                    24
                                                                          Q
Observe that this definition is chosen such that Оұ(i) = 12                    aвҲҲB(вҲ’,b) Вө i,a   /#ПҖвӢҶвҲ’1 (ПҖвӢҶ (i)).

Let us show that P (j вҲҲ Eia (ПҶ) | (S, ПҶ) вҲҲ M(Ab \ {b}), Fb ) вүҘ Вөi,a . For shortness in the writing of
this proof, let k = #GвӢҶa (вҲ’, i) вҲҲ N and q(a,b) = О»(a,b) /na вҲҲ [0, 1]. For a subset I вҠҶ ПҖ вҲ’1 (a) вҠҶ VG
such that #I = k, write Z(I) the set of bijections from I to GвӢҶa (вҲ’, i). Now, observe that by
disjunction over such subsets I and average over Z(I), it holds
                          X                                1    X         Y
      1jвҲҲEia (ПҶ) вүҘ                 1I=Ga (вҲ’,j) 1IвҠҶVS              1ПҶ|I =О¶   1вҲҘw(u,j) вҲ’w(О¶(u),i)
                                                                                       вӢҶ        вҲҘвүӨО·
                                                          #Z(I)
                      IвҠҶПҖ вҲ’1 (a)                                     О¶вҲҲZ(I)              uвҲҲI
                       #I=k


By independence and linearity, we can take the conditional expectation

   E 1jвҲҲEia (ПҶ) (S, ПҶ) вҲҲ M(Ab \ {b}), Fb
             X
                             k
                                               na вҲ’k 1 X             Y
                                                                               вӢҶ

        вүҘ         1IвҠҶVS В· q(a,b)   1 вҲ’ q(a,b)                1ПҶ|I =О¶   p(a,b) w(О¶(u),i) ,О·
       (S1)                                          k!
              вҲ’1
              IвҠҶПҖ (a)                                                 О¶вҲҲZ(I)             uвҲҲI
               #I=k

           k
                                    na вҲ’ki,a 1      X                     X                 Y
                                                                                                          вӢҶ

        вүҘ q(a,b) 1 вҲ’ q(a,b)                                    1IвҠҶVS В·            1ПҶ|I =О¶         p(a,b) w(О¶(u),i) ,О·
       (S2)                                  k!
                                                  IвҠҶПҖ вҲ’1 (a)             О¶вҲҲZ(I)             uвҲҲI
                                                   #I=k
                k
            1 О»(a,b) вҲ’О»(a,b) 1           X                      X                 Y
                                                                                                вӢҶ

        вүҘ           e                              1IвҠҶVS В·              1ПҶ|I =О¶         p(a,b) w(О¶(u),i) ,О·
       (S3) 2 k!            nka
                                      IвҠҶПҖ вҲ’1 (a)               О¶вҲҲZ(I)             uвҲҲI
                                       #I=k
                k
            1 О»(a,b) вҲ’О»(a,b)          Y
                                                        вӢҶ
                                                                  1               X                       X
        вүҘ           e                           p(a,b) w(u,i) ,О· В· k                       1IвҠҶVS В·                1ПҶ|I =О¶
       (S4) 2 k!                                                  na
                                   uвҲҲGвӢҶ
                                      a (вҲ’,i)                                 IвҠҶПҖ вҲ’1 (a)                 О¶вҲҲZ(I)
                                                                               #I=k
                k
            1 О»(a,b) вҲ’О»(a,b)          Y
                                                        вӢҶ

        вүҘ           e                           p(a,b) w(u,i) , О· В· Оұ(u)
       (S5) 2 k!
                                   uвҲҲGвӢҶ
                                      a (вҲ’,i)

       = Вөi,a

where (S1) is linearity of the expectation and independence of m and w, (S2) is a factorization
of constants related to m, (S3) is the lower-bound of Proposition L.1 because by assumption
na вүҘ max(2О»(a,b) , 2О»2(a,b) / log(2)), (S4) is a factorization of constants related to w, and (S5) is the
following counting trick:
                    1       X                     X                      1          X
                                    1IвҠҶVS В·              1ПҶ|I =О¶ вүҘ                                   1
                    nka                                                 n
                                                                    (S1) a
                                                                          k
                             вҲ’1
                          IвҠҶПҖ (a)               О¶вҲҲZ(I)                         ПҲ:GвӢҶ
                                                                                  a (вҲ’,i)вҶ’VS
                           #I=k                                                          вҲ’1
                                                                              вҲҖu,ПҲ(u)вҲҲПҶ        (u)
                                                                         1        Y
                                                                                            #ПҶвҲ’1 (u)

                                                                     вүҘ k
                                                                    (S2) na
                                                                              uвҲҲGвӢҶ
                                                                                 a (вҲ’,i)

                                                                         1    Y
                                                                    вүҘ     k
                                                                                       (Оұ(u) В· na )
                                                                    (S3) na
                                                                            uвҲҲGвӢҶ
                                                                               a (вҲ’,i)
                                                                          Y
                                                                    вүҘ           Оұ(u)
                                                                      uвҲҲGвӢҶ
                                                                         a (вҲ’,i)


where (S1) is a lower-bound by exhibition of a subset of terms satisfying the indicator conditions,
(S2) is the counting of such terms, and (S3) is the hypothesis (S, ПҶ) вҲҲ M (Ab \ {b}) with the
Оұ-cover property applied to a вҲҲ B(вҲ’, b) вҠҶ (Ab \ {b}).

This concludes the proof of the inequality E 1jвҲҲEia (ПҶ) (S, ПҶ) вҲҲ M(Ab \ {b}), Fb вүҘ Вөi,a .


                                                               25
Extension (b): multi-parent compatibility. Define now Ei (ПҶ) = aвҲҲB(вҲ’,b) Eia (ПҶ). By condi-
                                                                      T

tional independence given Fb of the events (j вҲҲ Eia (ПҶ))a indexed by a вҲҲ B(вҲ’, b), we get
                                               пЈ®                                                 пЈ№
                                                     Y
E 1jвҲҲEi (ПҶ) (S, ПҶ) вҲҲ M (Ab \ {b}) , Fb = E пЈ°               1jвҲҲE a (ПҶ) (S, ПҶ) вҲҲ M (Ab \ {b}) , Fb пЈ»
                                                                         i
                                                        aвҲҲB(вҲ’,b)
                                                       Y
                                                 =              E 1jвҲҲEia (ПҶ) (S, ПҶ) вҲҲ M (Ab \ {b}) , Fb
                                                     aвҲҲB(вҲ’,b)
                                                       Y
                                                 вүҘ              Вөi,a
                                                     aвҲҲB(вҲ’,b)

Write for shortness Вөi = aвҲҲB(вҲ’,b) Вөi,a , recall that Оұ(i) = 12 Вөi /#ПҖвӢҶвҲ’1 (b), and equipped with the
                        Q

inequality E 1jвҲҲEi (ПҶ) (S, ПҶ) вҲҲ M (Ab \ {b}) , Fb вүҘ Вөi , let us show that Ei (ПҶ) is large enough.

Extension (c): probability amplification. The events (j вҲҲ Ei (ПҶ))j indexed by j вҲҲ ПҖ вҲ’1 (b) are
independent conditionally on Fb . Thus the random variables Xj = 1jвҲҲEi (ПҶ) for j вҲҲ ПҖ вҲ’1 (b) have a
Bernoulli distribution and conditional expectation
                         P (j вҲҲ Ei (ПҶ) | (S, ПҶ) вҲҲ M(Ab \ {b}), Fb ) вүҘ Вөi > 0
Let Оҙi = 12 П„ (i) вҲҲ [0, 1]. Since #Ei (ПҶ) =
                                             P
                                                j Xj , we get by amplification (Appendix-Lemma L.4)

                     P (#Ei (ПҶ) вүӨ (1 вҲ’ Оҙi ) Вөi В· nb | (S, ПҶ) вҲҲ M(Ab \ {b}), Fb )
                                                               П„ (i)2

                                    1
                         вүӨ exp вҲ’ Оҙi2 nb В· Вөi = exp вҲ’                  nb В· Вө i
                                    2                             8
                                          2

                                    П„ (i)
                         вүӨ exp вҲ’            nb В· Оұ(i)
                                       4
We can then get a lower-bound on the probability that all candidate preimage sets Ei (ПҶ) are suffi-
ciently large, by union bound (since their cardinals are not independent)
                 пЈ®                                                        пЈ№
                     Y
               EпЈ°          1#Ei (ПҶ)вүҘ(1вҲ’Оҙi )nb Вөi (S, ПҶ) вҲҲ M(Ab \ {b}), Fb пЈ»
                   iвҲҲПҖвӢҶвҲ’1 (b)
                                X
                  вүҘ1вҲ’                  E 1#Ei (ПҶ)<(1вҲ’Оҙi )nb Вөi (S, ПҶ) вҲҲ M(Ab \ {b}), Fb
                          iвҲҲПҖвӢҶвҲ’1 (b)

                                             П„ (i)2
                                X
                  вүҘ1вҲ’                  exp вҲ’        nb В· Оұ(i)
                                                4
                          iвҲҲПҖвӢҶвҲ’1 (b)

We will use positive parts (В·)+ in the following to handle nicely the case where this is strictly negative.

Extension (d): tackling overlap. Let us start by showing that for any partial morphism (S, ПҶ),
                                                    Y
                 1M(Ab )Мё=вҲ… вүҘ 1(S,ПҶ)вҲҲM(Ab \{b}) В·         1#Ei (ПҶ)вүҘ(1вҲ’Оҙi )nb Вөi               (6)
                                                            iвҲҲПҖвӢҶвҲ’1 (b)

If (S, ПҶ) вҲҲ M(Ab \ {b}) and if for every i вҲҲ ПҖвӢҶвҲ’1 (b) it holds #Ei (ПҶ) вүҘ (1 вҲ’ Оҙi )nb Вөi then let
us construct an extension (S + , ПҶ+ ) вҲҲ M(Ab ). The difficulty is that the sets (Ei (ПҶ))i may not be
disjoint, thus we must select disjoint subsets of sufficient size to satisfy the covering condition. Choose
for every i вҲҲ ПҖвӢҶвҲ’1 (b) a subset Vi вҠҶ Ei (ПҶ) such that (Vi )i are disjoint, and #Vi вүҘ 21 nb Вөi /#ПҖвӢҶвҲ’1 (b).
Proof that such choice is possible is given in Proposition L.6, since if nb Оұ(i) вүҘ 1, for P = #ПҖвӢҶвҲ’1 (b),

            #Ei (ПҶ)               nb Вө i          1       1      nb Вө i         nb Вө i
                      вүҘ (1 вҲ’ Оҙi )        вҲ’1=        +                   вҲ’1=            = nb Оұ(i)
              P                     P             2 2nb Оұi         P             2P
And if nb Оұ(i) < 1, then Eq. (5) is immediately contradicted because the right-hand side is zero.


                                                       26
Then, let VS + = i Vi be the extended vertex set and ES + = vвҲҲVS + uвҲҲG(вҲ’,v) (u, v) the
                    S                                                S         S

corresponding edges. Define ((VS вҲӘ VS + , ES вҲӘ ES + ), ПҶ+ ) the morphism obtained as ПҶ+ |VS = ПҶ
and for v вҲҲ Vi вҠҶ VS + as ПҶ+ (v) = i. By construction of (Vi )i , this morphism is a fibration of
graphs. Since for all i вҲҲ ПҖвӢҶвҲ’1 (b), we have #(ПҶ+ )вҲ’1 (i) = #Vi вүҘ 12 nb Вөi /#ПҖвӢҶвҲ’1 (b) = nb Оұ(i), thus
the covering condition is satisfied, and therefore ((VS вҲӘ VS + , ES вҲӘ ES + ), ПҶ+ ) вҲҲ M(Ab ), which
conclues the proof of Eq. (6).

Towering.    We can now proceed by using the property that 1M(Ab )Мё=вҲ… = sup(S,ПҶ) 1(S,ПҶ)вҲҲM(Ab ) .

                                 пЈ®                                                                               пЈ№
                                                                            Y
    E 1M(Ab )Мё=вҲ… Fb вүҘ E пЈ° sup 1(S,ПҶ)вҲҲM(Ab \{b}) В·                                    1#Ei (ПҶ)вүҘ(1вҲ’Оҙi )nb Вөi Fb пЈ»
                                     (S,ПҶ)
                                                                        iвҲҲПҖвӢҶвҲ’1 (b)
                                         пЈ®                                                                       пЈ№
                                                                            Y
                           вүҘ sup E пЈ°1(S,ПҶ)вҲҲM(Ab \{b}) В·                              1#Ei (ПҶ)вүҘ(1вҲ’Оҙi )nb Вөi Fb пЈ»
                               (S,ПҶ)
                                                                        iвҲҲПҖвӢҶвҲ’1 (b)
                                                                    пЈ®                                            пЈ№
                                                                            Y
                           = sup 1(S,ПҶ)вҲҲM(Ab \{b}) В· E пЈ°                             1#Ei (ПҶ)вүҘ(1вҲ’Оҙi )nb Вөi Fb пЈ»
                               (S,ПҶ)
                                                                        iвҲҲПҖвӢҶвҲ’1 (b)
                                                                  пЈ«                                              пЈ¶
                                                                                               П„ (i)2
                                                                              X
                           вүҘ sup 1(S,ПҶ)вҲҲM(Ab \{b}) В· пЈӯ1 вҲ’                                exp вҲ’        nb В· Оұ(i) пЈё
                               (S,ПҶ)                                                              4
                                                                            iвҲҲПҖвӢҶвҲ’1 (b)                               +
                                                      пЈ«                                                      пЈ¶
                                                                                         П„ (i)2
                                                                   X
                           вүҘ 1M(Ab \{b})Мё=вҲ… В· пЈӯ1 вҲ’                          exp вҲ’               nb В· Оұ(i) пЈё
                                                                                            4
                                                              iвҲҲПҖвӢҶвҲ’1 (b)                                     +


Finally, we can conclude by a towering argument

        E 1M(Ab )Мё=вҲ… = E E 1M(Ab )Мё=вҲ… Fb
                            пЈ®пЈ«                                      пЈ¶                 пЈ№
                                                       2

                                      X          П„ (i)
                       вүҘ E пЈ°пЈӯ1 вҲ’           exp вҲ’         nb В· Оұ(i) пЈё В· 1M(Ab \{b})Мё=вҲ… пЈ»
                            пЈҜ                                                         пЈә
                                       вҲ’1
                                                    4
                                             iвҲҲПҖвӢҶ (b)                                            +
                            пЈ«                                                            пЈ¶
                                                            П„ (i)2
                                         X

                       = пЈӯ1 вҲ’                       exp вҲ’          nb В· Оұ(i) пЈё В· E 1M(Ab \{b})Мё=вҲ…
                                                               4
                                       iвҲҲПҖвӢҶвҲ’1 (b)                                            +
                                             пЈ«                                            пЈ¶
                                                                        П„ (i)2
                                  Y                     X
                           вүҘ                 пЈӯ1 вҲ’                 exp вҲ’        na В· Оұ(i) пЈё
                       (S1)                                                4
                               aвҲҲAb \IB              iвҲҲПҖвӢҶвҲ’1 (a)                                      +

where (S1) is the reverse of inequality Eq. (5) for any a вҲҲ VB with a вүә b by minimality of b. This
contradicts the inequality Eq. (5) defining b, thus concludes the case b вҲҲ VB \ IB and the induction,
which concludes the proof.


                                                            27
I.1     BALLWISE RESISTANCE OF COVERINGS WITH LOW OUT- DEGREE

Recall that we write n0 : IB вҶ’ N the function n0 : b 7вҶ’ #pвҲ’1C (b).
Proposition I.3.
Let О» : EB вҶ’ RвҲ—+ . For e вҲҲ EB , let Ne be a distribution on We with full support.
Let GвӢҶ = (GвӢҶ , ПҖвӢҶ , cвӢҶ ) вҲҲ LiftPMod(B, C) and wвӢҶ вҲҲ Param(GвӢҶ ), over graph GвӢҶ = (VвӢҶ , EвӢҶ ).
Let О· вҲҲ R+ . Define ОұО· : VвӢҶ вҶ’ ]0, 1] the Оұ-parameter associated to (GвӢҶ , wвӢҶ ) and О· by Def. I.1.
Let n : VB вҶ’ N such that if b вҲҲ IB then nb = n0b . Let (G, w0 ) be a random sparse lift of B along
(n, О») with distribution N .
Assume that for all (a, b) вҲҲ EB , if a вҲҲ IB then О»(a,b) вүӨ min{n0a /2, (n0a /3)1/2 }, and that
                                                              2          1+#V
                                                                          B
                                                   (R + О·) (1 + Оӣ)
                           вҲҖb вҲҲ VB \ IB , nb вүҘ 8
                                                      О·2   inf vвҲҲVвӢҶ ОұО·/2 (v)
                           7 О»(a,b) + 1 + log(2) + log(#VвӢҶ + #EB ) вҲ’ log Оҙ
            P
where Оӣ =       (a,b)вҲҲEB

Then,                                  1
                                         Оұ
                   P вҲҖw вҲҲ B(w0 , R), MО·2 О·/2 [(G, w), (GвӢҶ , wвӢҶ )] Мё= вҲ… вүҘ 1 вҲ’ Оҙ

The proof is deferred to Appendix I.1.2. Together with Proposition H.4, it should be straightforward
to see how this proposition will be used to prove the tangent approximation property on an R-ball.

I.1.1    D ECOMPOSITION OF BALLWISE COVER VIA LOW- DEGREE PROPERTIES
Lemma I.4 (Resistance of cover in low out-degree graphs). Let О· вҲҲ RвҲ—+ and R вҲҲ R+ .
Let GвӢҶ = (GвӢҶ , ПҖвӢҶ , cвӢҶ ) вҲҲ LiftPMod(B, C) and wвӢҶ вҲҲ Param(GвӢҶ ) over graph GвӢҶ = (VвӢҶ , EвӢҶ ).
Let Оұ : VвӢҶ вҶ’ ]0, 1] and let G = (G, ПҖ, c) вҲҲ LiftPMod(B, C) and w0 вҲҲ Param(G).
Write n : VB вҶ’ N and d : EB вҶ’ N (vertex count and maximal out-degree of G) defined as
       n : b вҲҲ VB 7вҶ’ #ПҖ вҲ’1 (b) and d : (a, b) вҲҲ EB 7вҶ’ sup # G(v, вҲ’) вҲ© ПҖ вҲ’1 (b)

                                                                  vвҲҲПҖ вҲ’1 (a)

Assume that вҲҖ(a, b) вҲҲ EB , nb вүҘ na log na , and that there is a constant Оӣ вҲҲ R+ such that
          "                          #               "             #
                                                                                   #V
                    X             na                                    2R2 (1 + Оӣ) B
             sup           d(a,b)      вүӨ Оӣ and           inf nb вүҘ 2
            bвҲҲVB                  nb                   bвҲҲVB \IB          О· inf vвҲҲVвӢҶ Оұv
                   aвҲҲB(вҲ’,b)

Then for every w вҲҲ Param(G) such that w вҲ’ w0 вүӨ R it holds
                                                Оұ/2
              MОұ        0     вӢҶ   вӢҶ
                                          вҮ’ M2 О· [(G, w), (GвӢҶ , wвӢҶ )] Мё= вҲ…

                 О· (G, w ), (G , w ) Мё= вҲ…


Proof of Lemma I.4. Under the assumption that this set is non-empty, choose a partial morphism
                                                                       Оұ/2
(S, ПҶ) вҲҲ MОұ         0   вӢҶ    вӢҶ                                                         вӢҶ  вӢҶ

           О· (G, w ), (G , w ) and let us construct an an element of M2О· [(G, w), (G , w )].

Write S = (VS , ES ). We will show that we can extract a subgraph U = (VU , EU ) of S such that the
inclusion О№U : U вҶ’ S is a fibration, and the restriction of ПҶ to U preserves weights (up to 2О·).
We proceed by induction on b вҲҲ VB , by defining Ub вҠҶ VS вҲ© ПҖ вҲ’1 (b) as follows:
                пЈұ                                                               пЈј
                пЈҙ
                пЈІ                                                               пЈҙ
                                                                                пЈҪ
                                                 [
                        вҲ’1                                            0
          Ub = v вҲҲ ПҖ (b) вҲ© VS G(вҲ’, v) вҠҶ              Ua , sup       wu вҲ’ wu вүӨ О·
                пЈҙ
                пЈі                               aвҲҲVB     uвҲҲG(вҲ’,v)               пЈҙ
                                                                                пЈҫ
                                                        aвүәb

In words, Ub is the set of vertices of S selected as follows: a vertex is selected if all its parents have
been selected already, and weights on links to its parents have moved no more than О· from w0 to w.
                                                             S
The extracted graph is then U = (VU , EU ), where VU = bвҲҲVB Ub , and EU = ES вҲ© (VU Г— VU ).
First, let us check that the inclusion О№U : U вҶ’ S is a fibration, and that the weight-approximation


                                                   28
condition is satisfied. It is immediately verified that it is an isomorphism of graphs. Moreover, by
definition of U , if v вҲҲ VU then U (вҲ’, v) = G(вҲ’, v) = S(вҲ’, v), therefore О№U is an isomorphism of
in-neighborhoods, thus a fibration. To check the weight-approximation condition, let e вҲҲ EU , and
observe that it holds by triangle inequality in WПҖ(e) that
       вҲҘ(О№вҲ— w)e вҲ’ (ПҶвҲ— wвӢҶ )e вҲҘ = вҲҘwe вҲ’ wПҶ(e)
                                       вӢҶ
                                            вҲҘ вүӨ вҲҘwe вҲ’ we0 вҲҘ + вҲҘwe0 вҲ’ wПҶ(e)
                                                                      вӢҶ
                                                                           вҲҘ вүӨ О· + О· = 2О·

Thus, it only remains to show that the restriction ПҶ|U : VU вҶ’ VвӢҶ has sufficient volume. This is a
little more tedious. We will switch points of view, to count the vertices from VS that we reject instead
of those that we keep. Define (again inductively on b вҲҲ VB ):
                        пЈұ                                                    пЈј
                        пЈҙ
                        пЈІ                                            [       пЈҙ
                                                                             пЈҪ
                                вҲ’1
                  Cb = v вҲҲ ПҖ (b) вҲ© VS вҲғu вҲҲ G(вҲ’, v), u вҲҲ          /        Ua
                        пЈҙ                                                    пЈҙ
                        пЈі                                          aвҲҲVB      пЈҫ
                                                                        aвүәb
                       n                                                                     o
                               вҲ’1                              0
                Wb = v вҲҲ ПҖ          (b) вҲ© VS   вҲғu вҲҲ G(вҲ’, v), вҲҘw(u,v) вҲ’ w(u,v) вҲҘ > О·

In words, Wb is the set of vertices in VS of вҖңtype bвҖқ that have been rejected because one the
corresponding weights had moved to much. Similarly, Cb is the set of vertices in VS that have been
rejected because one of their parents had been rejected (C stands for вҖңchainвҖқ rejection). Observe that
                                 Ub = ПҖ вҲ’1 (b) вҲ© VS \ (Cb вҲӘ Wb )



Therefore #Ub вүҘ # ПҖ вҲ’1 (b) вҲӘ VS вҲ’ #Cb вҲ’ #Wb . Let us bound each term separately.


First, note that if v вҲҲ I(G) вҠҶ V, and v вҲҲ VS , then v вҲҲ UПҖ(v) because G(вҲ’, v) = вҲ….
Regarding #Wb , since we know by assumption eвҲҲES вҲҘwe0 вҲ’ we вҲҘ2 вүӨ eвҲҲE вҲҘwe0 вҲ’ we вҲҘ2 вүӨ R2 , but
                                                P                    P

also by definition of Wb that #Wb В· О· 2 вүӨ eвҲҲES вҲҘwe0 вҲ’ we вҲҘ2 , we can deduce that #Wb вүӨ R2 /О· 2 .
                                          P

Regarding #Cb , we will rely on the following forward inclusion:
                                          [       [
                                Cb вҠҶ                     G(v, вҲ’)
                                         aвҲҲB(вҲ’,b) vвҲҲCa вҲӘWa

therefore we can leverage outgoing degree bounds to obtain
                                       X
                             #Cb вүӨ           (#Ca + #Wa ) В· d(a,b)
                                        aвҲҲB(вҲ’,b)


At this point, it becomes easier to stop thinking in integers and cardinals, and to switch to rates.
Define r : VB вҶ’ [0, 1] the вҖңrejection rateвҖқ r : a 7вҶ’ (#Ca + #Wa ) /na . We have shown so far that
if b вҲҲ IB , then rb = 0. Then, dividing the previous inequality by nb on both sides, and rewriting
               #Wb      #Cb        X #Ca + #Wa na                         X                  na
        rb вҲ’         =       вүӨ                          В·     В· d(a,b) =         ra В· d(a,b)
                nb       nb                    na         nb                                 nb
                                aвҲҲB(вҲ’,b)                                      aвҲҲB(вҲ’,b)
                                                                                         2
Write s = 21 inf Оұ/(1 + Оӣ)#VB . Using the second assumption, that nb вүҘ R        1
                                                                          О· 2 В· s , and the first
          P                na
assumption (a,b)вҲҲEB d(a,b) nb вүӨ Оӣ, we can deduce the following bound for r
                                                   пЈ«                   пЈ¶
                                          R2 1

          #Wb        X                na               X           n a
     rb вүӨ        +        ra В· d(a,b)    вүӨ 2    +пЈӯ           d(a,b) пЈё В·        max ra
           nb                         nb  О· nb                     nb        aвҲҲB(вҲ’,b)
                    aвҲҲB(вҲ’,b)                                   aвҲҲB(вҲ’,b)

                                      rb вүӨ s + Оӣ В·        max ra
                                                         aвҲҲB(вҲ’,b)
                                                                          #VB
Hence by Appendix-Lemma L.5, we get maxbвҲҲVB rb вүӨ s В· (1 + Оӣ)                    вүӨ 21 inf Оұ.
We are now ready to check volume conditions on ПҶ|U : U вҶ’ GвӢҶ . Let v вҲҲ VвӢҶ , and b = ПҖвӢҶ (v) вҲҲ VB .
                           вҲ’1
                     (ПҶ|U ) (v) = ПҶвҲ’1 (v) вҲ© Ub = ПҶвҲ’1 (v) \ (Cb вҲӘ Wb )



                                                     29
Thus, by using the Оұ-covering property of ПҶ : S вҶ’ GвӢҶ and the previous bound rb вүӨ Оұ(v)/2,

                                 вҲ’1
                       # (ПҶ|U ) (v) вүҘ # ПҶвҲ’1 (v) вҲ’ (#Wb + #Cb )


                                              вүҘ Оұ(v) В· nb вҲ’ rb В· nb
                                                1
                                              вүҘ Оұ(v) В· nb
                                                2
                    Оұ/2
Thus (U, ПҶ|U ) вҲҲ M2О· [(G, w), (GвӢҶ , wвӢҶ )], which concludes the proof.
Lemma I.5 (Low out-degree of random sparse lifts).
Let n : VB вҶ’ N such that if b вҲҲ IB then nb = #pвҲ’1C (b). Let (G, w) be a random sparse lift of B
along (n, О») with distribution N .
For any Оҙ вҲҲ ]0, 1], and for (a, b) вҲҲ #EB , let D(a,b) = 7 nnab О»(a,b) + log na + log #EB вҲ’ log Оҙ.
It holds                                                                           !
                                                               вҲ’1

              P вҲҖ(a, b) вҲҲ EB ,     sup        # G(v, вҲ’) вҲ© ПҖ         (b) вүӨ D(a,b)       вүҘ1вҲ’Оҙ
                                 vвҲҲПҖ вҲ’1 (a)


Write d : EB вҶ’ N the random variable d : (a, b) вҲҲ EB 7вҶ’ supvвҲҲПҖвҲ’1 (a) #(G(v, вҲ’) вҲ© ПҖ вҲ’1 (b)).

Proof of Lemma I.5. Write for shortness c = вҲ’ log(Оҙ/#EB ) вҲҲ R+ . Let (a, b) вҲҲ EB , and
p = О»(a,b) /na . Define for all (i, j) вҲҲ [na ] Г—P [nb ], independent random Bernoulli variables
m(i,j) вҲј Bern (p). For i вҲҲ [na ], let Xi =        jвҲҲ[nb ] m(i,j) . Note that these variables have a
Binomial distribution Xi вҲј B (nb , p). Thus from Appendix-Lemma L.2,
                                                           D(a,b) О»(a,b)


                      P Xu вүҘ D(a,b) вүӨ exp вҲ’nb D
                                                            nb       na
where D ( a вҲҘ p ) = a log ap + (1 вҲ’ a) log 1вҲ’a
                                           1вҲ’p . Observe that D(a,b) /nb вүҘ О»(a,b) /na because

                 D(a,b) na    7 О»(a,b)   na log na     c na      7 О»(a,b)
            ПҒ=              =          +           +           вүҘ          =7>1
                  nb О»(a,b)    О»(a,b)        nb      О»(a,b) nb    О»(a,b)

Therefore, we get (S1) by Appendix-Lemma L.3 and (S2) by the previous lower-bound on ПҒ, in
                     D(a,b) О»(a,b)        D(a,b)                        D(a,b)

                                                            1
                D                     вүҘ            log (ПҒ) + вҲ’ 1 вүҘ
                       nb     na     (S1)  n b              ПҒ      (S2)  nb

because log(7) + 71 вҲ’ 1 вүҲ 1.09 Вұ 0.01 вүҘ 1.

                                             D(a,b) О»(a,b)
Hence so far, we have thus shown that nb D    nb     na      вүҘ M вүҘ log(na ) + c. Thus,

                                         M О»(a,b)

                                                                                 1 вҲ’c
     P Xu вүҘ D(a,b) вүӨ exp вҲ’nb D                           вүӨ exp (вҲ’ log na вҲ’ c) =    e
                                         nb     na                              na

Then let X = supuвҲҲ[na ] Xu , and observe that by definition of a random sparse lift (Def. 4.2), The
random variables X and d(a,b) have the same distribution. By union bound,
                                               X                          X 1
                                                                                   eвҲ’c = eвҲ’c

    P d(a,b) вүҘ D(a,b) = P X вүҘ D(a,b) вүӨ              P Xu вүҘ D(a,b) вүӨ
                                                                               na
                                                  uвҲҲ[na ]                      uвҲҲ[na ]

                                                                                    Оҙ
Then by union bound again, and by definition of the shorthand c = вҲ’ log            #EB
                                                   X
                                                            P d(a,b) вүҘ D(a,b) вүӨ #EB В· eвҲ’c = Оҙ

       P вҲғ(a, b) вҲҲ EB , d(a,b) вүҘ D(a,b) вүӨ
                                                (a,b)вҲҲEB

By negation, it follows P вҲҖ(a, b) вҲҲ EB , d(a,b) вүӨ D(a,b) вүҘ 1 вҲ’ Оҙ.


                                                    30
I.1.2     P ROOF OF BALLWISE COVER RESISTANCE
Proof of Proposition I.3.
Write d : EB вҶ’ N the function d : (a, b) вҲҲ EB 7вҶ’ d(a,b) = supvвҲҲПҖвҲ’1 (a) #(G(v, вҲ’) вҲ© ПҖ вҲ’1 (b)).
                            Оұ
Let Acov be the event {MО·/2 О·/2
                                [(G, w0 ), (GвӢҶ , wвӢҶ )] Мё= вҲ…} (a covering exists at initialization). Then,
let Adeg be the event {вҲҖb вҲҲ VB , aвҲҲB(вҲ’,b) d(a,b) nnab вүӨ Оӣ} (the lift has relatively low out-degree).
                                  P


Degree control. Let us start by showing that P(Adeg ) вүҘ 1 вҲ’ Оҙ/2. In order to use Lemma I.5,
let us show first that for any (a, b) вҲҲ EB , it holds na вүҘ 2 max{О»(a,b) , О»2(a,b) / log(2)}. By case
disjunction on a, first if a вҲҲ IB , then on one hand О»(a,b) вүӨ n0a /2 = na /2, and on the other
hand О»(a,b) вүӨ (n0a /3)1/2 = (na /3)1/2 thus 2О»2(a,b) / log(2) вүӨ (2/ log(2))(na /3) вүӨ na because
2/ log(2) вүҲ 2.88 Вұ 0.01 вүӨ 3. For the other case, if a вҲҲ/ IB , then by dropping extraneous factors in
the assumption, na вүҘ 2 (1 + Оӣ)2 since #VB вүҘ 1, which concludes because Оӣ вүҘ О»(a,b) .
For every edge (a, b) вҲҲ EB , define D(a,b) = 7О»(a,b) nb /na + log na + log #EB вҲ’ log(Оҙ/2). By
virtue of Lemma I.5, we have

                           P вҲҖ(a, b) вҲҲ EB , d(a,b) вүӨ D(a,b) вүҘ 1 вҲ’ Оҙ/2
Moreover, for any b вҲҲ VB ,
           X na                    X                na log na   na
                     D(a,b) =             7О»(a,b) +           +    (log #EB вҲ’ log(Оҙ/2))
                  nb        (S1)                        nb      nb
         aвҲҲB(вҲ’,b)                aвҲҲB(вҲ’,b)
                                   X
                             вүӨ            7О»(a,b) + 1 + log #EB вҲ’ log(Оҙ/2)
                             (S2)
                                        aвҲҲB(вҲ’,b)
                                    X
                             вүӨ             7О»e + 1 + log(#VвӢҶ + #EB ) вҲ’ log(Оҙ/2) = Оӣ
                                                                                     (S3)
                                    eвҲҲEB
where (S1) is the definition of D(a,b) , (S2) uses twice the assumption that nb вүҘ na log na for every
a вҲҲ B(вҲ’, b), and (S3) is the definition of Оӣ. Thus
                     P Adeg вүҘ P вҲҖ(a, b) вҲҲ EB , d(a,b) вүӨ D(a,b) вүҘ 1 вҲ’ Оҙ/2


Initial cover. Let us show now that P(Acov ) вүҘ 1 вҲ’ Оҙ/2. By leveraging               as (S1), and
                                                                     Proposition I.2
                                                                                1
writing for shortness, when ПҖвӢҶ (v) = b, as in the proposition, П„ (v) = 1 вҲ’ nb ОұО·/2 (v)    , we have
                                                                                        +
                                                     пЈ«                                            пЈ¶
                                                                                 2


       ОұО·/2
                                               Y              X            П„ (v)
P MО·/2 [(G, w0 ), (GвӢҶ , wвӢҶ )] Мё= вҲ… вүҘ                 пЈӯ1 вҲ’            exp вҲ’         nb В· ОұО·/2 (v) пЈё
                                      (S1)                                    4
                                                   bвҲҲVB \IB    вҲ’1
                                                                vвҲҲПҖвӢҶ (b)                                 +
                                                                              П„ (v)2
                                                         X      X
                                              вүҘ 1вҲ’                     exp вҲ’         nb В· ОұО·/2 (v)
                                             (S2)                                4
                                                   bвҲҲVB \IB vвҲҲПҖвӢҶвҲ’1 (b)

                                                     X        X               1
                                              вүҘ 1вҲ’                     exp вҲ’ nb В· ОұО·/2 (v)
                                             (S3)                             8
                                                   bвҲҲVB \IB vвҲҲПҖвӢҶвҲ’1 (b)

                                                    X                      Оҙ
                                              вүҘ 1вҲ’      exp + log
                                             (S4)     вӢҶ
                                                                         2#VвӢҶ
                                                       vвҲҲV
                                     вүҘ 1 вҲ’ Оҙ/2
where (S2) is a union bound, then (S3) uses nb В· ОұО·/2 (v) вүҘ 4 thus П„ (v)2 вүҘ (3/4)2 = 9/16 вүҘ 1/2,
                                            2
and (S4) uses nb В· ОұО·/2 (v) вүҘ 8 (R+О·)
                                  О·2
                                                                    Оҙ
                                      (1 + Оӣ)1+#VB вүҘ 8 Оӣ вүҘ вҲ’8 log 2#V вӢҶ.



Conclusion. Finally, by using Lemma I.4 for (S1), and a union bound for (S2), we get the bound
                                1
                                    Оұ
        P(вҲҖw вҲҲ B(w0 , R), MО·2 О·/2 [(G, w), (GвӢҶ , wвӢҶ )] Мё= вҲ…) вүҘ P(Adeg вҲ© Acov ) вүҘ 1 вҲ’ Оҙ
                                                                   (S1)                     (S2)


                                                        31
J       Q UANTITATIVE PAC CONVERGENCE OF RANDOM SPARSE LIFTS
The statement of this theorem references the definitions of Section 4.2.
Theorem J.1. Let (Оө, Оҙ) вҲҲ RвҲ—+ Г— ]0, 1].
Assume that there exists GвӢҶ = ((VвӢҶ , EвӢҶ ), ПҖвӢҶ , cвӢҶ ) вҲҲ LiftPMod(B, C) a lifted perceptron module, and
parameters (wвӢҶ , aвӢҶ ) вҲҲ Param(GвӢҶ ) Г— LinReadout(GвӢҶ , k) such that L[GвӢҶ ](wвӢҶ , aвӢҶ ) < Оө.
Let L[GвӢҶ ](wвӢҶ , aвӢҶ ) = Оө0 , and define the constants
                                         X X               вҲҘaвӢҶi,v вҲҘ
                                 CвӢҶ =                    q
                                         iвҲҲ[k] vвҲҲT (GвӢҶ )  #ПҖвӢҶвҲ’1 (ПҖвӢҶ (v))
                            (                                      r            !)
                                    вҲ—       вӢҶ    вӢҶ           1       Оө + Оө0 вҲҡ
                 О· = sup О· вҲҲ R+ L[G , w ](О·, X ) < вӢҶ                       вҲ’ Оө0
                                                           C            2
                         X
                                 7 О»(a,b) + 1 + log(2) + log(#VвӢҶ + #EB ) вҲ’ log Оҙ

                 Оӣ=
                          (a,b)вҲҲEB

Let ОұО·/2 : VвӢҶ вҶ’ ]0, 1] be the Оұ-parameter associated to (GвӢҶ , wвӢҶ ) and О·2 by Def. I.1. Define
                                v
                                                      2 вҲҘaвӢҶi,v вҲҘ2
                                uX X
                                u
                           c= t
                                                 Оұ (v) В· #ПҖвӢҶвҲ’1 (ПҖвӢҶ (v))
                                  iвҲҲ[k] vвҲҲT (GвӢҶ ) О·/2

Let Оә = 3 cвҲ’2 / вҲҘf вӢҶ вҲҘ4D . Let N1 = VB вҶ’ N be defined for b вҲҲ IB as N1 (b) = #pвҲ’1   C (b) and
                                                                  2
                                                   4 c вҲҘf вӢҶ вҲҘ2D      (1 + Оӣ)1+#VB

                 вҲҖb вҲҲ VB \ IB , N1 (b) = 8 1 +
                                                    О· Оө вҲ’ Оө0        inf vвҲҲVвӢҶ ОұО·/2 (v)

It holds, for all n вҲҲ S0 such that n вӘ° N1 , that if (G, w) is a random sparse lift of B along (n, О») with
distribution N , and a = 0 вҲҲ LinReadout(G, k), then the pair (L[G], (w, a)) satisfies Convergence
Criterion 1 with limit error Оө and constant Оә, with probability at least (1 вҲ’ Оҙ).
Theorem 4.3 is a direct consequence of Theorem J.1, it is thus sufficient to prove the latter.

Proof of Theorem J.1. Define Оө0 = L[GвӢҶ ](wвӢҶ , aвӢҶ ) вҲҲ RвҲ—+ the error achieved by the witness. Then,
define Оө1 = (Оө0 + Оө)/2 вҲҲ ]Оө0 , Оө[ the midpoint between the witness error and the target limit error.
Outline. The idea for the proof is as follows. First, we use the witness network to get tangent
approximation to error Оө1 > Оө0 on a ball around initialization (by Proposition H.4), provided the
network is large enough to have the witness as subnetwork. This is possible because we take О· small
enough to ensure that the gap between the witness error and tangent approximation error is no more
than (Оө1 вҲ’ Оө0 ). Then, for a yet unspecified constant R, we leverage Proposition I.3 to set N1 large
enough such that the witness is a subnetwork on an R-ball with probability at least (1 вҲ’ Оҙ), thus we
have tangent approximation with error Оө1 < Оө with high probability. Finally, we set R large enough
with respect to the gap (Оө вҲ’ Оө1 ) and the tangent approximation intercept (as per Theorem E.2 and
more precisely Lemma E.1) to ensure the limit error of gradient flows is at most Оө, and propagate that
choice of radius to the definition of N1 , which will be sufficient to conclude.
Proof of Condition C1. Let us reconstruct the setting of Section 2 with the definitions of perceptron
modules. Let (S, вӘҜ) be the set S = {n : VB вҶ’ N | вҲҖb вҲҲ IB , nb = #pвҲ’1           C (b)}, with the order
n0 вүӨ n1 if and only if вҲҖb вҲҲ VB , n0b вүӨ n1b . For n вҲҲ S, define C = (VC , EC ) the fully-connected lift
of B along n, and the set QGn of lifted modules2 ((VG , EG ), ПҖ, c) вҲҲ LiftPMod(B, C) with vertices
                                    вҲ—
VG = VC . Let Оҳn = eвҲҲEC (ПҖC W)e . Define F(n,G) : Оҳn вҶ’ (X вҶ’ Rk ) the forward function
F(n,G) (w, a) = a В· F[G](w, вҲ’). Let us try to show that Condition C1 is satisfied with parameters
(Оө1 , Оҙ) and with intercept c. Let R вҲҲ R+ , and let s1 (R) вҲҲ S be defined as follows
                                                             (R + О·)2 (1 + Оӣ)1+#VB
                         вҲҖb вҲҲ VB \ IB ,     [s1 (R)]b = 8
                                                                О·2    inf vвҲҲVвӢҶ ОұО·/2 (v)
    2
        Note that there are distinct elements of Gn which may be isomorphic as graphs.


                                                        32
Let s вӘ° s1 , let (G, w0 ) be a random sparse lift along (s, О») and and a0 = 0 вҲҲ LinReadout(G, k).
By Proposition I.3 and by definition of s1 (R), with probability at least (1 вҲ’ Оҙ) over (G, w0 ),
for every w вҲҲ Param(G) such that вҲҘw вҲ’ w0 вҲҘ вүӨ R, it holds that (G, w) has ( 12 ОұО·/2 , О·)-cover
of (GвӢҶ , wвӢҶ ). Furthermore, by Proposition H.4, this implies that for every r < R and for every
a вҲҲ LinReadout(G, k) such that вҲҘ(w, a) вҲ’ (w0 , a0 )вҲҘ вүӨ r, writing Оё = (w, a) вҲҲ Оҳs , the proposition
implies that there exists u вҲҲ Оҳs with вҲҘuвҲҘ вүӨ c + вҲҘaвҲҘ вүӨ c + r and such that
                                                      вҲҡ
          вҲҘF(s,G) (Оё) + dF(s,G) (Оё) В· u вҲ’ f вӢҶ вҲҘ2D вүӨ ( Оө0 + C вӢҶ В· L[GвӢҶ , wвӢҶ ](О·, X ))2 вүӨ Оө1
This is nearly the (Оө1 , Оҙ) tangent approximation stated in Condition C1, but the assumption uses a
strict inequality. We could proceed by extending the proof of Theorem E.2, but since our bound
on the threshold N1 is not tight anyway, we will instead choose to match the assumption exactly.
Therefore, define Оө2 = (Оө + Оө1 )/2. Note that Оө2 > Оө1 , therefore we have shown that Condition C1 is
satisfied with parameters (Оө2 , Оҙ). Moreover, by an immediate calculation, Оө вҲ’ Оө2 = (Оө вҲ’ Оө0 )/4.
Proof of PAC-convergence. Note that it holds L[G](w0 , a0 ) вүӨ вҲҘf вӢҶ вҲҘ2D almost surely because a0 = 0.
Thus, as per Theorem E.2, set R0 = cвҲҘf вӢҶ вҲҘ2D /(Оө вҲ’ Оө2 ) and inject that constant in N1 = s1 (R0 ).
Indeed, this matches the definition of N1 because R0 = cвҲҘf вӢҶ вҲҘ2D /(Оө вҲ’ Оө2 ) = 4 cвҲҘf вӢҶ вҲҘ2D /(Оө вҲ’ Оө0 )
This concludes the proof.

K     P ROOFS OMMITTED FROM THE MAIN TEXT
Here we provide several straightforward checks that the definitions introduced in this document are
properly defined. All ideas are relatively simple, but the very general notation can sometimes obscure
this simplicity. Lifting in particular requires going back to the definition and carefully checking that
every type coincides with what we expect. The MLP examples of Fig. 4 and Fig. 5 can help.

K.1    L IFTING BY HOMOMORPHISM IS WELL DEFINED

Proposition K.1 (Def. 3.5 is well-defined). Let B = (VB , EB ) be a finite directed acyclic graph.
Let B = ((IB , TB ), (Y, Z, W), (M, Пғ)) вҲҲ PMod(B) be a perceptron module.
Let G = (V, E) be a graph, and ПҖ : G вҶ’ B a homomorphism of graphs.
Then G = ((ПҖ вҲ’1 (IB ), ПҖ вҲ’1 (TB )), (ПҖ вҲ— Y, ПҖ вҲ— Z, ПҖ вҲ— W), (MМ„ , ПғМ„)) is a perceptron module.

Proof. Let us check the conditions of Def. 3.3 one by one. First, G is a directed acyclic graph, because
ПҖ : G вҶ’ B is a homomorphism and B is a directed acyclic graph. Then, IG = ПҖ вҲ’1 (IB ) вҠҶ V,
and if v вҲҲ IG , then ПҖ(v) вҲҲ IB therefore B(вҲ’, ПҖ(v)) = вҲ…, thus G(вҲ’, v) = вҲ… because ПҖ is a
homomorphism. Then TG = ПҖ вҲ’1 (TB ) вҠҶ V is immediate. The bundles ПҖ вҲ— Y, ПҖ вҲ— Z, ПҖ вҲ— W over
respectively V, E, E are well-defined by pullback (Def. 3.2) through ПҖ : V вҶ’ VB viewed as a
function of sets (respectively ПҖ : E вҶ’ EB as a function of sets). It remains to check the domains and
co-domains of (MМ„ , ПғМ„). First let (u, v) вҲҲ E, and observe that

  MМ„(u,v) = MПҖ(u,v) вҲҲ WПҖ(u,v) Г— YПҖ(u) вҶ’ ZПҖ(u,v) = (ПҖ вҲ— W)(u,v) Г— (ПҖ вҲ— Y)u вҶ’ (ПҖ вҲ— Z)(u,v)
Then, letQv вҲҲ V \ IG . We have ПҖ(v) вҲҲ VB \ IB becauseQIG = ПҖ вҲ’1 (IB ), thus ПғПҖ(v) has type signature
ПғПҖ(v) : bвҲҲB(вҲ’,ПҖ(v)) ZПҖ(u,v) вҶ’ YПҖ(v) . Let z вҲҲ uвҲҲG(вҲ’,v) (ПҖ вҲ— Z)(u,v) , and let us show that
ПғМ„v (z) вҲҲ (ПҖ вҲ— Y)v . For any a вҲҲ B(вҲ’, ПҖ(v)), we can define Za = uвҲҲGa (вҲ’,v) zu , where Ga (вҲ’, v) =
                                                                 P

ПҖ вҲ’1 (a) вҲ© G(вҲ’, v). This sum is well-defined because zu вҲҲ (ПҖ вҲ— Z)(u,v) = Z(ПҖ(u),ПҖ(v)) = Z(a,ПҖ(v))
and Z(a,ПҖ(v)) is a vector space. Since G a (вҲ’, v) вҠҶ G(вҲ’, v),
                                                             the quantity Za is a function of z. Then
the check concludes by ПғМ„v (z) = ПғПҖ(v) (Za (z))aвҲҲB(вҲ’,ПҖ(v)) вҲҲ YПҖ(v) = (ПҖ вҲ— Y)v by definition.

K.2    T HE PARAMETER Оұ OF A PERCEPTRON MODULE IS WELL DEFINED

Let us check that the parameter Оұ defined in Definition I.1 is well-defined. First, the expression
is well-formed because the finite directed graph GвӢҶ is acyclic since it admits a homomorphism
ПҖвӢҶ : GвӢҶ вҶ’ B to an acyclic graph. Then, for all v вҲҲ VвӢҶ , as a product or non-negative factors lower
than 1, ОұО· (v) вҲҲ [0, 1]. Finally, by induction on v, it is immediate that ОұО· (v) > 0 provided all factors
            вӢҶ
pПҖвӢҶ (u,v) (w(u,v) , О·) are strictly positive, which is granted by the full-support assumption on NПҖвӢҶ (u,v) .


                                                    33
K.3   S UBADDITIVITY OF THE D- SEMINORM

Proposition K.2. Let D be a distribution on X with compact support, and define for f : X вҶ’ Rk
                                             q
                                 вҲҘВ·вҲҘD : f 7вҶ’ ExвҲјD [вҲҘf (x)вҲҘ22 ]

Let a : X вҶ’ Rk and b : X вҶ’ Rk . Then it holds вҲҘa + bвҲҘD вүӨ вҲҘaвҲҘD + вҲҘbвҲҘD

Proof. Since both sides of the inequality are non-negative, we work directly with squares. By a
straightforward computation, using Cauchy-Schwarz inequality in Rk , then E[AB]2 вүӨ E[A2 ] E[B 2 ],
                  E вҲҘax + bx вҲҘ22 = E вҲҘax вҲҘ22 + 2вҹЁax , bx вҹ©Rk + вҲҘbx вҲҘ22


                                   вүӨ E вҲҘax вҲҘ22 + 2вҲҘax вҲҘ2 вҲҘbx вҲҘ2 + вҲҘbx вҲҘ22


                                    = вҲҘaвҲҘ2D + 2 E [вҲҘax вҲҘ2 вҲҘbx вҲҘ2 ] + вҲҘbвҲҘ2D
                                               q            q
                                    вүӨ вҲҘaвҲҘ2D + 2 E [вҲҘax вҲҘ22 ] E [вҲҘbx вҲҘ22 ] + вҲҘbвҲҘ2D
                                                        2
                                    = (вҲҘaвҲҘD + вҲҘbвҲҘD )



L     T ECHNICAL LEMMAS
Proposition L.1. Let О» вҲҲ RвҲ—+ , n вҲҲ N, k вҲҲ [n]. If n вүҘ max(2О», 2О»2 / log(2)), then
                                              nвҲ’k
                                           О»          1
                                       1вҲ’           вүҘ eвҲ’О»
                                           n          2
Proof. Let g : [0, 1/2] вҶ’ R, x 7вҶ’ log(1 вҲ’ x) + x. We will start by showing that g(x) вүҘ вҲ’2x2 .
Indeed by computing the derivatives, g(0) = 0 and g вҖІ (x) = 1 вҲ’ 1/(1 вҲ’ x) so g вҖІ (0) = 0 and
                     2
g вҖІвҖІ (x) = вҲ’1/(1 вҲ’ x) . Observing that g вҖІвҖІ (x) вүҘ вҲ’4 for x вҲҲ [0, 1/2], and integrating twice following
Taylor-LaplaceвҖҷs theorem with integral remainder, we get
                                                         Z x
                        g(x) = g(0) + g вҖІ (0)(x вҲ’ 0) +       g вҖІвҖІ (s)(x вҲ’ s) ds
                                                          0
                               Z x                                         x
                                                                      s2

                             вүҘ     вҲ’4(x вҲ’ s) ds = вҲ’4 xs вҲ’
                                0                                     2    0
                              = вҲ’2x2
Let us now apply this result to x = О»/n вүӨ 1/2.
                                                                О»2

                                        О»     О»         О»
                          n log 1 вҲ’         +     = ng     вүҘ вҲ’2
                                        n     n         n       n
Therefore, moving the О» term from the left to the right hand side, and taking exponentials,
                            nвҲ’k                 n
                         О»                   О»              2               1
                    1вҲ’            вүҘ 1вҲ’              вүҘ eвҲ’2О» /n В· eвҲ’О» вүҘ eвҲ’О»                         (7)
                         n       (S1)        n     (S2)                (S3) 2

where (S1) uses 0 < 1 вҲ’ О»/n вүӨ 1, (S2) is the exponential of the previous inequality, and (S3) is the
assumption n вүҘ 2О»2 / log(2) which implies вҲ’2О»2 /n вүҘ вҲ’ log(2).
Lemma L.2. Let X вҲј Bern(n, p) be a binomial random variable, and M вҲҲ R+ .

                                                    M
                       P (X вүҘ M ) вүӨ exp вҲ’n D             p
                                                     n
where D ( a вҲҘ p ) = a log ap + (1 вҲ’ a) log 1вҲ’a
                                           1вҲ’p .

This lemma is Mulzer (2018, Theorem 2.1), which presents and discusses several proofs.


                                                   34
                                     2
Lemma L.3. For all (a, p) вҲҲ ]0, 1[ , let D ( a вҲҘ p ) = a log ap + (1 вҲ’ a) log 1вҲ’a
                                                                              1вҲ’p . It holds

                                                            a p
                         a вүҘ p вҮ’ D ( a вҲҘ p ) вүҘ a log + вҲ’ 1
                                                            p a

Proof. Note that it is sufficient to show that log 1вҲ’a
                                                     1вҲ’p вүҘ p вҲ’ a. Let f : [p, a] вҶ’ R, u 7вҶ’ log(1 вҲ’ u).
This function has derivative f вҖІ (u) = вҲ’1/(1 вҲ’ u). For u вүӨ a, it holds f вҖІ (u) вүҘ вҲ’1/(1 вҲ’ a). Thus,
                      1вҲ’a h            ia Z a                 Z a
                                                                   вҲ’1           pвҲ’a
                 log          = f (u) =          f вҖІ (u) du вүҘ           du =
                      1вҲ’p               p     p                p 1вҲ’a            1вҲ’a
Multiplying both members by (1 вҲ’ a) вүҘ 0 concludes the proof.
Lemma L.4. Let (Xi )iвҲҲ[n] be independent identically distributed random variables with values in
                                             P
{0, 1} such that E[Xi ] вүҘ Вө вҲҲ [0, 1]. Let X = i Xi . For all Оҙ вҲҲ ]0, 1[,

                                                            1
                             P (X вүӨ (1 вҲ’ Оҙ)nВө) вүӨ exp вҲ’ Оҙ 2 nВө
                                                            2

This lemma is Mulzer (2018, Corollary 4.3).
Proposition L.5. Let S be a finite set with a strict total order вүә. Let r : S вҶ’ R+ be a function such
that r(min S) = 0 and such that there exist two constants (p, q) вҲҲ R2+ such that

                              вҲҖs вҲҲ S, r(s) вүӨ p + q В· max r(a)
                                                                   aвүәs


Then, it holds
                                                                    #S
                                         max r(s) вүӨ p В· (1 + q)
                                         sвҲҲS


                 вҶ’ R+ be the sequence defined by x0 = 0 and xk+1 = p + q В· xk . By a quick
Proof. Let x : N P
induction, xk = p i<k q i . The total ordering of S induces ПҲ : S вҶ’ [#S] an increasing map, called
a numbering of S. By induction on k вҲҲ [#S] вҠҶ N, we will show that r(ПҲ вҲ’1 (k)) вүӨ maxiвүӨk xi . The
case k = 0 is immediate because both are null, and for s = ПҲ вҲ’1 (k + 1) we have
r(s) вүӨ p + q В· max r(a) = p + q В· max r(ПҲ вҲ’1 (i)) вүӨ p + q В· max xi вүӨ max p + q В· xi вүӨ max xi+1
                 aвүәs                 iвүӨk                                 iвүӨk            iвүӨk           iвүӨk
                                                   P           i
                                                                         P         k i
                                                                                                    k
Now observe that for all k вҲҲ N, it holds xk вүӨ p        iвүӨk q       вүӨp        iвүӨk   i q = p В· (1 + q) . Thus

                                                                     i                    #S
                       max r(s) вүӨ max xi вүӨ max p В· (1 + q) вүӨ p В· (1 + q)
                       sвҲҲS         iвүӨ#S         iвүӨ#S


Proposition L.6. Let P вҲҲ N and let {Ei | i вҲҲ [P ]} be a collection of finite sets. There exists a disjoint
collection {Vi | i вҲҲ [P ]} such that for all i вҲҲ [P ], it holds both Vi вҠҶ Ei and #Vi вүҘ вҢҠ#Ei /P вҢӢ.

Proof. The proof is an application of HallвҖҷs marriage theorem. Define the bipartite graph    ` G as
follows. Let c : [P ] вҶ’ N be c : i 7вҶ’ вҢҠ#Ei /P вҢӢ. Define the left part of the graph as X = iвҲҲ[P ] [ci ],
                              S
and the right part as Y = iвҲҲ[P ] Ei . For any (i, u) вҲҲ X (i.e. i вҲҲ [P ] and u вҲҲ [ci ]) and e вҲҲ Y ,
there is an edge ((i, u), e) in G if and only if e вҲҲ Ei . An X-perfect matching in G is an injective
function M : X вҶ’ Y such that (x, M (x)) is an edge of G for every x вҲҲ X. Such a matching yields
a choice of subsets (Vi = M ({i} Г— [ci ]))i satisfying the conditions, therefore, let us show that such a
matching exists by proving HallвҖҷs condition: for every W вҠҶ X, it holds #W вүӨ #NG (W ) where
NG (W ) вҠҶ Y are the P   neighbours of W in G. Let W вҠҶ X. Let I = {i вҲҲ [P ] | вҲғu, (i, u)SвҲҲ W }
Observe that #W вүӨ iвҲҲI ci вүӨ maxiвҲҲI         S #Ei . However by definition of G, NG (W ) = iвҲҲI Ei
thus we get #W вүӨ maxiвҲҲI #Ei вүӨ #( iвҲҲI Ei ) = #NG (W ), which concludes the proof.



                                                    35
M     C ONVOLUTIONAL EXAMPLE
We give in Figure 7 an example of fully-convolutional neural network to compute functions
R16Г—16Г—3 вҶ’ R. The max operation has signature max : R8Г—8 вҶ’ R and computes a maxi-
mum across the feature map, wich is typical of fully-convolutional networks. The lift dimension of
the input is 3, which corresponds to the three color channels of RGB images, and the lift dimension
of 6 for the hidden layer corresponds to 6 вҖңchannelsвҖқ of activations in the hidden layer.


                              R5Г—5                             R5Г—5
            3                               6                                1
                 R16Г—16        R12Г—12            R12Г—12          R8Г—8                 R
                      convolution         ReLU          convolution max в—Ұ ReLU
                        no-pad                            no-pad
        Figure 7: Convolutional perceptron module. Lift dimensions correspond to channels.


N     E MPIRICAL OBSERVATIONS RELATED TO THE PRESENT THEORY
We include in this section several preliminary experiments to evaluate empirical predictions based on
this theory. None of these experiments are sufficient in scale or diversity to claim anything consistent
across architectures or tasks. However, we hope that these experiments suffice to show that the theory
presented here is not entirely vacuous, and that conducting larger and broader experiments to verify
and challenge its predictions is a direction worth pursuing.
The present theory is limited to continuous-time gradient flow for very large lifts, but we hope that
future extensions will tackle time-discretization, smaller lifts, and different optimizers. For these
reasons, we perform these experiments using an empirical setting closer to the common practices of
deep learning, despite the discrepancies that this induces with the theory, to show that it still produces
valuable insights even outside its limited application domain at this early stage.

N.1     Q UANTILES OF THE FINAL TRAINING LOSS

In the context of one-dimensional regression, we train random sparse lifts, with two distinct base
modules, and plot quantiles of the final training loss reached as a function of the lift dimension.

N.1.1    D ETAILS OF THE EXPERIMENT SETUP
We consider the one-dimensional regression task of learning the target function f вӢҶ : R вҶ’ R, defined
as x 7вҶ’ a sin(Пү x + ПҶ), with target parameters a = 2, Пү = 0.5 and ПҶ = 0.42.
The training set consists of n = 104 input points independently sampled uniformly at random from
the interval [0, 100], together with the corresponding value for f вӢҶ . We use the quadratic loss on R and
the models described in the following section. We train each model for 105 iterations with training
samples grouped by batches of 10, taken uniformly at random in the training set with replacement,
with the Adam optimizer for a step size of 10вҲ’2 . We consider base perceptron modules describing
two-layer networks with biases, but with two different activations. For each lift dimension, we plot вҖ”
over twenty training runs for each lift dimension вҖ” the median of the final training loss in orange,
the first and third quartile with a box, and the first and last decile with its whiskers.

N.1.2    BASE PERCEPTRON MODULES STUDIED
We use as models the random sparse lifts defined by Figure 8 for Пғ = (В·)+ : x 7вҶ’ max(0, x) and
Пғ = sin : R вҶ’ [вҲ’1, 1]. Note that for two layers, since the input dimension is one and the last layer is
a fully-connected linear readout, neither of those models is effectively вҖңsparseвҖқ, despite being defined
as random sparse lifts. This coincides with the usual definition of a multi-layer perceptron for two
layers and activation Пғ : R вҶ’ R, with the additional node above being used to create a bias term in
the language of perceptron modules. Lift annotations of vertices are depicted above the vertex.


                                                   36
                                           1            R          1                                    R
                                                 R       R                                    R          R

                                        вҲ… 7вҶ’ 1        Г—          вҲ… 7вҶ’ 1                             Г—


                                           1            R              h                                R            1
                                                 R           R                                R              R2          R
                                                      Г—            Пғ                          (w,x)7вҶ’(wx,1)
                                                                                                                         вҲҡ
                                                                                                            ((x,n),b)7вҶ’x/ n+b


                                Figure 8: One-dimensional two-layer perceptron blueprint with activation Пғ


N.1.3                         E XPERIMENTAL RESULTS AND INTERPRETATION
We plot in Figure 9 the results of this experiment. We observe that, as predicted by the theory, when
the lift dimension increases then all quantiles of the final loss decrease (it is unclear whether they will
tend to zero as predicted by the theory, see the discussion with the next figure). We do not observe an
вҖңincompressible failure probabilityвҖқ, of for instance 10% of networks not moving below 1.90 train
error regardless of size. We do not observe a significant chance of small networks reaching near-zero
loss, despite universality results with low lift dimension. We do not observe across blueprints the
same speed of convergence of the error to zero with respect to the lift dimension (note the differences
in scales in Figure 9), on the contrary the two blueprints define two very different families of networks
in terms of effective learnability at tractable sizes. We do not observe a вҖңsweet spotвҖқ in lift dimension,
past which large networks would consistently fail to learn or have diverging training loss. All of these
observations, despite the notable differences between the experimental setting and the theoretical
model (discrete vs continuous time, change of optimizer, etc.), are relatively consistent with the
theoretical predictions. This suggests that this type of experiment could be conducted at a larger scale
to challenge the predictions of this theory.

                                   Architecture: ReLU MLP                                                    Architecture: Sine-based MLP

                        1.9                                                                       100
                        1.8                                                                    10вҲ’1
                        1.7
                                                                                               10вҲ’2
 Final Training error


                                                                       Final Training error


                        1.6
                                                                                               10вҲ’3
                        1.5
                        1.4                                                                    10вҲ’4

                        1.3                                                                    10вҲ’5
                                                                                               10вҲ’6
                        1.2
                                                                                               10вҲ’7
                        1.1
                                                                                               10вҲ’8

                                101 102 103 104 105 106                                                      101 102 103 104 105 106
                                 Lift dimension (a.k.a. width)                                                Lift dimension (a.k.a. width)

      Figure 9: Median, inter-quartile range, first and last deciles of final training loss (106 iterations).

Since the measurements in Figure 9 are used as estimates of the limit value reached by the loss, we
assess the quality of convergence in Figure 10. We plot the same quantiles of the training loss at 80%
and 100% of the total allocated training interations: on one hand, for networks that have converged to
a critical point, we expect these quantiles to be identical since the parameters should not move when


                                                                       37
gradients are null; on the other hand, if they differ significantly, then the experiment would need to be
repeated with an increased training budget to rule these considerations out.

                                    Architecture: ReLU MLP                                                         Architecture: Sine-based MLP

                        1.9                                                                          100
                        1.8                                                                         10вҲ’1
 Final Training error


                                                                             Final Training error
                        1.7                                                                         10вҲ’2
                        1.6
                        1.5                                                                         10вҲ’3
                        1.4                                                                         10вҲ’4
                        1.3                                                                         10вҲ’5
                        1.2                                                                         10вҲ’6
                                                                                                    10вҲ’7
                        1.1
                                                                                                    10вҲ’8

                                  101 102 103 104 105 106                                                          101 102 103 104 105 106
                                   Lift dimension (a.k.a. width)                                                    Lift dimension (a.k.a. width)

                        Figure 10: Superposition of quantiles at 100% and 80% (in red, shifted right) of training.

For lift dimensions lower than 102 , the results are similar enough that the measured loss can be
understood as the final limit. For higher lift dimensions, this conclusion is not as clear, and other
replication experiments would be needed to confidently conclude that the observations on these plots
are representative of a general behavior of neural networks, rather than only artefacts of this very
particular experimental setting. Given the very simple setting, and comparatively very large lift
dimensions and training times explored here, these observations remain promisingly similar to the
theoryвҖҷs predictions.

N.2                      S PARSE VERSUS DENSE LIFTS IN CLASSIFICATION

In the context of classification, for the MNIST digit-recognition dataset, we perform experiments
with dense and sparse multi-layer perceptrons to check whether there exists a fundamental difference
which would prevent the extension of this theory to the dense setting.

N.2.1                         D ETAILS OF THE EXPERIMENT SETUP
We train several models on the MNIST digit recognition dataset, using the cross-entropy loss and
the Adam optimizer with a step-size of 10вҲ’3 by batches of 100 samples taken with replacement, and
measure the test accuracy of the resulting models after 105 training iterations.


                              1               R              1               R                             1                   R
                                    R             R                  R               R                               R             R
                                          1                              1                                                 1

                        вҲ… 7вҶ’ 1           Г—                вҲ… 7вҶ’ 1         Г—                              вҲ… 7вҶ’ 1             Г—

                          784                 R                  h           R                                 h               R            10
                                    R                 R              R                              R                R                 R2        R
                                          О»                              О»                                                 вҲһ

                                         Г—                ReLU в—ҰОЈ        Г—                              ReLU в—ҰОЈ       (w,x)7вҶ’(wx,1)
                                                                                                                                              вҲҡ
                                                                                                                                 ((x,n),b)7вҶ’x/ n+b


Figure 11: Blueprint of the base perceptron module used for the MNIST experiment. Lift annotations
  are depicted above the vertices, and inside the boxes for edges (вҲһ indicates dense connection)

For the dense networks, we use three-layer fully connected perceptrons with hidden widths h вҲҲ N
and ReLU activation. We initialize each weight matrix W вҲҲ RnГ—m with independent identicaly
distributed entries, with a gaussian distribution of mean zero and variance 1/n, also known as


                                                                             38
вҖңKaiming HeвҖҷs normal initialization with fan-in modeвҖқ, and biases with normal distributions. Each
вҖңlinearвҖқ layer computes the function (W, b, x) 7вҶ’ W В· x + b (i.e. without a renormalizing factor).
For sparse networks, we use random sparse lifts derived from the blueprint of Figure 11, to have nearly-
identical architectures. We use a lift dimension h вҲҲ N identical for all layers, and a degree parameter
О» вҲҲ R+ . We initialize all weights with a normal distribution. Consistently with the definition
                                                                                            вҲҡ         of
linear readouts, the last вҖңlinearвҖқ operation
                                    вҲҡ        computes the  function (W,   b, x) вҶ’
                                                                                7  (W  В· x)/  h + b (i.e.
with a renormalization factor of h for the matrix W вҲҲ RhГ—10 ). We vary О» вҲҲ R+ the expected
incoming degree of hidden nodes, and for both dense and sparse models, we use various powers of
two for the lift dimension h вҲҲ N.

N.2.2                   E XPERIMENT RESULTS
The results of this experiment are depicted in Figure 12. In the absence of any regularization or
data augmentation, or even large hyperparameter scans, we do not expect particularly impressive
performance for either family of models, but only look for differences between the two families. At
this small scale, differences in accuracy lower than 1% are to be interpreted with care.
We observe in Figure 12 that for similar lift dimensions, sparse networks perform slightly worse and
their performance degrades when the sparsity is more extreme. However this drop remains relatively
small, for instance at h = 128 there is only a 3% drop from the dense model to the sparse model with
О» = 10. For scale, in the first hidden layer of the dense model, there are 784 Г— h вүҲ 105 parameters,
while in the corresponding sparse model there are О» Г— h вүҲ 103 . Overall the sparse models appear
very similar to their dense counterparts, we do not observe a plateau at a very low (e.g. 70%) accuracy,
and we do not observe failures to learn (e.g. order of 10% accuracy) even at large lift dimensions.
We also plot in Figure 12 the accuracy as a function of the total number of floating-point parameters,
for which the performance is even closer Sparse models appear to outperform dense models with the
same number of floating-point parameters, however this gap is too small for conclusions at this scale.
In particular, the number of floating-point parameters does not account for the total storage space of
the network, since the connectivity of the sparse network also has to be stored (e.g. using one bit per
corresponding dense-network parameter, with a naive encoding), which should be accounted for in
future larger-scale experiments. We did not include large lift dimensions in sparse networks in this
experiment, due to our inefficient implementation of sparse operations with few non-zero entries.

                              MNIST MLP - Dense vs Sparse                                         MNIST MLP - Dense vs Sparse
                     0.99                                                                0.99
                     0.98                                                                0.98
                     0.97                                                                0.97
                                                                     Test-set accuracy
 Test-set accuracy


                     0.96                                                                0.96
                     0.95                                                                0.95
                     0.94                                                                0.94
                     0.93                       Dense MLP
                                                                                         0.93                    Dense MLP
                     0.92                       Sparse MLP (О»=10)                        0.92                    Sparse MLP (О»=10)
                                                Sparse MLP (О»=50)                                                Sparse MLP (О»=50)
                     0.91                       Sparse MLP (О»=100)                       0.91                    Sparse MLP (О»=100)
                     0.90                                                                0.90
                            101           102         103                                        103 104 105 106 107
                                  Lift dimension (a.k.a. width)                                 Number of floating-point parameters

   Figure 12: MNIST accuracy of dense and sparse Multi-Layer Perceptrons with ReLU activations

This experiment is overall inconclusive in uncovering a fundamental difference betweent the behaviors
of sparse and dense lifts. This leaves hope that the current proof of convergence, tailored to the sparse
case at the moment, will admit extensions to explain the performance of similar dense networks.



                                                                     39
