Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


L(M)V-IQL: M ULTIPLE I NTENTION I NVERSE
R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING FOR A NIMAL
B EHAVIOR C HARACTERIZATION
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT
         In the pursuit of comprehending decision-making, behavioral neuroscience has
         made significant progress, aided by mathematical models in recent years. Among
         various approaches, Inverse Reinforcement Learning (IRL) stands out as a promis-
         ing technique, distinguishing itself from other paradigms through its ability to cir-
         cumvent the necessity for a reward function in characterizing observed behavior.
         Nevertheless, the widespread adoption of IRL within the field of neuroscience
         remains limited. This constraint may be attributed, in part, to the prevailing as-
         sumption in many existing IRL frameworks that animals exhibit a singular in-
         tention throughout a given task, wherein their behavior is optimized based on a
         single static reward function. In an effort to overcome this limitation, we propose
         the class of Latent (Markov) Variable Inverse Q-learning (L(M)V-IQL) algorithms,
         a novel IRL framework designed to accommodate multiple discrete intrinsic re-
         wards. We formulate an Expectation-Maximization approach to cluster observed
         trajectories into multiple intentions, and subsequently solve the IRL problem inde-
         pendently for each intention. We illustrate the application of L(M)V-IQL through
         simulated experiments, followed by its utilization on a dataset of mice engaged
         in a two-armed bandit task. Our methods exhibit exceptional proficiency in dis-
         cerning animal intentions and yield interpretable reward functions corresponding
         to each identified intention. We anticipate that this progress will open up new pos-
         sibilities in neuroscience and psychology, serving as an important advancement in
         elucidating the intricacies of animal decision-making and uncovering underlying
         brain mechanisms.


1   I NTRODUCTION
The characterization of animal’s decision-making behavior stands as a fundamental objective within
the field of behavioral neuroscience (Niv, 2009; Wilson & Collins, 2019). Prior research has for-
mulated a variety of mathematical behavioral models across diverse tasks, encompassing gener-
alized linear models and models based on reinforcement learning (Ashwood et al., 2022b; Beron
et al., 2022). Such forward models facilitate the comprehension and comparison of decision-making
strategies employed by both human and animal subjects. Additionally, they offer a low-dimensional
behavioral representation suitable for regression analysis with neural activities (Hattori et al., 2019;
Hamaguchi et al., 2022). Forward models require a empirically defined reward function that guides
subjects optimizing their behavior during decision-making. However, defining a comprehensive and
suitable reward function can pose challenges in complex behavioral tasks. Alyahyay et al. (2023)
introduced a response-preparation task where subjects ought to hold a lever until a cue indicating
the release signal. In this task, subjects can receive a binary extrinsic reward from the environment,
whereas the intrinsic reward driving behavior such as hunger, thirst, engagement, associated with
each timestamp is, however, not obvious to the experimenter. As another example, within a 127-
node-labyrinth with a water port at the terminal, Rosenberg et al. (2021) observed that the navigation
behavior of water-restricted mice is influenced not solely by the extrinsic water reward but also by
intrinsic motivators, including their curiosity to explore the environment.
Inverse reinforcement learning (IRL) (Ng et al., 2000; Arora & Doshi, 2021) is a popular approach
to recover a reward function that induces the observed behavior, assuming that the demonstrator was


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


(softly) maximizing its long-term return. Along with the significant successes of IRL in autonomous
driving (Kalweit et al., 2020; Nasernejad et al., 2023), robotics (Kumar et al., 2023; Chen et al.,
2023), and healthcare domains (Coronato et al., 2020; Chan & van der Schaar, 2021), it appears
to be emerging as an valuable tool for constructing mathematical behavior models in neuroscience
research, as exemplified by Yamaguchi et al. (2018), Kwon et al. (2020), and Alyahyay et al. (2023).
Classic IRL methods seek to identify a single, fixed reward function for a specific scenario. In
contrast, Ashwood et al. (2022a) suggested that animal’s goals can evolve over time due to factors
like fatigue, satiation, and curiosity. Under this assumption, they proposed the Dynamic Inverse
Reinforcement Learning (DIRL) framework, which parametrizes the animal’s reward function as a
time-varying linear combination of a small number of spatial reward maps, which are referred to
as “goal maps”. By positing the existence of multiple goal maps with time-varying weights, DIRL
allows the instantaneous reward function to vary continuously in time. This innovative framework
achieved state-of-the-art performance in characterizing animal behavior. Nevertheless, persistent
demands have emerged regarding an IRL framework incorporating discrete time-varying reward
functions, particularly following the proposal by Ashwood et al. (2022b) that natural behaviors can
be represented through a Markov chain characterized by alternating between discrete intentions.
To address this requirement, we propose the novel class of Latent (Markov) Variable Inverse Q-
learning (L(M)V-IQL) algorithms, which extend the single reward Inverse Q-learning (IQL) frame-
work from Kalweit et al. (2020) to solve IRL problems accounting for multiple intentions. We
formulate an Expectation-Maximization (EM) approach to first cluster animal trajectories into mul-
tiple intentions, and then solving the IRL problem independently for each intention, respectively.
We theoretically demonstrate that L(M)V-IQL can cover the most common two types of intention
transition dynamics: generalized Bernoulli process and Markov process. Finally, we present the
application of our framework in 1) a simulated Gridworld environment, 2) real mice navigation
trajectories with known environment model from Rosenberg et al. (2021), and 3) real mice decision-
making data from a dynamic two-armed bandit task with unknown environment model, showing that
our methods outperform state-of-the-art in behavior prediction, demonstrate exceptional aptitude in
capturing the intentions of animals, and provide interpretable reward functions corresponding to
each identified intention.

2   R ELATED W ORK

                 Table 1: Overview of different multiple intention IRL algorithms.

                                                                                         Time-varying
                  Algorithms                    Model-free    Rewards     # Intentions
                                                                                           Rewards
      EM-MLIRL (Babes et al., 2011)                   ×        linear       known             ×
      DPM-BIRL (Choi & Kim, 2012)                     ×        linear      unknown            ×
 MRP/MPO-MC (Dimitrakakis & Rothkopf, 2012)           ×        linear       known          discrete
       BN-IRL (Michini & How, 2012)                   ×        linear      unknown         discrete
     BNP-IRL (Surana & Srivastava, 2014)              ×        linear      unknown         discrete
    Meta-AIRL (Gleave & Habryka, 2018)                ✓      non-linear       ×               ×
  SEM/MCEM-MIIRL (Bighashdel et al., 2021)            ×      non-linear    unknown            ×
      MI-Σ-GIRL (Likmeta et al., 2021)                ✓        linear       known             ×
        DIRL (Ashwood et al., 2022a)                  ×      non-linear     known         continuous
             L(M)V-IAVI (Ours)                        ×      non-linear     known          discrete
             L(M)V-IQL (Ours)                         ✓      non-linear     known          discrete


Various approaches have been introduced to address multiple intention inverse reinforcement learn-
ing problems (Table 1). Notably, several frameworks based on parametric (Babes et al., 2011;
Likmeta et al., 2021), or Bayesian non-parametric (Choi & Kim, 2012; Bighashdel et al., 2021)
approaches share a similar objective to ours, allowing for multiple agents with distinct reward func-
tions. However, these frameworks do not accommodate single agents with time-varying rewards.
Gleave & Habryka (2018) developed a meta adversarial learning method for multi-task IRL prob-
lems. While their framework demonstrated high-level performance in real-world applications, it sac-
rifices theoretical interpretability and heavily relies on exploiting similarities between reward func-
tions across tasks. Built on the Bayesian IRL approach, algorithms from Dimitrakakis & Rothkopf


                                                  2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


(2012), Michini & How (2012), and Surana & Srivastava (2014) posits that an agent’s trajectory
can be divided into discrete behavioral states with corresponding unique reward function. Never-
theless all these algorithms assume linear reward functions and the Bayesian inference problem is
intractable even for moderately sized finite-state IRL problems. Finally, the framework from Ash-
wood et al. (2022a) parametrizes the animal’s reward function as a time-varying linear combination
of a small number of spatial reward maps with Gaussian random walk prior over weights, captur-
ing continuous time-varying reward functions. Their approach pursue a related aim to ours, yet is
limited to capturing continuous intra-episode variation of reward functions (as illustrated in Sec-
tion 5.1), and difficult to adopt to other environments. Last but not least, most of the aforementioned
algorithms are model-based, relying on a known transition dynamics of the environment, whereas
in many scenarios, the environment model is unknown.


3     BACKGROUND

3.1   I NVERSE R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING

Consider a Markov Decision Process (MDP): {S, A, T, R, γ}, where S and A denotes the state- and
action-space; T : S × A → ∆(S) is the state transition function (∆ denotes the probability simplex)
with T (s, a, s′ ) := Pr(s′ | s, a); R : S × A → R defines the reward function, and γ ∈ [0, 1) denotes
the discount factor. The problem of inverse reinforcement learning is formally defined as:
                                                                         N
Problem 1 (IRL problem). Given the demonstration space D := {ξi }i=1 with N trajectories, where
each trajectory is a sequence of state-action pairs, ξi := {(s1 , a1 ), (s2 , a2 ), . . .}, the IRL problem
consists of finding a reward function R that maximizes the LL between agent demonstrations and
the (soft) optimal policy πR under R:

                                                N
                                                X
                                  maximize            log(Pr(ξi | πR )) .                              (1)
                                       R
                                                i=1


3.2   I NVERSE Q- LEARNING

The class of Inverse Q-learning algorithms (Kalweit et al., 2020) provides a precise yet notably
time-efficient solution to Problem 1, compared to the popular Maximum Entropy IRL algorithm
from Ziebart et al. (2008) and some of its variants. It assumes that the demonstrations are collected
from an agent following a Boltzmann policy according to its unknown optimal value function Q∗ :


                   exp(Q∗ (s, a))
 π E (s, a) := P            ∗ (s, A))
                                      ⇒ Q∗ (s, a) = Q∗ (s, b) + log(π E (s, a)) − log(π E (s, b)) , (2)
                  A∈A exp(Q

for all actions a ∈ A and b ∈ Aā where Aā := A\{a}. Using the Bellman optimality equation in
Equation 2, the immediate reward of action a in state s can be expressed by the immediate reward
of some other action b ∈ Aā , the respective log-probabilities and future action-values:

                                                 1    X
                             r(s, a) = ηsa +             r(s, b) − ηsb ,

                                                                                                       (3)
                                               dA − 1
                                                          b∈Aā


where r(s, a) ∈ RPis the unknown reward function, dA denotes the dimension of A, and ηsa :=
log(π E (s, a)) − γ s′ ∈S T (s, a, s′ ) maxa′ ∈A Q∗ (s′ , a′ ). The resulting system of linear equations
can be solved with least squares, leading to the model-based Inverse Action-value Iteration (IAVI)
algorithm, which solves the IRL problem analytically in closed-form. To relax the assumption of
an existing transition model and action probabilities, IAVI was further extended to the sampling-
based model-free Inverse Q-learning (IQL) algorithm (Kalweit et al., 2020). They showed that the
Boltzmann distribution induced by the optimal action-value function on the learned reward from
IAVI and IQL is equivalent to the arbitrary demonstrated behavior distribution.


                                                      3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


4     I NVERSE Q- LEARNING ABOUT M ULTIPLE I NTENTIONS

We first define the Multiple Intention Inverse Reinforcement Learning (MI-IRL) problem accord-
ingly:
                                                     K
Problem 2 (MI-IRL problem). Let Z := {zk }k=1 be a K-dimensional latent state space with each
                                                          N
zk ∈ Z corresponding to one intention, and let D := {ξi }i=1 be N trajectories demonstrated by an
agent each under one of the latent states without labels. The MI-IRL problem consists of inferring
                                                                    K
the latent state labels and the corresponding reward functions {Rk }k=1 in D such that under the
k-th latent state the agent (softly) optimizes Rk .

We adopt the EM (Dempster et al., 1977) as a straightforward approach to attack Problem 2. Let
                                                             N
Θ be the set of parameters to be inferred, and let Y := {yi }i=1 be the set of latent state labels for
each trajectory ξ ∈ D, where yi = k if trajectory i came from under latent state zk . At iteration τ
of the EM process before Θ converges, the expected value of the likelihood function L of Θ will be
maximized as in the following update equation:

                                             X
                         Θτ +1 := arg max            L(Θ | D, Y) Pr(Y | D, Θτ )                      (4)
                                       Θ
                                                 Y


Noting that different latent state transition dynamics lead to respective parameter space Θ and spe-
cific implementations of Equation 4. In the following, we consider the latent state transition dynam-
ics described with a generalized Bernoulli process (independent latent states) and a Markov process
(Markovian interdependent latent states).

4.1   C LUSTERING OF I NDEPENDENT L ATENT S TATES

We start from the simpler case where the occurrence of different intentions satisfies a generalized
Bernoulli process. Let {ν1 , . . . , νK | ν1 + · · · + νK = 1} be the set of prior probability corre-
sponding to the occurrence of each latent state zk , the set of parameters Θ to be inferred is then
{ν1 , . . . , νK ; R1 , . . . , RK | ν1 + · · · + νK = 1}. The optimal value for respective parameters in
this parameter set at each EM iteration is provided by Theorem 1:
Theorem 1. Given that the intention transition dynamics satisfies a generalized Bernoulli process,
at iteration τ , the EM update equation (Equation 4) for each parameter in the corresponding pa-
rameter set Θ = {ν1 , . . . , νK ; R1 , . . . , RK | ν1 + · · · + νK = 1} is given by

                           
                                         N
                              τ +1    1 X τ
                             ν      :=     ζik
                           
                           
                            k
                           
                                      N   i=1
                                                                                                     (5)
                                             N
                                              X
                              τ +1               τ
                           
                             R     := arg max   ζik log(Pr(ξi | πRk )) ,
                           
                           
                            k
                           
                                           Rk        i=1


for all ν, R ∈ Θ, where ζik := Z1 νk (s,a)∈ξi πRk (s, a) is the probability that trajectory i was
                                      Q

demonstrated under latent state zk normalized by factor Z.


Proof. See Appendix A.1.


Noting that updating the reward function estimation R at each iteration according to Equation 5
is equivalent to solving Problem 1, except that each trajectory is weighted by a probability ζ dur-
ing sampling. Thus combining the above EM approach for trajectory clustering with IAVI or IQL
algorithms leads to the class of Latent Variable Inverse Q-learning (LV-IQL) algorithms (cf. Algo-
rithm 1), solving the MI-IQL problem (Problem 2) when the occurrence of different latent states is
independent.


                                                         4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


4.2   C LUSTERING OF M ARKOVIAN I NTERDEPENDENT L ATENT S TATES

In addition to the generalized Bernoulli process, the Markov process is also considered an alterna-
tive for describing intention transition dynamics (Ashwood et al., 2022b; Le et al., 2023), where the
occurrence of the next latent state corresponding to a specific intention is dependent and only depen-
dent on the previous latent state. Under this assumption, given the agent demonstrations D consisting
of a sequence of trajectories, the set of parameters to be inferred is then {Π, Λ; R1 , . . . , RK }, where
Π : ∆(Z) and Λ : Z → ∆(Z) (∆ is the probability simplex) denoting the latent state initial distri-
bution probability and latent state transition matrix, respectively. The optimal value for respective
parameters in the parameter set Θ at each EM iteration is provided by Theorem 2:
Theorem 2. Given that the intention transition dynamics satisfies a Markov process, at iteration
τ , the EM update equation (Equation 4) for each parameter in the corresponding parameter set
Θ = {Π, Λ; R1 , . . . , RK } is given by1
                    τ +1
                   
                    πk := Pr(y0 = k | D, Θτ )
                             PN
                                    Pr(yi−1 = k, yi = l | D, Θτ )
                   
                   
                   Λτ +1 := i=1
                   
                   
                      kl          PN                       τ
                                   i=1 Pr(yi−1 = k | D, Θ )                                                 (6)
                   
                   
                                     XN
                   
                    τ +1
                    R
                    k
                          := arg max     Pr(yi = k | D, Θτ ) log(Pr(ξi | πRk )) ,
                                    Rk     i=0

for all π, Λ, R ∈ Θ.

Proof. See Appendix A.2.

In practice, the Forward-Backward algorithm (Baum et al., 1970) can be used to address the proba-
bilities in Equation 6, and IAVI or IQL then estimates the corresponding reward function indepen-
dently for each latent state. This leads to the class of Latent Markov Variable Inverse Q-learning
(LMV-IQL) algorithms (cf. Algorithm 2, details see also Appendix B.2), which solves Problem 2
when the latent state transition satisfies the Markov property.

5     E XPERIMENTS
5.1   A PPLICATION OF LV-IQL TO S IMULATED B EHAVIOR

We first demonstrate the LV-IQL algorithm on trajectories
from a simulated animal foraging task in a 15 × 15 Grid-                              Initial State
world environment (Figure 1), and compare to the class of                             Water Resource
single intention IQL algorithms. The action space of Grid-                            Food Resource
world was defined as A := {up, down, left, right, stay}.                              Expert Trajectories
Stochastic transitions took the agent in a random direc-
tion with 30% chance after each action execution. Two
types of rewarded resources were randomly assigned to                                Actions

each state in the environment. The agent was considered
to have two intentions: ‘Hungry’ and ‘Thirsty’ with the Figure 1: Gridworld environment ar-
occurrence probability of 70% and 30% respectively. Un- chitecture with agent trajectories.
der the ‘hungry’ intention, states with food resource as-
signed would be rewarded (+1) while states with water
resource would be punished (−1), and vice versa under the ‘thirsty’ intention. Each trajectory was
demonstrated under one of the two intentions with the agent executing the optimal greedy policy on
the respective reward function (Figure 2, Top, Ground Truth). (More details see also Appendix C.1.)
We compared between the performance of LV-IAVI, LV-IQL, IAVI, and IQL trained on the whole
demonstration space. Two latent states were considered for both LV-IAVI and LV-IQL. As a measure
   1
     Here we assume the index of trajectories in D starts from 0 instead of 1 for convenience but without losing
generality.


                                                       5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                 Ground Truth    LV-IAVI       LV-IQL        IAVI           IQL
                                                                                                        1


                     'Hungry'
                                                                                                        0.5


                     'Thirsty'
                                                                                                        0

                                                   LV-IAVI       LV-IQL             IAVI          IQL
                                     ‘Hungry’    0.00 ± 0.00   0.00 ± 0.00   21.42 ± 0.00    21.38 ± 0.00
                     EVD
                                     ‘Thirsty’   0.00 ± 0.00   0.00 ± 0.00   38.00 ± 0.00    38.05 ± 0.00


Figure 2: (Top) Visualization of the normalized ground truth and learnt state-value functions. Red
lines indicate the ground truth trajectory distribution and the learnt trajectory clusters used to recover
the reward function for respective intention. (All expert trajectories are shown for each figure of IAVI
and IQL.) (Bottom) EVD for different approaches, Mean ± SE over 5 repeated runs.


of performance, we used the Expected Value Difference (EVD) metric (Levine et al., 2011). EVD
is defined as the mean square error between the state-value under the true reward function for the
expert policy and the state-value under the true reward for the optimal Boltzmann policy w.r.t. the
learnt reward. It provides an estimation of the sub-optimality of the learnt policy under the true re-
ward function. For LV-IAVI and LV-IQL, the inferred latent states with respective trajectory clusters
were assigned to the best-fit ground truth intentions. Since IAVI and IQL assumed all trajectories
were demonstrated under one intention, the EVD was analyzed twice on the ground truth reward for
different intentions with the same learnt Boltzmann policy (Figure 2). The trajectory clusters learnt
with LV-IAVI and LV-IQL are highly overlapped with the ground truth trajectory distribution. As a
result, the learnt reward functions via LV-IAVI and LV-IQL match the respective ground truth reward
functions exactly, while the single intention IAVI and IQL only resulted in a large EVD of ∼ 21 for
the ‘hungry’ intention and ∼ 38 for the ‘thirsty’ intention, representing a mixed reward function
for the two intentions. Similar results were found when we removed the punishment on intention
irrelevant rewards (Appendix C.2). Noting that the DIRL algorithm (Ashwood et al., 2022a) is in-
feasible here as it assumes continuously time-varying rewards, which only addresses cases where
the intention transition occurs after each action execution. However, in the above Gridworld exper-
iment, each episode was conducted under one of two intentions, where the intention remains fixed
within the episode, and the transition between intentions only occurs between episodes.

5.2   A PPLICATION OF LMV-IAVI TO M ICE NAVIGATING T RAJECTORIES

Next, we apply the LMV-IAVI algorithm to mice trajectories recorded during navigating in a 127-
node labyrinth environment (Rosenberg et al., 2021) (Figure 3A) as a benchmark to compare with
the state-of-the-art — DIRL (Ashwood et al., 2022a). In this task, two groups of mice navigated a
labyrinth: one with water restrictions and access to a water port (Figure 3A), and another without
water restrictions and no access to water. (More details see also Appendix D.1.) To formalize
the MDP, we consider a 127 state environment with known world model and action space A :=
{left, right, reverse, stay}.
We demonstrate model comparison by first applying our method to trajectories from the water-
restricted animals. The test set log-likelihood (LL) is similar for LMV-IAVI and DIRL under single
intention (K = 1). However, LMV-IAVI with K > 2 substantially outperforms DIRL (Figure 3B).
Although the test LL continues to grow for larger K, the Bayesian information criterion (BIC) ap-
pears to increase (Figure 3C). Thus LMV-IAVI with 2 latent states is considered for subsequent anal-
ysis. The learnt mice policy under latent state 1 (‘Tired’) displays a preference of moving out from
the water port towards the maze entrance and stay, while the policy under latent state 2 (‘Thirsty’)
guides the mice directly to the water port along the optimal track. Correspondingly, in the ‘Tired’
latent state, the highest state occupancy is noted at the entrance state, while under ‘Thirsty’, it is ob-
served at the water port (Figure 3D). To delve into the intention transition dynamics, we computed
the posterior probability over mice’s latent state across all trajectories. The recovered average tem-


                                                                  6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


            Initial State
            and Actions
 A          Water Resource          B
  . .. . . . .. . . .. . . . .. .                                         Random

                                                                          }
  ...............
                                                 1 map                                                C
                                                                                  DIRL
  . .. . . . .. . . .. . . . .. .               4 maps
                                                                                                              6000
  ... ....... ...
                                                                          }
                                          1 latent state


                                                                                                        BIC
  . .. . . . .. . . .. . . . .. .                                                 LMV-IAVI                    4000
  ...............                        4 latent states
  . .. . . . .. . . .. . . . .. .    −2.0      −1.5     −1.0     −0.5   0.0
                                                                                                              2000
  ... ... ... ...                                     Test LL.
                                                                                                                     1    2     3
                                                                                                                      # Latent States
                                                                                                                                     4


          Latent State 1                Latent State 2
  D           'Tired'                      'Thirsty'
                                                                 1
      ... ... ... ...               ... ... ... ...
       . . .   . . .                 . . .   . . .                       E                                              F
      ... ... ... ...               ... ... ... ...
         .   .   .                     .   .   .
      ... ... ... ...               ... ... ... ...
       . . .   . . .                 . . .   . . .               0.1              1.0       'Thirsty'
      ... ... ... ...               ... ... ... ...
             .                             .


                                                                                                                     Latent State t
      ... ... ... ...               ... ... ... ...                                                                                   1     0.98   0.02


                                                                          Prob.
       . . .   . . .                 . . .   . . .                                0.5
      ... ... ... ...               ... ... ... ...              0.01
         .   .   .                     .   .   .
      ... ... ... ...               ... ... ... ...                                                                                        0.124   0.876
       . . .   . . .                 . . .   . . .                                          'Tired'
                                                                                                                                      2
      ... ... ... ...               ... ... ... ...                               0.0
                                                                 0                      0                      20                            1       2
                                                                                             Time                                         Latent State t+1



Figure 3: (A) The labyrinth environment. Blue line shows the optimal path from entrance to water
port. Left, right, and reverse actions are represented with arrows while stay is denoted with cross.
(B) Comparison of LMV-IAVI on test set trajectories to a random policy and DIRL, represented
as LL. (C) BIC as a function of latent state numbers in LMV-IAVI. (D) Learnt policy (red arrows
and crosses) in the environment and corresponding state occupancy (grey colormap) under different
intentions. State occupancy was calculated by assigning each trajectory to the latent state with
hightest posterior probability. Policies are shown only for states with non-zero occupancy. (E)
Trajectories of latent state probabilities. Solid and shaded curves denote the Mean and SE. (F)
Inferred latent state transition matrix from the best-fitting LMV-IAVI.


poral latent state trajectories show a high probability of the ‘Thirsty’ latent state at the beginning but
later on tailed off, as the ‘Tired’ latent state gradually became dominant (Figure 3E). These findings
demonstrate that LMV-IAVI not only excels the state-of-the-art in predicting mice labyrinth navigat-
ing behavior, but also provides distinct and interpretable reward functions. Similarly, our LMV-IAVI
algorithm again outperforms DIRL when applied to the water-unrestricted animal trajectory dataset.
Further details can be found at Appendix D.2.

5.3    A PPLICATION OF LMV-IQL TO M ICE R EVERSAL - LEARNING B EHAVIOR

Finally, we apply the LMV-IQL algorithm to behavioral data recorded from a group of mice engaged
in a dynamic two-armed bandit reversal-learning task from De La Crompe et al. (2023). At the
beginning of the task, water-restricted mice may choose from two available spouts, left (L) and
right (R), with random one of them assigned water as extrinsic reward. After reaching an online
performance of 75% correct in a 15-trials sliding average window and a minimum 20-trials block,
the rewarded spout is automatically changed. To formulate the MDP, we define the action space
as: A := {left, right}. Every state s ∈ S is defined with a set of truncated history information:
st := {φt−1 , . . . , φt−ℓh ; at−1 , . . . , at−ℓh }, where ℓh denotes the history length, a ∈ A denotes
history action, and φ ∈ {correct, error} represents history environmental feedback, i.e. extrinsic
reward. Such MDP formulation allows us to avoid explicitly describing a partially observable MDP
formulation. Different from the first two experiments, the environment model here is considered to
be unknown in the dynamic reversal-learning task.
We begin our application of LMV-IQL on the recorded mice behavior by selecting the hyper-
parameter ℓh . At this step, we only consider single latent state LMV-IQL (equivalent to IQL).
We compared the LL on training and test sets of multiple IQL fitting with different ℓh (Figure 4A).


                                                                 7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                                                                                                     Global Fit                     Prob. Win-stay
A                                      B                                                     C                                             D                         Prob. Switch                   Prob. Lose-switch
        −0.38                                                                                                                                            0.8 'Exploitation'
                                              0.4                                                  4000                                                                                                     'Exploration'
        −0.40                                                                                                                                                                                  'Win-stay'


                                                                                                                                               Prob.
                                      Δ LL.
                                                                                                                                                         0.6
LL.


                                                                                             BIC
        −0.42                                 0.2
                          Train
        −0.44             Test
                                                                                                   2000
                                               0                                                                                                         0.4
        −0.46
                1 2 3 4 5                           F. 1 2 3 4 5                                           1 2 3 4 5                                                                     1         2             3
                 History Length                        # Latent States                                      # Latent States                                                                  Latent State


E                    Avg. All Block                       F                                                G 1.0                                           H
        1.0


                                                                                                                                                       Avg. Prob. 'Exploration'
                                                                                                                                    0.86
                                                                                                                                                                                  0.15


                                                                                                          Prob. Correct
                Correct
                                                                                                                                 0.74
                                     'Exploitation'                      1   0.859   0.132    0.008                       0.75

                                                        Latent State t
Prob.


                                                                                                                                        0.64                                      0.10
        0.5                                                                                                                                 0.56
                                        'Win-stay'                       2   0.169   0.784    0.047
                                                                                                                                                                                  0.05
                                     'Exploration'                                                                         0.5
                                                                         3   0.646   0.196    0.157
          0
                                                                                                                                                                                  0.00
                0     5       10        15                                    1       2            3                             All 1 2 3                                            0.0      0.5       1.0
                           Trial #                                           Latent State t+1                                    Latent State                                        Avg. Prob. 'Exploitation'



Figure 4: (A) LL (Mean ± SE, 5-fold cross-validation) as a function of ℓh of single latent state
LMV-IQL. (B) Change in test LL as a function of latent state numbers in LMV-IQL with ℓh = 3,
relative to the fQ-learning model (labeled ‘F.’). Each trace represents a single mouse, averaged over
cross-validation. Solid black indicates the mean across animals, and the dashed curve indicates the
example mouse. (C) BIC as a function of latent state numbers in LMV-IQL with ℓh = 3. (D) Learnt
mice policy represented with the probability of switch, win-stay, and lose-switch. Each grey curve
denotes one mouse. (E) Average task performance and trajectories of latent state probabilities. Solid
and shaded curves denote the Mean and SE. (F) Inferred latent state transition matrix from the best-
fitting LMV-IQL for the example mouse. (G) Overall task performance (gray) and the performance
under different latent states. (H) Relationship between the probability of the ‘Exploitation’ latent
state, 5 trials before block switch and the mean probability of the ‘Exploration’ latent state, 5 trials
after block switch, Mean ± SE.


The LL on test sets shows a bell-shaped curve as ℓh increases, indicating an overfit on the training
set when ℓh > 3. Noting that there is an abnormal drop on training set LL at large ℓh s. This can
be explained with the insufficient sampling given the fixed set of expert demonstrations, since the
size of the state space S grows exponentially as the history length ℓh increases. The best test LL
is achieved at ℓh = 3, which is selected for subsequent steps. Next, to determine the number of in-
tentions K under which mice demonstrated the trajectories, we fit multiple LMV-IQL with varying
numbers of latent states. In this step, we additionally applied a forgetting Q-learning (fQ-learning)
model (Beron et al., 2022), which has been widely recognized as a prominent forward behavioral
model for the reversal-learning task. This was done using the same dataset, serving as a baseline for
comparative analysis. We found that the multiple intention LMV-IQL fitting substantially outper-
formed the single intention models (Figure 4B). Although the BIC w.r.t. different K indicates that
both K = 2 and K = 3 are reasonable values (Figure 4C), we will focus subsequent analysis on the
LMV-IQL with 3 latent states for biological interpretability. (More details about LMV-IQL fitting
see also Appendix E.)
The inferred mice policies from LMV-IQL define how the subjects make decisions under three
intentions (Figure 4D). One of these policies, operating within latent state 1, displays a strong
inclination toward adopting a ‘win-stay’ and ‘lose-switch’ strategy, which is the optimal policy
in this deterministic reward bandit task. On the other hand, within latent state 2, the policy, re-
ferred to as the ‘Win-stay’ policy, exhibits a preference for exploitation when the previous trial
was successful. However, following error trials, it employs a random action selection strategy,
indicated by a ∼ 0.5 probability of executing a ‘lose-switch’. Lastly, in latent state 3, a char-
acteristic ‘Exploration’ policy emerges, where the subject consistently favors selecting the option
opposite to the one chosen in the preceding trial, irrespective of whether they had won or lost


                                                                                               8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


in that particular instance. The recovered latent state trajectories in the example session reveals
that the most probable latent state often exhibits a probability close to 1, indicating a high de-
gree of confidence in discerning the subject’s intent based on the observed data (Figure 5). The
‘Exploration’ intention predominantly manifested at the onset of a block and endured for a rel-
atively brief duration, in alignment with the learned latent state transition matrix (Figure 4F).
The significant values along the diagonal of the transi-
tion matrix within latent states 1 and 2, corresponding to                             Example Session
‘Exploitation’ and ‘Win-stay’, signify a heightened pref-           1.0 'Exploitation'


                                                                 Latent State
erence for persisting in the same latent state over multi-                                                L


                                                                                                        Choice
                                                                    Prob.
                                                                            Correct
ple consecutive trials. Additionally, it becomes evident            0.5     Error

that error trials tend to coincide with the trials where the                'Win-stay'
                                                                                                          R
                                                                         'Exploration'
posterior probability of ‘Win-stay’ and ‘Exploration’ la-           0.0
                                                                        0            20     40      60 80
tent states reaches its zenith, corroborating the presence                                 Trial #
of suboptimal exploratory behavior associated with these
two intentions. The average latent state transition trajecto- Figure 5: Posterior latent state proba-
ries across all blocks closely resembles those observed in bilities for an example session. Dots
the example session (Figure 4E). As each block begin with and triangles indicate mice behavior.
the animal’s performance at a relatively low level, there is
a decline in the posterior probability associated with the
‘Exploitation’ latent state, accompanied by an increase in the probabilities of the other two latent
states associated with suboptimal exploratory strategies. Nonetheless, as the subjects’ performance
steadily improves, the ‘Exploitation’ latent state progressively reasserts its dominance. Finally, to
quantify latent state occupancies across all sessions, we assigned each trial to its most probable state.
In contrast to the cohort’s general correct rate of 0.74 ± 0.02, mice performed significantly better
within the ‘Exploitation’ latent state, achieving a correctness rate of 0.86 ± 0.01. In comparison,
they attained lower correctness rates of 0.64 ± 0.03 and 0.56 ± 0.06 in the two alternative latent
states (Figure 4G). Furthermore, it’s worth noting that the mean posterior probability of the ‘Ex-
ploration’ latent state at the beginning of a new block shows a positive correlation with the average
probability of the ‘Exploitation’ state at the end of the preceding block (Figure 4H), suggesting that
the ‘Exploration’ latent state appears to involve a deliberate, exploration-oriented action selection
when mice are highly engaged and possess a good understanding of the environment.


6    C ONCLUSION

In this study, we introduce a novel class of Latent (Markov) Variable Inverse Q-learning (L(M)V-
IQL) algorithms for characterizing animal behavior during complex decision-making tasks. We
extend the class of IQL algorithms (Kalweit et al., 2020) to learn multiple discrete reward functions
from demonstrations. Specifically, we address the two most prevalent types of intention transition
dynamics: the generalized Bernoulli process and the Markov process, under both model-based and
model-free contexts. To validate our framework and compare with the state-of-the-art, we conduct
experiments on simulated and real animal behavior data. Our approaches demonstrate a substantial
improvement in behavior prediction compared to DIRL (Ashwood et al., 2022a) on mice naviga-
tion trajectories (indicated by the LL on held-out trajectories), without losing interpretability of the
learnt reward functions. Moreover, our method provides distinct and interpretable reward functions
for the mice cohort engaged in the reversal-learning task, where the animals displayed a pattern of
alternating between exploitation and exploration intentions, which could extend over several con-
secutive trials within a single session. The transitions between these intentions followed a typical
block-correlated trajectory, wherein the mice were more likely to exhibit in exploratory behaviors
at the start of a new block, particularly if they had been highly engaged in the task in the preceding
block.
A compelling avenue for future research lies in extending our framework to involve function ap-
proximations, which would enable the learning of a low-dimensional embedding of each state in the
environment via e.g. a deep neural network. Such extension would allow us to scale our approach
to high-dimensional or continuous state spaces, while also enabling the generalization across states.
Another promising direction would be to extend the fixed intention transition probabilities with e.g. a
generalized linear model, to incorporate the identification of potential external factors that influence
intention transition dynamics.


                                                    9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Mansour Alyahyay, Gabriel Kalweit, Maria Kalweit, Golan Karvat, Julian Ammer, Artur Schneider,
 Ahmed Adzemovic, Andreas Vlachos, Joschka Boedecker, and Ilka Diester. Mechanisms of
 premotor-motor cortex interactions during goal directed behavior. bioRxiv, pp. 2023–01, 2023.

Saurabh Arora and Prashant Doshi. A survey of inverse reinforcement learning: Challenges, meth-
  ods and progress. Artificial Intelligence, 297:103500, 2021.

Zoe Ashwood, Aditi Jha, and Jonathan W Pillow. Dynamic inverse reinforcement learning for
  characterizing animal behavior. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:29663–
  29676, 2022a.

Zoe C Ashwood, Nicholas A Roy, Iris R Stone, International Brain Laboratory, Anne E Urai, Anne K
  Churchland, Alexandre Pouget, and Jonathan W Pillow. Mice alternate between discrete strategies
  during perceptual decision-making. Nature Neuroscience, 25(2):201–212, 2022b.

Monica Babes, Vukosi Marivate, Kaushik Subramanian, and Michael L Littman. Apprenticeship
 learning about multiple intentions. In Proceedings of the 28th international conference on ma-
 chine learning (ICML-11), pp. 897–904, 2011.

Leonard E Baum, Ted Petrie, George Soules, and Norman Weiss. A maximization technique occur-
  ring in the statistical analysis of probabilistic functions of markov chains. The annals of mathe-
  matical statistics, 41(1):164–171, 1970.

Celia C Beron, Shay Q Neufeld, Scott W Linderman, and Bernardo L Sabatini. Mice exhibit stochas-
  tic and efficient action switching during probabilistic decision making. Proceedings of the Na-
  tional Academy of Sciences, 119(15):e2113961119, 2022.

Ariyan Bighashdel, Panagiotis Meletis, Pavol Jancura, and Gijs Dubbelman. Deep adaptive multi-
  intention inverse reinforcement learning. In Machine Learning and Knowledge Discovery in
  Databases. Research Track: European Conference, ECML PKDD 2021, Bilbao, Spain, Septem-
  ber 13–17, 2021, Proceedings, Part I 21, pp. 206–221. Springer, 2021.

Alex J Chan and Mihaela van der Schaar. Scalable bayesian inverse reinforcement learning. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2102.06483, 2021.

Jiayu Chen, Tian Lan, and Vaneet Aggarwal. Option-aware adversarial inverse reinforcement learn-
   ing for robotic control. In 2023 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation
   (ICRA), pp. 5902–5908. IEEE, 2023.

Jaedeug Choi and Kee-Eung Kim. Nonparametric bayesian inverse reinforcement learning for mul-
  tiple reward functions. Advances in neural information processing systems, 25, 2012.

Antonio Coronato, Muddasar Naeem, Giuseppe De Pietro, and Giovanni Paragliola. Reinforcement
  learning for intelligent healthcare applications: A survey. Artificial Intelligence in Medicine, 109:
  101964, 2020.

Brice De La Crompe, Megan Schneck, Florian Steenbergen, Artur Schneider, and Ilka Diester. Frei-
  box: A versatile open-source behavioral setup for investigating the neuronal correlates of behav-
  ioral flexibility via 1-photon imaging in freely moving mice. Eneuro, 10(4), 2023.

Arthur P Dempster, Nan M Laird, and Donald B Rubin. Maximum likelihood from incomplete data
  via the em algorithm. Journal of the royal statistical society: series B (methodological), 39(1):
  1–22, 1977.

Christos Dimitrakakis and Constantin A Rothkopf. Bayesian multitask inverse reinforcement learn-
  ing. In Recent Advances in Reinforcement Learning: 9th European Workshop, EWRL 2011,
  Athens, Greece, September 9-11, 2011, Revised Selected Papers 9, pp. 273–284. Springer, 2012.

Martin Ester, Hans-Peter Kriegel, Jörg Sander, Xiaowei Xu, et al. A density-based algorithm for
 discovering clusters in large spatial databases with noise. In kdd, volume 96, pp. 226–231, 1996.


                                                  10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Adam Gleave and Oliver Habryka. Multi-task maximum entropy inverse reinforcement learning.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:1805.08882, 2018.
Kosuke Hamaguchi, Hiromi Takahashi-Aoki, and Dai Watanabe. Prospective and retrospective val-
  ues integrated in frontal cortex drive predictive choice. Proceedings of the National Academy of
  Sciences, 119(48):e2206067119, 2022.
Ryoma Hattori, Bethanny Danskin, Zeljana Babic, Nicole Mlynaryk, and Takaki Komiyama. Area-
  specificity and plasticity of history-dependent value coding during learning. Cell, 177(7):1858–
  1872, 2019.
Gabriel Kalweit, Maria Huegle, Moritz Werling, and Joschka Boedecker. Deep inverse q-learning
  with constraints. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:14291–14302, 2020.
Sateesh Kumar, Jonathan Zamora, Nicklas Hansen, Rishabh Jangir, and Xiaolong Wang. Graph
  inverse reinforcement learning from diverse videos. In Conference on Robot Learning, pp. 55–
  66. PMLR, 2023.
Minhae Kwon, Saurabh Daptardar, Paul R Schrater, and Xaq Pitkow. Inverse rational control with
 partially observable continuous nonlinear dynamics. Advances in neural information processing
 systems, 33:7898–7909, 2020.
Nhat Minh Le, Murat Yildirim, Yizhi Wang, Hiroki Sugihara, Mehrdad Jazayeri, and Mriganka Sur.
  Mixtures of strategies underlie rodent behavior during reversal learning. PLOS Computational
  Biology, 19(9):e1011430, 2023.
Sergey Levine, Zoran Popovic, and Vladlen Koltun. Nonlinear inverse reinforcement learning with
  gaussian processes. Advances in neural information processing systems, 24, 2011.
Amarildo Likmeta, Alberto Maria Metelli, Giorgia Ramponi, Andrea Tirinzoni, Matteo Giuliani,
 and Marcello Restelli. Dealing with multiple experts and non-stationarity in inverse reinforcement
 learning: an application to real-life problems. Machine Learning, 110:2541–2576, 2021.
Bernard Michini and Jonathan P How. Bayesian nonparametric inverse reinforcement learning. In
  Machine Learning and Knowledge Discovery in Databases: European Conference, ECML PKDD
  2012, Bristol, UK, September 24-28, 2012. Proceedings, Part II 23, pp. 148–163. Springer, 2012.
Payam Nasernejad, Tarek Sayed, and Rushdi Alsaleh. Multiagent modeling of pedestrian-vehicle
  conflicts using adversarial inverse reinforcement learning. Transportmetrica A: transport science,
  19(3):2061081, 2023.
Andrew Y Ng, Stuart Russell, et al. Algorithms for inverse reinforcement learning. In Icml, vol-
  ume 1, pp. 2, 2000.
Yael Niv. Reinforcement learning in the brain. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 53(3):139–154,
  2009.
Matthew Rosenberg, Tony Zhang, Pietro Perona, and Markus Meister. Mice in a labyrinth show
 rapid learning, sudden insight, and efficient exploration. Elife, 10:e66175, 2021.
Ruslan Salakhutdinov, Sam T Roweis, and Zoubin Ghahramani. Optimization with em and
  expectation-conjugate-gradient. In Proceedings of the 20th International Conference on Machine
  Learning (ICML-03), pp. 672–679, 2003.
Amit Surana and Kunal Srivastava. Bayesian nonparametric inverse reinforcement learning for
 switched markov decision processes. In 2014 13th International Conference on Machine Learning
 and Applications, pp. 47–54. IEEE, 2014.
Robert C Wilson and Anne GE Collins. Ten simple rules for the computational modeling of behav-
  ioral data. Elife, 8:e49547, 2019.
Shoichiro Yamaguchi, Honda Naoki, Muneki Ikeda, Yuki Tsukada, Shunji Nakano, Ikue Mori, and
  Shin Ishii. Identification of animal behavioral strategies by inverse reinforcement learning. PLoS
  computational biology, 14(5):e1006122, 2018.
Brian D Ziebart, Andrew L Maas, J Andrew Bagnell, Anind K Dey, et al. Maximum entropy inverse
  reinforcement learning. In Aaai, volume 8, pp. 1433–1438. Chicago, IL, USA, 2008.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A PPENDICES

A     P ROOF OF T HEOREMS

A.1   P ROOF OF T HEOREM 1

Proof. Substitute the parameters Θ = {ν1 , . . . , νK ; R1 , . . . , RK | ν1 + · · · + νK = 1} under
independent latent state assumption into the EM update equation (Equation 4) and unroll:
                     X
      Ψ(Θ, Θτ ) :=       L(Θ | D, Y) Pr(Y | D, Θτ )                                   (from Equation 4)
                         Y
                      N
                     XX                                         N
                                                                Y
                 =                  log(νyi Pr(ξi | πRyi ))            Pr(yi′ | ξi′ , Θτ )                            (A.1)
                     Y        i=1                              i′ =1

                     X              N X
                                   XX K                                                N
                                                                                       Y
                 =           ···                 δk=yi log(νk Pr(ξi | πRk ))                   Pr(yi′ | ξi′ , Θτ )    (A.2)
                     y1             yN i=1 k=1                                         i′ =1
                     K X
                     X N                                    X             X            N
                                                                                       Y
                 =                  log(νk Pr(ξi | πRk ))           ···        δk=yi           Pr(yi′ | ξi′ , Θτ )    (A.3)
                     k=1 i=1                                   y1         yN           i′ =1
                     K X
                     X N
                                                          τ
                 =                  log(νk Pr(ξi | πRk ))ζik                                                 (by Equation 5)
                     k=1 i=1
                     K X
                     X N                             K X
                                                     X N
                                     τ                          τ
                 =                  ζik log(νk ) +             ζik log(Pr(ξi | πRk )) ,                               (A.4)
                     k=1 i=1                         k=1 i=1


where δ denotes the Kronecker delta function. Equation A.4 indicates that νk and Rk are not inter-
dependent, we can thus optimize them separately in the M-step of EM, leading to the second update
equation in Equation 5 trivially. According to Gibbs’ inequality, the first term of Equation A.4 is
maximized if and only if
                                                    N
                                                 1 X τ
                                       νkτ +1 :=       ζ ,                                   (A.5)
                                                 N i=1 ik
for all ν ∈ Θ, proving the first update equation in Equation 5.

A.2   P ROOF OF T HEOREM 2

Proof. Similar to the proof for Theorem 1, substitute the parameter set Θ = {Π, Λ; R1 , . . . , RK }
into the EM update equation (Equation 4) and unroll:

                     X
      Ψ(Θ, Θτ ) :=           L(Θ | D, Y) Pr(Y | D, Θτ )                                                   (from Equation 4)
                      Y

                     X                                  N
                                                        Y
                 =           log(πy0 Pr(ξ0 | πRy0 )            Λyi−1 yi Pr(ξi | πRyi )) Pr(Y | D, Θτ )                (A.6)
                     Y                                  i=1
                     X
                 =           log(πy0 ) Pr(Y | D, Θτ )
                     Y
                          N
                         XX
                     +               log(Λyi−1 yi ) Pr(Y | D, Θτ )
                          Y    i=1
                          N
                         XX
                     +               log(Pr(ξi | πRyi )) Pr(Y | D, Θτ )                                               (A.7)
                          Y    i=0


                                                          12
     Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    Algorithm 1: Latent Variable Inverse Q-learning (LV-IQL)
    Input: agent demonstrations D, latent space dimension K
 1 initialize Θ := {ν1 , . . . , νK ; R1 , . . . , RK | ν1 + · · · + νK = 1}
 2 repeat
 3      E-step
 4          foreach ξi ∈ D do
 5              forall k doQ
  6                 ζik ← (s,a)∈ξi πRk (s, a)νk /Z

 7       M-step
 8          forall k do
                      PN
 9              νk ← i=1 ζik /N
10              compute Rk via IAVI or IQL on D with weight ζik on trajectory ξi
11   until convergence;
     Output: Θ



                          X            K
                                      XX                        N
                                                                Y
                      =         ···            δk=y0 log(πk )           Pr(yi′ | ξi′ , Θτ )
                          y1          yN k=1                    i′ =1

                              X           XX K X
                                           N X K                                        N
                                                                                        Y
                          +         ···                    δk=yi−1 ,l=yi log(Λkl )             Pr(yi′ | ξi′ , Θτ )
                               y1         yN i=1 k=1 l=1                               i′ =1

                              X           XX K
                                           N X                                        N
                                                                                      Y
                          +         ···                δk=yi log(Pr(ξi | πRk ))               Pr(yi′ | ξi′ , Θτ )    (A.8)
                               y1         yN i=0 k=1                                  i′ =1
                          K
                          X
                      =         Pr(y0 = k | D, Θτ ) log(πk )
                          k=1
                              K X
                              X K X
                                  N
                          +                   Pr(yi−1 = k, yi = l | D, Θτ ) log(Λkl )
                              k=1 l=1 i=1
                              K X
                              X N
                          +               Pr(yi = k | D, Θτ ) log(Pr(ξi | πRk )) ,                                   (A.9)
                              k=1 i=0


     where δ denotes the Kronecker delta function. Since πk , Λkl and Rk are not interdependent, we can
     thus maximize the respective term separately, resulting in Equation 6.


     Remark 1. In a more practical case where the agent demonstration space has multiple trajectory
     sequences, Theorem 2 can also be generalized and proved in the same manner.
     Remark 2. All ξ ∈ D above are assumed to be the trajectory for a whole episode. In some special
     cases where it is assumed that the latent state transition happens after each action execution, instead
     of per episode, Theorem 2 can also be applied by regarding each episode as a trajectory sequence
     with each trajectory consists of only one action execution.


     B     A LGORITHMS

     B.1   L ATENT VARIABLE I NVERSE Q- LEARNING

     The pseudo code for LV-IQL can be found at Algorithm 1.


                                                              13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B.2   L ATENT M ARKOV VARIABLE I NVERSE Q- LEARNING

To implement the LMV-IQL algorithm, let the forward probability aik be the posterior probability
of the observed agent demonstrations up until trajectory i and the latent state under which the i-th
trajectory was demonstrated is zk :

                       aik := Pr(D0:i , zi = k | Θ)
                             
                             
                              Πk Pr(ξ0 | z0 = k, Θ),                  i=0
                             
                                K                                                               (B.1)
                           = X
                             
                                  a(i−1)j Λjk Pr(ξi | zi = k, Θ),     i ̸= 0 ,
                             
                                 j=1

and the backward probability bik be the posterior probability of the demonstrations after trajectory
i:

                    bik := Pr(Di+1:N | zi = k, Θ)
                          
                            K
                          X
                               b(i+1)j Λkj Pr(ξi+1 | zi+1 = j, Θ), i ̸= N                      (B.2)
                        = j=1
                          
                          
                            1,                                      i=N.
                          

The posterior probability that trajectory i was demonstrated under latent state zk is then denoted as:

                                       gik := Pr(yi = k | D, Θ)
                                                 aik bik                                        (B.3)
                                           = PK             ,
                                                j=1 aij bij

and the posterior probability that trajectory i − 1 was demonstrated under latent state zk and con-
comitantly trajectory i was demonstrated under latent state zl is:

                      xikl := Pr(yi−1 = k, yi = l | D, Θ)
                                    a(i−1)k Λkl Pr(ξi | zi = l, Θ)bil                           (B.4)
                           = PK PK                                          .
                                u=1   v=1 a(i−1)u Λuv Pr(ξi | zi = v, Θ)biv

Thus the update equation in Equation 6 is equivalent to
                           τ +1
                          
                           Πk := gτ0k
                          
                                    PN τ
                                        i=1 xikl
                          
                          Λτ +1 :=
                          
                          
                             kl      PN −1 τ
                                       i=0 gik                                                  (B.5)
                          
                          
                          
                                              XN
                             τ +1
                            R     := arg max      gτik log(Pr(ξi | ΠRk )) .
                          
                          
                           k
                          
                                          Rk    i=0

Combining Equation B.5 and the class of IQL algorithms leads to LMV-IQL (Algorithm 2).

C     F URTHER D ETAILS AND A DDITIONAL R ESULTS ON THE S IMULATED
      G RIDWORLD B EHAVIOR DATASET
C.1   T HE G RIDWORLD DATASET AND M ODEL T RAINING

The simulated agent demonstration space from the Gridworld environment consisted of 512 trajec-
tories with each having a length of 64 movements. The discount factor was set to be γ = 0.99.
All evaluated algorithms were trained for 5 repeated runs on the whole demonstration space until


                                                 14
     Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    Algorithm 2: Latent Markov Variable Inverse Q-learning (LMV-IQL)
    Input: expert demonstrations D, latent space dimension K
 1 initialize Θ := {Π, Λ; R1 , . . . , RK }
 2 repeat
 3      E-step
 4          calculate g and x according to Equations B.1–B.4
 5      M-step
 6          forall k do
 7              Πk ← g0k
 8              forall l do
                            PN           PN −1
  9                 Λkl ← i=1 xikl / i=0 gik
10              compute Rk via IAVI or IQL on D with weight gik on trajectory ξi
11   until convergence;
     Output: Θ


     convergence (difference of learnt reward function and the posterior probability of intentions for each
     trajectory < 10−3 between iterations).

     C.2   A DDITIONAL R ESULTS ON G RIDWORLD

                                      Ground Truth    LV-IAVI       LV-IQL         IAVI            IQL
                                                                                                               1
                          'Hungry'


                                                                                                               0.5
                          'Thirsty'


                                                                                                               0

                                                        LV-IAVI        LV-IQL             IAVI           IQL
                                          ‘Hungry’    0.00 ± 0.00    1.00 ± 0.90     3.03 ± 0.00    3.02 ± 0.00
                          EVD
                                          ‘Thirsty’   0.00 ± 0.00    2.00 ± 1.79     7.98 ± 0.00    7.98 ± 0.00

     Figure 6: (Top) Visualization of the normalized ground truth and learnt state-value functions. Red
     lines indicate the ground truth trajectory distribution and the learnt trajectory clusters used to recover
     the reward function for respective intention. (All expert trajectories are shown for each figure of IAVI
     and IQL.) (Bottom) EVD for different approaches, Mean ± SE over 5 repeated runs.

     We also performed analysis under the environment set up where the intention irrelevant punishments
     were removed, i.e. replacing the −1 reward on the type of reward irrelevant to the intentions with 0.
     In this environment, there is an increased overlapping between some of the demonstrated trajectories
     under different intentions (Figure 6). However, LV-IAVI and LV-IQL still outperform the single in-
     tention algorithm IAVI and IQL in trajectory clustering and recovering corresponding expert reward
     functions.


     D     F URTHER D ETAILS AND A DDITIONAL R ESULTS ON THE E VALUATION OF
           M ICE NAVIGATION T RAJECTORIES

     D.1    L ABYRINTH NAVIGATION TASK AND M ODEL T RAINING

     In the navigation task from Rosenberg et al. (2021), two cohorts of 10 mice moved freely in dark
     through the labyrinth over the course of 7 hours. For comparability with the result from Ash-
     wood et al. (2022a), we obtained their pre-processed mouse trajectories for water-restricted and


                                                                      15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


water-unrestricted animals from https://github.com/97aditi/dynamic irl2 . For the
pre-processing, Ashwood et al. (2022a) used a clustering algorithm (based on DBSCAN (Ester
et al., 1996)) for aligning trajectories across animals and bouts to reduce variability. After the pre-
processing, they obtained 200 trajectories from the water-restricted animals and 207 trajectories
from the water-unrestricted animals. 20% of trajectories from each cohort were held out as a test
set.
To compare the performance of LMV-IAVI and DIRL in this environment, we used the source code
provided by Ashwood et al. (2022a) to train DIRL on the animal trajectory dataset. All LMV-IAVI
algorithms were trained for 10 repeated runs with different initializations, and the results from the
initializations with hightest test set LL was selected for analysis. The initial latent state distribution
Π was initialized with a uniform distribution on the latent state space Z as Π := U(Z), and the
latent state transition matrix Λ was initialized as: Λ := 0.95 × I + N (0, 0.05 × I), where N denotes
the normal distribution and I : Z × Z → R is the identity matrix. This initial Λ was then normalized
so that each row added up to 1. The discount factor was set to be γ = 0.99.

D.2       A DDITIONAL R ESULTS FOR WATER - UNRESTRICTED M ICE

                                                                               Latent State 1                                        Latent State 2
A                                                                       B        'Exploring'                                             'Tired'
                                                                                                                                                                    1
                                              Random                        . .. . . . .. . . .. . . . .. .                       . .. . . . .. . . .. . . . .. .

                                              }
           1 map                                                            ...............                                       ...............
                                                   DIRL                     . .. . . . .. . . .. . . . .. .                       . .. . . . .. . . .. . . . .. .   0.1
         4 maps                                                             ... ....... ...                                       ... ....... ...

                                              }
         1 latent state
                                                                            . .. . . . .. . . .. . . . .. .                       . .. . . . .. . . .. . . . .. .
                                                   LMV-IAVI                 ...............                                       ...............                   0.01
         4 latent states                                                    . .. . . . .. . . .. . . . .. .                       . .. . . . .. . . .. . . . .. .
  −2.0      −1.5     −1.0     −0.5       0.0                                ... ... ... ...                                       ... ... ... ...
                   Test LL.                                                                                                                                         0


                                     C 1.0                                                       D
                                                                 'Tired'
                                                                                              Latent State t


                                                                                                               1    0.441   0.559
                                     Prob.


                                             0.5

                                                            'Exploring'                                        2    0.054   0.946
                                             0.0
                                                   0               10                                                 1       2
                                                          Time                                                     Latent State t+1



Figure 7: (A) Comparison of LMV-IAVI on test set trajectories to a random policy and DIRL,
represented as LL. (B) Learnt policy (red arrows) under different intentions and corresponding state
occupancy (grey colormap) in the environment. State occupancy was calculated by assigning each
trajectory to the latent state with hightest posterior probability. Policies are shown only for some
states. (C) Trajectories of latent state probabilities. olid and shaded curves denote the Mean and SE.
(D) Inferred latent state transition matrix from the best-fitting LMV-IAVI.


In contrast to the outcomes from the water-restricted animal dataset (Figure 3), LMV-IAVI demon-
strates a higher test LL, even when considering a single intention. As the number of latent states
(associated with DIRL’s goal maps) grows, the test LL of LMV-IAVI increases, while the test LL of
DIRL remains constant (Figure 7A). Focus on the two latent states LMV-IAVI, the inferred policy
under two intentions exhibits ‘Exploring’ and ‘Tired’ behavior. The policy under ‘Exploring’ tends
to encourage the animal lingering in the labyrinth, whereas the policy under ‘Tired’ latent state steers
the animal back to the maze entrance. Correspondingly, the posterior probability of ‘Exploring’ ini-
tially dominates at the session’s beginning but is generally surpassed by the ‘Tired’ latent state over
time.

    2
      The original recorded animal trajectories from Rosenberg et al. (2021) are provided with MIT open source
license at https://github.com/markusmeister/Rosenberg-2021-Repository.


                                                                            16
    Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    E    F URTHER D ETAILS ON THE E VALUATION OF M ICE R EVERSAL - LEARNING
         B EHAVIOR
    The behavior data was collected from a cohort of mice consisted of 9 mice in total. Behavior
    recordings for each mice were repeated for at least 7 independent sessions with an average of ∼ 87
    trials per session.
    We employed a multi-stage fitting procedure (Algorithm 3) to select hyper-parameters and to allow
    us to fit LMV-IQL individually to each animal. In the first stage, we concatenated the data from
    all animals in a single dataset together. We then performed multiple IQL (single latent state LMV-
    IQL) with different history truncation length ℓh ∈ {1, . . . , 5} on the concatenated data. Out of the
    5 different values, We chose the ℓh that resulted in the best test set LL for subsequent stages. In
    the second stage, we run multiple LMV-IQL with different number of latent states K ∈ {2, . . . , 5}
    again to the concatenated dataset to obtain a global fit. The initial latent state distribution Π was
    initialized with a uniform distribution on the latent state space Z as Π := U(Z), and the latent state
    transition matrix Λ was initialized as: Λ := 0.95 × I + N (0, 0.05 × I), where N denotes the normal
    distribution and I : Z ×Z → R is the identity matrix. This initial Λ was then normalized so that each
    row added up to 1. The reward and action-value function was initialized as r(s, a) := N (0, 0.2) and
    Q(s, a) := N (0, 5) for all s ∈ S and a ∈ A. All discount factors were set to be γ = 0.99. Since
    Algorithm 2 is not guaranteed to converge to the global optimum (Salakhutdinov et al., 2003), we
    performed 10 different initializations for each value of K. Out of the 10 initializations, we chose
    the parameters that resulted in the best training set LL for subsequent stages. In the last stage of
    the fitting procedure, we wanted to obtain a respective but aligned LMV-IQL fit for each animal, so
    we initialized the parameters for each animal with the best global fit parameters from all animals
    together, omitting the necessity to permute the retrieved latent states from each animal so as to map
    semantically similar intentions to one another. Algorithm 3 shows the pseudo-code for the whole
    procedure. A 5-fold cross-validation was used to split the training and test dataset3 , and Algorithm 3
    was fit on each cross-validation fold independently.

  Algorithm 3: Fitting LMV-IQL on real mice behavior
  Fit IQL globally:
1 foreach ℓh ∈ {1, . . . , 5} do
2     run IQL on the concatenated data from all animals until convergence
3 select best ℓh with largest test set LL
  Fit LMV-IQL globally:
4 foreach K ∈ {2, . . . , 5} do
5     foreach i ∈ {1, . . . , 10} do
6         initialize LMV-IQL with K latent states and random parameters
7         run Algorithm 2 on the concatenated data from all animals until convergence
   Fit separate LMV-IQL to each animal:
8  forall animals do
 9     foreach K ∈ {1, . . . , 5} do
10         initialize LMV-IQL with K latent states using the best global fit parameters for this K
11         run Algorithm 2 until convergence


        3
          Here we considered to hold out entire sessions of behavior for assessing test set performance. That is, the
    training and test set consisted of 80% and 20% of recorded sessions of each mouse, respectively.


                                                           17
