Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


S ELF E VAL : L EVERAGING THE DISCRIMINATIVE NATURE OF
GENERATIVE MODELS FOR EVALUATION

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                                  A BSTRACT

         In this work, we show that text-to-image generative models can be ‘inverted’ to assess their
         own text-image understanding capabilities in a completely automated manner. Our method,
         called S ELF E VAL, uses the generative model to compute the likelihood of real images given
         text prompts, making the generative model directly applicable to discriminative tasks. Us-
         ing S ELF E VAL, we repurpose standard datasets created for evaluating multimodal text-image
         discriminative models to evaluate generative models in a fine-grained manner: assessing their
         performance on attribute binding, color recognition, counting, shape recognition, spatial un-
         derstanding. To the best of our knowledge S ELF E VAL is the first automated metric to show a
         high degree of agreement for measuring text-faithfulness with the gold-standard human eval-
         uations across multiple models and benchmarks. Moreover, S ELF E VAL enables us to evaluate
         generative models on challenging tasks such as Winoground image-score where they demon-
         strate competitive performance to discriminative models. We also show severe drawbacks of
         standard automated metrics such as CLIP-score to measure text faithfulness on benchmarks
         such as DrawBench, and how S ELF E VAL sidesteps these issues. We hope S ELF E VAL enables
         easy and reliable automated evaluation for diffusion models.


1   I NTRODUCTION

In the past few years, generative image models have rapidly advanced and state-of-the-art text-to-image models
now generate high quality realistic images. While a lot of research effort is focussed on improving these models,
their evaluation has received considerably less attention. Evaluations for text-to-image models typically focus
on two aspects: (1) quality of the generated image; and (2) the alignment between the generated image and the
input text, i.e., the ‘faithfulness’ of the generation. The gold standard for evaluating text-to-image models is to
compare generations from pairs of models using human judgement. However, using pairwise human evaluations
does not scale to lots of models or generations, and it is an open question on how to convert them to ordinal
metrics to rank models. Thus, automatic evaluations are commonly used as a proxy for comparing models.
In this work, we focus on automatic evaluations that measure the ‘text faithfulness’ of the generated image to
the input text prompt. While automated evaluations for diffusion models are common, they typically rely on an
external discriminative model, e.g., CLIP to measure the ‘relatedness’ of the generated image to the input text.
Instead, we ask the question can the diffusion model itself be used to measure the relatedness of an image-text
pair and thus evaluate its own generations?
Most work using text-to-image diffusion models focusses on sampling good images from them given a text
prompt. However, as shown in Figure 1, diffusion models can be used to estimate the conditional likelihood of
an image x given a text prompt c, i.e., p(x|c). We propose S ELF E VAL which is a practical way to estimate such
likelihoods accounting for numerical issues arising in standard diffusion models. We show that these likelihoods
can be used directly to evaluate the model’s text-faithfulness. S ELF E VAL repurposes standard multimodal
image-text datasets such as Visual Genome, COCO and CLEVR to measure the model’s text understanding
capabilities. Our evaluation allows us to assess fine-grained aspects such as the model’s ability to recognize
colors, count objects etc. We apply our method to a wide variety of diffusion models: different types of image
representations (pixel based, latent space based), different text encoders and different model sizes. S ELF E VAL’s
automatic evaluation results are in agreement with the ‘gold-standard’ human judgements making S ELF E VAL
suitable for evaluation.

                                                  1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


     Standard Diffusion sampling                                 Self Eval                                Self Eval for classification

                      xT                                               xT                                              xT
    Noise                                  𝒙! : Real Input                                     𝒙! : Real Input                        𝒑(𝒙𝟎 |𝑐𝟎 )

                                                                                                                 KV           KV       𝑝(𝒙" |𝒄# )
               KV          KV                                    KV         KV
                                                                                    𝑝(𝒙! |𝒄)


                                                                                                                                         …
                Q              Q                                 Q              Q                                Q            Q
                                                                                                                                      𝑝(𝒙" |𝒄$ )



                    𝒄: A dog                                         𝒄: A dog                      𝒄! : A dog    𝒄" : A cat   …    𝒄# : A car


Figure 1: Illustration of proposed method: (Left) Starting from a noised input, the standard diffusion sampling method
denoises the input iteratively to generate images from the input distribution. (Middle): S ELF E VAL takes an image x0 and
conditioning c pairs to estimates the likelihood p(x0 |c) of the pair in an iterative fashion. (Right): Given an image, x0 and
n captions, {c0 , c1 , . . . , cn }, S ELF E VAL is a principled way to convert generative models into discriminative models. In
this work, we show that the classification performance of these classifiers can be used to evaluate the generative capabilities.


S ELF E VAL has the added benefit that it does not require additional pretrained models apart from the diffusion
models being compared. As we show in Figure 2, relying on an external model leads to three major issues. First,
the automated metrics vary greatly depending on the type of the external model used for evaluation. Second,
many generative models rely on an external model such as CLIP’s text encoding during training, and thus using
the same CLIP model for automated evaluation biases the results. Finally, the external model itself can be bad at
certain image-text tasks, such as counting or attribute recognition making its scores unreliable for evaluations.


2    R ELATED W ORKS

Generative models: Generative models learn to model the joint distribution, p(X, Y ) of data consisting of an
observed variable X and the target Y . The model can subsequently be employed to generate novel data through
sampling from the learned distribution.. In this work, we are interested in image generation models i.e., models
that learn the distribution of natural images. Generative Adverserial Networks (GAN) Goodfellow et al. (2014);
Radford et al. (2015), Variational AutoEncoders (VAE) Kingma & Welling (2014) and Denoising Diffusion
Probabilistic models (DDPM) Ho et al. (2020) are some of the most popular image generation models in the
literature. GANs belong to the category of generative models, where two distinct components, a generator
and a discriminator, are pitted against each other within a zero-sum game framework. VAEs are a category
of autoencoders that ensure “regularity” within the latent space by constraining their distribution to closely
align with a well-behaved and typically standard normal distribution. Subsequently, VQ-VAE’s van den Oord
et al. (2017) were proposed to prevent “posterior” collapse that were typically observed with VAEs. In more
recent times, DDPMs have exceeded the capabilities of all preceding state-of-the-art image generative models
in terms of their generative prowess. Drawing inspiration from non-equilibrium statistical physics, Diffusion
probabilistic models Sohl-Dickstein et al. (2015) employ a forward diffusion process to gradually destroy the
structure in the unknown input distribution and transforming it into a well-behaved and tractable distribution. A
reverse diffusion process is trained to learn to restore the structure, thereby learning the input distribution. Ho
et al. (2020) establish an explicit connection between diffusion models and denoising score matching Song &
Ermon (2019); Vincent (2011) leading to a simplified objective for training diffusion models. In this study, we
employ diffusion models owing to their exceptional image generation performance Dhariwal & Nichol (2021).
Diffusion models: In a relatively short time, diffusion models have surpassed GANs and VAEs as the defacto
models for image generation due to their superior quality Dhariwal & Nichol (2021) and flexibility. Numer-
ous studies have shown that diffusion models can be conditioned on a variety of modalities, including object
classes Peebles & Xie (2023); Ho et al. (2020), natural language captions Saharia et al. (2022); Rombach et al.
(2022); Nichol et al. (2022); Ramesh et al. (2022), camera pose Liu et al. (2023), images Brooks et al. (2023),
bounding boxes Li et al. (2023b), segmentation, edge and depth maps Zhang & Agrawala (2023). Among these,
text-conditioned diffusion models have attracted significant interest and popularity. Given paired image, caption
data, the standard way of training text conditioned diffusion models is to fuse the caption features, extracted
using a pre-trained text encoder, with the image features while training the reverse diffusion process. The fu-
sion is typically done using cross-attentions Vaswani et al. (2017) layers. Models trained in this manner have
demonstrated a remarkable comprehension of compositionality within text, often highlighted by their capac-


                                                             2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                           Counting objects        Spatial awareness            Binding attributes            Text corruption


                                                           Three sheep and a dog    Street sign above stop sign  White apple and sliced rice Bowl of pudding on a plate
                                                           Four sheep and a dog    Street sign next to stop sign Sliced apple and white rice Plate of bowl pudding on a



Figure 2: Drawbacks of CLIP for generative model evaluation. (Left) We compare the CLIP similarity scores of two
Latent diffusion models Rombach et al. (2022) trained with CLIP ViT-L/14 (LDM-CLIP (ViT-L/14)) and OpenCLIP ViT-
H/14 (LDM-CLIP (ViT-H/14)) text encoders. On the left, we compare the CLIP similarity scores, computed using CLIP
ViT-L/14, on prompts generated from DrawBench, Winoground and, COCO datasets. The plot on the right compares the
CLIP similarity scores computed using OpenCLIP ViT-H/14 model. The ranking changes depending on the model used.
(Right) CLIP has poor performance in tasks involving counting instances, spatial relationships, matching attributes to objects
and understanding corruption of text which constitute about 50 (25%) prompts in DrawBench. In each example, the correct
caption is shown in green and CLIP picked the caption in bold. Using CLIP to evaluate text to image models on such
prompts is not optimal.


ity to generate images based on counterfactual textual descriptions (like avacado shaped chair etc.). The most
popular text encoders in use today for text-conditioned image synthesis are text encoders from the CLIP Rad-
ford et al. (2021) and the text-to-text transformer T5 Raffel et al. (2020). In this work, we analyze the text
understanding capabilities of the diffusion models trained with different text encoders.
There exist two families of diffusion models in the literature, namely, pixel Saharia et al. (2022); Ramesh
et al. (2022) and latent diffusion Rombach et al. (2022), differing primarily in the nature of input. As the
name suggests, in pixel diffusion, the forward and reverse diffusion processes are performed on the pixels of
the input. Performing diffusion on pixels is computationally expensive and hence a typical pixel diffusion
pipeline consists of a low resolution generation step followed by a pixel upsampler to get a higher resolution
output. Latent diffusion models Rombach et al. (2022) enable training with limited computational budget while
simultaneously retaining their quality and flexibility. This is achieved by performing the diffusion process on the
latent space of an autoencoder instead of the pixels. In this work, we analyze the text understanding capabilities
of two state-of-the-art models with different text encoders each from pixel and latent diffusion models.
Classifiers with diffusion models: Lately, there has been a increase in the usage of conditional diffusion mod-
els as classifiers, driven by their superior understanding of the conditioned modality. These models are surpris-
ingly good at capturing intricate patterns and dependencies within the conditioning input, making them strong
discriminative models across a range of downstream tasks. Notable works include He et al. (2023), Mukhopad-
hyay et al. (2023) that either finetune a diffusion model, or use linear probing, for several classification and
reasoning tasks. Unlike these methods, we do not train any models but instead convert the generative model
into a discriminative one to understand its text understanding capabilities. Along similar lines as ours is the
work of Clark & Jaini (2023) that observed that the zero-shot performance of the text-to-image pixel diffusion
model, Imagen Saharia et al. (2022), is on-par with CLIP Radford et al. (2021) in several downstream tasks.
Similar to Clark & Jaini (2023), Li et al. (2023a) adopt the standard ELBO loss as a proxy for the likelihood
of a label, given an image, and convert it to a posterior probability using Bayes rule. Authors demonstrate
impressive performance on several image classsification benchmarks. They also report promising results on
ITM tasks on the Winoground Thrush et al. (2022) dataset. We propose a systematic way of estimating the
likelihood scores from diffusion models and observe that the performance of generative classifiers, on several
Image-Text Matching (ITM) tasks, can be used to evaluate their generative performance. To the best of our
knowledge, we are the first method to compare the generative capabilities of different diffusion models using
their discriminative performance.

3    M ETHOD : C ONVERTING GENERATIVE MODELS TO DISCRIMINATIVE MODELS
Our method converts generative (diffusion) models into discriminative models by simply changing the inference,
and does not require any retraining. This allows us to use the diffusion model itself on a variety of different
image-text benchmarks and assess the diffusion model’s image-text understanding capabilities. We briefly
discuss an overview of diffusion models in Sec. 3.1 followed by our proposed method in Sec. 3.2


                                                       3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


3.1   P RELIMINARIES

Diffusion Probabilistic Models (DPM) Sohl-Dickstein et al. (2015) are a class of generative models that are
trained to ‘denoise’ inputs constructed by a Markovian forward process. The forward process starts with a real
sample x0 and repeatedly adds gaussian noise, over t timesteps to generate xt :
                                                         p
                                   q(xt |xt−1 ) ∼ N (xt ; 1 − βt xt−1 , βt I).                             (1)

Here q(x0 ) is the data distribution. βt is the strength of the noise at timestep t with β0 = 0, βT = 1. Note that
xt are the same size as the input. The joint distribution of the input along with the latents q(x0:T ) is
                                                                         T
                                                                         Y
                                                    q(x0:T ) = q(x0 )              q(xt |xt−1 )                           (2)
                                                                         t=1


To sample images, one applies the reverse process p(xt−1 |xt ), starting with xT sampled from the unit normal
distribution N (0, I). So the joint distribution of the reverse process can be described as
                                                                             T
                                                                             Y
                                                    p(x0:T ) = p(xT )              p(xt−1 |xt )                           (3)
                                                                             t=1


The reverse process p(xt−1 |xt ) is not tractable and is often modeled using a neural network whose parameters
are characterized by θ, i.e. pθ (xt−1 |xt ) ∼ N (xt−1 ; µθ (xt , t), Σθ (xt , t)).

3.2   L IKELIHOOD ESTIMATES FROM DIFFUSION MODELS

We specifically focus on text-to-image diffusion models, although our formulation extends to any conditional
diffusion model. Text-to-image diffusion models are trained on a large datasets of image-text (x, c) pairs and
model the reverse diffusion process p(xt−1 |xt , c). We ‘invert’ such a generative model and use it to estimate
the likelihood of a real image x given a text caption c, i.e., p(x|c). We note that our method only changes the
inference of a diffusion model and does not require any training. Assuming uniform prior on the classes, the
likelihood p(x|c) can be converted into the posterior, p(c|x) using Bayes’ rule, i.e. p(c|x) = p(x|c)
                                                                                                 |C| , where C is
the set of all classes.
Given the reverse process of a diffusion model parameterized by θ, the likelihood for a datapoint x0 is
                                            Z
                                pθ (x0 |c) = pθ (x0:T |c)dx1:T                                                            (4)
                                                          Z            T
                                                                       Y
                                                      =       p(xT )         pθ (xt−1 |xT , c)dx1:T .                     (5)
                                                                       t=1

Since the diffusion models reverse process pθ (·) is also a gaussian, we can further write this as

                                T
                                                                 −(xt−1 − µθ (xt , c))T Σ−1
                                                                                          θ (xt−1 − µθ (xt , c))
                   Z            Y               1
      p(x0 |c) =       p(xT )         p                   exp(                                                   )dx1:T   (6)
                                t=1       (2π)D |Σθ |                                   2

Here, p(xT ) ∼ N (0, I). For the sake of simplicity, we denote any realization of the random variable x0 as x0 .
Given a natural language caption c, an image x0 and the noised latents x1:T , the quantity inside the integral in
Eq. 6 can be estimated numerically. We compute a Monte Carlo estimate of the integral by sampling N noise
terms (ϵ) and computing p(x0 |c) as

                                N
                                X               T
                                                Y                                             p              p
                p(x0 |c) =            p(xnT )         p(xnt−1 |xnt , c) where xnt =            1 − βt xnt−1 + βt ϵn       (7)
                             n=1                t=1



                                                                4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 Attribute binding                  Color                  Count                      Shape                      Spatial              Text corruption


  blue lake and brown hill   oranges in a black bowl   One sphere                    A red sphere          Swan in front of a boat.   wooden lined are spoons


                                                                                          …
                                                            …
            …


                                                                                                                     …


                                                                                                                                               …
                                      …
  brown lake and blue hill   oranges in a green bowl   Three sphere                 A red cylinder            Swan under a boat.      wooden spoons are lined


Figure 3: Representative samples from the benchmark. We divide the evaluation into six broad tasks, namely
Attribute binding, Color, Count, Shape, Spatial, and Text Corruption. Each task is designed to evalu-
ate a specific aspect of text faithfulness mimicing the categories in DrawBench. Each task is posed as an image-text matching
problem, where given an image, the goal is to pick the right caption among distractors. The figure above shows examples
from each task with the right caption highlighted in green.



Practical considerations. The terms on the RHS of Eq. 7 are multivariate gaussians and analytically comput-
ing them involves exponentials which can be numerically unstable. This can be prevented by computing log
probabilities instead. Taking log both sides of Eq. 7, we get



                                                                N
                                                                X                   T
                                                                                    Y
                                        log p(x0 |c) = log                p(xnT )         p(xnt−1 |xnt , c)                                                 (8)
                                                                n=1                 t=1
                                                           N
                                                           X                           T
                                                                                       X
                                                       ≥        (log p(xnT ) +                  log p(xnt−1 |xnt , c))                                      (9)
                                                           n=1                            t=1


Where the last inequality is due to Jensen’s inequality for concave functions, i.e. E(f (x)) ≤ f (E(x)). All
the terms in Eq. 9 are log probabilities of multivariate gaussians, which can be computed analytically and are
numerically more stable.
We now show how estimating p(x0 |c) allows us to use a diffusion model for discriminative tasks and thus to
evaluate their image-text understanding capabilities.


3.3     S ELF E VAL TO EVALUATE DIFFUSION MODEL’ S TEXT FAITHFULNESS

The ‘standard’ way of evaluating the text faithfulness of generative models is to 1. manually construct a prompt
set that can reason about the model’s capacity to understand the input text, and, 2. evaluate the faithfulness of
the generation using human evaluators or an automatic evaluation score, like the CLIP Radford et al. (2021)
score. As evaluating the text faithfulness of generative models inherently involves vision-language reasoning,
we propose an alternate way to evaluate the model’s performance across discriminative image-text reasoning
tasks. In S ELF E VAL, we pose the evaluation as an image-text matching problem and repurpose standard dis-
criminative image-text datasets. Thus, S ELF E VAL does not rely on external models such as CLIP, does not need
human evaluators, and does not need manual prompt-set curation.
Image-text matching problems such as image-classification or retrieval can be reformulated as picking the
correct caption for a single image x from a set of captions {ci }. We can use a diffusion model to esti-
mate p(x|ci ) for each of the captions and pick the caption that gives the highest likelihood. As shown in
Fig. 1, the noised latents x1:T are computed using the forward process. The final latent xT is denoised for
T steps using the reverse process to obtain the denoised latents x̄0:T −1 . This process is repeated for N in-
dependent noise vectors resulting in {xn1:T }N            n       N
                                                 n=1 , {x̄0:T −1 }n=1 . Next, the likelihood can be computed as
             PN               T
p(x0 |ck ) = n=1 p(xnT ) t=1 p(xnt−1 |x̄nt , ck ), which is then converted to the posterior, p(ck |x0 ) using Bayes’
                           Q
rule. Finally, the caption with the highest likelihood, i.e. arg maxci p(ci |x0 ) is chosen as the right one.


                                                                      5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


4     E XPERIMENTS
We now use S ELF E VAL to evaluate text-to-image diffusion models. In § 4.1, we introduce our benchmark
datasets and models, and present the S ELF E VAL results in § 4.2.

4.1     B ENCHMARK AND E VALUATION

In S ELF E VAL, we pose the text faithfulness evaluation as an image-text matching problem, where the goal is to
pick the right image caption pair among distractors.
Tasks. We identify and divide the evaluation into six broad reasoning tasks (illustrated in Figure 3): 1)
Attribute binding, 2) Color, 3) Count, 4) Shape, 5) Spatial relationships, and 6) Text
corruption. Each of these tasks evaluate the model’s understanding of a specific aspect of text faithfulness
and is similar to the categories of prompts from DrawBench Saharia et al. (2022). The six tasks are constructed
using data from TIFA Hu et al. (2023), CLEVR Johnson et al. (2016) and ARO Yuksekgonul et al. (2023).
Datasets. TIFA Hu et al. (2023) consists of 4000 text prompts, collected manually and from image captioning
datasets, to evaluate the text faithfulness of generative models. In our evaluation, we use ∼2000 of these text-
prompts that are constructed from the COCO Lin et al. (2014) dataset and convert the dataset from question-
answering to an image-text matching format as detailed in the supplement. Attribution, Relation and Order
(ARO) Yuksekgonul et al. (2023) is a benchmark that uses data from Visual Genome Krishna et al. (2017) for
attribute and spatial relations, and COCO for ordering tasks. CLEVR Johnson et al. (2016) is a benchmark
for compositional understanding and visual reasoning that uses synthetic images. We use the splits proposed
by Lewis et al. (2022) for our experiments.
We divide the datasets among all the reasoning task as follows. For attribute binding, we combine samples
from ARO (attribution) and CLEVR. For colors and counts, we use corresponding samples from TIFA and
CLEVR. For shapes, use samples from CLEVR. Data for spatial relationships is from TIFA, CLEVR and ARO
(relations). The data for the text corruption task is from the ARO (order sensitivity) dataset. A sample of each
task consists of an image and multiple text prompts and the performance on the task is the classification accuracy
of pairing the image with the right caption.
We measure the performance of text-to-image generative models on the benchmark using the following evalua-
tion methods. We provide full details for each of the methods in the supplement.
S ELF E VAL (Ours) is an automatic evaluation method and uses both the images and text from our benchmark
introduced in § 4.1. For each benchmark task, we randomly sample 1000 examples and evaluate the classifica-
tion performance on them. We repeat this three times and the report the mean accuracy. We use 10 trials (i.e.
N = 10) and perform diffusion for 100 steps (i.e. T = 100) for all the models. Refer to the supplement for
ablation experiments on N , T .
Human evaluations are the gold standard for judging the performance of text-to-image models using pairwise
comparsions. We present humans with generations from two models and ask them to vote for one of four
choices: “both” the generations are faithful, “none” of them are faithful, or if only one of the two images
(“Image 1” or “Image 2”) demonstrates fidelity to the given prompt. For simplicity, we only report votes where
there is a clear preference for a model. We randomly pick 250 text prompts from each benchmark task as
conditioning for human evaluation and the images are generated using DDIM Song et al. (2021) sampling,
with 100 denoising steps. Note that unlike S ELF E VAL, human evaluations do not use the real images from the
benchmark tasks and the human evaluators only look at the generated images.

4.1.1    M ODELS
We use models with different image representations: pixel diffusion models which directly use the pixel RGB
values, and latent diffusion models where the image is projected into a latent space using an auto-encoder. We
pick models trained with different text encoders within each class. This enables us to analyze the effect of text
encoder on the final performance within each class.
Diffusion models with CLIP text encoder. For latent diffusion, we use a model trained with OpenCLIP Ilharco
et al. (2021) text encoder with a ViT-H/14 backbone via an API containing open-sourced model weights. This
model is trained on a public dataset with 5 billion images, excluding explicit material, and outputs 512 × 512


                                                  6
 Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                    Human evaluations of Pixel diffusion models                                     11
                                                                                                           Comparison of PD Models using SelfEval                                  Human evaluations of Latent diffusion models                                         12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Comparison of LD Models using SelfEval
              0.6                                                                                                                       PDM-CLIP         PDM-T5                  0.7                                                                                                                        LDM-CLIP         LDM-T5
                                               PDM-CLIP     PDM-T5                                                                                                                                                 LDM-CLIP     LDM-T5


                                                                     Accuracy above random chance


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Accuracy above random chance
                                                                                                     7                                                                                                                                                                   9
             0.45                                                                                                                                                                0.5
% of votes


                                                                                                                                                                    % of votes
              0.3                                                                                    4                                                                           0.4                                                                                     6


             0.15                                                                                    0                                                                           0.2                                                                                     2


              0.0                                                                                   -3                                                                           0.0                                                                                     0
                                                                                                         Attribute   Color   Count   Shape   Spatial      Text                                                                                                               Attribute   Color   Count   Shape   Spatial      Text
                     Attribute Color   Count     Shape    Spatial                                                                                      Corruption                      Attribute   Color   Count     Shape    Spatial                                                                                      Corruption



 Figure 4: Evaluating text-to-image models using human evaluations and S ELF E VAL. We evaluate different types of text-
 to-image models such as pixel diffusion (first two columns) and latent diffusion model (last two columns), and models that
 use different text encoders such as T5 XXL and CLIP. We observe that across all 4 diffusion models the relative ordering
 given by S ELF E VAL’s accuracy correlates with the pairwise human evaluation results. We also observe that latent diffusion
 models have a higher S ELF E VAL accuracy than pixel diffusion models suggesting better text-faithfulness. Using the stronger
 T5 text encoder leads to better performance across human evaluations and S ELF E VAL.
 images. For pixel diffusion, we adopt the architecture of DALLE-2 Ramesh et al. (2022) for our experiments
 and train a model. We use a CLIP (ViT-L/14) text encoder and produce images of resolution 64×64. Our model
 has a total of 4.2B parameters and is trained for 2M steps on an internal image-text dataset (Internal-Dataset).
 Diffusion models with T5 text encoder. For latent diffusion, we train a UNet model, similar to Rombach et al.
 (2022), but replace the CLIP text encoder with a T5 XXL Raffel et al. (2020) text encoder that outputs images
 of resolution 256 × 256. This model is also trained on Internal-Dataset for 2M steps using a latent space with a
 4× downsampling factor and has a total of 5.8B parameters. We train a 7.5B parameter pixel diffusion model,
 similar to Imagen Saharia et al. (2022), on inputs of resolution 64 × 64 for 2M steps also on Internal-Dataset.
 Subsequently, we apply a super resolution model to upsample the output to 512 × 512.
 With the exception of the CLIP-based latent diffusion model Rombach et al. (2022), all the other models are
 trained for the same number of steps on the exact same data to ensure fair comparison.

 4.2                     M AIN RESULTS

 We evaluate the four text-to-image models and report results in Figure 4. For S ELF E VAL, we report the accuracy
 difference with the random chance accuracy, since each of the tasks has a different degree of difficulty.
 Agreement between S ELF E VAL and human evaluation. We use both human evaluation and S ELF E VAL
 to evaluate the four different diffusion models in Figure 4. Human evaluation performance, measured using
 pairwise comparison, follows the same ranking as given by S ELF E VAL when comparing both types of pixel
 diffusion models and both types of latent diffusion models. To the best of our knowledge, ours is the first work
 to establish correlation between the discriminative performance of generative models and human evaluation for
 text-to-image diffusion models across a wide range of models and tasks. The high degree of alignment between
 S ELF E VAL and human evaluation suggests that S ELF E VAL is a reliable and interpretable way to evaluate and
 compare the text faithfulness of different diffusion models.
 Next, we use S ELF E VAL to further analyze the performance of diffusion models.
 Effect of the text encoder. Comparing the different text-encoders used in Figure 4, we observe that diffusion
 models using the stronger T5 text encoder perform better on most tasks than the ones using the CLIP text
 encoder. The stronger performance of T5-based models holds for both human evaluations and S ELF E VAL.
 The S ELF E VAL results also show that diffusion models using the CLIP based encoders have poor performance,
 worse than random chance, on the Count task. On the Text Corruption task that involves identifying
 a linguistically correct sentence amongst distractors with a shuffled word order, CLIP-based models show a
 lower performance. Thus, similar to prior work Yuksekgonul et al. (2023), CLIP models show a bag-of-words
 understanding of the input text and are less sensitive to word order.
 Pixel vs. latent diffusion. We compare the S ELF E VAL performance of the pixel diffusion models to that of the
 latent diffusion models in Figure 5. Among models that use the same text encoder, i.e. PDM-T5 and LDM-
 T5, we observe that the latent diffusion models outperform the pixel diffusion ones in most cases, especially
 on the harder tasks of Attribute Binding, Count, Spatial Relations and Text Corruption.
 We hypothesize that this difference can be explained by the fact that the latent diffusion models operate on the
 compressed latent space and prioritize the text conditioning while ‘offloading’ the high-frequency image details


                                                                                                                                                   7
 Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


              0.4      Comparison of LDM vs PDM
                                          LDM     PDM
                                                        A blue lighted bridge       A blue and white double    The black umbrella and     The gray shorts and                                  A toaster sits in front of
                                                                                                                                                                          Five cubes
                                                         over water at night        decker bus on the street      the orange dress            white door                                              a blender

             0.27
% of votes


                                                        The large pillows and       The gray table cloth and    The boulders is to the   The bus is to the left of   An old toilet pained in    A red bike with white
                                                         leather headboard               the white pie           right of the house             the tree             red with a wooden lid             handles
             0.13

                                            Figure 6: Qualitative Results. (Top): Each example compares the generations
                                            of pixel diffusion models with CLIP (left) and T5 (right) text encoders. As the
    0.0
         Human evaluation      SelfEval     difficulty of the prompt increases, models with stronger text encoders maintain
 Figure 5: Pixel vs Latent diffusion. We higher text fidelity. Both the models fail on simple prompts from Count and
 observe that human raters rank the gen- Spatial relationships. (Bottom): Comparison between generations of
 eration of latent models higher than pixel Pixel (left) and Latent (right) diffusion models with a T5 text encoder. Latent
 models in text faithfulness. We notice a diffusion models can get smaller details like “gray cloth” and “white handles”
 similar ordering using S ELF E VAL.        (second and last example respectively) correctly.

 to the autoencoder. We further investigate the performance of pixel and latent diffusion models by employing
 human raters to evaluate their text faithfulness in Figure 5. The data, for human evaluation, is constructed by
 randomly picking 500 examples from the all the tasks (100 examples from each task except text corruption),
 and choosing the right caption as the text prompt. We convert the accuracy of S ELF E VAL, to votes, by counting
 the number of samples where only one model is right. From Figure 5, we observe that human raters prefer
 generations of latent diffusion models to pixel diffusion ones for text faithfulness. S ELF E VAL also shows that
 latent diffusion models have a better text faithfulness and shows an alignment with human evaluations.
 Qualitative results. Figure 6 (Top) compares the generations of pixel diffusion models that use T5 and CLIP
 text encoders. In each example, the image on the left and right are generated using CLIP and T5 text encoder
 respectively. We notice that as the difficulty of prompts increases, models with a stronger text encoder performs
 better. Both the models fail on the much harder task of counting instances and spatial relationships. In Figure 6
 (Bottom), each example consists two images generated using a pixel diffusion model (left) and a latent diffusion
 model (right) with a T5 text encoder. We observe that unlike the pixel diffusion model, the latent diffusion model
 can get small yet important details right (“gray table cloth” and “white handles” in the second and sixth example
 respectively). We believe that the latent diffusion model can offload the high frequency appearance details to
 the autoencoder, allowing it to pay more attention to the conditioning variable.


 4.3                G ENERATIVE MODELS APPLIED TO OTHER REASONING TASKS

 We now use the challenging Winoground Thrush et al. (2022) benchmark to evaluate the vision-language rea-
 soning abilities of diffusion models. Winoground defines two tasks - (1) ‘text score’ that involves choosing the
 right text prompt amongst distractors given an input image; and (2) ‘image score’ that involves picking the right
 image amongst distractor images given a text prompt.
 S ELF E VAL vs. concurrent work Concurrent work from Li et al. (2023a) demonstrates that diffusion models
 perform well on the Winoground text score task and achieve competitive performance with discriminative mod-
 els. Using their formulation yields poor results (zero accuracy) on the image score task as shown in Table 1. Li
 et al. (2023a) use the ELBO loss as a proxy for the likelihood p(x|c) which works well for comparing different
 text prompts and thus leads to good text score performance. However, our analysis revealed that the ELBO loss
 computed for the predictions from two different images are not comparable, and thus leads to zero image score.
 S ELF E VAL on the other hand, doesn’t approximate the likelihood but instead estimates it as described in Sec 3.
 Using S ELF E VAL leads to a non-zero image-score for the same generative model used by Li et al. (2023a), and
 yields performance close to that of the discriminative CLIP ViT-L model.
 S ELF E VAL applied to other diffusion models. Using S ELF E VAL reveals that all the diffusion models intro-
 duced in § 4.1.1 achieve competitive performance on both the image score and text score tasks. Compared to all
 the discriminative CLIP models, generative models achieve strong results in both image and text scores using
 S ELF E VAL. This result reinforces the notion that optimizing the generative objective can provide non-trivial
 and complementary improvements for several visuo-linguistic reasoning tasks. For additional analysis on the
 effect of various hyperparameters on the Winoground performance, refer to the supplement.


                                                                                8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 1: Diffusion models evaluated on the Winoground            Table 2: Performance of CLIP on the benchmark.
dataset. We measure the image score (accuracy of picking the     We evaluate the zero-shot performance of CLIP (ViT-
correct image given a text prompt) and text score (accuracy of   L/14 visual backbone) on the six tasks. “Random”
picking the correct text given an image). Using S ELF E VAL      denotes the random chance accuracy. CLIP achieves
allows us to use diffusion models for both tasks unlike prior    impressive performance on the tasks of Color and
work Li et al. (2023a) which leads to zero image score.          Shape. We observe that the performance of CLIP is
                                                                 close to random on Attribute binding, Count,
Method                  Model       Image Score    Text Score    Spatial and Text corruption. This makes
                                                                 CLIP unsuitable for evaluating text faithfulness of gen-
CLIP (ViT-L/14)           −             8.00          30.25      erative models on prompts from these tasks.
OCLIP (ViT-H/14)          −            12.75          30.75
Li et al. (2023a)    LDM-CLIP            0            34.00       Model   Attribute Color Count Shape Spatial    Text
S ELF E VAL          LDM-CLIP           7.25          22.75               binding                             corruption
S ELF E VAL          PDM-CLIP          14.00          17.00      Random     50      25      25      33      25      20
S ELF E VAL           PDM-T5           12.00          28.25
S ELF E VAL           LDM-T5           13.50          29.00       CLIP     55.40   85.20   67.80   91.10   40.50   51.00



4.4   D RAWBACKS OF CLIP SCORE

In this section, we discuss a few limitations of the CLIP score that S ELF E VAL can effectively address. CLIP
score is the most common metric for evaluating text faithfulness of generative models by measuring the cosine
similarity between the features of the generated image and the conditioned text caption.
Sensitivity to the exact CLIP model.
We report the CLIP similarity scores of the generations from two versions of the Latent Diffusion Models Rom-
bach et al. (2022) on prompts from DrawBench Saharia et al. (2022), Winoground Thrush et al. (2022) and
COCO-minival Lin et al. (2014) datasets in Figure 2. The first model (LDM-CLIP (ViT-L/14)) uses the text
encoder of CLIP with ViT-L/14 backbone and the second model (LDM-CLIP (ViT-H/14)) uses the text encoder
with OpenCLIP Ilharco et al. (2021) ViT-H/14 visual backbone. Across all the three datasets, we observe that
LDM-CLIP (ViT-L/14) ranks higher than LDM-CLIP (ViT-H/14) if a CLIP (ViT-L/14 visual backbone) model
is used, but ranks lower with an OpenCLIP (ViT-H/14 visual backbone). Our hypothesis is that images gener-
ated by a model using a particular CLIP text encoder may still contain some residual information, which could
cause them to receive higher scores when assessed using the same CLIP model. This type of bias was identified
by Park et al. (2021) in the context of evaluation of text-to-image models, though not in relation to the CLIP
score. We emphasize the need for caution among researchers who employ this metric, particularly concerning
this bias. S ELF E VAL avoids this problem as we do not employ an external model for evaluation.
CLIP score is limited by CLIP’s performance and thus using it as a proxy on tasks where CLIP itself has
poor performance does not yield meaningful comparsions. While the CLIP model has demonstrated impressive
zero-shot performance on several image-text tasks, it has severe limitations on many complex reasoning tasks.
We compute the performance of CLIP ViT-L/14 model on the six tasks introduced in § 4.1 and report the results
in Table 2. CLIP performs well on Color and Shape but its performance on all the other tasks is poor.
On the widely used DrawBench prompts, 25% of the captions evaluate the generations for attribute binding,
counting, spatial relationships and text corruption. Thus, using CLIP to evaluate generations on such prompts
in DrawBench is not ideal. S ELF E VAL avoids this problem by directly leveraging the diffusion model itself.


5     C ONCLUSION

In this paper, we presented S ELF E VAL which is an automated way to assess the text-understanding capabilities
of diffusion models. Since S ELF E VAL uses the diffusion model itself to estimate the likelihood of real images
given text prompts, it does not require external discriminative models for such assessments. We showed that
evaluations using S ELF E VAL agree with human evaluations across a range of models and tasks demonstrating
that S ELF E VAL is a reliable automated metric. We believe that such metrics can greatly speed up research in
diffusion models and further research to improve the metrics is necessary. Since S ELF E VAL’s formulation is
not limited to text-to-image diffusion models, we believe it can also serve to evaluate other types of conditioned
diffusion models such as text-to-audio, text-to-video etc. In the future, we want to further generalize S ELF E VAL
to work with non-diffusion based generative models.

                                                    9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Tim Brooks, Aleksander Holynski, and Alexei A. Efros. Instructpix2pix: Learning to follow image editing
  instructions. In CVPR, 2023. 2

Kevin Clark and Priyank Jaini. Text-to-image diffusion models are zero-shot classifiers. In ICLR 2023 Workshop
  on Multimodal Representation Learning: Perks and Pitfalls, 2023. URL https://openreview.net/
  forum?id=laWYA-LXlNb. 3

Prafulla Dhariwal and Alex Nichol. Diffusion models beat gans on image synthesis. ArXiv, abs/2105.05233,
  2021. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:234357997. 2

Ian J. Goodfellow, Jean Pouget-Abadie, Mehdi Mirza, Bing Xu, David Warde-Farley, Sherjil Ozair, Aaron C.
  Courville, and Yoshua Bengio. Generative adversarial networks. Communications of the ACM, 63:139 – 144,
  2014. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:12209503. 2

Xuehai He, Weixi Feng, Tsu-Jui Fu, Varun Jampani, Arjun Akula, Pradyumna Narayana, Sugato Basu,
  William Yang Wang, and Xin Eric Wang. Discriminative diffusion models as few-shot vision and language
  learners, 2023. 3

Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. In Hugo Larochelle,
  Marc’Aurelio Ranzato, Raia Hadsell, Maria-Florina Balcan, and Hsuan-Tien Lin (eds.), Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems 33: Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2020,
  NeurIPS 2020, December 6-12, 2020, virtual, 2020. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/
  paper/2020/hash/4c5bcfec8584af0d967f1ab10179ca4b-Abstract.html. 2

Yushi Hu, Benlin Liu, Jungo Kasai, Yizhong Wang, Mari Ostendorf, Ranjay Krishna, and Noah A Smith. Tifa:
  Accurate and interpretable text-to-image faithfulness evaluation with question answering. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2303.11897, 2023. 6

Gabriel Ilharco, Mitchell Wortsman, Ross Wightman, Cade Gordon, Nicholas Carlini, Rohan Taori, Achal
  Dave, Vaishaal Shankar, Hongseok Namkoong, John Miller, Hannaneh Hajishirzi, Ali Farhadi, and Ludwig
  Schmidt. Openclip, July 2021. URL https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.5143773. If you use
  this software, please cite it as below. 6, 9

Justin Johnson, Bharath Hariharan, Laurens van der Maaten, Li Fei-Fei, C. Lawrence Zitnick, and Ross B.
  Girshick. Clevr: A diagnostic dataset for compositional language and elementary visual reasoning. 2017
  IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 1988–1997, 2016. URL https:
  //api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:15458100. 6

Diederik P. Kingma and Max Welling. Auto-encoding variational bayes. In Yoshua Bengio and Yann LeCun
  (eds.), 2nd International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2014, Banff, AB, Canada, April
  14-16, 2014, Conference Track Proceedings, 2014. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1312.6114. 2

Ranjay Krishna, Yuke Zhu, Oliver Groth, Justin Johnson, Kenji Hata, Joshua Kravitz, Stephanie Chen, Yannis
  Kalantidis, Li-Jia Li, David A. Shamma, Michael S. Bernstein, and Li Fei-Fei. Visual genome: Connecting
  language and vision using crowdsourced dense image annotations. Int. J. Comput. Vision, 123(1):32–73,
  may 2017. ISSN 0920-5691. doi: 10.1007/s11263-016-0981-7. URL https://doi.org/10.1007/
  s11263-016-0981-7. 6

Martha Lewis, Nihal V. Nayak, Qinan Yu, Jack Merullo, and Elizabeth-Jane Pavlick. Does clip bind concepts?
 probing compositionality in large image models. ArXiv, abs/2212.10537, 2022. URL https://api.
 semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:254877746. 6

Alexander Cong Li, Mihir Prabhudesai, Shivam Duggal, Ellis Langham Brown, and Deepak Pathak. Your dif-
  fusion model is secretly a zero-shot classifier. In ICML 2023 Workshop on Structured Probabilistic Inference
  & Generative Modeling, 2023a. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=Ck3yXRdQXD. 3, 8,
  9

                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Yuheng Li, Haotian Liu, Qingyang Wu, Fangzhou Mu, Jianwei Yang, Jianfeng Gao, Chunyuan Li, and Yong Jae
  Lee. Gligen: Open-set grounded text-to-image generation. 2023 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
  and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 22511–22521, 2023b. URL https://api.semanticscholar.
  org/CorpusID:255942528. 2
Tsung-Yi Lin, Michael Maire, Serge Belongie, James Hays, Pietro Perona, Deva Ramanan, Piotr Dollár, and
  C. Lawrence Zitnick. Microsoft coco: Common objects in context. In David Fleet, Tomas Pajdla, Bernt
  Schiele, and Tinne Tuytelaars (eds.), Computer Vision – ECCV 2014, pp. 740–755, Cham, 2014. Springer
  International Publishing. ISBN 978-3-319-10602-1. 6, 9
Ruoshi Liu, Rundi Wu, Basile Van Hoorick, Pavel Tokmakov, Sergey Zakharov, and Carl Vondrick. Zero-1-to-3:
  Zero-shot one image to 3d object. ICCV, 2023. 2
Soumik Mukhopadhyay, Matthew Gwilliam, Vatsal Agarwal, Namitha Padmanabhan, Archana Swaminathan,
  Srinidhi Hegde, Tianyi Zhou, and Abhinav Shrivastava. Diffusion models beat gans on image classification,
  2023. 3
Alexander Quinn Nichol, Prafulla Dhariwal, Aditya Ramesh, Pranav Shyam, Pamela Mishkin, Bob McGrew,
  Ilya Sutskever, and Mark Chen. GLIDE: towards photorealistic image generation and editing with text-guided
  diffusion models. In Kamalika Chaudhuri, Stefanie Jegelka, Le Song, Csaba Szepesvári, Gang Niu, and
  Sivan Sabato (eds.), International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2022, 17-23 July 2022, Baltimore,
  Maryland, USA, volume 162 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 16784–16804. PMLR, 2022.
  URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v162/nichol22a.html. 2
Dong Huk Park, Samaneh Azadi, Xihui Liu, Trevor Darrell, and Anna Rohrbach. Benchmark for compositional
  text-to-image synthesis. In Thirty-fifth Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems Datasets and
  Benchmarks Track (Round 1), 2021. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=bKBhQhPeKaF.
  9
William Peebles and Saining Xie. Scalable diffusion models with transformers. ICCV, 2023. 2
Alec Radford, Luke Metz, and Soumith Chintala. Unsupervised representation learning with deep con-
  volutional generative adversarial networks. CoRR, abs/1511.06434, 2015. URL https://api.
  semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:11758569. 2
Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, A. Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal, Girish Sastry,
  Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, Gretchen Krueger, and Ilya Sutskever. Learning transferable
  visual models from natural language supervision. In ICML, 2021. 3, 5
Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Katherine Lee, Sharan Narang, Michael Matena, Yanqi Zhou, Wei
  Li, and Peter J. Liu. Exploring the limits of transfer learning with a unified text-to-text transformer. Journal of
  Machine Learning Research, 21(140):1–67, 2020. URL http://jmlr.org/papers/v21/20-074.
  html. 3, 7
Aditya Ramesh, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alex Nichol, Casey Chu, and Mark Chen. Hierarchical text-conditional
  image generation with clip latents, 2022. 2, 3, 7
Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer. High-resolution image
  synthesis with latent diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
  Pattern Recognition, pp. 10684–10695, 2022. 2, 3, 7, 9
Chitwan Saharia, William Chan, Saurabh Saxena, Lala Li, Jay Whang, Emily L. Denton, Seyed Kamyar Seyed
  Ghasemipour, Burcu Karagol Ayan, Seyedeh Sara Mahdavi, Raphael Gontijo Lopes, Tim Salimans, Jonathan
  Ho, David J. Fleet, and Mohammad Norouzi. Photorealistic text-to-image diffusion models with deep lan-
  guage understanding. ArXiv, abs/2205.11487, 2022. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/
  CorpusID:248986576. 2, 3, 6, 7, 9
Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Eric Weiss, Niru Maheswaranathan, and Surya Ganguli. Deep unsupervised learning
  using nonequilibrium thermodynamics. In Francis Bach and David Blei (eds.), Proceedings of the 32nd
  International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 37 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research,
  pp. 2256–2265, Lille, France, 07–09 Jul 2015. PMLR. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/
  v37/sohl-dickstein15.html. 2, 4


                                                   11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Jiaming Song, Chenlin Meng, and Stefano Ermon. Denoising diffusion implicit models. In Interna-
   tional Conference on Learning Representations, 2021. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
   St1giarCHLP. 6
Yang Song and Stefano Ermon.      Generative modeling by estimating gradients of the data distri-
  bution.    In H. Wallach, H. Larochelle, A. Beygelzimer, F. d'Alché-Buc, E. Fox, and R. Gar-
  nett (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 32. Curran Associates,
  Inc., 2019. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2019/file/
  3001ef257407d5a371a96dcd947c7d93-Paper.pdf. 2
Tristan Thrush, Ryan Jiang, Max Bartolo, Amanpreet Singh, Adina Williams, Douwe Kiela, and Candace Ross.
  Winoground: Probing vision and language models for visio-linguistic compositionality. 2022 IEEE/CVF
  Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 5228–5238, 2022. URL https:
  //api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:248006414. 3, 8, 9
Aaron van den Oord, Oriol Vinyals, and koray kavukcuoglu.        Neural discrete representation learn-
  ing.    In I. Guyon, U. Von Luxburg, S. Bengio, H. Wallach, R. Fergus, S. Vishwanathan, and
  R. Garnett (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 30. Curran Associates,
  Inc., 2017. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2017/file/
  7a98af17e63a0ac09ce2e96d03992fbc-Paper.pdf. 2
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Ł ukasz Kaiser,
  and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. In I. Guyon, U. Von Luxburg, S. Bengio, H. Wallach,
  R. Fergus, S. Vishwanathan, and R. Garnett (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  volume 30. Curran Associates, Inc., 2017. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_
  files/paper/2017/file/3f5ee243547dee91fbd053c1c4a845aa-Paper.pdf. 2
Pascal Vincent. A connection between score matching and denoising autoencoders. Neural Computation, 23
  (7):1661–1674, 2011. doi: 10.1162/NECO a 00142. 2
Mert Yuksekgonul, Federico Bianchi, Pratyusha Kalluri, Dan Jurafsky, and James Zou. When and why vision-
 language models behave like bags-of-words, and what to do about it? In International Conference on Learn-
 ing Representations, 2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=KRLUvxh8uaX. 6, 7
Lvmin Zhang and Maneesh Agrawala. Adding conditional control to text-to-image diffusion models, 2023. 2


                                              12
