Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


M ODEL -BASED T RANSFER RL WITH TASK -AGNOSTIC
O FFLINE P RETRAINING
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                             A BSTRACT
         Pretraining RL models on offline datasets is a promising way to improve their
         training efficiency in online tasks, but challenging due to the inherent mismatch
         in dynamics and behaviors across tasks or data domains. We present Vid2Act, a
         model-based RL method that learns to transfer potentially useful dynamics and
         action demonstrations from various offline datasets to a novel task. The main idea
         is to use the world models not only as simulators for behavior learning but also
         as tools to measure the task relevance for both dynamics representation transfer
         and policy transfer. Specifically, we build a time-varying, task-selective distillation
         loss to generate a set of offline-to-online similarity weights. These weights serve
         two purposes: (i) adaptively transferring the task-agnostic knowledge of physical
         dynamics to facilitate world model training, and (ii) learning to replay relevant
         source actions to guide the target policy. We demonstrate the advantages of Vid2Act
         over the state-of-the-art methods in Meta-World and DeepMind Control Suite.


1    I NTRODUCTION
Reinforcement learning (RL) approaches have made significant advancements in solving a wide
range of sequential control problems (Ebert et al., 2018; Sekar et al., 2020; Laskin et al., 2020b).
In the realm of visual RL, agents need to not only conduct representation learning from raw image
inputs but also perform behavior learning in the learned state space, which requires a large number
of interactions with an online environment and limits the applications in the real world. Recently,
model-based RL algorithms have greatly improved sample efficiency by concurrently learning a
differentiable simulator of the environment (i.e., the world model), and using imagined rollouts
generated by the world model for policy optimization (Kaiser et al., 2019; Hafner et al., 2020).
Nevertheless, the process of training an effective world model from scratch remains a time-consuming
and challenging pursuit, often yielding less generalizable representations.
To address this problem, many recent approaches (Stooke et al., 2021; Sun et al., 2023; Xu et al.,
2023; Taiga et al., 2023) adopt the pretraining and finetuning paradigm to pre-learn representation
models on off-the-shelf offline datasets and transfer the learned prior knowledge to a novel online RL
domain. For example, SMART (Sun et al., 2023) exploits a Transformer model to learn generalizable
visual representations from reward-free, offline interaction data under a control-centric pretraining
objective. Similarly, our focus lies in leveraging multi-task offline data without reward to improve the
visual RL performance in a novel online task. However, it is crucial to recognize that, despite the
effectiveness of the pretraining method, a straightforward finetuning method may still suffer from the
potential discrepancy in visual observations, physical dynamics, or even action spaces across task
domains. Therefore, unlike SMART, our approach aims to:

1. Adaptively identify the relevance between offline and online tasks in an unsupervised manner,
   allowing for positive domain transfer even when some offline data may seem unrelated.
2. Exploit relevant actions from the offline datasets to guide policy optimization for the new task.

As shown in Figure 1, we propose a new task-selective transfer RL approach called Vid2Act to
reduce the potential discrepancies between the pretraining stage and the transferring stage. In the
pretraining stage, we exploit reward-free offline trajectories of image-action pairs to train task-specific
world models, which learn the observation-to-state mapping functions and state-to-state transition
functions for different source tasks. In the transferring stage, instead of performing direct finetuning,


                                                    1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                Oﬄine Mul3-tasks                                                      Online Task
                                                        Dynamics Transfer


                                                World
                                                Model
                      push
                                                         Policy Transfer
                                                                                     window open
    peg insert side             drawer close
                                                  Task Selec3on


Figure 1: We aim to build an offline-to-online transfer RL agent for visual control problems, which
is challenging due to the discrepancies between the target task and the source tasks from which the
offline datasets are collected. The key idea of our approach is to leverage the world models to enable
positive knowledge transfer through task-selective dynamics distillation and behavior guidance.

we leverage the source world models as teacher models to provide flexible regularization to the
representation learning process of the target-domain agent. This is achieved through a task-selective
distillation loss, where we learn a set of importance weights over the teacher models to adaptively
transfer the prior knowledge of physical dynamics gathered from the offline data to the target world
model.
In addition to their impact on representation learning, the importance weights also directly contribute
to the policy optimization process conducted over the imaginations of the target world model.
Specifically, Vid2Act incorporates a “generative action replay” module. During behavior learning,
it serves to reproduce source-domain actions based on the target-domain states, which have been
aligned to the corresponding source-domain state spaces by the distillation loss. By reusing the
importance weights, we can dynamically select the most relevant source task at different time steps
and replay its source expert behaviors to provide effective guidance for target policy improvement.
We claim the proposed method to be “task-agnostic” because our experimental results show that it
consistently enables Vid2Act to achieve positive domain transfer even when the available source
offline data appears less relevant to the target task.
We evaluate Vid2Act on the Meta-World benchmark (Yu et al., 2020) and the DeepMind Control
Suite (Tassa et al., 2018). Our approach shows remarkable performance improvements over both the
vanilla model-based RL baselines like DreamerV2 (Hafner et al., 2021) and existing unsupervised
pretraining methods for transfer RL, such as APV (Seo et al., 2022) and SMART (Sun et al., 2023).

2    R ELATED W ORK
Visual RL. In visual control tasks, the agent needs to learn policy from high-dimensional and
complex observations. Learning generalized representation by either unsupervised (Gelada et al.,
2019; Laskin et al., 2020a; Zhang et al., 2020; Schwarzer et al., 2020; Stooke et al., 2021; Yarats
et al., 2021) or self-supervised manners (Choudhary et al., 2022; Yang et al., 2022; Ze et al., 2023),
is a natural way to learn an auxiliary encoder of images for visual control tasks. Prior approaches
consist of model-based methods to optimize latent dynamics model (Hafner et al., 2020; 2019; 2021;
Pan et al., 2022), and model-free methods to utilize data augmentation (Laskin et al., 2020b; Yarats
et al., 2020; Hansen et al., 2021; Cho et al., 2022) and contrastive representation learning (Oord et al.,
2018; Anand et al., 2019; Mazoure et al., 2020; Laskin et al., 2020a; Nair et al., 2022; Li et al., 2023).
Similar to our work, there are several methods that pretrain RL models on offline datasets and then
finetune them on the online target task (Finn et al., 2016; Dwibedi et al., 2018; Zhan et al., 2020;
Laskin et al., 2020a; Stooke et al., 2021; Schwarzer et al., 2021; Seo et al., 2022). Except for not
bridging the domain gap between pretraining source data and RL tasks, they have shown attractive
performance on vision-based RL tasks. In our framework, we do not directly finetune the parameters
of the pretrained models, but rather learn more useful world models by distillation.
Transfer RL. Previous experiences across a diverse range of tasks can be beneficial in solving
online control tasks, even when encountering them for the first time. To quickly leverage the past
information to the new environments, many transfer learning approaches (Ng et al., 1999; Wiewiora
et al., 2003; Li et al., 2014; Hinton et al., 2015; Rusu et al., 2015; Long et al., 2015; Gupta et al.,
2016; Rebuffi et al., 2017; Yin & Pan, 2017; Zhang & Ma, 2018; Hester et al., 2018; Nair et al.,


                                                    2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


2018; Marom & Rosman, 2018; Rebuffi et al., 2018; Xuhong et al., 2018; Liu et al., 2019; Li et al.,
2019; Yao et al., 2020; Ma et al., 2019; Klissarov & Precup, 2020; Yang & Nachum, 2021; Zheng
et al., 2022; Kadokawa et al., 2023) are proposed to bridge the gap across different tasks or domains.
APV (Seo et al., 2022) employs action-free videos of multiple domains to pretrain an action-free
recurrent state-space model (RSSM), which focuses on learning visual representation from offline
datasets. Xu et al. (2023) trains a world model by using multiple offline tasks both in pretraining
and finetuning to overcome the challenges of catastrophical forgetting. Recently, some methods
leveraging Transformer have been proposed to facilitate transfer learning in control tasks (Xie et al.,
2023; Sun et al., 2023). SMART(Sun et al., 2023) designs a control-centric pretraining objective
for Decision Transformers(Chen et al., 2021) to captures the common essential information relevant
to short-term control and long-term control across tasks. A work closely related to our approach is
Knowledge Flow(Liu et al., 2019), which involves training multiple teacher models and distilling
knowledge from their layers to a student model. In our work, we propose a task-selective distillation
strategy to fully utilize both the dynamics and action information from the source tasks. It introduces
a more flexible way to adaptively transfer useful knowledge to help downstream tasks.

3     P ROBLEM F ORMULATION
In the visual control task, the agent learns the behavior policy directly from high-dimensional
observations, which is formulated as a partially observable Markov decision process (POMDP) with
a tuple (O, A, T , R). Here, O is the observation space, A is the action space, R(st , at ) is the reward
function, and T (st+1 | st , at ) is the state-transition distribution. At each timestep t ∈ [1; T ], the
agent takes an action at ∈ A to interact with the environment and receives a reward rt = R(st , at ).
                                                                                         PT
The objective is to learn a policy that maximizes the expected cumulative reward Ep [ τ =1 rτ ].
To improve policy learning and sample efficiency of visual RL, we aim to transfer previous knowledge
from multiple offline tasks. The offline datasets are reward-free and exclusively consist of image-
action pairs {(ot , at )}. It is important to note that there might be substantial distribution shifts in
observations (O), state transition functions (T ), and behaviors (A) across task domains, which pose
significant challenges in transfer learning, providing strong motivation for the development of a
dynamic task-selective transfer RL approach. The primary goal of our approach is to efficiently bridge
the gap between tasks in terms of state representations, physical dynamics, and action behaviors.

4     M ETHOD
In this section, we present a comprehensive overview of the pretraining process in the source datasets
and the subsequent transfer learning process in the target task. The transfer learning process consists
of two stages, i.e., task-selective dynamics transfer and behavior learning with generative action
replay, as shown in Figure 2 and described in detail in Algorithm 1.

4.1   P RELIMINARY: W HY MODEL - BASED RL FOR DOMAIN TRANSFER ?
Our overall pipeline is built upon model-based RL, which involves learning the underlying dynamics
from a buffer of past experiences, optimizing the control policy through future rollouts of compact
model states, and executing actions in the environment to append the experience buffer. More
precisely, we introduce a transfer RL approach based on the model-based DreamerV2 method (Hafner
et al., 2021). Unlike previous work, the world model in our approach serves not only as a simulator
for policy learning but also provides a measure of task relevance for both dynamics representation
transfer and behavior transfer discussed in the following sections. Additionally, after pretraining the
world models, subsequent algorithms can rely on the fixed parameters of the source models, making
it more universal in real-world scenarios and decoupled from the source data.

4.2   M ULTI -TASK O FFLINE P RETRAINING OF W ORLD M ODELS
As illustrated in Figure 2, we consider multiple reward-free, action-conditioned datasets denoted
as D. These datasets comprise expert data that has been previously collected from N tasks and is
readily available for our use. Our initial step involves pretraining a batch of action-conditioned video
prediction models with independent model parameters, denoted as {Fϕi }N     i=1 . In contrast to APV (Seo
et al., 2022), an existing model-based pretraining-finetuning transfer RL method, our approach
incorporates actions during the pretraining phase, which is reasonable in learning the consequences


                                                   3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



 Oﬄine Pretraining          Online Transfer
                                                     Fϕ1                   fdistill
    Source     Teacher
   datasets    models            Online              Fϕ2                   fdistill
                                 buﬀer
      D
                                   B                                                                          Dynamic
                  Fϕ1                                FϕN
                                                                           fdistill
                                                                                               Ldistill       Transfer
                  Fϕ2
                                             Student model                        w
                                          (Train from scratch)
                                                   Fφ
                  FϕN

                                                               Ac8on genera8on         Actor              a    Policy
                                                                   model
                                                                                                              Transfer
                                                                     Gθ                Lvae

           input /output                      Genera8ve ac8on guidance                Task selec8on weights

Figure 2: Left: We employ multiple offline action-conditioned video datasets to train multiple teacher
models, whose parameters are frozen during the subsequent transfer learning process. Right: We
dynamically distill prior knowledge from the teacher models for dynamics representation learning,
and acquire a set of task-similarity weights W. These weights are further used to reproduce the most
relevant source actions to guide the target policy through a generative action replay model Gθ .


of state transitions. Similar to Dreamer (Hafner et al., 2020), the pretrained models consist of three
main components as follows:
                              Representation model: q(st | st−1 , at−1 , ot )
                                  Dynamics model: p(ŝt | st−1 , at−1 )                                             (1)
                                    Decoder model: p(ôt | st ).
The representation model extracts posterior latent states st from observations ot , previous states st−1 ,
and previous actions at−1 . The dynamics model follows the Recurrent State Space Model (RSSM)
architecture from PlaNet (Hafner et al., 2019) to predict the prior latent states ŝt without access to the
corresponding ot . The decoder reconstructs ôt given the latent states. All components are optimized
jointly using the following loss function:
                    X T
       Lsource = E {     − ln p(ot | st ) + β KL[q(st | st−1 , at−1 , ot ) ∥ p(st | st−1 , at−1 )]},                (2)
                     t=1
                         |     {z      } |                          {z                           }
                           Image reconstruction                       KL divergence

where β is a hyperparameter of the Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence that regularizes the approximate
posterior learned from the representation model toward the prior learned from the dynamics model.

4.3   TASK -S ELECTIVE DYNAMICS T RANSFER
It is important to note that, even though the pretraining method is effective, a simple finetuning
approach may encounter challenges due to the potential discrepancy in visual observations, physical
dynamics, or even action spaces across task domains. Therefore, when a novel target task emerges,
we initialize a student world model Fφ from scratch, while freezing the parameters of {Fϕi }N
                                                                                            i=1 and
using them as teacher models to transfer the dynamics representations from the source domains
(see Figure 2). In addition to the model components outlined in Equation (1), Fφ also incorporates
a reward model represented as r̂t ∼ p(rt | st ). To avoid confusion of notations, we use sit to
denote the state of i-th pretrained teacher model, and et to denote the state of the target student
model. Given a latent state denoted by et−1 and a corresponding action at−1 , we first transit this
state to the next time step individually using the teacher models and the student model, obtaining
{sit ∼ p(et−1 , at−1 ; ϕ)}N
                          i=1 and et ∼ p(et−1 , at−1 ; φ).

To close the distance between the marginal distributions of state transitions produced by the source
world model and the dynamics estimated by each teacher model, we incorporate a distillation network


                                                           4
    Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    Algorithm 1: Vid2Act with improved dynamics learning, behavior learning & policy deployment
1  Hyperparameters: H: Imagination horizon
2  Initialize the offline replay buffer D with multiple tasks.
 3 Initialize the online replay buffer B with random episodes.
 4 while not converged do
 5      for update step c = 1 . . . C do
 6           Draw data sequences {(ot , at , rt )}Tt=1 ∼ B.
 7           // Dynamics learning and source action replay
 8           Compute distillation loss using Equation (4) and update world model parameters using Equation (5)
 9           Draw data sequences {(ot , at )}Tt=1 ∼ D from each source task.
10           Compute action generation model loss using Equation (7) and update model parameters.
11           // Behavior learning
12           for time step i = t . . . t + H do
13                 Select the task label k with highest confidence according to Equation (3)
14                 Imagine an action ai ∼ π(ai | ei , Gθ (ei , k)).
15                 Predict rewards ri ∼ p(ri | ei ) and values vψ (ei )
16           end
17           Update the policy and value models in Equation (8) using estimated rewards and values.
18      end
19      // Environment interaction
20      o1 ← env.reset()
21      for time step t = 1 . . . T do
22           Calculate the posterior representation et ∼ q (et | et−1 , at−1 , ot ) from history.
23           Use the teacher models to obtain {ŝit ∼ p(et−1 , at−1 ; ϕ) | i ∈ [1, N ]} and determine the task
               label k with highest confidence according to Equation (3)
24           Compute ai ∼ π(ai | ei , Gθ (ei , k)).
25           rt , ot+1 ← env.step(at )
26      end
27      Add experience to the online replay buffer B ← B ∪ {(ot , at , rt )Tt=1 }.
28 end


    in Fφ , denoted as fdistill , which takes the form of a multilayer perceptron (MLP). The role of this
    module is to extract transferable features from the predicted states of the teacher models. In other
    words, it transforms the states sit predicted by the teacher models into a set of transferable features
    {uit = fdistill (sit )}N
                           i=1 . These features are then used in the knowledge distillation loss.

    Intuitively, each source task may hold varying impacts on the dynamics learning of the target visual
    control task. We introduce the concept of task-similarity weights and propose to optimize these
    weights through the knowledge distillation loss. By learning this set of weights, we can dynamically
    transfer knowledge in an adaptive manner based on offline-online task relevance. To compute the
    similarity weight W, we concatenate the predicted state sit of each teacher model and the predicted
    state et of the student model. This concatenated representation is then fed into a fully-connected
    layer fweight , followed by a softmax activation function:

                Task selection weights: W = {wi }N                        i        N
                                                 i=1 = Softmax({fweight (st ∗ et )}i=1 ),                        (3)
    where ∗ denotes the operation of concatenation. We then minimize the Euclidean distance between
    pairs of states as follows, taking into account the corresponding task-similarity weights:
                                                 N X
                                                 X   T
                                      Ldistill =        wi · ∥ et − uit ∥22 .                    (4)
                                                  i=1 t=1

    The overall objective of the student model can be written as follows, where α is a hyperparameter:
                                     T
                                  hh X
                    Ltarget = E         β KL q(et | et−1 , at−1 , ot ) ∥ p(et | et−1 , at−1 )
                                    t=1
                                        |                       {z                           }
                                                                  KL divergence                                  (5)
                                                                             i      i
                                     − ln p(ot | et ) − ln p(rt | et ) + α Ldistill .
                                     |     {z      }|       {z      }
                                    Image reconstruction Reward prediction


                                                            5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Equation (4) is the fundamental basis for Vid2Act. When the dynamics of the source domain are
similar to the target task, the latter term of this loss naturally becomes smaller. On the other hand,
for source tasks with significantly different dynamics from the target task, the model will minimize
the weight term in order to minimize this loss. The use of the task-selective distillation loss allows
the student model to effectively learn from multiple teachers while considering their respective
importance weights. This approach grants the student model the ability to acquire significant prior
knowledge regarding intricate physical dynamics from the most relevant source tasks. By selectively
distilling knowledge from these source tasks, the student model can adapt and incorporate valuable
information to enhance its overall learning capabilities.

4.4     TASK -S ELECTIVE B EHAVIOR T RANSFER
Generative replay of selected source actions. In the representation learning stage for the target
task, we reuse the offline source datasets to learn an action generation model with the explicit task
label k ∈ {1, . . . , N } to provide guidance for target behavior learning. Inspired by BCQ (Fujimoto
et al., 2019), which is an offline RL method, we design Gθ using a state-conditioned variational
auto-encoder (VAE) (Kingma & Welling, 2013; Sohn et al., 2015). The action generation model
Gθ consists of an encoder Eθ1 and a decoder Dθ2 . The encoder takes a state-action pair and a task
label k, and outputs a Gaussian distribution N (µ, σ). The state s of a source task distilled by fdistill ,
along with a latent vector z sampled from the Gaussian distribution and a task label k, is passed to
the decoder Dθ2 (s, z) which outputs an action:
                       µ, σ = Eθ1 (s, a, k),   â = Dθ2 (s, z, k),   z ∼ N (µ, σ).                      (6)
The action generation model Gθ is optimized by
                                    T
                                   hX                                     i
                       Lreplay = E    (a − â)2 + KL (N (µ, σ) ∥ N (0, 1)) .                            (7)
                                     t=1

Behavior learning with generative action guidance We utilize an actor-critic algorithm to learn
the policy over the predicted future state and reward trajectories. As shown in Figure 2, we use the
action generation model Gθ to promote policy learning, which 1) provides an efficient indication
when a strong correlation exists between the source and target tasks, and 2) expends exploration of
action space when there is little correlation between them. The parameters in Gθ are frozen at this
stage. Notably, instead of using the output of Gθ , we use the feature of Gθ before output, which is
more informative. Reusing the similarity weights learned in dynamics transfer, we can dynamically
select task label k with the highest confidence to generate action guidance. Therefore, we modify the
action model and the value model as follows:
                                                                                        t+H
                                                                                        X
    Action model: at ∼ π(at | et , Gθ (et , k)),    Value model: vψ (et ) ≈ Eπ(·|et )         γ k−t rk , (8)
                                                                                        k=t

where H is the imagination time horizon. Similar to the process of behavior learning, we also utilize
the action generation model Gθ to draw action from the action model during policy deployment. As
shown in Lines 23-24 in Algorithm 1, the action guidance is dependent on current states ei and the
source task label with the highest task-similarity weights, which may evolve over time.

5     E XPERIMENTS
5.1     E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP
We evaluate Vid2Act on two visual RL environments in an offline-to-online domain transfer setup:
• Meta-World (Yu et al., 2020): It simulates 50 manipulation tasks, all involving the same robotic
  arm. We collect 6 offline datasets using expert experiences from button press topdown, door open,
  drawer close, peg insert side, pick place, and push. Each of them contains 10 demonstrations.
• DeepMind Control Suite (Tassa et al., 2018): It is a standard benchmark for visual-based RL
  that contains a diverse set of continuous control tasks. We collect offline datasets from 4 tasks,
  i.e., cheetah run, hopper stand, walker walk, and walker run. Each task contains 50 trajectories of
  expert experiences.


                                                    6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                    Bu#on Press                                        Coﬀee Push


                   Drawer Open                                          Door Lock


                   Window Open                                         Door Close


Figure 3: Performance comparison with the state-of-the-art methods on 6 tasks from Meta-World as
measured on the success rate. Vid2Act generally outperforms the compared models.


We compare Vid2Act with the following approaches:
• DreamerV2 (Hafner et al., 2021): A model-based RL method that learns the policy directly from
  latent states in the world model. For a fair comparison, we pretrain this model with offline datasets.
• APV (Seo et al., 2022): A model-based RL method that stacks an action-conditional RSSM model
  on top of the pretrained action-free RSSM model. It utilizes the pretrained representations for
  finetuning. We train this model by following its training setting.
• Iso-Dream (Pan et al., 2022): A strong baseline for visual RL method that focuses on modeling
  different dynamics based on controllability. It rolls out noncontrollable states into the future and
  performs policy optimization based on the decoupled latent imaginations.
• SMART (Sun et al., 2023): A generic multi-task pretraining framework that designs a Control
  Transformer coupled with a control-centric pretraining objective in a self-supervised manner.


                                                   7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                   Bu#on Press                                         Drawer Open


Figure 4: Ablation studies of Vid2Act that shows the impact of learning time-varying task importance
weights (orange) and optimizing behavior learning with generative action guidance (green).

             Drawer Open of Meta-World                            Quadruped Walk of DMC


              Figure 5: Analyses on the impact of different source task configurations.


5.2   M ETA -W ORLD

Implementation details. We first pretrain the teacher models of action-conditioned video prediction
model by minimizing the objective in Equation (2) for 200K gradient steps. Our model is evaluated
in 6 tasks, i.e., button press, coffee push, drawer open, door lock, window open, and door close. In all
tasks, the episode length is 500 steps without any action repeat. The number of environment steps
is limited to 300K. We run all tasks with 3 seeds and report the mean success rate and standard
deviations of 10 episodes.
Quantitative comparisons. As shown in Figure 3, our Vid2Act generally outperforms other
methods in 6 tasks. We improve DreamerV2 about 25% in button press and 90% in coffee push.
Iso-Dream, which serves as a robust baseline for addressing visual control tasks using isolated state
transition branches, exhibits limitations in handling a majority of the tasks in Meta-World. Compared
with APV, our model is more stable and effective, especially in drawer open.
Ablation studies. We conduct ablation studies to confirm the validity of learning a set of time-
varying task importance weights and behavior learning with generative action guidance on two tasks,
as shown in Figure 4. Without the process of learning the importance weights (orange) to measure
the similarity between source and target tasks, the performance of our model has decreased by about
25% in button press, and it requires more timesteps to improve the behavior policy in drawer open. It
demonstrates that information in different source tasks has different impacts on the target task, and a
task-selective knowledge distillation loss with importance weights encourages the student model to
adaptively find useful prior knowledge and transfer it to help the dynamics learning in downstream
tasks. Moreover, we evaluate Vid2Act without generative action guidance for behavior learning
(green). The result shows that our proposed task-selective behavior learning strategy can identify
potentially valuable source actions and employ them as exemplar guidance for the target policy.

                                                   8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                Quadruped Walk                                     Quadruped Run


Figure 6: Performance comparison on two tasks from DeepMind Control Suite as measured on the
episode rewards. Our Vid2Act with dynamic knowledge distillation achieves significant improvements
compared with existing model-based RL approaches.


Impact of fewer or less relevant source tasks. To analyze the robustness of our approach to
different source domain configurations, we sequentially decrease the number of source domain tasks
according to the learned importance weights, i.e., gradually removing the task with the highest
importance weight. The results are shown in Figure 5. We have two observations in this figure. First,
compared with the baseline model that is solely trained on the target task, our approach consistently
achieves positive offline-to-online transfer even when it can only access parts of the source datasets
with lower importance weights. Second, as the number of the source tasks grows, the performance of
Vid2Act improves as well, demonstrating its effectiveness in identifying task similarity and improving
the target policy with the expanded offline datasets.

5.3   D EEP M IND C ONTROL S UITE
Implementation details. In this environment, the episode length is 1,000 steps with the action
repeat of 2, and the reward ranges from 0 to 1. We pretrain four teacher models for four source tasks
with 200K gradient steps. For the online target tasks, we train our method for 200K iterations, which
results in 400K environment steps. The input image size is set to 64 × 64, the batch size is 50, and
the imagination horizon is 50. The hyperparameters β and α are set to 1 in Equation (5).
Quantitative comparisons. We evaluate Vid2Act with baselines on the mean episode rewards and
standard deviations. The results of quadruped walk and quadruped run are shown in Figure 6. Our
framework achieves significant improvements compared with existing model-based RL approaches.
For example, Vid2Act performs nearly 100 higher performance on the task of quadruped walk and
quadruped run than DreamerV2 after 400k steps environment interactions. These results show that
our model can effectively transfer valuable dynamics knowledge from source tasks. Compared with
APV, which only uses the pretrained action-free world model as initialization to train downstream
tasks, Vid2Act is encouraged to learn more precise state transitions based on action input and more
useful source dynamics based on task-selective knowledge distillation. Moreover, the learned task
selection weights help the agent adaptively transfer potentially useful action demonstrations from
offline datasets. Such as quadruped walk, our agent tends to select a source task with the greatest
relevance, i.e., walker walk in this online task.

6     C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we proposed a new task-selective transfer learning framework called Vid2Act that
improves visual RL with offline datasets with multiple tasks. Vid2Act has two contributions. First,
it provides a novel model-based pretraining and transfer learning pipeline for visual RL. Unlike
APV (Seo et al., 2022), it transfers action-conditioned dynamics from multiple source tasks with a
set of importance weights learned by the world models. Second, it provides a novel task-selective
behavior learning strategy that identifies potentially valuable source actions and employs them as
exemplar guidance for the target policy. Experiments in the Meta-World and the DeepMind Control
environments demonstrated that Vid2Act significantly outperforms existing visual RL approaches.


                                                  9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Ankesh Anand, Evan Racah, Sherjil Ozair, Yoshua Bengio, Marc-Alexandre Côté, and R Devon
  Hjelm. Unsupervised state representation learning in atari. In NeurIPS, volume 32, 2019.
Lili Chen, Kevin Lu, Aravind Rajeswaran, Kimin Lee, Aditya Grover, Misha Laskin, Pieter Abbeel,
  Aravind Srinivas, and Igor Mordatch. Decision transformer: Reinforcement learning via sequence
  modeling. In NeurIPS, volume 34, pp. 15084–15097, 2021.
Daesol Cho, Dongseok Shim, and H Jin Kim. S2p: State-conditioned image synthesis for data
  augmentation in offline reinforcement learning. In NeurIPS, 2022.
Rahul Choudhary, Rahee Walambe, and Ketan Kotecha. Spatial and temporal features unified self-
  supervised representation learning networks. Robotics and Autonomous Systems, 157:104256,
  2022.
Debidatta Dwibedi, Jonathan Tompson, Corey Lynch, and Pierre Sermanet. Learning actionable
  representations from visual observations. In IROS, pp. 1577–1584. IEEE, 2018.
Frederik Ebert, Chelsea Finn, Sudeep Dasari, Annie Xie, Alex Lee, and Sergey Levine. Visual
  foresight: Model-based deep reinforcement learning for vision-based robotic control. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1812.00568, 2018.
Chelsea Finn, Xin Yu Tan, Yan Duan, Trevor Darrell, Sergey Levine, and Pieter Abbeel. Deep spatial
  autoencoders for visuomotor learning. In ICRA, pp. 512–519. IEEE, 2016.
Scott Fujimoto, David Meger, and Doina Precup. Off-policy deep reinforcement learning without
  exploration. In ICML, pp. 2052–2062. PMLR, 2019.
Carles Gelada, Saurabh Kumar, Jacob Buckman, Ofir Nachum, and Marc G Bellemare. Deepmdp:
  Learning continuous latent space models for representation learning. In ICML, pp. 2170–2179.
  PMLR, 2019.
Saurabh Gupta, Judy Hoffman, and Jitendra Malik. Cross modal distillation for supervision transfer.
  In CVPR, pp. 2827–2836, 2016.
Danijar Hafner, Timothy Lillicrap, Ian Fischer, Ruben Villegas, David Ha, Honglak Lee, and James
  Davidson. Learning latent dynamics for planning from pixels. In ICML, pp. 2555–2565. PMLR,
  2019.
Danijar Hafner, Timothy Lillicrap, Jimmy Ba, and Mohammad Norouzi. Dream to control: Learning
  behaviors by latent imagination. In ICLR, 2020.
Danijar Hafner, Timothy Lillicrap, Mohammad Norouzi, and Jimmy Ba. Mastering atari with discrete
  world models. In ICLR, 2021.
Nicklas Hansen, Hao Su, and Xiaolong Wang. Stabilizing deep q-learning with convnets and vision
  transformers under data augmentation. In NeurIPS, volume 34, pp. 3680–3693, 2021.
Todd Hester, Matej Vecerik, Olivier Pietquin, Marc Lanctot, Tom Schaul, Bilal Piot, Dan Horgan,
  John Quan, Andrew Sendonaris, Ian Osband, et al. Deep q-learning from demonstrations. In AAAI,
  2018.
Geoffrey Hinton, Oriol Vinyals, and Jeff Dean. Distilling the knowledge in a neural network. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1503.02531, 2015.
Yuki Kadokawa, Lingwei Zhu, Yoshihisa Tsurumine, and Takamitsu Matsubara. Cyclic policy
  distillation: Sample-efficient sim-to-real reinforcement learning with domain randomization.
  Robotics and Autonomous Systems, 165:104425, 2023.
Lukasz Kaiser, Mohammad Babaeizadeh, Piotr Milos, Blazej Osinski, Roy H Campbell, Konrad
  Czechowski, Dumitru Erhan, Chelsea Finn, Piotr Kozakowski, Sergey Levine, et al. Model-based
  reinforcement learning for atari. In ICLR, 2019.


                                               10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Diederik P Kingma and Max Welling.            Auto-encoding variational bayes.       arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1312.6114, 2013.
Martin Klissarov and Doina Precup. Reward propagation using graph convolutional networks.
 NeurIPS, 33:12895–12908, 2020.
Michael Laskin, Aravind Srinivas, and Pieter Abbeel. CURL: contrastive unsupervised representations
 for reinforcement learning. In ICML, volume 119, pp. 5639–5650. PMLR, 2020a.
Misha Laskin, Kimin Lee, Adam Stooke, Lerrel Pinto, Pieter Abbeel, and Aravind Srinivas. Rein-
 forcement learning with augmented data. In NeurIPS, volume 33, pp. 19884–19895, 2020b.
Dongxu Li, Shaochen Wang, Kang Chen, and Bin Li. Contrastive inductive bias controlling networks
  for reinforcement learning. In ACML, pp. 563–578. PMLR, 2023.
Jinyu Li, Rui Zhao, Jui-Ting Huang, and Yifan Gong. Learning small-size dnn with output-
   distribution-based criteria. In Fifteenth annual conference of the international speech communica-
   tion association, 2014.
Xingjian Li, Haoyi Xiong, Hanchao Wang, Yuxuan Rao, Liping Liu, and Jun Huan. Delta: Deep
  learning transfer using feature map with attention for convolutional networks. In ICLR, 2019.
Iou Jen Liu, Jian Peng, and Alexander G Schwing. Knowledge flow: Improve upon your teachers. In
  ICLR, 2019.
Mingsheng Long, Yue Cao, Jianmin Wang, and Michael Jordan. Learning transferable features with
 deep adaptation networks. In ICML, pp. 97–105. PMLR, 2015.
Yifei Ma, Yu-Xiang Wang, and Balakrishnan Narayanaswamy. Imitation-regularized offline learning.
  In ICAIS, pp. 2956–2965. PMLR, 2019.
Ofir Marom and Benjamin Rosman. Belief reward shaping in reinforcement learning. In AAAI, 2018.
Bogdan Mazoure, Remi Tachet des Combes, Thang Long Doan, Philip Bachman, and R Devon
  Hjelm. Deep reinforcement and infomax learning. In NeurIPS, volume 33, pp. 3686–3698, 2020.
Ashvin Nair, Bob McGrew, Marcin Andrychowicz, Wojciech Zaremba, and Pieter Abbeel. Overcom-
  ing exploration in reinforcement learning with demonstrations. In ICRA, pp. 6292–6299. IEEE,
  2018.
Suraj Nair, Aravind Rajeswaran, Vikash Kumar, Chelsea Finn, and Abhinav Gupta. R3m: A universal
  visual representation for robot manipulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.12601, 2022.
Andrew Y Ng, Daishi Harada, and Stuart Russell. Policy invariance under reward transformations:
 Theory and application to reward shaping. In ICML, volume 99, pp. 278–287. Citeseer, 1999.
Aaron van den Oord, Yazhe Li, and Oriol Vinyals. Representation learning with contrastive predictive
  coding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1807.03748, 2018.
Minting Pan, Xiangming Zhu, Yunbo Wang, and Xiaokang Yang. Iso-dream: Isolating and leveraging
 noncontrollable visual dynamics in world models. In NeurIPS, volume 35, pp. 23178–23191,
 2022.
Sylvestre-Alvise Rebuffi, Hakan Bilen, and Andrea Vedaldi. Learning multiple visual domains with
  residual adapters. NeurIPS, 30, 2017.
Sylvestre-Alvise Rebuffi, Hakan Bilen, and Andrea Vedaldi. Efficient parametrization of multi-
  domain deep neural networks. In CVPR, pp. 8119–8127, 2018.
Andrei A Rusu, Sergio Gomez Colmenarejo, Caglar Gulcehre, Guillaume Desjardins, James Kirk-
  patrick, Razvan Pascanu, Volodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, and Raia Hadsell. Policy
  distillation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1511.06295, 2015.
Max Schwarzer, Ankesh Anand, Rishab Goel, R Devon Hjelm, Aaron Courville, and Philip Bachman.
 Data-efficient reinforcement learning with self-predictive representations. In ICLR, 2020.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Max Schwarzer, Nitarshan Rajkumar, Michael Noukhovitch, Ankesh Anand, Laurent Charlin, R De-
 von Hjelm, Philip Bachman, and Aaron C Courville. Pretraining representations for data-efficient
 reinforcement learning. In NeurIPS, volume 34, pp. 12686–12699, 2021.
Ramanan Sekar, Oleh Rybkin, Kostas Daniilidis, Pieter Abbeel, Danijar Hafner, and Deepak Pathak.
  Planning to explore via self-supervised world models. In ICML, pp. 8583–8592, 2020.
Younggyo Seo, Kimin Lee, Stephen L James, and Pieter Abbeel. Reinforcement learning with
  action-free pre-training from videos. In ICML, pp. 19561–19579. PMLR, 2022.
Kihyuk Sohn, Honglak Lee, and Xinchen Yan. Learning structured output representation using deep
  conditional generative models. In NeurIPS, volume 28, 2015.
Adam Stooke, Kimin Lee, Pieter Abbeel, and Michael Laskin. Decoupling representation learning
  from reinforcement learning. In ICML, pp. 9870–9879. PMLR, 2021.
Yanchao Sun, Shuang Ma, Ratnesh Madaan, Rogerio Bonatti, Furong Huang, and Ashish Kapoor.
  Smart: Self-supervised multi-task pretraining with control transformers. In ICLR, 2023.
Adrien Ali Taiga, Rishabh Agarwal, Jesse Farebrother, Aaron Courville, and Marc G Bellemare.
  Investigating multi-task pretraining and generalization in reinforcement learning. In ICLR, 2023.
Yuval Tassa, Yotam Doron, Alistair Muldal, Tom Erez, Yazhe Li, Diego de Las Casas, David Budden,
  Abbas Abdolmaleki, Josh Merel, Andrew Lefrancq, et al. Deepmind control suite. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1801.00690, 2018.
Eric Wiewiora, Garrison W Cottrell, and Charles Elkan. Principled methods for advising reinforce-
  ment learning agents. In ICML, pp. 792–799, 2003.
Zhihui Xie, Zichuan Lin, Deheng Ye, Qiang Fu, Yang Wei, and Shuai Li. Future-conditioned
  unsupervised pretraining for decision transformer. In ICML, pp. 38187–38203. PMLR, 2023.
Yifan Xu, Nicklas Hansen, Zirui Wang, Yung-Chieh Chan, Hao Su, and Zhuowen Tu. On the
  feasibility of cross-task transfer with model-based reinforcement learning. In ICLR, 2023.
LI Xuhong, Yves Grandvalet, and Franck Davoine. Explicit inductive bias for transfer learning with
  convolutional networks. In ICML, pp. 2825–2834. PMLR, 2018.
Huanhuan Yang, Dianxi Shi, Guojun Xie, Yingxuan Peng, Yi Zhang, Yantai Yang, and Shaowu Yang.
  Self-supervised representations for multi-view reinforcement learning. In UAI, 2022.
Mengjiao Yang and Ofir Nachum. Representation matters: offline pretraining for sequential decision
 making. In ICML, pp. 11784–11794. PMLR, 2021.
Zhiyu Yao, Yunbo Wang, Mingsheng Long, and Jianmin Wang. Unsupervised transfer learning for
  spatiotemporal predictive networks. In ICML, pp. 10778–10788. PMLR, 2020.
Denis Yarats, Ilya Kostrikov, and Rob Fergus. Image augmentation is all you need: Regularizing
  deep reinforcement learning from pixels. In ICLR, 2020.
Denis Yarats, Amy Zhang, Ilya Kostrikov, Brandon Amos, Joelle Pineau, and Rob Fergus. Improving
  sample efficiency in model-free reinforcement learning from images. In AAAI, pp. 10674–10681,
  2021.
Haiyan Yin and Sinno Pan. Knowledge transfer for deep reinforcement learning with hierarchical
  experience replay. In AAAI, 2017.
Tianhe Yu, Deirdre Quillen, Zhanpeng He, Ryan Julian, Karol Hausman, Chelsea Finn, and Sergey
  Levine. Meta-world: A benchmark and evaluation for multi-task and meta reinforcement learning.
  In CoRL, pp. 1094–1100. PMLR, 2020.
Yanjie Ze, Nicklas Hansen, Yinbo Chen, Mohit Jain, and Xiaolong Wang. Visual reinforcement
  learning with self-supervised 3d representations. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, 8(5):
  2890–2897, 2023.


                                               12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Albert Zhan, Ruihan Zhao, Lerrel Pinto, Pieter Abbeel, and Michael Laskin. A framework for
  efficient robotic manipulation. In Deep RL Workshop NeurIPS, 2020.
Amy Zhang, Rowan Thomas McAllister, Roberto Calandra, Yarin Gal, and Sergey Levine. Learning
 invariant representations for reinforcement learning without reconstruction. In ICLR, 2020.
Xiaoqin Zhang and Huimin Ma. Pretraining deep actor-critic reinforcement learning algorithms with
  expert demonstrations. arXiv preprint arXiv:1801.10459, 2018.
Changdong Zheng, Fangfang Xie, Tingwei Ji, Xinshuai Zhang, Yufeng Lu, Hongjie Zhou, and
  Yao Zheng. Data-efficient deep reinforcement learning with expert demonstration for active flow
  control. Physics of Fluids, 34(11):113603, 2022.


                                               13
