Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


F ED GT: I DENTIFICATION OF M ALICIOUS C LIENTS IN
F EDERATED L EARNING WITH S ECURE AGGREGATION
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                             A BSTRACT

         We propose FedGT, a novel framework for identifying malicious clients in feder-
         ated learning with secure aggregation. Inspired by group testing, the framework
         leverages overlapping groups of clients to identify the presence of malicious clients
         in the groups via a decoding operation. The clients identified as malicious are then
         removed from the training of the model, which is performed over the remaining
         clients. By choosing the size, number, and overlap between groups, FedGT strikes a
         balance between privacy and security. Specifically, the server learns the aggregated
         model of the clients in each group—vanilla federated learning and secure aggrega-
         tion correspond to the extreme cases of FedGT with group size equal to one and the
         total number of clients, respectively. The effectiveness of FedGT is demonstrated
         through extensive experiments on the MNIST, CIFAR-10, and ISIC2019 datasets
         in a cross-silo setting under different data-poisoning attacks. These experiments
         showcase FedGT’s ability to identify malicious clients, resulting in high model
         utility. We further show that FedGT significantly outperforms the private robust
         aggregation approach based on the geometric median recently proposed by Pillutla
         et al. on heterogeneous client data (ISIC2019) and in the presence of targeted
         attacks (CIFAR-10 and ISIC2019).



1    I NTRODUCTION

Federated learning (FL) (McMahan et al., 2017) is a distributed machine learning paradigm that
enables multiple devices (clients) to collaboratively train a machine learning model under the
orchestration of a central server while preserving the privacy of their raw data. To preserve privacy,
the clients share their local models instead of the raw data with the central server.
In its original form, FL is susceptible to model-inversion attacks (Fredrikson et al., 2015; Wang
et al., 2019), which allow the central server to infer clients’ data from their local model updates.
As demonstrated in (Dimitrov et al., 2022), such attacks can be mitigated by employing secure
aggregation protocols (Bonawitz et al., 2017; Bell et al., 2020). These protocols guarantee that the
server only observes the aggregate of the client models instead of individual models.
A salient problem in FL is poisoning attacks (Baruch et al., 2019), where malicious and/or faulty
clients corrupt the jointly-trained global model by introducing mislabeled training data (data poi-
soning) (Tolpegin et al., 2020; Wang et al., 2020), or by modifying local model updates (model
poisoning) (Fung et al., 2018). Poisoning attacks pose a serious security risk for critical applications.
Defensive measures against these threats generally fall into two categories: robust aggregation and
anomaly detection. Robust aggregation techniques (Blanchard et al., 2017; Yin et al., 2018; Cao et al.,
2019) are reactive approaches designed to mitigate the effect of poisoned models, whereas anomaly
detection is inherently proactive and aims to identify and eliminate corrupted models (Li et al., 2020;
Mallah et al., 2021; Nguyen et al., 2022). Robust aggregation techniques can introduce bias, espe-
cially when clients have heterogeneous data Li et al. (2020), and their effectiveness tends to diminish
with an increasing number of malicious clients Zhang et al. (2022). Moreover, a recurring issue with
defense mechanisms is their reliance on accessing individual client models, leaving clients vulnerable
to model-inversion attacks. Addressing resiliency against poisoning attacks and devising protocols
for the identification of malicious clients in FL without access to individual client models remains
a challenge (Kairouz et al., 2021; Gong et al., 2023). Notably, privacy-enhancing schemes such as


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                   0.04                                                                    0.4                                                                0.5
                              no defense                                                             no defense                                                         no defense
                              FedGT                                                                  RFA                                                                RFA
                              RFA                                                                    FedGT                                                              oracle
                   0.03       oracle                                                       0.3       oracle
                                                                                                                                                              0.4       FedGT
 attack accuracy


                                                                         attack accuracy


                                                                                                                                            attack accuracy
                   0.02                                                                    0.2                                                                0.3



                   0.01                                                                    0.1                                                                0.2



                                                                                            0                                                                 0.1
                          0    1           2        3            4   5                           0    1           2        3        4   5                           0    1           2        3        4   5
                                               nm                                                                     nm                                                                 nm
                                   (a) MNIST dataset, Λ = 0.9.                                         (b) CIFAR-10 dataset, Λ = 0.9.                                     (c) ISIC2019 dataset, Λ = 0.4.


Figure 1: Attack accuracy MNIST (left), CIFAR10 (mid), and ISIC2019 (right) datasets for varying
number of malicious clients.

secure aggregation, enhance clients’ privacy at the expense of camouflaging adversaries (Kairouz
et al., 2021). Hence, there is a fundamental trade-off between security and privacy.
In this paper, we propose FedGT, a novel framework for identifying malicious clients in FL with
secure aggregation. Our framework is inspired by group testing (Dorfman, 1943), a paradigm to
identify defective items in a large population that significantly reduces the required number of tests
compared to the naive approach of testing each item individually. FedGT’s key idea is to group
clients into overlapping groups. For each group, the central server observes the aggregated model
of the clients and runs a suitable test to identify the presence of malicious clients in the group. The
malicious clients are then identified through a decoding operation at the server, allowing for their
removal from the training of the global model. FedGT trades-off client’s data privacy, provided by
secure aggregation, with security, understood here as the ability to identify malicious clients. It
encompasses both non-private vanilla FL and privacy-oriented methods, e.g., secure aggregation,
by selecting group sizes of one and the total amount of clients, respectively. However, by allowing
group sizes between these two extremes, FedGT strikes a balance between privacy and security, i.e.,
improved identification capabilities comes at the cost of secure aggregation involving fewer clients.
We showcase FedGT’s effectiveness in identifying malicious clients through experiments on the
MNIST, CIFAR-10, and ISIC2019 datasets under both targeted and untargeted data-poisoning attacks.
Our focus is specifically on the cross-silo scenario, wherein the number of clients is moderate (up to
100) and data-poisoning is the predominant attack vector (Shejwalkar et al., 2022). Fig. 1 illustrates
the performance of FedGT for a scenario with 15 clients and a targeted label-flipping attack. The figure
shows the attack accuracy after 10 (MNIST), 50 (CIFAR-10), and 40 (ISIC2019) communication
rounds, respectively, versus the number of malicious clients, nm . When no defense mechanism
is in place, the attack success significantly increases as the number of malicious clients grows.
Remarkably, FedGT enables the identification and removal of malicious clients with low misdetection
and false alarm probabilities. This leads to a substantially reduced attack accuracy—significantly
outperforming the recently-proposed robust federated aggregation (RFA) protocol based on the
geometric median (Pillutla et al., 2022) for the CIFAR-10 and ISIC2019 datasets, while achieving a
lower communication complexity.

2                    R ELATED WORK
To the best of our knowledge, only the works (So et al., 2021; Pillutla et al., 2022; Zhang et al., 2021)
address resiliency against poisoning attacks in conjunction with secure aggregation. The work by
So et al. (2021) is the first single-server solution to account for both privacy and security in FL. The
protocol is based on drop-out resilient secure aggregation where the server utilizes secret sharing
to first obtain the pairwise Euclidean distance between the clients’ updates and then selects what
clients to aggregate by means of multi-Krum (Blanchard et al., 2017). However, it is not clear if the
pairwise differences can leak extra information. In (Pillutla et al., 2022), a robust aggregation protocol
(dubbed RFA) based on an approximate geometric median (computed exploiting secure aggregation)
is proposed. However, this protocol lacks the capability to identify malicious clients and is known to
be inferior to other robust aggregation techniques, especially when dealing with heterogeneous client
data (Li et al., 2023). The work by Zhang et al. (2021) presents a privacy-preserving tree-based robust
aggregation method. In particular, each leave in the tree consists of a subgroup of clients who securely
aggregate their local models. To achieve privacy between subgroups, masking is done on all but the


                                                                                                                  2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


last parameters in the aggregated models. By using the Euclidean distance between the unmasked
parameters and the corresponding parameters in the global model, an outlier removal scheme, based
on variance thresholding, is used iteratively to determine what groups should contribute to the global
model. The approach in Zhang et al. (2021) is the method closest to ours as it relies on dividing
clients into subgroups and on testing the group aggregates. However, contrary to FedGT, it is unable
to identify malicious clients and to leverage the information of overlapping groups.


3    P RELIMINARIES

Group testing. Group testing (Dorfman, 1943; Aldridge et al., 2019) encompasses a family of test
schemes aiming at identifying items affected by some particular condition, usually called defective
items (e.g., individuals infected by a virus), among a large population of n items (e.g., all individuals).
The overarching goal of group testing is to design a testing scheme such that the number of tests
needed to identify the defective items is minimized. The principle behind group testing is that, if the
number of defective items is significantly smaller than n, then negative tests on groups (or pools) of
items can spare many individual tests. Following this principle, items are grouped into overlapping
groups, and tests are performed on each group. Based on the test results on the groups, the defective
items can then be identified—in general with some probability of error—via a decoding operation.
Attack model. We consider a cross-silo scenario with an honest-but-curious server and n clients out
of which nm are compromised (referred to as malicious clients). A client may be compromised due
to hardware malfunction or adversarial corruption. In the latter case, we assume that the malicious
clients can collude and perform coordinated attacks against the global model. In this paper, we
focus on data-poisoning attacks, which constitute the most realistic type of attack for cross-silo FL
(Shejwalkar et al., 2022).


4    F ED GT: GROUP TESTING FOR FL WITH SECURE AGGREGATION

We consider a population of n clients, nm of which are malicious. We define the defective vector
d = (d1 , d2 , . . . , dn ) with
                             Pn entries representing whether a client j is malicious (dj = 1) or not
(dj = 0). It follows that j=1 dj = nm . Note that d is unknown, i.e., we do not know a priori which
clients are malicious.
Borrowing ideas from group testing (Dorfman, 1943), the n clients are grouped into m overlapping
test groups. We denote by P1 , P2 , . . . , Pm the set of indices of the clients belonging to test group i,
i.e., if client j is a member of test group i, then j ∈ Pi .
Definition 1 (Assignment matrix). The assignment of clients to test groups can be described by an
assignment matrix A = (ai,j ), i ∈ [m], j ∈ [n], where ai,j = 1 if client j participates in test group i
and ai,j = 0 otherwise.

The assignment of clients to test groups, i.e., matrix A, can be conveniently represented by a
bipartite graph consisting of n variable nodes (VNs) v1 , . . . , vn corresponding to the n clients, and
m constraint nodes (CNs) c1 , . . . , cm , corresponding to the m test groups. An edge between VN vj
and CN ci is then drawn if client j participates in test group i, i.e., if ai,j = 1. Matrix A—and hence
the corresponding bipartite graph—is a design choice that may be decided offline, analogous to the
model architecture, and shared with the clients for transparency.
Example 1. The bipartite   graph corresponding       to a scenario with 5 clients and 2 test groups with
                           1 1 0 1 0
assignment matrix A =                            is depicted in Fig. 2a.
                           0 1 1 0 1

In FedGT, for each test group, a secure aggregation mechanism is employed to reveal only the
aggregate of the client models in the test group to the server. Let ui , i ∈ [m], be the aggregate model
of test group i. The central server then applies a test t : u → {0, 1} to the aggregate model for each
test group to be used for the identification of malicious clients in the group. Let ti = t(ui ) ∈ {0, 1}
be the result of the test for test group i, where ti = 1 if the test is positive and ti = 0 if the test is
negative. We collect the result of the m tests into the binary vector t = (t1 , t2 , . . . , tm ). We remark
that the proposed framework is general and can be applied to any test on the test group aggregates.


                                                     3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                 v1   v2        v3        v4   v5
                                                            ℓ=0     ℓ=1     ℓ=2   ℓ=3    ℓ=4     ℓ=5
                                                             0       0       0     0      0       0

                                                                     1       1     1      1       1

                                                                                   2      2       2

                                                                             3     3      3       3
                           c1        c2
         (a) Circles represent VNs, squares CNs            (b) Dashed edges represent a “0”, solid edges a “1”
Figure 2: Bipartite graph (left) and trellis (right) representation of the assignment matrix A in
Example 1.

We define the syndrome vector s = (s1 , . . . , sm ), where si = 1 if at least one client participating in
test group i is malicious and si = 0 if no client participating in test group i is malicious, i.e.,
                                        _
                                  si =       dj and s = d ∨ AT ,
                                                    j∈Pi

where ∨ is the logical disjunction.
For perfect (non-noisy) test results, it follows that t = s. However, note that the result of a test
may be erroneous, i.e., the result of the test may be ti = 1 even if no malicious clients are present
or ti = 0 even if malicious clients are present. In general, the (noisy) test vector t is statistically
dependent on the syndrome vector s according to an (unknown) probability distribution Q(t|s).
Given the test results t and the assignment matrix A, the goal of FedGT is to identify the malicious
clients, i.e., infer the defective vector d. The design of the assignment matrix A and the corresponding
inference problem is akin to an error-correcting coding problem, where the assignment matrix A
can seen as the parity-check matrix of a code, and the inference problem corresponds to a decoding
operation based on A and t. Thus, a suitable choice for A is the parity-check matrix of a powerful
error-correcting code, i.e., with good distance properties. Furthermore, d can be inferred by applying
conventional decoding techniques. We denote by dˆ = (dˆ1 , . . . , dˆn ) the estimated defective vector
provided by the decoding operation, and define M̂ = {i : dˆi = 1}. Once dˆ has been obtained, clients
i ∈ M̂ are excluded from the training and the server aggregates the models of the remaining—flagged
non-malicious—clients by means of secure aggregation.
The performance of FedGT, measured in terms of the utility of the model, is affected by two quantities:
the misdetection probability, i.e., the probability that a malicious client is flagged as non-malicious,
and the false-alarm probability, i.e., the probability that a non-malicious client is flagged as malicious,
defined as
                            n                                                n
                      1X                                                  1X
             PMD ≜          Pr(dˆi = 0|di = 1) ,                  PFA ≜         Pr(dˆi = 1|di = 0) .
                      n i=1                                               n i=1

A high misdetection probability will result in many malicious clients poisoning the global model,
hence yielding poor utility, while a high false-alarm probability will result in excluding many
non-malicious clients from the training, thereby also impairing the utility. The misdetection and
false-alarm probabilities depend in turn on the assignment matrix A, the decoding strategy, and the
nature of the test performed. We discuss the decoding strategy to estimate d in Section 5.

4.1   P RIVACY- SECURITY TRADE - OFF AND THE CHOICE OF ASSIGNMENT MATRIX A

Vanilla FL (McMahan et al., 2017) and FL with full secure aggregation (Bonawitz et al., 2017) can
be seen as the two extreme cases of FedGT, corresponding to n (non-overlapping) groups and a
single group with n clients, respectively. In vanilla FL, tests on individual models can be conducted,
facilitating the identification of malicious clients. However, this comes at the expense of clients’
privacy. In contrast, full secure aggregation provides privacy by enabling the server to observe only
the aggregation of the n models, but it does not permit the identification of malicious clients.
                                                                                      Pn
Under FedGT, the server observes m aggregated models u1 . . . , um , with ui = j=1 ai,j cj and
cj being the local model of client j. The privacy of the clients increases with the number of
models aggregated (Elkordy et al., 2022). Hence, FedGT trades privacy for providing security, i.e.,
identification of the malicious clients. Furthermore, due to the aggregates being from overlapping


                                                           4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


groups, there might be additional privacy loss. This loss depends on the assignment matrix A and is
agnostic to the number of malicious clients participating in the training. The privacy of FedGT is
given in the following proposition (the proof is given in Appendix E).
Proposition 1. Let the assignment of clients to test groups be defined by assignment matrix A and
let r be the smallest non-zero Hamming weight of the vectors in the row span of A (in the coding
theory jargon, the minimum Hamming distance of the code generated by A as its generator matrix).
Then FedGT achieves the same privacy as a secure aggregation scheme with r clients.

The assignment matrix A should be carefully chosen to optimize the trade-off between privacy and
security: To improve identification of malicious clients, one should choose A as the parity-check
matrix of an error-correcting code with good distance properties, while to achieve a high privacy
level, A should correspond to the generator matrix of a code of large minimum Hamming distance.
Such codes are readily available, see, MacWilliams & Sloane (1977).

5     D ECODING : INFERRING THE DEFECTIVE VECTOR d
Several decoding techniques can be applied to infer d. In this paper, we consider optimal inference in
a Neyman-Pearson sense (see Appendix C), which prescribes for some ∆′ > 1
                                0 if Pr(t|di = 0) > Pr(t|di = 1)∆′

                        dˆi =                                               .
                                1 if Pr(t|di = 0) < Pr(t|di = 1)∆′
The Neyman-Pearson criterion can be rewritten in terms of the log-likelihood ratio (LLR) Li =
log(Pr(t|di = 0)/ Pr(t|di = 1)) as

                                   ˆ      0 if Li > ∆
                                   di =                   ,                                (1)
                                          1 if Li < ∆
where ∆ = log(∆′ ). Further, we can write the LLR Li as

                      Pr(di = 0|t)            Pr(di = 0)                  1−δ
         Li = log                    − log                 = LAPP
                                                              i   − log         ,                        (2)
                      Pr(di = 1|t)            Pr(di = 1)                   δ
where δ is the prevalence of malicious clients in the population of n clients, i.e., the probability
of a client being malicious, δ = Pr(di = 1). In a frequentist approach to probability, δ = nm /n.
Using (2), the Neyman-Pearson criterion in (1) can be rewritten in terms of the a posteriori LLR
LAPP
  i   as
                                              0 if LAPP

                                                           >Λ
                                     dˆi =            i           ,                              (3)
                                              1 if LAPP
                                                      i    <Λ
where Λ = ∆ + log 1−δ

                       δ    . Note that, as Λ increases, PFA increases and PMD decreases.
The Neyman-Pearson criterion requires the computation of the a posteriori LLRs LAPP  i  . For not-too-
large matrices A, they can be computed efficiently via the forward-backward algorithm (Bahl et al.,
1974), which exploits the trellis representation of the assignment matrix A. For large matrices A, the
computation of the a posteriori LLRs is not feasible, and one needs to resort to suboptimal decoding
strategies, such as belief propagation (Kschischang et al., 2001) (see Appendix L, Item 3).
In Subsection 5.1, we describe how to obtain the trellis diagram corresponding to a given assignment
matrix A, and in Subsection 5.2, we discuss the forward-backward algorithm to compute the a
posteriori LLRs to infer d.

5.1   T RELLIS REPRESENTATION OF ASSIGNMENT MATRIX A

In this section, we describe the trellis representation corresponding to assignment matrix A, which
can be used to compute the a posteriori LLRs as described in Section 5.2. The trellis representation
was originally introduced for linear block codes in Wolf (1978) and applied to group testing in Liva
et al. (2021).
For a given defective vector d˜ (not necessarily             the true one), define the syndrome vector s̃ =
(s̃1 , . . . , s̃n ), where s̃i is given by s̃i = j∈Pi d˜j . The syndrome vector can be written as a function
                                                 W


                                                     5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


of the defective vector d˜ and the assignment matrix as s̃ = d˜ ∨ AT . Note that several defective
vectors are compatible with a given syndrome s̃. Let D be the set of all possible defective vectors, i.e.,
all binary tuples of length n. We denote by Ds the set of defective vectors compatible with syndrome
vector s, i.e., Ds̃ = {d˜ ∈ D : d˜ ∨ AT = s̃}.
Let aj be the j-th column of matrix A. The syndrome corresponding to defective vector d˜ can then
                      Wn
be rewritten as s̃ = i=1 (d˜i ∧ aT  i ), where ∧ is the logical conjunction. This equation naturally leads
to a trellis representation of the assignment matrix A as explained next. A trellis is a graphical way to
represent matrix A, consisting of a collection of nodes connected by edges. The trellis corresponding
to matrix A in Example 1 is depicted in Fig. 2b. Horizontally, the nodes, called trellis states, are
grouped into sets indexed by parameter ℓ ∈ {0, . . . , n}, referred to as the trellis depth.
Let s̃ℓ be the partial syndrome vector at trellis depth ℓ ∈ [n] corresponding to d,                 ˜ given as s̃ℓ =
Wℓ      ˜        T                                                                                     ˜     T
   i=1 (di ∧ ai ). It is easy to see that s̃ℓ can be obtained from s̃ℓ−1 as s̃ℓ = s̃ℓ−1 ∨ (dℓ ∧ aℓ ), with
s̃0 being the all-zero vector. The trellis representation is such that each state in the trellis represents a
particular partial syndrome. The trellis is then constructed as follows: At trellis depth ℓ = 0 there
is a single trellis state corresponding to s̃0 . At trellis depth ℓ ∈ [n], the trellis states correspond to
all possible partial syndrome vectors s̃ℓ for all possible partial syndrome vectors (d˜1 , . . . , d˜ℓ ), with
d˜i ∈ {0, 1}. For example, at trellis depth ℓ = 1 there are only two trellis states, corresponding to
partial syndromes 0 ∧ aT                                   T                                      ˜           ˜
                               1 = (0, . . . , 0) and 1 ∧ a1 = (a1,1 , . . . , a1,m ), i.e., for d1 = 0 and d1 = 1,
                                                                 m
respectively. Note that at trellis depth ℓ = n, there are 2 trellis states, corresponding to all possible
syndromes s̃. For simplicity, we label the trellis P         state corresponding to partial syndrome vector
                                                                m
s̃ℓ = (sℓ,1 , . . . , sℓ,m ) by its decimal representation i=1 s̃ℓ,i 2i−1 . Finally, an edge from the node at
trellis depth ℓ corresponding to partial syndrome s̃ℓ to the node at trellis depth ℓ + 1 corresponding
to partial syndrome s̃ℓ+1 is drawn if s̃ℓ+1 = s̃ℓ ∨ (d˜ℓ+1 ∧ aT                          ˜
                                                                        ℓ+1 ), with dℓ+1 ∈ {0, 1}. The edge is
labeled by the value of d˜ℓ+1 enabling the transition between s̃ℓ and s̃ℓ+1 .
Example 2. For the trellis of Fig. 2b, corresponding to the assignment matrix A in Example 1 with
n = 5 nodes and m = 2 tests, the number of trellis states at trellis depth ℓ = 5 is 22 = 4, i.e., all
length-2 binary vectors (in decimal notation {0, 1, 2, 3}). At trellis depth ℓ = 2, there are three states,
                                                              W2
corresponding to all possible partial syndromes s̃ = i=1 (d˜i ∧ aT             i ), i.e., all possible (binary) linear
combinations of the two first columns of matrix A, resulting in states (0, 0) ∨ (0, 0) = (0, 0) = 0,
(0, 0) ∨ (1, 1) = (1, 1) = 3, (1, 0) ∨ (0, 0) = (1, 0) = 1, and (1, 0) ∨ (1, 1) = (1, 1) = 3.

The trellis graphically represents all possible defective vectors d˜ and their connection to the syndromes
s̃ via the assignment matrix A. In particular, the paths along the trellis originating in the all-zero state
at trellis depth ℓ = 0 and ending in trellis state s̃ at trellis depth ℓ = n correspond to all defective
vectors d˜ compatible with syndrome s̃.

5.2    T HE FORWARD - BACKWARD ALGORITHM

The a posteriori LLRs can be computed efficiently using the trellis representation of matrix A
introduced in the previous subsection via the forward-backward algorithm (Bahl et al., 1974). Let
  (0)      (1)
Eℓ and Eℓ be the set of edges connecting trellis states at trellis depth ℓ − 1 with states at trellis
depth ℓ labeled by d˜ℓ = 0 and d˜ℓ = 1, respectively. LAPPℓ   can be computed as
                      X                                           X
      LAPP
       ℓ    = log            αℓ−1 (σ ′ )γ(σ ′ , σ)βℓ (σ) − log          αℓ−1 (σ ′ )γ(σ ′ , σ)βℓ (σ) , (4)
                               (0)                                             (1)
                     (σ ′ ,σ)∈Eℓ                                     (σ ′ ,σ)∈Eℓ

where (σ ′ , σ) denotes an edge connecting state σ ′ at trellis depth ℓ − 1 with state σ at trellis depth ℓ.
The quantities αℓ−1 (σ ′ ) and βℓ (σ) are called the forward and backward metrics, respectively, and
can be computed using the recursions
                         X                                           X
              αℓ (σ) =       αℓ−1 (σ ′ )γℓ (σ ′ , σ) , βℓ−1 (σ ′ ) =   βℓ (σ)γℓ (σ ′ , σ) ,
                             σ′                                               σ

with initialization of the forward recursion α0 (0) = 1 and of the backward recursion βn (σ) =
Q(t|s(σ)), where s(σ) is the syndrome corresponding to trellis state σ. The quantity γℓ (σ ′ , σ) is


                                                          6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


called the branch metric and is given by
                                             (
                                                                       (0)
                                   ′             1−δ    if (σ ′ , σ) ∈ Eℓ
                              γℓ (σ , σ) =                              (1)   .
                                                  δ     if (σ ′ , σ) ∈ Eℓ

The a posteriori LLRs computed via (4) are then used to make decisions on {di } according to (3).

6    E XPERIMENTS
Experiment configuration and hyperparameters. We consider a cross-silo scenario with n = 15
clients (all participating in each training round) out of which nm are malicious. In Appendix J, we
also provide results for n = 31 clients. The goal of the server is to prevent an attack by identifying
the malicious clients and exclude their models from the global aggregation. The experiments are
conducted for image classification problems on the MNIST (LeCun & Cortes, 2010), CIFAR-10 (He
et al., 2016), and ISIC2019 (Codella et al., 2018) datasets for which we rely on a single-layer neural
network, a ResNet-18 (Krizhevsky et al., 2009), and an Efficientnet-B0 pretrained on Imagenet (Tan
& Le, 2019), respectively.
Similar to previous works (Pan et al., 2020; Cao et al., 2020; Mallah et al., 2021; Park et al., 2021;
Nguyen et al., 2022), we assume that the server has a small validation dataset at its disposal to
perform the group tests (the validation dataset is not used for training). Such dataset is not required
by FedGT, but is used here due to our choice for the tests in the experiments. The validation dataset
should contain data that are sampled from a distribution close to the underlying distribution of the
(benign) clients’ datasets, i.e., it should be a quasi-dataset (Pan et al., 2020; Mallah et al., 2021). For
the experiments, we create the validation dataset by randomly sampling 100 data-points from the
training set, i.e., the label distribution may not be uniform. For MNIST and CIFAR10, the remaining
training data (of size 59900 and 49900) are split evenly at random among the 15 clients, resulting in
homogenous data among the clients. For ISIC2019, we follow (Ogier du Terrail et al., 2022) and
randomly partition the dataset into a training and a test set consisting of 19859 and 3388 samples,
respectively. We then partition the training dataset into six parts according to the image acquisition
system used to collect the images. Finally, we iteratively split the largest partition in half until we
have 15 partitions. As shown in Appendix K, this procedure results in a heterogeneous setting where
both label distributions and number of samples differ among clients.
For MNIST, we use the cross-entropy loss and stochastic gradient descent with a learning rate of 0.01,
batch size of 64, and number of local epochs equal to 1. For CIFAR-10, we use the cross-entropy loss
and stochastic gradient descent with momentum and parameters taken from McMahan et al. (2017):
the learning rate is 0.05, momentum is 0.9, and the weight decay is 0.001. Furthermore, the batch
size is set to 128 and the number of local epochs is set to 5. The results presented are averaged over
100 and 5 runs for MNIST and CIFAR-10, respectively, and we discuss the statistical variations of
the results in Appendix F. For ISIC2019, we use the focal loss in (Lin et al., 2017) and stochastic
gradient descent with a learning rate of 0.0005, momentum of 0.9, and weight decay equal to 0.0001.
The batch size equals 64 and the number of local epochs is set to 1. Furthermore, we use the same set
of augmentations as in (Ogier du Terrail et al., 2022) to encourage generalization during the training.
We compare the performance of FedGT with three benchmarks: “no defense”, “oracle” and RFA (Pil-
lutla et al., 2022). The no defense benchmark corresponds to the case of plain FL over all clients,
i.e., disregarding some clients may be malicious, while the oracle assumes that the server knows the
malicious clients and discards them. Note that RFA belongs to a short list of defense mechanisms
that also provide privacy.
To demonstrate the effectiveness of FedGT, we perform the group testing step only once during the
training. Note that this constitutes the weakest version of our framework as the group testing may be
performed in each round at the expense of increased communications. In particular, for MNIST, we
perform a group test in the first round and for CIFAR-10 and ISIC2019, in the fifth round. We pick as
the assignment matrix a parity-check matrix of a BCH code (Bose & Ray-Chaudhuri, 1960) of length
15 and redundancy 8, meaning that we create a group testing scheme where the 15 clients are pooled
into 8 groups, each containing 4 clients.
Privacy. With our choice of assignment matrix, FedGT guarantees the same level of privacy of
full secure aggregation with 4 clients. This stems from the property that any linear combination of


                                                    7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


the server’s group aggregates leads to an aggregation involving no fewer than 4 client models, as
elucidated in Proposition 1. We provide the learning accuracy associated with alternative assignment
matrix choices, each yielding distinct privacy guarantees, in Appendix I.
Test design. Let vi denote a measured metric on the aggregated model of test group i evaluated on
the validation dataset and let v = (v1 , v2 , . . . , vm ). To determine whether a client is malicious or not,
we consider a simple approach where
                                         0 if vi ≥ ρ · v ⋆

                                 ti =                            , i ∈ [m],                                (5)
                                         1 otherwise
where 0 ≤ ρ ≤ 1 and v ⋆ = arg maxi∈[m] vi , i.e., a test group is labeled as negative when the metric
is close to the maximum value among the test groups. Thereafter, the test vector t = {t1 , t2 , . . . tm }
is fed to a forward-backward decoder as described in Section 5.2 and dˆ is obtained. In the special
case of dˆ = 1, i.e., all clients are flagged as malicious, one may either cancel the learning procedure
or, as done in the experiments, proceed without a defense. For all experiments, we use ρ = 0.96. We
remark that FedGT is compatible with any testing strategy.
Distribution Q(t|s), prevalence δ, and threshold Λ. The decoder requires the distribution Qm Q(t|s),
the prevalence δ, and the threshold Λ. We model the noisiness of the test as Q(t|s) = i=1 Q(ti |si ),
and Q(ti |si ) as a binary symmetric channel (BSC), i.e., Q(ti |si ) = 1 − p if ti = si and Q(ti |si ) = p
if ti ̸= si . Note that the true distribution Q(t|s) is in general unknown and hard to estimate—even
assuming that the BSC is a good model, p is unknown and test dependent. In our experiments, we
arbitrarily choose p = 0.05. However, in Appendix G, we demonstrate that FedGT is robust to
different choices of p. Moreover, in the experiments we feed the decoder the prevalence, i.e., prior
probability, δ = nm /n. For the case of nm = 0, we use a mismatched metric δ = 0.1. Similarly to
p, nm is unknown and we demonstrate in Appendix G that FedGT is robust to a mismatch in the
prevalence fed to the decoder. Finally, for all three datasets we evaluate FedGT for the threshold
Λ ∈ {0.1, 0.2, . . . , 0.9}. Although the best performance of FedGT is obtained by optimizing Λ for
the specific context, we report our results for the same Λ over all values of nm . We reiterate that
Λ is a design choice and trades off between misdetections and false alarms. We provide results for
optimized values of Λ in Appendix A.1.

6.1   E XPERIMENTAL RESULTS FOR TARGETED ATTACKS

For targeted data-poisoning, we consider label-flipping attacks. We refer to the attacked label as
the source label and the resulting label after the flip as the target label. For MNIST, we consider
malicious clients to flip source label 1 into target label 7. As such, the objective of the malicious
clients is to cause the global model to misclassify 1’s into 7’s. Similarly, for CIFAR-10, malicious
clients change source label 7, i.e., horses, into target label 4, i.e., deers. For the ISIC2019 dataset,
malicious clients mislabel source label 0, i.e., melanoma, into target label 1, i.e., mole. Note that this
attack has a huge medical impact, as the goal of the attacker is to force the model to classify cancer
into non-cancer. As the adversary objective is not to deteriorate the global model but only to make it
misinterpret the source label as the target label, we adopt the attack accuracy as the metric of interest,
defined as the fraction of source labels that are classified as the target label in the test dataset.
We consider the source label recall, i.e., the fraction of source labels that are classified into the correct
label, as the performance metric adopted in the testing strategy (5) to flag test groups containing
malicious clients. Although we assume the server is informed of what label is under attack, we
remark that it is straightforward to detect the labels under attack as the source label recall in a test
group is significantly reduced in the presence of a malicious client.
In Fig. 1, we show the attack accuracy (evaluated over the test dataset) under FedGT. For MNIST
(Fig. 1a), we observe a modest impact of the label flip, even for nm ∈ [5]. Nevertheless, FedGT
significantly diminishes the attack accuracy compared to no defense and performs close to oracle.
RFA slightly outperforms FedGT. However, we recall that it lacks the capability of identifying
malicious clients and it has a higher communication cost (discussed in Appendix B). For CIFAR10,
the label flip attack has a significant impact as can be seen from the no-defense attack accuracy being
close to 40% when 1/3 of the clients are malicious. FedGT performs significantly better than RFA
for nm ≥ 3 and close to the oracle—FedGT reduces the attack accuracy to 7% when 1/3 of the
clients are malicious (compared to 19.34% for RFA).


                                                      8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                   0.9                                                                                                                                     0.65
                                                                                        0.8

                  0.88


                                                                                                                                       balanced accuracy
 top-1 accuracy                                                                                                                                             0.6


                                                                       top-1 accuracy
                  0.86                                                                  0.7

                                                                                                                                                           0.55
                  0.84
                             oracle                                                     0.6       oracle                                                              oracle
                             RFA                                                                  RFA                                                                 RFA
                  0.82       FedGT                                                                FedGT                                                     0.5       FedGT
                             no defense                                                           no defense                                                          no defense
                   0.8                                                                  0.5
                         0   1          2         3            4   5                          0   1        2         3         4   5                              0   1        2         3         4   5
                                            nm                                                                 nm                                                                  nm
                                 (a) MNIST dataset, Λ = 0.9.                                      (b) CIFAR-10 dataset, Λ = 0.5.                                      (c) ISIC2019 dataset, Λ = 0.4.

                                  Figure 3: Average top-1 accuracy versus the number of malicious clients

For ISIC2019, RFA achieves only a small improvement in attack accuracy with respect to no defense
and performs as no defense for nm = 5 (RFA is known to perform poorly for heterogeneous data
across clients (Li et al., 2023)). FedGT significantly diminishes the attack accuracy and performs
even better than oracle. This can be explained from the data heterogeneity across clients where some
clients, although not malicious, will be biased to output a given label, see, e.g., client 4 and client
10 in Appendix K. Hence, due to the testing strategy, FedGT may identify benign clients exhibiting
extreme heterogeneity as malicious to be removed from the training, ultimately benefiting the overall
utility of the global model. In Appendix A, we show how the attack accuracy evolves with the number
of communication rounds and we provide the top-1 (or balanced) accuracy of the global model.

6.2                      E XPERIMENTAL RESULTS FOR UNTARGETED ATTACKS

We consider a label permutation attack where malicious clients offset their data labels by 1, i.e.,
Lnew = (Lold + 1) mod nc , where nc is the number of classes. The attack aims at damaging the
classification accuracy as a whole, i.e., an attacker wants to lower the top-1 accuracy (MNIST and
CIFAR-10) or the balanced accuracy (ISIC2019). For this reason, we use the top-1 accuracy (MNIST
and CIFAR10) and the balanced accuracy (ISIC2019) on the test group’s aggregates as the metric for
the testing strategy in (5) adopted by the server. The balanced accuracy is the average recall per class,
used to take into account class imbalances, as in the case of ISIC2019 (Ogier du Terrail et al., 2022).
In Fig. 3, we plot the top-1 accuracy versus nm for MNIST (left) and CIFAR-10 (middle), and the
balanced accuracy for ISIC2019 (right). For all cases, when no defense is in place, a significant drop
in accuracy is observed as the number of malicious clients grows. FedGT permits to identify the
malicious clients with low misdetection and false alarm probabilities, which translates into a high
accuracy: For nm up to 3, the top-1 accuracy of FedGT is at most 1% lower than the performance
of an oracle for CIFAR-10 and MNIST. Furthermore, in Fig. 3c we observe that FedGT performs
close to the oracle for all values of nm for experiments over ISIC2019. The robust performance
of RFA is anticipated due to our untargeted attack rendering malicious client models significantly
different from benign models. Consequently, the geometric median—essentially performing a
majority vote—assigns the malicious models a very low weight. However, even with the simple test
in (5) only being performed in a single round, FedGT achieves a performance close to that of RFA
and it even outperforms RFA for nm = 5 for the ISIC2019 dataset.

7                   C ONCLUSION
We proposed FedGT, a novel framework for identifying malicious clients in FL that is compatible with
secure aggregation. By grouping clients into overlapping groups, FedGT enables the identification
of malicious clients at the expense of secure aggregation involving fewer clients. Experiments on a
cross-silo scenario for different data-poisoning attacks demonstrate the effectiveness of FedGT in
identifying malicious clients, resulting in high model utility and low attack accuracy. Remarkably,
FedGT significantly outperforms RFA in several scenarios. To the best of our knowledge, this is the
first work that provides a solution for identifying malicious clients in FL with secure aggregation.
In this paper, we considered a cross-silo scenario, wherein the number of clients is moderate. The
extension of FedGT to a cross-device scenario, where the number of clients is typically very large,
is discussed in Appendix L. Moreover, our framework is also applicable against model-poisoning
attacks provided proper group tests are available (see Appendix L).


                                                                                                           9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E THICS S TATEMENT

In this work, our studies and experiments are not related to human subjects, practices to data set
releases, discrimination/bias/fairness concerns, and also do not have legal compliance or research
integrity issues. The datasets we use are public and the attacks performed are done only for experi-
mental purposes. Poisoning attacks are attacks performed by malicious users that aim to deteriorate
the global model’s performance in the federation. In our work, we aim at privately identifying the
malicious clients and excluding them from the learning, such that the effects of the poisoning attacks
can be hindered.

R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT

We provide extensive details regarding the parameters and strategies we use to produce our results.
The source code we used to generate the results is available via the anonymous link https:
//anonymous.4open.science/r/4D37/.

R EFERENCES
Matthew Aldridge, Oliver Johnson, and Jonathan Scarlett. Group testing: An information theory
 perspective. 2019.

L. Bahl, J. Cocke, F. Jelinek, and J. Raviv. Optimal decoding of linear codes for minimizing symbol
   error rate. IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, 20(2):284–287, 1974.

Gilad Baruch, Moran Baruch, and Yoav Goldberg. A little is enough: Circumventing defenses for
  distributed learning. In Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS),
  volume 32, 2019.

James H. Bell, K. A. Bonawitz, A. Gascón, T. Lepoint, and Mariana Raykova. Secure single-server
  aggregation with (poly)logarithmic overhead. In Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun.
  Secur. (CCS), pp. 1253–1269, online, Nov. 2020.

Peva Blanchard, El Mahdi El Mhamdi, Rachid Guerraoui, and Julien Stainer. Machine learning
  with adversaries: Byzantine tolerant gradient descent. In I. Guyon, U. Von Luxburg, S. Bengio,
  H. Wallach, R. Fergus, S. Vishwanathan, and R. Garnett (eds.), Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, volume 30. Curran Associates, Inc., 2017.

Keith Bonawitz, Vladimir Ivanov, Ben Kreuter, Antonio Marcedone, H Brendan McMahan, Sarvar
  Patel, Daniel Ramage, Aaron Segal, and Karn Seth. Practical secure aggregation for privacy-
  preserving machine learning. In Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur. (CCS), pp.
 1175–1191, Dallas, TX, Nov. 2017.

R.C. Bose and D.K. Ray-Chaudhuri. On a class of error correcting binary group codes.
  Information and Control, 3(1):68–79, 1960. ISSN 0019-9958. doi: https://doi.org/10.
  1016/S0019-9958(60)90287-4. URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
  article/pii/S0019995860902874.

Di Cao, Shan Chang, Zhijian Lin, Guohua Liu, and Donghong Sun. Understanding distributed
  poisoning attack in federated learning. In the 25th International Conference on Parallel and
  Distributed Systems (ICPADS), 2019.

Xiaoyu Cao, Minghong Fang, Jia Liu, and Neil Zhenqiang Gong. Fltrust: Byzantine-robust federated
  learning via trust bootstrapping, 2020.

Noel C. F. Codella, David Gutman, M. Emre Celebi, Brian Helba, Michael A. Marchetti, Stephen W.
  Dusza, Aadi Kalloo, Konstantinos Liopyris, Nabin Mishra, Harald Kittler, and Allan Halpern. Skin
  lesion analysis toward melanoma detection: A challenge at the 2017 international symposium on
  biomedical imaging (isbi), hosted by the international skin imaging collaboration (isic). In IEEE
  International Symposium on Biomedical Imaging, 2018.


                                                 10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Dimitar Iliev Dimitrov, Mislav Balunovic, Nikola Konstantinov, and Martin Vechev. Data leakage in
  federated averaging. Transactions on Machine Learning Research, 2022.
Robert Dorfman. The detection of defective members of large populations. The Annals of Mathemat-
  ical Statistics, 14(4):436–440, 1943.
Ahmed Roushdy Elkordy, Jiang Zhang, Yahya H. Ezzeldin, Konstantinos Psounis, and Amir Salman
  Avestimehr. How much privacy does federated learning with secure aggregation guarantee? ArXiv,
  abs/2208.02304, 2022.
Matt Fredrikson, Somesh Jha, and Thomas Ristenpart. Model inversion attacks that exploit confidence
 information and basic countermeasures. In Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur.
 (CCS), pp. 1322–1333, Denver, CO, October 2015.
Clement Fung, Chris J. M. Yoon, and Ivan Beschastnikh. Mitigating sybils in federated learning
  poisoning, 2018.
Xueluan Gong, Yanjiao Chen, Qian Wang, and Weihan Kong. Backdoor attacks and defenses in fed-
  erated learning: State-of-the-art, taxonomy, and future directions. IEEE Wireless Communications,
  30(2):114–121, 2023.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image
  recognition. In 2016 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp.
  770–778, 2016. doi: 10.1109/CVPR.2016.90.
Tayyebeh Jahani-Nezhad, Mohammad Ali Maddah-Ali, Songze Li, and Giuseppe Caire. Swiftagg:
  Communication-efficient and dropout-resistant secure aggregation for federated learning with
  worst-case security guarantees. In 2022 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory
  (ISIT), pp. 103–108. IEEE, 2022.
Peter Kairouz, H Brendan McMahan, Brendan Avent, Aurélien Bellet, Mehdi Bennis, Arjun Nitin
  Bhagoji, Kallista Bonawitz, Zachary Charles, Graham Cormode, Rachel Cummings, et al. Ad-
  vances and open problems in federated learning. Foundations and Trends® in Machine Learning,
  14(1–2):1–210, 2021.
Esmaeil Karimi, Fatemeh Kazemi, Anoosheh Heidarzadeh, Krishna R. Narayanan, and Alex
  Sprintson. Sparse graph codes for non-adaptive quantitative group testing. In IEEE Information
  Theory Work. (ITW), 2019.
Alex Krizhevsky, Vinod Nair, and Geoffrey Hinton. Cifar-10 (canadian institute for advanced
  research). 2009. URL http://www.cs.toronto.edu/~kriz/cifar.html.
F.R. Kschischang, B.J. Frey, and H.-A. Loeliger. Factor graphs and the sum-product algorithm. IEEE
  Trans. Inf. Theory, 47(2):498–519, 2001.
Yann LeCun and Corinna Cortes. MNIST handwritten digit database. 2010. URL http://yann.
  lecun.com/exdb/mnist/.
Kangwook Lee, Kabir Chandrasekher, Ramtin Pedarsani, and Kannan Ramchandran. Saffron: A fast,
  efficient, and robust framework for group testing based on sparse-graph codes. IEEE Trans. Signal
  Processing, 67(17):4649–4664, September 2019.
Shenghui Li, Edith C.-H. Ngai, and Thiemo Voigt. An experimental study of byzantine-robust
  aggregation schemes in federated learning. IEEE Transactions on Big Data, pp. 1–13, 2023.
Suyi Li, Yong Cheng, Wei Wang, Yang Liu, and Tianjian Chen. Learning to detect malicious clients
  for robust federated learning, 2020.
Tsung-Yi Lin, Priya Goyal, Ross Girshick, Kaiming He, and Piotr Dollár. Focal loss for dense object
  detection. In Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on computer vision, 2017.
Gianluigi Liva, Enrico Paolini, and Marco Chiani. Optimum detection of defective elements in
  non-adaptive group testing. In Annu. Conf. Information Sciences and Systems (CISS), Baltimore,
  MD, 2021.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Florence Jessie MacWilliams and Neil James Alexander Sloane. The theory of error-correcting codes,
  volume 16. Elsevier, 1977.
Ranwa Al Mallah, David Lopez, Godwin Badu Marfo, and Bilal Farooq. Untargeted poisoning attack
  detection in federated learning via behavior attestation, 2021.
Mgeni Makambi Mashauri, Alexandre Graell i Amat, and Michael Lentmaier. Low-density parity-
 check codes and spatial coupling for quantitative group testing. In IEEE Int. Symp. Information
 Theory (ISIT), pp. 1860–1865, 2023.
H. B. McMahan, E. Moore, D. Ramage, S. Hampson, and B. Agüera y Arcas. Communication-
  efficient learning of deep networks from decentralized data. In Proc. Int. Conf. Artificial Intell.
  Stats. (AISTATS), pp. 1273–1282, Fort Lauderdale, FL, Apr. 2017.
J. Neyman and E. S. Pearson. On the Problem of the Most Efficient Tests of Statistical Hypotheses,
   pp. 73–108. Springer New York, New York, NY, 1992.
Thien Duc Nguyen, Phillip Rieger, Roberta De Viti, Huili Chen, Björn B Brandenburg, Hossein
  Yalame, Helen Möllering, Hossein Fereidooni, Samuel Marchal, Markus Miettinen, et al. FLAME:
  Taming backdoors in federated learning. In USENIX Security 22, 2022.
Jean Ogier du Terrail, Samy-Safwan Ayed, Edwige Cyffers, Felix Grimberg, Chaoyang He, Regis
  Loeb, Paul Mangold, Tanguy Marchand, Othmane Marfoq, Erum Mushtaq, et al. Flamby: Datasets
  and benchmarks for cross-silo federated learning in realistic healthcare settings. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 35, 2022.
Xudong Pan, Mi Zhang, Duocai Wu, Qifan Xiao, Shouling Ji, and Min Yang. Justinian’s gaavernor:
  Robust distributed learning with gradient aggregation agent. In USENIX Security Symposium,
  2020.
Jungwuk Park, Dong-Jun Han, Minseok Choi, and Jaekyun Moon. Sageflow: Robust federated
  learning against both stragglers and adversaries. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, volume 34, pp. 840–851, 2021.
Krishna Pillutla, Sham M. Kakade, and Zaid Harchaoui. Robust aggregation for federated learning.
  IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing, 70:1142–1154, 2022.
Virat Shejwalkar, Amir Houmansadr, Peter Kairouz, and Daniel Ramage. Back to the drawing
  board: A critical evaluation of poisoning attacks on production federated learning. In 2022 IEEE
  Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP), pp. 1354–1371. IEEE, 2022.
Jinhyun So, Başak Güler, and A. Salman Avestimehr. Byzantine-resilient secure federated learning.
   IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, 39(7):2168–2181, 2021. doi: 10.1109/JSAC.
   2020.3041404.
Jinhyun So, Chaoyang He, Chien-Sheng Yang, Songze Li, Qian Yu, Ramy E. Ali, B. Güler, and
   Salman Avestimehr. LightSecAgg: a lightweight and versatile design for secure aggregation in
   federated learning. In Proc. Mach. Learn. Syst. (MLSys), Santa Clara, CA, aug 2022.
Mingxing Tan and Quoc Le. Efficientnet: Rethinking model scaling for convolutional neural networks.
 In ICML, 2019.
Vale Tolpegin, Stacey Truex, Mehmet Emre Gursoy, and Ling Liu. Data poisoning attacks against
  federated learning systems. In Liqun Chen, Ninghui Li, Kaitai Liang, and Steve Schneider (eds.),
  Computer Security – ESORICS 2020, pp. 480–501, Cham, 2020. Springer International Publishing.
Hongyi Wang, Kartik Sreenivasan, Shashank Rajput, Harit Vishwakarma, Saurabh Agarwal, Jy yong
  Sohn, Kangwook Lee, and Dimitris S. Papailiopoulos. Attack of the tails: Yes, you really can
  backdoor federated learning. In Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems
 (NeurIPS), December 6–12 2020.
Zhibo Wang, Mengkai Song, Zhifei Zhang, Yang Song, Qian Wang, and Hairong Qi. Beyond
  inferring class representatives: User-level privacy leakage from federated learning. In Proc. IEEE
  Int. Conf. Comp. Commun. (INFOCOM), pp. 2512–2520, Paris, France, May 2019.


                                                12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


J. Wolf. Efficient maximum likelihood decoding of linear block codes using a trellis. IEEE Trans. Inf.
   Theory, 24(1):76–80, 1978.
Dong Yin, Yudong Chen, Kannan Ramchandran, and Peter Bartlett. Byzantine-robust distributed
  learning: Towards optimal statistical rates, 2018.
Zaixi Zhang, Xiaoyu Cao, Jinyuan Jia, and Neil Zhenqiang Gong. Fldetector: Defending federated
  learning against model poisoning attacks via detecting malicious clients. In ACM SIGKDD
  Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, 2022.
Zhuosheng Zhang, Jiarui Li, Shucheng Yu, and Christian Makaya. Safelearning: Enable backdoor
  detectability in federated learning with secure aggregation, 2021.


                                                 13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A PPENDIX
We discuss some important properties of our proposed framework, FedGT, that we could not include
in the main body of the paper due to space limitations. The appendix is organized as follows:

       • In Appendix A, we present more results obtained by the simulations as described in Section 6.
       • Appendix B discusses the communication cost of FedGT
       • In Appendix C we state the Neyman-Pearson decision criterion.
       • In Appendix D, we give the trellises for vanilla federated learning and federated learning
         with full secure aggregation. We believe this section will help the reader better understand
         the trellis decoding and the trade-off between privacy and security of our framework.
       • We prove Proposition 1 in Appendix E
       • Appendix F discusses the statistical variations of the results presented in Fig. 1 and Fig. 3 of
         the main paper.
       • Throughout the paper, we have presented results obtained by feeding the decoder a frequen-
         tist choice of prevalence, δ = nm/n. Hence, the decoder, i.e., the server, knows the number
         of malicious clients nm —an unrealistic assumption in practice. Moreover, the decoder
         models the noisiness of the tests with a binary symmetric channel with crossover probability
         p whose real value is unknown (even in our experiments). In Appendix G, we show the
         robustness of FedGT to different values of p and a mismatch in prevalence, denoted by δ̃.
       • In Appendix H, we discuss potential testing strategies to improve the performance of FedGT
         and present results of FedGT with a perfect testing strategy, which we refer to as noiseless
         FedGT.
       • In Appendix I, we present numerical results that capture the privacy-security trade-off.
       • In Appendix J, we show numerical results for a larger scenario including 31 clients.
       • In Appendix K, we provide more details around the experiments pertaining to the ISIC2019
         dataset.
       • Appendix L underscores the constraints inherent to our framework and puts forth suggestions
         for mitigating these limitations.

A    F URTHER EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
In this section we present more results obtained from experiments as detailed in Section 6 for
both targeted and untargeted attacks, and for all three datasets (MNIST, CIFAR-10, ISIC2019).
We show how the learning accuracy (balanced, top-1, or attack accuracy) evolves with respect to
communication rounds. For ease of presentation, in this section we focus on the case nm ∈ {1, 3, 5}.
Targeted attacks. In Fig. 4, we plot the attack accuracy of a label-flip attack over communication
rounds. For MNIST, the attack impact is limited even for the case of no defense. However, even
though the attack is weak, FedGT is able to detect the malicious clients and dampen the attack, e.g.,
after 10 communication rounds for nm = 5, the attack accuracy is more than three times weaker by
employing FedGT compared to no defense. The robust aggregation strategy RFA in (Pillutla et al.,
2022) achieves better attack accuracy than FedGT (we recall that, contrary to FedGT, RFA lacks
the capability to identify malicious clients), but our proposed framework is very competitive in the
nm ≤ 3 regime.
For CIFAR-10, the impact of the attack is more significant. For example, for nm = 5, the oracle-aided
scheme has an attack accuracy of 3% after 50 communication rounds, while the no defense strategy
suffers an attack accuracy of 30 − 40%. RFA reduces the attack accuracy to 20%, still operating
closer to the no defense strategy. On the other hand, FedGT is able to reduce the attack accuracy to
7 − 8%, operating much closer to the oracle-aided strategy and significantly outperforming RFA (see
Fig. 4f). Similarly, one can see that FedGT outperforms RFA for nm = 3 (see Fig. 4e), while for
nm = 1 their performances are similar (see Fig. 4d). The label flip attack proves to be impactful for
the ISIC2019 dataset—the attack accuracy of a no defense strategy doubles compared to the oracle
scheme for nm = 5 (see Fig. 4i). From Figs. 4g– 4i, one can see that FedGT performs best, i.e., it


                                                  14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                   10−1                                                                                   10−1                                                                                       10−1
                                                                                                                                                                 no defense
                                                                                                                                                                 FedGT
                                                                                                                                                                 RFA
                                                                                                                                                                 oracle
 attack accuracy   10−2                                                                                   10−2                                                                                       10−2


                                                                                        attack accuracy


                                                                                                                                                                                   attack accuracy
                                      Group test performed

                   10−3                                                                                   10−3                                                                                       10−3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Group test performed
                                                                                                                              Group test performed


                   10−4                                                                                   10−4                                                                                       10−4
                          1       2    3      4    5        6        7    8    9   10                            1       2    3      4    5        6        7      8     9    10                            1       2    3      4    5        6        7    8    9   10
                                             (a) nm = 1, Λ = 0.9.                                                                   (b) nm = 3, Λ = 0.9.                                                                       (c) nm = 5, Λ = 0.9.
                    100                                                                                    100                                                                                        100
                                                                                                                                                                 no defense
                                                                                                                                                                 RFA
                                                                                                                                                                 FedGT
                                                                                                                                                                 oracle
 attack accuracy


                                                                                        attack accuracy


                                                                                                                                                                                   attack accuracy
                   10−1                                                                                   10−1                                                                                       10−1


                                       Group test performed                                                                   Group test performed                                                                       Group test performed

                    −2                                                                                     −2                                                                                         −2
                   10                                                                                     10                                                                                         10
                          1   5       10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50                                                 1   5       10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50                                                     1   5       10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50
                                             (d) nm = 1, Λ = 0.9.                                                                   (e) nm = 3, Λ = 0.9.                                                                       (f) nm = 5, Λ = 0.9.
                    100                                                                                    100                                                                                        100
                                                                                                                                                                no defense
                                                                                                                                                                RFA
                                                                                                                                                                FedGT
                                                                                                                                                                oracle
 attack accuracy


                                                                                        attack accuracy


                                                                                                                                                                                   attack accuracy
                                            Group test performed                                                                   Group test performed                                                                       Group test performed

                   10−1                                                                                   10−1                                                                                       10−1
                          1   5        10     15       20       25       30   35   40                            1   5        10     15       20       25        30    35     40                            1   5        10     15       20       25       30   35   40
                                            Communication rounds                                                                   Communication rounds                                                                       Communication rounds
                                            (g) nm = 1, Λ = 0.4.                                                                   (h) nm = 3, Λ = 0.4.                                                                        (i) nm = 5, Λ = 0.4.


Figure 4: Average attack accuracy on the MNIST (row 1), CIFAR10 (row 2) and ISIC2019 (row 3)
datasets for varying number of malicious clients.

achieves the smallest attack accuracy among the four strategies. Interestingly, FedGT outperforms
oracle. This can be attributed to the heterogeneous data distribution among clients, where some
clients with highly heterogeneous data points are biased and therefore deteriorate the performance of
the global model.
What is often overlooked in the literature when considering targeted attacks is the impact that the
defense strategy has on the utility of the global model, i.e., does the learning accuracy (top-1 or
balanced) deteriorate when lower attack accuracies are achieved? Since FedGT needs to balance
misdetections and false alarms, investigating the impact on the utility of the global model is important.
Therefore, we provide in Table 1, 2 and 3 the values of the attack accuracy (denoted in the table as
ATT) and learning accuracy (denoted as ACC; top-1 accuracy for MNIST, CIFAR-10 and balanced
accuracy for ISIC2019) at the last communication round obtained from the experiments over MNIST,
CIFAR-10 and ISIC2019 datasets, respectively. From Table 1, we see that RFA outperforms FedGT
in terms of attack accuracy, while in terms of top-1 accuracy their differences are negligible. However,
when the impact of the attack is more significant (CIFAR-10 and ISIC2019, Table 2 and 3), FedGT
outperforms RFA from the attack accuracy perspective. Nevertheless, RFA achieves a higher (top-1
or balanced) accuracy, which is expected. RFA is based on the geometric median aggregation, where
a majority decision strategy penalizes the outliers (minority), by assigning their model a smaller
coefficient. In a targeted attack, the model weights of the malicious clients will differ only by a few
entries, thus confusing the geometric median aggregation. Thus, for a relatively large number of
malicious clients nm ≥ 3, RFA achieves a high accuracy (top-1 or balanced)—in certain instances,
RFA surpasses the oracle strategy. However, it is crucial to highlight that RFA exhibits a significantly
higher attack accuracy compared to FedGT. This raises a pertinent question: should the attack
accuracy or the accuracy be the figure of merit in the context of a targeted attack? To answer this
question, it is important to emphasize that in our experiments with the ISIC2019 dataset, the label flip
attack mislabels melanoma into benign moles, carrying devastating clinical implications. Therefore,
in this case, minimizing the impact of the targeted attack should be a primary objective.


                                                                                                                                         15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 1: Attack accuracy (ATT) and top-1 accuracy (ACC) measured after 10 communication rounds
for experiments over MNIST dataset. The results of FedGT are obtained for Λ = 0.9.

                      Oracle              RFA               FedGT            No defense
           nm     ATT       ACC       ATT       ACC      ATT      ACC       ATT      ACC
            0    0.0005    0.903    0.0005     0.903    0.0005    0.903    0.0005    0.903
            1    0.0004    0.903    0.0007     0.903    0.0009    0.903    0.0014    0.903
            2    0.0004    0.902     0.001     0.903    0.0011    0.902    0.0016    0.902
            3    0.0004    0.901    0.0013     0.902    0.0014    0.902    0.0029    0.901
            4    0.0004    0.899    0.0014     0.902    0.0031    0.901    0.0093    0.899
            5    0.0004    0.895    0.0015     0.902    0.0057    0.900    0.0299    0.895


Table 2: Attack accuracy (ATT) and top-1 accuracy (ACC) measured after 50 communication rounds
for experiments over CIFAR-10 dataset. The results of FedGT are obtained for Λ = 0.9.

                      Oracle              RFA               FedGT            No defense
           nm     ATT       ACC       ATT       ACC      ATT      ACC       ATT      ACC
            0    0.0302    0.834    0.0318     0.837    0.0352    0.826    0.0302    0.834
            1    0.0314    0.836    0.0414     0.838    0.046     0.829    0.0508    0.836
            2    0.0318    0.832     0.057     0.835    0.0694    0.829    0.0866    0.832
            3    0.0326    0.827    0.0994     0.828    0.0612    0.814    0.1348    0.827
            4    0.0316    0.817    0.1404     0.823    0.0636    0.785    0.2244    0.817
            5    0.0356    0.798    0.1934     0.819    0.074     0.775    0.3916    0.798



Untargeted attacks. In Fig. 5, we plot the top-1 accuracy (for MNIST, first row, and CIFAR-10,
second row) and balanced accuracy (for ISIC2019, last row) over the communication rounds. For
nm = 1, the attack is not very powerful (regardless of the dataset), and the no defense and oracle
benchmarks have similar performance. For nm ∈ {3, 5}, the impact on the top-1 accuracy of the
attack for MNIST and CIFAR-10 is significant, as shown by the significant gap between the no
defense and oracle curves. FedGT significantly closes this gap, but RFA outperforms our strategy,
due to its majority decision-based aggregation technique. We observe an interesting phenomenon
for the experiments over the CIFAR-10 dataset. For nm = 3 and 5, the no defense curve exhibits
significant fluctuations throughout the rounds. Furthermore, as nm increases, the peak distance of
the fluctuations also increases. This instability can be attributed to the presence of a high number
of malicious clients. Notably, although the performance of FedGT also fluctuates, it does so to a
significantly lesser extent. RFA also suffers from this phenomenon. For nm = 5, one can see from
Fig. 5f, that the global model obtained from RFA achieves a better top-1 accuracy in round 50, but is
a more unstable model (fluctuations in the top-1 accuracy) for the last 5 rounds compared to FedGT.
Finally, for the ISIC2019 dataset, FedGT significantly outperforms RFA for nm = 5, while for
nm = 3 RFA slightly outperforms FedGT (see Figs. 5h,5i).

A.1    O PTIMIZATION OF THE DECODING THRESHOLD Λ

As mentioned in Section 6, we obtained the results by sweeping the decoding threshold Λ ∈
{0.1, 0.2, . . . , 0.9} and we present the results in Figs. 1,3-5 for a fixed threshold per dataset and
attack. However, the results previously shown do not highlight the real potential of FedGT. Therefore,
in Fig. 6 we plot the accuracy versus the number of malicious clients for the decoding threshold
Λ ∈ {0.1, 0.2, . . . , 0.9} that achieves the best performance (per nm ). From the experiments over


                                                  16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 3: Attack accuracy (ATT) and balanced accuracy (ACC) measured after 40 communication
rounds for experiments over ISIC2019 dataset. The results of FedGT are obtained for Λ = 0.4.

                                                                          Oracle                                                         RFA                                         FedGT                                                         No defense
                                                 nm              ATT                    ACC                                   ATT                      ACC                  ATT                   ACC                                          ATT                  ACC
                                                  0          0.2587                     0.632                      0.2172                             0.649                0.1691                 0.642                                       0.2587                0.632
                                                  1          0.2388                     0.632                      0.2437                             0.654                0.2155                 0.635                                       0.2935                0.628
                                                  2          0.2437                     0.622                      0.2669                             0.645                0.2155                 0.632                                       0.3101                0.631
                                                  3          0.2404                     0.614                      0.3316                             0.625                0.2321                 0.614                                       0.3681                0.609
                                                  4          0.2106                     0.614                      0.3167                              0.63                0.1592                 0.613                                       0.3565                0.621
                                                  5          0.2039                     0.615                      0.4112                             0.633                0.1658                 0.608                                       0.4162                0.613


                              0.9                                                                                              0.9                                                                                                  0.9
 top-1 accuracy


                                                                                                  top-1 accuracy


                                                                                                                                                                                                       top-1 accuracy
                             0.85                                                                                             0.85                                                                                                 0.85



                              0.8                                                                                              0.8                                                                                                  0.8
                                                                                                                                                                                     oracle
                                                                                                                                                                                     RFA
                                                Group test performed                                                                             Group test performed                FedGT                                                             Group test performed
                             0.75                                                                                             0.75                                                   no defense                                    0.75

                                    1       2    3      4    5        6        7    8    9   10                                      1       2    3     4     5        6        7    8    9       10                                      1        2    3      4    5        6        7    8    9   10
                                                       (a) nm = 1, Λ = 0.9.                                                                            (b) nm = 3, Λ = 0.9.                                                                                   (c) nm = 5, Λ = 0.9.

                              0.8                                                                                              0.8                                                                                                  0.8
         top-1 accuracy


                                                                                                          top-1 accuracy


                                                                                                                                                                                                               top-1 accuracy


                              0.6                                                                                              0.6                                                                                                  0.6



                                                                                                                                                                                     oracle
                              0.4                                                                                              0.4                                                                                                  0.4
                                                                                                                                                                                     RFA
                                                 Group test performed                                                                             Group test performed
                                                                                                                                                                                     FedGT                                                              Group test performed
                                                                                                                                                                                     no defense

                                    1   5       10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50                                                           1   5       10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50                                                               1    5       10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50
                                                       (d) nm = 1, Λ = 0.5.                                                                            (e) nm = 3, Λ = 0.5.                                                                                   (f) nm = 5, Λ = 0.5.


                              0.6                                                                                              0.6                                                                                                  0.6
         Balanced accuracy


                                                                                                          Balanced accuracy


                                                                                                                                                                                                               Balanced accuracy


                              0.5                                                                                              0.5                                                                                                  0.5


                              0.4                                                                                              0.4                          Group test performed                                                    0.4
                                                      Group test performed
                                                                                                                                                                                    oracle                                                                   Group test performed
                              0.3                                                                                              0.3                                                  RFA                                             0.3
                                                                                                                                                                                    FedGT
                                                                                                                                                                                    no defense
                              0.2                                                                                              0.2                                                                                                  0.2
                                    1   5        10     15       20       25       30   35   40                                      1   5        10     15       20       25       30   35       40                                      1    5        10     15       20       25       30   35   40
                                                      Communication rounds                                                                             Communication rounds                                                                                  Communication rounds
                                                      (g) nm = 1, Λ = 0.4.                                                                             (h) nm = 3, Λ = 0.4.                                                                                   (i) nm = 5, Λ = 0.4.


Figure 5: Average top-1 accuracy on the MNIST (row 1), CIFAR10 (row 2) and ISIC2019 (row 3)
datasets for different number of malicious clients.



MNIST (Figs. 6a, 6d), we observe that the situation does not improve much compared to the
fixed Λ = 0.9. However, for CIFAR-10, with the best Λ from the set {0.1, 0.2, . . . , 0.9}, FedGT
outperforms RFA for all nm considered (see Fig. 6b), while for untargeted attacks the top-1 accuracy
is improved for nm ∈ {4, 5}, but still cannot outperform RFA (see Fig. 6e). As for experiments
over ISIC2019, FedGT outperforms RFA for both attacks and for all considered values of nm (see
Figs. 6c, 6f).


                                                                                                                                                            17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                   0.04                                                                0.4                                                                             0.5
                                no defense                                                       no defense                                                                      no defense
                                FedGT                                                            RFA                                                                             RFA
                                RFA                                                              FedGT                                                                           oracle
                   0.03         oracle                                                 0.3       oracle
                                                                                                                                                                       0.4       FedGT
 attack accuracy


                                                                     attack accuracy


                                                                                                                                                    attack accuracy
                   0.02                                                                0.2                                                                             0.3



                   0.01                                                                0.1                                                                             0.2



                                                                                        0                                                                              0.1
                          0      1           2        3      4   5                           0    1           2         3         4   5                                      0    1           2        3        4   5
                                                 nm                                                                nm                                                                             nm
                                        (a) MNIST dataset.                                                (b) CIFAR-10 dataset.                                                         (c) ISIC2019 dataset.



                    0.9                                                                                                                                               0.65
                                                                                       0.8

                   0.88


                                                                                                                                          balanced accuracy
                                                                                                                                                                       0.6
 top-1 accuracy


                                                                     top-1 accuracy
                   0.86                                                                0.7

                                                                                                                                                                      0.55
                   0.84
                                oracle                                                 0.6       oracle                                                                          oracle
                                RFA                                                              RFA                                                                             RFA
                   0.82         FedGT                                                            FedGT                                                                 0.5       FedGT
                                no defense                                                       no defense                                                                      no defense
                    0.8                                                                0.5
                          0      1           2        3      4   5                           0    1           2         3         4   5                                      0    1           2        3        4   5
                                                 nm                                                                nm                                                                             nm
                                        (d) MNIST dataset.                                                (e) CIFAR-10 dataset.                                                         (f) ISIC2019 dataset.


Figure 6: Performance of FedGT shown for the best decoding threshold. Its performance is compared
to three strategies, no defense, oracle and RFA (robust federated aggregation). The first row represents
the targeted attack, while the second one shows the performance under an untargeted attack.
B                     D ISCUSSION : C OMMUNICATION C OST
FedGT introduces a communication overhead only in the round(s) where group testing is performed.
The version we have presented in this work performs group testing only in a single round, so we will
focus the analysis on this particular scenario. The overall communication cost of FedGT consists of:

                              • Before group testing: Number of communication rounds × communication complexity of
                                secure aggregation with n clients.
                              • Group testing round: m × communication complexity of secure aggregation with
                                maxj∈[m] |Pj | clients (maximum size of groups).
                              • After group testing: Number of rounds × communication complexity of secure aggregation
                                with n − |M̂| clients (number of clients classified as benign from the group testing).

The communication cost in the secure aggregation of clients that are estimated benign after the group
testing will vary as it depends on, e.g., the context and specific test. Therefore, here we will assume
the worst-case scenario from a communication overhead perspective, which is M̂ = ∅ and results in
a communication complexity of secure aggregation of n clients. The overall communication cost
heavily depends on the scheme used for secure aggregation. In Jahani-Nezhad et al. (2022, Table
I), the communication cost for different secure aggregation schemes is tabulated. Considering a
secure aggregation scheme with linear communication complexity such as LightSecAgg (So et al.,
2022), the communication cost of the group testing round is approximately 2× the complexity of
secure aggregation with 15 clients for the choice of assignment matrix described in Section 6. For
this particular assignment matrix, the overall communication cost in the worst-case scenario is for a
single round twice the communication cost of secure aggregation with 15 clients, while all the other
communication rounds have a communication cost equal to that of secure aggregation with 15 clients.
Compared to RFA, which requires 3× communication cost of secure aggregation with 15 clients in
each round, FedGT yields a significantly reduced communication cost.

C                     T HE N EYMAN -P EARSON D ECISION C RITERION
The Neyman-Pearson decision criterion is a fundamental concept in statistical hypothesis testing,
specifically in situations where one needs to make a decision between two competing hypotheses,


                                                                                                              18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 often referred to as the null hypothesis, H0 , and the alternative hypothesis, H1 . In the context of
 identification of malicious devices in FL, H0 could correspond to ‘non-malicious client’ and H1 to
‘malicious client’. If a test chooses H1 when in fact the truth was H0 , the error is called a false-alarm
(or false positive). The error of deciding H0 when H1 was correct is called a misdetection (or
 false-negative).
The Neyman-Pearson decision criterion is optimal in the sense that it allows to minimize one type of
error subject to a constraint on the other type of error. Formally, it solves the following optimization
problem,
                                                max PD ,                                               (6)
                                              s.t.PFA ≤α

where PFA is the probability of false alarm, PD = 1 − PMD the probability of detection, and PMD the
probability of misdetection.
This constrained optimization criterion does not require knowledge of the prior probabilities, but only
a specification of the maximum allowable value for one type of error. Neyman and Pearson showed
that the solution to this type of optimization is a likelihood ratio test (Neyman & Pearson, 1992).
Lemma 1. Consider the likelihood ratio test (LRT)
                                                      H1
                                              p(x|H1 ) >
                                                         λ                                             (7)
                                              p(x|H0 ) <
                                                      H0
and define the region
                               ALRT (λ) = {x : p(x|H1 ) > λp(x|H0 )} ,                                 (8)
i.e., the values of x for which the test decides H1 .
Let the probability of false alarm for the LRT be PFA (ALRT (λ)) and the probability of detection
PD (ALRT (λ)). In (7), λ > 0 is chosen such that PFA (ALRT (λ)) = α. Then, there does not
exist another test T (with corresponding region AT ) with PFA (AT (λ)) ≤ α and PD (AT (λ)) >
PD (ALRT (λ)), i.e., the LRT is the most powerful test with probability of false alarm less than or
equal to α.

One may consider alternative decision criteria to the Neyman-Pearson criterion, such as Bayesian
inference. In this case, the decision criterion is
                                                            H1
                                  p(H1 |x)   p(H1 ) p(x|H1 ) >
                                           =       ·           1.                                      (9)
                                  p(H0 |x)   p(H0 ) p(x|H0 ) <
                                                            H0
In contrast to the Neyman-Pearson criterion, the Bayesian approach does not assign a special role to
the null hypothesis—it treats both hypotheses equally.
In situations where striking a balance between misdetection and false alarm is important, the Neyman-
Pearson criterion is generally deemed more appropriate than Bayesian inference. Specially, the
Neyman-Pearson criterion is well-suited when false alarms carry significant consequences. For
instance, in medical diagnoses, a false positive can result in unnecessary treatments, potentially
leading to serious consequences.
As the performance of FedGT, measured in terms of the utility of the model, hinges upon a delicate
balance between the probability of false alarm and the probability of misdetection, in this paper we
consider optimal inference in a Neyman-Pearson sense. It is important to note that a false positive
in this context involves excluding data from a benign client from the training, ultimately impairing
utility. Particularly for heterogeneous data, the exclusion of benign clients can be highly detrimental.
The appropriate balance between misdetection and false alarm can be achieved through careful
manipulation of the parameter λ.
Furthermore, the Bayesian approach requires knowledge of the prior probabilities, which, in our
scenario, are unknown.


                                                    19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D       T RELLIS REPRESENTATION FOR VANILLA FEDERATED LEARNING AND
        FEDERATED LEARNING WITH FULL SECURE AGGREGATION

Section 5.1 describes the construction of the trellis corresponding to an assignment matrix. In Fig. 2b,
we depict the trellis representation of matrix A given in Example 1, which corresponds to a group
testing scheme of 5 clients and 2 groups.
In Section 4.1, we argue that there is a fundamental trade-off between privacy and security in federated
learning (FL). The two extremes correspond to vanilla FL, where the server observes individual client
models in each communication round, and FL with full secure aggregation. In the following, we
provide the assignment matrix A and the corresponding trellis representation for both scenarios.

                                                               ℓ=0         ℓ=1       ℓ=2       ℓ=3

ℓ=0              ℓ=1              ℓ=2           ℓ=3                0        0         0         0        4

                                                                            1         1         1        5
    0              0                0             0
                                                                                      2         2        6


                   1                1             1                                   3         3        7



          (a) Full secure aggregation.                                 (b) Vanilla federated learning.

Figure 7: Trellis representations of a group testing scheme with n = 3 nodes for the special case of
full secure aggregation (a) and vanilla federated learning (b).

Example 3 (Full secure aggregation). In FL with full secure aggregation, the server observes only the
aggregate of the models of all clients. Hence, it corresponds to the case of FedGT with a single group
with n clients. The assignment matrix for FL with full secure aggregation is therefore a 1 × n matrix
with all ones. For n = 3 clients,
                                         ASA = (1       1   1) .

In Fig. 7a, we depict the trellis representation of the assignment matrix ASA . Note that the non-zero
state at depth ℓ = n has many incoming edges. This way, even if the group test (i.e., the test on the
aggregate) is noiseless, a positive test t = (1) cannot identify the malicious clients, as every client
is equally probable to be malicious. Hence, secure aggregation provides privacy at the expense of
security.
Example 4 (Vanilla federated learning). In vanilla FL, the server has access to all the individual
models of the clients and it can perform tests on the clients’ individual (not aggregated) models.
Therefore, the assignment matrix for vanilla FL is an identity matrix. For n = 3,
                                                     1 0 0
                                                              !
                                         AVFL = 0 1 0 .
                                                     0 0 1

The trellis representation of AVFL is depicted in Fig. 7b. For all trellis depths 0 ≤ ℓ ≤ n, there is
only one incoming edge per state. Therefore, the decoding performed in the trellis is relatively easy,
and perfect identification of malicious clients can be achieved provided that the tests are noiseless.
Assume that the tests are noiseless and the test outcome is t ̸= 0. Then, from the trellis in Fig. 7b,
there is a single path that connects the state t (in decimal) at depth ℓ = 3 with state 0 at depth ℓ = 0,
thus enabling perfect identification of the malicious clients.

E       P ROOF OF P ROPOSITION 1
We re-state the proposition for the reader’s convenience.
Proposition. Let the assignment of clients to test groups be defined by assignment matrix A and let
r be the smallest non-zero Hamming weight of the vectors in the row span of A (in the coding theory
jargon, the minimum Hamming distance of the code generated by A as its generator matrix). Then
FedGT achieves the same privacy as a secure aggregation scheme with r < n clients.


                                                   20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                                                                        Oracle − FedGT     FedGT− No defense


                                                                                  0.1                                                                    0.35
    Difference between top-1 accuracies

                                                                                 0.08
                                                                                                                                                         0.25
                                                                                 0.06

                                                                                 0.04                                                                    0.15

                                                                                 0.02
                                                                                                                                                         0.05
                                               0
                                           −0.01                                                                                                            0
                                                                                        0           1           2          3            4       5               0    1         2         3             4   5
                                                                                                                     nm                                                            nm
                                                                                                        (a) MNIST, untargeted attack.                                (b) CIFAR-10, untargeted attack.
                                                                                            ·10−2
                                                                                   0
                                          Difference between attack accuracies


                                                                                                                                                            0


                                                                                  −1
                                                                                                                                                         −0.1

                                                                                  −2
                                                                                                                                                         −0.2

                                                                                  −3

                                                                                                                                                         −0.3
                                                                                        0           1           2          3            4       5               0    1         2         3             4   5
                                                                                                                     nm                                                            nm
                                                                                                         (c) MNIST, targeted attack.                                  (d) CIFAR-10, targeted attack.

Figure 8: The mean end accuracy difference between FedGT and oracle and no defense. The opaque
areas represent the confidence interval (± one standard deviation from the mean).

Proof.
     Pm Due to the overlapping groups arising from matrix A, there might exist a vector b ∈ Rm such
that i=1 bi ui = cj for some j ∈ [n], or equivalently bA = ej , where ej is the j-th unit vector.
This will occur if ej ∈ Spr (A),
                               P where Spr (A) is the row span of A. Generally speaking, for a subset
R ⊂ [n] of cardinality r, if ι∈R fι eι ∈ Spr (A) where fι ̸= 0, there exists a vector b′ such that
Pm ′           P
   i=1 bi ui =     ι∈R fι cι . Thus, we conclude that FedGT achieves the same privacy as a secure
aggregation scheme with r < n clients, where r is the smallest non-zero cardinality of the subset R.
In other words, r is the smallest non-zero Hamming weight of the vectors in the row span of A.


F                                         S TATISTICAL VARIATIONS OF THE NUMERICAL RESULTS

The results shown in Figs. 1, 3-6 are obtained from experiments using a Monte-Carlo strategy, i.e.,
the experiments are conducted more than once and the mean is presented. More specifically, the
experiments over the MNIST dataset are performed 100 times, while the ones for CIFAR-10 are
performed 5 times. We choose a smaller number of Monte-Carlo iterations for CIFAR-10 due to the
higher training complexity of Resnet-18. Due to heterogeneity in the data points of the ISIC2019
dataset, we performed a single round of experiments on this dataset and consequently omit it from
the present analysis.
An essential aspect of the Monte-Carlo-based experiments is that, due to the law of large numbers, the
result averaged over a large number of iterations approaches the real outcome of the results. However,
running FL experiments many times quickly becomes unfeasible, thus limiting the maximum number
of Monte-Carlo iterations we can perform.


                                                                                                                                                    21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


To reduce the simulation noise due to a small number of Monte-Carlo iterations, we performed our
experiments using a fixed seed for experiments with FedGT, oracle, no defense, and RFA. Note
that each Monte-Carlo iteration has its own unique seed, which ensures different realizations of the
defective vector d and data partition for the clients and the server validation dataset. However, for a
given Monte-Carlo iteration, all four strategies (FedGT, oracle, no defense, and RFA) are evaluated
on the same realization, thus making the comparison between the strategies fair.
In Fig. 8, we show the statistical variation of the numerical results presented in Fig. 6 for FedGT,
oracle, and no defense. Specifically, since we have dependent experiments across strategies (due to
the fixed seeding), we compute the differences in accuracies (top-1 accuracy for the untargeted attack
and attack accuracy for the targeted attack) at the last communication round (10 for experiments over
MNIST and 50 for CIFAR-10) between oracle and FedGT, and FedGT and no defense for every
Monte-Carlo iteration. In Fig. 8, the mean of the differences and the confidence interval (± one
standard deviation) are illustrated.
Figs. 8a and 8b show the differences in top-1 accuracy evaluated in the last communication round
for experiments over MNIST and CIFAR-10 datasets, respectively. We see that for low prevalences
(nm ≤ 2), the three strategies perform more or less similar regardless of the dataset. Moreover, the
differences in top-1 accuracy are concentrated in the mean. However, for MNIST and nm ∈ {3, 4, 5},
in average oracle is better than FedGT, and FedGT performs significantly better than no defense. For
nm = 5, FedGT has a performance gain from 4% to 10% compared to no defense, but it can have
a performance loss of 5% compared to oracle. However, the performance loss compared to oracle
can also be negligible for some Monte-Carlo iterations even for nm = 5. For the experiments over
CIFAR-10 (see Fig. 8b), and nm ∈ {3, 4, 5}, there is a positive performance gain of FedGT that can
go up to 40%. The performance loss of FedGT compared to oracle seems very concentrated around
the mean and goes at maximum 5% for nm = 5.
In Figs. 8c and 8d, we show the statistical variations of the results shown in Fig. 1 for targeted attack
experiments over MNIST and CIFAR-10 datasets, respectively. Note that a higher attack accuracy
means success for malicious clients. We conclude that for experiments over MNIST, it becomes
beneficial to use FedGT for nm ∈ {4, 5}, even though the performance gain and loss is minor. It is
important to note that for lower prevalence nm ≤ 3, FedGT does not worsen the performance. On the
other hand, experiments over CIFAR-10 dataset (see Fig. 8d) show that FedGT has a significantly
better performance compared to the no defense strategy for prevalences nm ∈ {2, 3, 4, 5}. For
example, for nm = 4, FedGT has a smaller attack accuracy in the range of 7% to 25%. Fig. 8d also
shows that, on average, FedGT performs closely to the oracle strategy, and it can deteriorate the
attack accuracy by at most 10%, for nm ∈ {4, 5}, compared to oracle.


G    M ISMATCHED DECODING

As described in Section 5.2, the forward-backward decoding algorithm requires the knowledge of
the prevalence δ and a probabilistic model Q(t|s) for the noisy test. The results shown in Figs. 1,
3-6, are obtained by feeding to the decoder the prevalence δ = nm/n (except for nm = 0, where
δ̃ = 0.1 is used), which requires the prior knowledge of nm . Moreover, we have considered a binary
symmetric channel Q(t|s) with crossover probability p = 0.05 as the noise test model. Although the
forward-backward decoder is compatible with asymmetric modeling of the noisy tests, in this paper
we utilize a symmetric probabilistic model.
In Fig. 9, we present experimental results to show the robustness of FedGT to a mismatched prevalence
δ̃ (i.e., a value that does not correspond to the true δ) and for other choices of the crossover probability
p. We have considered an untargeted attack and followed the same testing strategy described in
Section 6.2. The hyperparameters are the same as in Section 6. The experiments were conducted over
MNIST and CIFAR-10 datasets for the scenario nm = 3 and n = 15. We pick mismatched values
for the prevalence δ̃ = {0.05, 0.15, 0.25, 0.35} and we run experiments for crossover probabilities
p ∈ {0, 0.05, 0.1, 0.2}. Note that the particular case p = 0 means that the testing strategy is assumed
to be noiseless. We run the experiments using a Monte-Carlo approach, where we use 30 Monte-Carlo
iterations for MNIST and 5 for experiments over CIFAR and the results are averaged. We sweep the
decoding threshold Λ ∈ {0.1, 0.2, . . . , 0.9} for experiments over MNIST and Λ ∈ {0.1, 0.3, . . . , 0.9}
for CIFAR. In the plots in Fig. 9, the best lambda is picked and presented for each choice of δ̃ and p.


                                                    22
   7 9 810 9
       Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
                                                                                                                                                              10                                  1
ounds                             0.9                                                                                           0.9

                                 0.88                                                                                          0.88


 for on p for
ding                                                                                                                                                      0.9                                         (
        top-1 accuracy


                                                                                                      top-1 accuracy
                                 0.86                                             no defense                                   0.86
                                                                                   δ̃ = 0.05
                                                                                   δ̃ = 0.15                                                                                    no defense
                                 0.84                                                                                          0.84                                             p=0
                                                                                   δ = 0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                p = 0.05
                                                                                   δ̃ = 0.25



                                                                                                                                                                                                      p
                                 0.82                                                                                          0.82                                             p = 0.1
                                                 Group test performed             δ̃ = 0.35                                                    Group test performed             p = 0.2
                                                                                  oracle                                                                                        oracle
                                  0.8                                                                                           0.8
                                        1    2         3    4        5   6    7    8    9      10                                     1    2         3    4        5   6    7    8    9      10
                                                           Communication rounds                                                                          Communication rounds
                                            (a) MNIST: Mismatch decoding on δ̃ for                                                        (b) MNIST: Mismatch decoding on p for
                                            crossover probability p = 0.05.                                                               prevalence δ = 0.2.



                                  0.8                                                                                           0.8
                                                                                                                                                 0.88
                top-1 accuracy


                                                                                                              top-1 accuracy
                                  0.7                                             no defense                                    0.7
                                                                                  δ̃ = 0.05                                                                                     no defense
                                                                                  δ̃ = 0.15
                                                                                  δ = 0.2
                                                                                                top-1 accuracy                                                                  p=0
                                                                                                                                                                                p = 0.05
                                  0.6                                                                                           0.6                                             p = 0.1
                                                                                  δ̃ = 0.25                                                                                     p = 0.2
                                                    Group test performed          δ̃ = 0.35                                                       Group test performed          oracle
                                                                                  oracle


                                                                                                                                                 0.860.8
                                  0.5                                                                                           0.5


 o defense                                        10            20       30
                                                           Communication rounds
                                            (c) CIFAR: Mismatch decoding on δ̃ for
                                            crossover probability p = 0.05.
                                                                                   40          50                                               10            20       30
                                                                                                                                                         Communication rounds
                                                                                                                                          (d) CIFAR: Mismatch decoding on p for
                                                                                                                                          prevalence δ = 0.2.
                                                                                                                                                                                 40          50


       Figure 9: Experimental results using mismatch prevalence δ̃ and crossover probability of the noisy

˜ = 0.05
       test model p.


˜ = 0.15
       The plots in Figs. 9a and 9b, show the impact of using a mismatched prevalence and different
       crossover probabilities, respectively, in the top-1 accuracy for the MNIST dataset. In Fig. 9a, we can
       see a slight difference in the top-1 accuracy due to the mismatched prevalence, but the difference
       is negligible. The highest accuracy is achieved for δ̃ ∈ {0.2, 0.25, 0.35} (which are within 0.001%
       in final top-1 accuracy), and the difference between the highest accuracy and the lowest (due to the
                                                                                                                                                 0.84
 = 0.2
                                                                                                                                                accuracy


       mismatch) is 0.005%. The experiments over different crossover probabilities p show that the effect
       in accuracy is also negligible, see Fig. 9b. The difference of the (final) top-1 accuracy for different
       values of p is less than 0.001%. Hence, we conclude that over MNIST, FedGT is robust to a mismatch
       in prevalence and crossover probability.


˜ defense
       In Fig. 9c, we plot the results obtained by using a mismatched prevalence δ̃. Interestingly, the


  = 0.25                                                                                                                                                                        0.7
       mismatch in prevalence results in little to no effect on experiments over CIFAR-10. From our
       experiments, we observed that the difference in the performance of FedGT is at most 0.0001% by
       using a mismatched prevalence. Fig. 9d, where the results for different crossover probability p are
       shown, conveys the same message. The difference in end accuracy using different values of p is



˜ = 0.35 no defense 0.82
       negligible, amounting to a value of 0.0003% at most. Therefore, we conclude that FedGT is robust
       to a mismatch in prevalence and p also for experiments over the CIFAR-10 dataset. However, we
       advise not to consider extreme cases of mismatches in δ and p, for example, picking both of them


= 0.05 δ̃ = p = 0.5 will force the decoder to choose a random path in the trellis as the decoding output.
                                                                                                                                                                                                      G
  no defense                                                                                     23
              Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                         no defense     oracle     FedGT         noiseless FedGT



                                            0.9
                                                                                                                    0.8
oracle   FedGT                                               noiseless FedGT
                                  0.88
              top-1 accuracy


                                  0.86                                                                              0.7


                                  0.84
                                                                                                                    0.6
          0.8                     0.82

                                            0.8                                                                     0.5
                                                     0           1        2          3          4         5               0          1        2             3     4          5
                                                                               nm                                                                  nm
                                                            (a) Untargeted attack over MNIST dataset.                         (b) Untargeted attack over CIFAR-10 dataset.
                                                         ·10−2
          0.7                                    4                                                                  0.4



                                                 3                                                                  0.3
                               attack accuracy


                                                 2                                                                  0.2
          0.6
                                                 1                                                                  0.1



                                                                                                                     0
                                                     0           1        2          3          4         5               0          1        2             3     4          5
          0.5                                                                  nm                                                                  nm

  5               0                                                  1                   2
                                                             (c) Targeted attack over MNIST dataset.
                                                                                                              3                  4                      5
                                                                                                                               (d) Targeted attack over CIFAR-10 dataset.


              Figure 10: Performance of FedGT withnperfect
                                                         m   (noiseless) testing for experiments with untargeted
              (first row) and targeted (second row) attacks.
                                                     (b) Untargeted attack over CIFAR-10 dataset.
              H                                  T ESTING STRATEGIES
          0.4
              In this work, we provided experiments that assume the presence of a small validation dataset at the
              server and employ very simple tests. However, FedGT is not restricted to this assumption and is, in
              fact, test-agnostic. Devising more sophisticated testing strategies may enhance the performance of
              FedGT. In general, the performance will depend on the noisiness of the tests: less noisy tests will in
              general yield better results.
          0.3Moreover, we considered the weakest version of FedGT, in the sense that we perform group testing
              only at a single communication round. The protocol can be modified such that testing is performed
              in multiple rounds and, further, the previous decoding outcome may be used for future tests and
              decoding. The testing strategy can also be a composite of multiple different tests and/or be performed
              by tracking the aggregated models of earlier communication rounds and comparing them. This way,
          0.2 FedGT can provide resiliency against a smarter attack that switches the status (benign or malicious)
              between rounds. FedGT can be modified such that the groups are randomized in different rounds.
              However, extra leakage might occur due to the re-grouping and further analysis in this scenario is
              necessary.
              In Fig. 10, we plot the performance of FedGT with a perfect testing strategy, i.e., a test such that
              t = s, denoted as noiseless FedGT. To obtain these results, we feed the decoder the correct test
          0.1 outcome, t = s, prevalence δ = nm/n, and p = 0. We follow the same strategy as for FedGT, if


                                                                                                              24
                 Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


ups, 6 clients                               (15, 7) code: 8 groups, 4 clients
                                                      (15, 11) code: 4 groups, 8 clients
                                                      oracle
                                                                                           (15, 9) code: 6 groups, 6 clients
                                                                                           no defense
                                                                                                                                         (15, 7) code: 8 groups, 4 clients


                                       0.9                                                                                0.8

                                      0.88
                     top-1 accuracy


                                                                                                         top-1 accuracy
                                                                                                                          0.7
                                      0.86

                                      0.84
8                                     0.82
                                                                                                                          0.6

                                                                                                                                    Group test performed
                                                     Group test performed

                                       0.8                                                                                0.5
                                             1   2       3    4     5       6   7      8   9   10                                 10        20         30         40         50
                                                            Communication rounds                                                        Communication rounds
                                                     (a) Experiments over MNIST dataset.                                        (b) Experiments over CIFAR-10 dataset.


                 Figure 11: We present experimental results where FedGT uses different codes for grouping the clients.
                 The codes are picked to have the same length 15 and yield different numbers of groups. More groups
                 are translated into less privacy for the clients and vice-versa.
7
                 dˆ = 1, the training proceeds without a defense, i.e., we fix dˆ = 0. The plots shown in Figs. 10a
                 and 10b show the top-1 accuracy as a function of nm , similar to the plots presented in Figs. 6d and 6e,
                 with the addition of the performance of noiseless FedGT. Similarly, Figs. 10c and 10d show the
                 comparison of noiseless FedGT with the curves already presented in Figs. 6a and 6b. In Fig. 10a, we
                 see that there is a gap between FedGT and noiseless FedGT. In general, we see from Fig. 10 that
                 FedGT and noiseless FedGT have similar performance. However, this is mostly happening because
                 noiseless FedGT has higher chances of obtaining dˆ = 1 compared to FedGT (due to the testing
                 strategy). Our experimental results show that if there exists at least one group that does not contain
6                any malicious clients, then noiseless FedGT outperforms FedGT. Hence, our testing strategy is noisy
                 and better tests may be envisaged.


                 I        P RIVACY- SECURITY TRADE - OFF
                 Group test performed
                 Throughout the paper, we have considered a scenario with n = 15 clients and the parity-check matrix
                 of a (15, 7) BCH code of length 15 and dimension 7 as the assignment matrix. This corresponds to a
                 FedGT scheme with 15 clients and 8 groups, each with 4 clients, and the privacy achieved is the same
                 as secure aggregation with 4 clients. However, there are other ways of grouping the clients, where
5                the number of groups can be smaller and the number of clients per group larger, yielding a trade-off
           10                                         20                               30
                 between privacy and security. To highlight this trade-off, here we consider two other assignment
                 matrices obtained by taking the parity-check matrices of cyclic codes of length 15. More specifically,
                                                                                                                                40                            50
                 we choose two other cyclic codes: A (15, 9) code of length 15 and dimension 9 and a (15, 11) code
                 Communication rounds
                 of length 15 and dimension 11. The (15, 9) code results into 6 groups of 6 clients each and a level of
                 privacy equal to that of secure aggregation with 6 clients. The (15, 11) code results into 4 groups of 8
         (b) Experiments over CIFAR-10 dataset.
                 clients each and a level of privacy equal to that of secure aggregation with 8 clients. As expected,
                 reducing the number of groups increases the clients’ privacy. This occurs since the dual of the code
                 used for grouping has a lower dimension and hence enables a higher minimum Hamming distance.
                 In Fig. 11, we present the impact on the accuracy when using assignment matrices with a different
                 number of groups and number of clients per group, highlighting the trade-off between privacy and
                 security. The experiments are run for the MNIST and CIFAR datasets (for nm = 3, untargeted
                 attack). The results are shown in Figs. 11a and 11b, respectively. For both datasets, we observe that
                 increasing the number of groups (equivalently, lowering the code rate) yields a higher accuracy. This
                 is expected, as the code is stronger and can correct more errors. However, the higher accuracy comes
                 at the expense of a lower privacy, as discussed above. In contrast, decreasing the number of groups
                 (i.e., increasing the code rate) increases privacy, but reduces the learning accuracy. The latter effect


                                                                                                    25
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                    no defense                       FedGT     oracle

                  0.9
                                                                                                      0.8
                                                                                                     0.75
                                                                                                      0.7
                 0.85
top-1 accuracy


                                                                                    top-1 accuracy
                                                                                                     0.65
                                                                                                      0.6

                  0.8                                                                                0.55
                                                                                                      0.5
                                 Group test performed                                                0.45          Group test performed

                 0.75                                                                                 0.4
                        1    2       3    4     5       6   7   8    9    10                                     10        20        30        40         50
                                       Communication rounds                                                             Communication rounds
                            (a) Experiments on MNIST dataset, Λ = 3.5.                                       (b) Experiments on CIFAR-10 dataset, Λ   =
                                                                                                             1.5.


Figure 12: Experimental results for a federated learning with n = 31 clients out of which nm = 6
of them are malicious. The malicious clients follow an untargeted attack strategy. We show the
performance of FedGT and we compare it with the no defense and oracle strategy.


occurs since the capability of identifying malicious clients deteriorates due to the use of a weaker
code.


J                F EDERATED LEARNING WITH MORE CLIENTS


Throughout this paper, we have restricted the focus of the experiments to a cross-silo FL scenario
with 15 clients. Here, we investigate the performance of FedGT for another cross-silo FL scenario
with more clients, specifically n = 31 clients. To apply FedGT to this scenario, we choose as the
assignment matrix the parity-check matrix of a (31, 21) BCH code of length 31 and dimension 21,
resulting in 10 groups, each containing 12 clients. The dual of this BCH code has minimum Hamming
distance 12, thus FedGT preserves the same clients’ privacy of secure aggregation with 12 clients,
which is almost 40% of the total number of clients.
We investigate a scenario where nm = 6 malicious clients are present and they perform an untargeted
attack, as explained in Section 6.2. The results are shown in Fig. 12. We conduct experiments
over the MNIST and CIFAR-10 datasets, where the hyperparameters considered are specified in
Section 6. The results are shown in Figs. 12a and 12b, respectively. We run the experiments for
Λ ∈ {1, 1.5, . . . , 3.5} and plot the results for the best Λ. We compare the performance of FedGT
with that of no defense and the oracle strategy.
From Fig. 12, we observe that regardless of the dataset, FedGT has a better performance compared
to no defense. However, there is a non-negligible gap between the performance of FedGT and the
oracle strategy. This is expected since the number of clients per group is relatively high, resulting in a
large overlap between groups, which ultimately makes it challenging to render groups containing
only benign clients. An improved accuracy (at the expense of lower privacy) can be achieved by
considering a lower rate code (i.e., with more groups). In this case, however, optimal decoding via
the forward-backward algorithm becomes quickly infeasible and one needs to rely on suboptimal
decoding strategies (see Appendix L, Item 3). Furthermore, better performance can be achieved by
improving the testing strategy, as discussed in Appendix H. Improving the testing strategy seems
crucial for larger scenarios (larger n).


                                                                               26
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                                                                                     0
                                                1,906                                                                                                1
                                                                                                                                                     2
                                                156                                                                                                  3
                                                                                                                                                     4
                                                 25                                                                                                  5
                                                                1,659                                      1,659
                                                                                                            25                                       6
                                                                 60                                                                                  7
                                                                                                            53
                                                410
                                                        1,424                                                      1,425
                                                         34                                                          39
                                        1,327            29                         1,327 1,327 1,327                      1,328 1,327 1,327 1,327
                                          47                                          46   39    55                          45    42    45   46
                                                 90     190                                                        210
                                        129                                         116      122     111                   134   120    121   129


                          label count
                                                247      86                          82       90      75            91            75    70
                                         75                                                                                 75                73



                                        309                                         325      289     284                   300   326    291   282
                                                                1,556
                                                                                                           1,557
                                                                              701
                                                        780                                                        776
                                                686                           165
                                                                                             443     448                                445   449
                                        470                                         433                                    454   454

                                                                        368
                                                                              347


                                                                        289
                                                291     292                         301      323     328                   291   289    327   319
                                        272                                                                        274
                                                                              189
                                                                 28     60
                                         1       2       3        4     5     6      7          8      9    10      11      12    13    14    15
                                                                                         client number


             Figure 13: Client data partitions for experiments over the ISIC2019 dataset
                                                    .


K    D ETAILS OF THE ISIC2019 E XPERIMENT

The ISIC2019 dataset (Codella et al., 2018) is a public dataset consisting of images of various skin
lesion types, including malignant melanomas and benign moles, used for research in dermatology
and skin cancer detection. We use the ISIC2019 dataset and follow (Ogier du Terrail et al., 2022)
by first restricting our usage to 23247 data samples (out of 25331 entries) from the public training
set due to metadata availability and then preprocessing by resizing the shorter side to 224 pixels
and by normalizing the contrast and brightness of the images. Next, we randomly divide the data
into a test and a training dataset of size 3388 and 19859, respectively. The server validation set is
created by randomly sampling 100 data entries from the training set. Next, as in (Ogier du Terrail
et al., 2022), the remaining 19759 training samples are partitioned into 6 partitions with respect to the
image acquisition system used. The 6 partitions are then split into 15 partitions by iteratively splitting
the largest partition in half. This procedure results in 15 partitions with heterogeneity in number of
data samples and label distribution, as seen in Fig. 13, and in the feature distribution due to different
acquisition systems, as visualized in (Ogier du Terrail et al., 2022, Fig. 1.f).
Due to the large imbalance in the dataset (label 1 corresponds to 48.7% whereas label 5 and 6 are
represented by about 1% of the entries), the focal loss is used in the training (Lin et al., 2017) and
we use the balanced accuracy to assess the performance of the trained network. Furthermore, to
encourage generalization during training, we follow (Ogier du Terrail et al., 2022, Appendix H) and
apply random augmentations to the training data.
Finally, the heterogeneous data partitioning causes the choice of malicious clients to significantly
impact the outcome of the experiment. For this reason, we let the set of malicious clients Mi ⊂ Mj
for j > i to ensure that results across different values of nm are comparable. In particular, we
let M1 = {2}, M2 = {2, 7}, M3 = {2, 7, 9}, M4 = {2, 7, 9, 10}, M5 = {2, 7, 9, 10, 15},
respectively.

L    L IMITATIONS

In this section, we identify and discuss some limitations of the proposed framework, FedGT.

       • Dependence on a good test: Any group testing framework relies on an appropriate test.
         FedGT, as a group testing-based framework, does not constitute an exception. Thus, the
         performance of FedGT will heavily depend on the choice of the testing strategy adopted.
         Ideally, the testing strategy should be noiseless. FedGT proposes that testing is performed
         on aggregated models and not on individual clients’ models (to preserve privacy). However,
         finding good testing strategies over aggregated models is an active research area and further
         investigations are necessary. Furthermore, in our paper we considered a simple testing


                                                                                          27
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


        strategy (measuring the accuracy or the recall once after a number of communication
        rounds). More sophisticated testing strategies could be considered, potentially leading to
        improved results, especially for large n.
      • Validation dataset: The tests in this paper hinge upon the use of a relatively small val-
        idation dataset. Generally, assuming the presence of a validation dataset on the server
        constitutes a substantial assumption, let alone a dataset that mirrors the clients’ distribution
        closely. Nevertheless, the FedGT framework’s versatility accommodates a wide range of
        tests, including those that do not rely on a validation set, e.g., tests based on the spectral
        decomposition of models (Tolpegin et al., 2020). This feature allows for the incorporation of
        tests initially designed for non-private defenses into the FedGT framework, thereby ensuring
        client privacy is upheld.
      • Scalability to a cross-device FL scenario with a very large number of clients: In this
        work, our primary focus lies in the context of a cross-silo scenario, characterized by a limited
        number of clients (up to 100) (Shejwalkar et al., 2022). This allows us to compute exact a
        posteriori LLRs using the forward-backward algorithm. For a cross-device scenario, wherein
        the number of clients is significantly larger (resulting in a very large matrix A), the exact
        computation of the LLRs becomes infeasible for full client participation. Although FedGT
        is general and extends to the cross-device FL scenario, to tackle the decoding complexity
        challenge associated with a very large assignment matrix A, it becomes imperative to utilize
        a matrix A corresponding to a sparse-graph code (e.g., a low-density parity-check (LDPC)
        code or a generalized LDPC code) and employ (suboptimal) message-passing decoding
        techniques such as belief propagation (Kschischang et al., 2001). Message-passing decoding
        for codes on graphs is based on the exchange of messages over the edges of the bipartite
        graph representation of the code (in our scenario, the bipartite graph corresponding to A,
        see Fig. 2a). Message-passing decoding is known to perform very well for large sparse
        matrices. Furthermore, LDPC and generalized LDPC codes have been shown to yield
        excellent performance for group testing (Mashauri et al., 2023; Lee et al., 2019; Karimi et al.,
        2019). In our future work, we will consider FedGT based on LDPC codes and generalized
        LDPC codes for the identification of malicious clients in a cross-device scenario.
        For cross-device FL, it is common to sample different clients over the communication
        rounds. If the number of sampled clients is < 100, FedGT can be applied in every round to
        detect malicious clients. However, the privacy impact on clients participating in multiple
        rounds and in different groups is currently unknown. The cross-device scenario is a natural
        extension to the current work that we will pursue in the future.
      • Beyond data poisoning: The FedGT framework organizes clients into several subgroups,
        within which secure aggregation is practiced. It is crucial for the integrity of each subgroup
        that clients contribute the same local model to all subgroups they participate in—this is
        inherently true for data-poisoning attacks. A model poisoning attack, where the malicious
        clients upload arbitrary model parameters, may leverage the sub-grouping to its advantage
        by submitting benign models during the testing stage and a malicious model during the
        subsequent step, effectively becoming invisible to FedGT. To address this issue, one may
        utilize cryptographic techniques to ensure model consistency from each client over subgroups
        (and the final aggregation of benign clients) at the expense of an increase in communication
        cost.
      • Test timing: The FedGT framework permits client testing at any given round. However, it is
        important to note that each round of testing inevitably leads to an increase in communication
        overhead due to the secure aggregation conducted across subgroups. It may be prudent
        to conduct tests periodically to ensure the integrity of the training process. The optimal
        timing of these tests might vary depending on the testing strategy employed. For instance,
        with simpler tests as considered in this paper, testing should ideally occur once the local
        models have begun to extract meaningful patterns from the data. For the MNIST dataset,
        this learning phase begins as early as the first communication round, while for CIFAR-10
        and ISIC2019 datasets, it takes place after a few communication rounds.


                                                 28
