Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


FAIR PATE: E XPOSING THE PARETO F RONTIER OF
FAIRNESS , P RIVACY, ACCURACY, AND C OVERAGE
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                             A BSTRACT

         Deploying machine learning (ML) models often requires both fairness and privacy
         guarantees. In this work, we study the challenges of integrating group fairness
         interventions into the Private Aggregation of Teacher Ensemble (PATE) framework.
         We show that in the joint fairness-privacy setting, the placement of the fairness in-
         tervention before, or after PATE’s noisy aggregation mechanism (which ensures its
         differential privacy guarantees) leads to excessive fairness violations, or inefficient
         privacy budgeting, respectively. With this in mind, we present FairPATE which
         adds a rejection mechanism due to fairness violations. Through careful adjust-
         ment of PATE’s privacy accounting, we match the DP-SGD-based state-of-the-art
         privacy-fairness-accuracy trade-offs (Lowy et al., 2023) in demographic parity, and
         improve on them for equality of odds with 2% lower disparity at similar accuracy
         levels and privacy budgets. We also evaluate FairPATE in the setting where exact
         fairness guarantees need to be enforced by refusing to provide algorithmic deci-
         sions at inference-time (for instance, in a human-in-the-loop setting) thus trading
         off fairness with coverage. Based on our FairPATE, we provide, for the first time,
         empirical Pareto frontiers for fairness, privacy, accuracy and coverage on a range
         of privacy and fairness benchmark datasets.



1    I NTRODUCTION

From medical applications (Irvin et al., 2019) to infrastructure planning with census data (US Cen-
sus Bureau, 2020), deploying machine learning (ML) models in critical contexts often requires not
only utility (accuracy) guarantees, but also fairness and privacy assurances. Differential Privacy (DP)
is the de facto standard for privacy-preserving ML. In this work, we highlight three main challenges
of integrating group fairness interventions in Private Aggregation of Teacher Ensemble (PATE)—one
of the two canonical privacy-preserving ML frameworks. PATE takes advantage of privacy-preserving
transfer learning between teacher and student models; and as a result, provides multiple possible
interventions points to preserve fairness. However, not all such interventions are equally effective.
We find that when optimizing for both privacy and fairness, instead of locating the fairness intervention
with respect to the training process—as is commonly done in the algorithmic fairness literature—it is
more beneficial to locate it with respect to the differential privacy (DP) intervention. In PATE, this
DP intervention takes the form of a private labeling process with a query rejection mechanism. Next,
we highlight three challenges for placing a fairness intervention in PATE. First, we argue that pre-DP
interventions where a fairness constraint is placed before DP noising can be ineffective in satisfying
the constraint. Second, we theoretically show a particular instance of such interventions—one that
balances class labels for different subpolulations—leads to degraded privacy guarantees. Third, we
argue that post-DP interventions in PATE, suffer from inaccurate privacy budgeting.
To address these challenges, we present FairPATE which augments PATE’s query rejection mechanism
with a fairness constraint. To make DP accounting accurate, we adjust PATE privacy accounting
to consider the possibility of rejecting queries due to fairness. We achieve state-of-the-art (SOTA)
privacy-fairness-accuracy trade-offs, improving on the previous SOTA (Lowy et al., 2023) under
equality of odds fairness notion by up to 2% improvement in average disparity at similar accuracy
levels over a range of privacy budgets.


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


We initially present FairPATE assuming a demographic parity notion of fairness since PATE relies
on unlabeled public data, which lacks the ground truth labels Y necessary to estimate other group
fairness metrics (such as equality of odds, or loss disparity). To enable the use of metrics that rely
on labels, we present a novel fairness metric estimation where we decompose each metric into
components which include Y , and those that do not. Using a small dataset with ground truth labels
we calculate the former in an offline fashion and once for every dataset. This allows us to estimate
standard group fairness (demographic parity, equality of odds, error parity, etc.) metrics at inference
time for the unlabeled dataset.
Finally, we consider FairPATE within a larger decision making context where producing unfair
decisions is much more costly than refusing to answer. For instance, consider a human-in-the-loop
system used for bail decisions . If at inference-time a decision cannot be made without violating
a pre-specified fairness metric, then the model can refuse to answer, at which point that decision
could be relegated to a human judge. From a technical point of view, this relaxes the classification
setting to that of classification with a reject option with the difference being coverage is trading off
with fairness instead of accuracy. We implement this setting using a inference-time post-processor
that mirrors (but is independent of) our new aggregation algorithm for FairPATE. Empirically, we
find that once the reject option is activated (i.e., when a tighter fairness gurantee is desired than is
achievable via fairness intervention) privacy, fairness and accuracy are no longer in a trade-off with
each other.
We run an extensive empirical evaluation in several domains over multiple tabular (Adult, Retired-
Adult, Parkinson’s, Credit-Card) and vision (UTKFace, FairFace, CelebA, CheXpert) datasets, and
provide, for the first time to the best of our knowledge, empirical Pareto frontiers for fairness, privacy,
accuracy and coverage.

2    BACKGROUND
We denote the ML model for classification by θ, the features as (x, z) ∈ X × Z where X is the
domain of non-sensitive attributes, Z is the domain of the sensitive attribute (categorical variable).
The categorical class-label is denoted by y ∈ [1, . . . , K]. We refer the interested reader to Appendix G
for a more thorough overview.
Group Fairness. We base our work on the fairness metric of multi-class demographic parity which
requires that ML models produce similar success rates (i.e., rate of predicting a desirable outcome,
such as getting a loan) for all sub-populations (Calders & Verwer, 2010). In practice, we estimate
multi-class demographic disparity for class k and subgroup z with: Γ(z, b k) := |{Ŷ =k,Z=z}| −
                                                                                        |{Z=z}|
|{Ŷ =k,Z̸=z}|
   |{Z̸=z}|          = θ(x, z). We define demographic parity when the worst-case demographic
               , where Ŷ
disparity between members and non-members for any subgroup, and for any class is bounded by γ:
Definition 1 (γ-DemParity). For predictions Y with corresponding sensitive attributes Z to satisfy
γ-bounded demographic parity (γ-DemParity), it must be that for all z in Z and for all k in K, the
demographic disparity is at most γ: Γ(z, k) ≤ γ.

Differential Privacy. Differential privacy Dwork & Roth (2013) is a framework to protect privacy
of individuals when analyzing their data. It achieves this by adding controlled noise to the algorithm
used for analysis, making it difficult to identify individual contributions while still providing useful
statistical results. More formally, (ε, δ)-differential privacy can be expressed as follows:
Definition 2 ((ε, δ)-Differential Privacy). Let M : D∗ → R be a randomized algorithm that satisfies
(ε, δ)-DP with ε ∈ R+ and δ ∈ [0, 1] if for all neighboring datasets D ∼ D′ , i.e., datasets that
differ in only one data point, and for all possible subsets R ⊆ R of the result space it must hold that
P [M(D) ∈ R] ≤ eε · P [M(D′ ) ∈ R] + δ .

Private Aggregation of Teacher Ensemble (PATE). As illustrated in Figure 1a, PATE (Papernot
et al., 2016) trains an ensemble of so-called teacher models on disjoint subsets of the private data
without any privacy protection. As a result, these teachers cannot be publicly exposed because
they would leak information about the private data. Instead, PATE utilizes them to label a public
dataset within an appropriately noised knowledge transfer process. Therefore, the teachers in the
ensemble each vote for a label for each public data point, and the final label is determined as a noisy


                                                    2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


arg max over the teachers’ vote. PATE estimates the privacy cost of answering queries (i.e. labeling
data) through teachers consensus with higher consensus revealing less information about individual
teachers, and, thereby, consuming less privacy costs. To take advantage of the fact that estimating
consensus is less privacy-costly than answering queries, PATE rejects high-cost queries to save on the
privacy budget (see Algorithm 4 in Appendix G.2). Both consensus estimation and vote aggregation
(answering the query) are noised with N (0, σ12 ) and N (0, σ22 ), respectively; where σ1 , σ2 are tuned
for better final utility of the separate student model that is then trained on the labeled public dataset.
The student can eventually be deployed publicly while the teachers are never externally exposed.


3    C HALLENGES OF U NFAIRNESS M ITIGATION IN PATE

Group fairness interventions (including demographic parity) in ML are often categorized with respect
to the training process as either pre-processing, in-processing, or post-processing. PATE’s semi-
supervised design, with both teacher and student models, then allows for multiple intervention
points to implement unfairness mitigation (see Figure 1a). Designs with Teacher-level interventions
are 1 PATE-Tpre , 2 -Tin , and 3 -Tpost . Corresponding Student-level interventions are 5 PATE-
Spre , 6 -Sin , and 7 -Spost . To motivate the choice of intervention point for our FairPATE in Section 4,
we analyze the other intervention points and highlight three main challenges that they suffer from.
(C1) DP-Induced Fairness Violations. Assume a non-private model θ : X 7→ Y that satisfies a
fairness constraint C. If we privatized θ by adding sensitivity-calibrated noise to its predictions,
and thus create model θ′ ; θ′ is not guaranteed to satisfy C anymore. Prior work has also observed
this phenomenon and showed the necessity of using a “post-hoc correction” to maintain the fairness
guarantee despite privatization (Mozannar et al., 2020). Similarly, a line of work has emerged to
quantify and mitigate the fairness cost of employing privacy preserving practices (Tran et al., 2021a;
2022a). All PATE designs where fairness intervention occurs before the voting mechanism (the noisy
argmax, which PATE derives its privacy guarantees from), namely 1 , 2 , and 3 are (see Figure 1a),
subject to this DP-induced fairness violations.
(C2) Fairness pre-processing increases the cost of private training. In Theorem 1, we show that
pre-processing the training data to equalize subpopulation rates will degrade the privacy guarantee of
the composed mechanism (i.e., preprocessor followed by private learning) compared to that of the
private learning mechanism alone :
Theorem 1. Assume the training dataset D = {(x, z, y) | x ∈ X , z ∈ Z, y ∈ Y} is fed through the
demographic parity pre-processor Ppre following an ordering defined over the input space X . Let
Ppre enforce a maximum violation γ, and |Z| = 2. Suppose
                                                      l nowm M is an (ε, δ) training mechanism,
                                                               2γ
then M ◦ Ppre is (Kγ ε, Kγ eKγ ε δ)-DP where Kγ = 2 +         1−γ   .

We provide the proof for Theorem 1 in Appendix A. This result is training-framework-agnostic, and
highlights the inefficacy of pre-processing in a privacy-aware learning pipeline. In Figure 1a, 1 can
be regarded as fairness pre-processors, and as such, suffers from a deteriorated privacy guarantee.
(C3) Inefficient Privacy Budgeting. In PATE, integrating unfairness mitigation after the privacy
intervention can lead to inefficient privacy budgeting. This is because due to PATE’s design, rejecting
a query always incurs smaller costs than answering it. If now, queries are answered without rejection
due to privacy constraint, but later on filtered out to mitigate unfairness, this privacy budget is
wasted. In reality, no privacy is actually lost, but the privacy budgeting has been made inaccurate (the
bound between actual and reported privacy becomes looser) which leads to unnecessary utility loss.
In Figure 1a, all designs that apply a fairness mechanism post privacy-noising, namely 5 , 6 , and
 7 ; suffer from this inefficient privacy budgeting.
For designs 6 and 7 we provide an instructive example in Figure 1b. Assume the student model is
a SVM and we require demographic parity. The correct hypothesis class (the max margin solution) h
is in black. Assume that the outlier query x0 is privacy-costly such that ε(x0 ) ≈ ε(x1 ) + ε(x2 ), but
x0 is the last query answered as the privacy budget is exhausted. Clearly no hypothesis h′ can achieve
perfect accuracy or exact fairness. We show one such h′ in magenta. However, if query x0 was not in
the training set to begin with, we could have achieved both. Our design, FairPATE 4 , rejects x0 due
to fairness violation which frees up the budget to accept x1 and x2 and learn the more robust h.


                                                    3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                  (C1): DP-Induced Fairness Violations               (C3) Inefficient Privacy Budegting
                       1                    2        3                 4    5        6            7

  (C2) Increased
 Training Privacy                                                                                                         h           unanswered
       Cost                Data 5       Teacher 5                                                                         h′              x2
                                                                                                                     y : 1, z : 1
                           Data 4       Teacher 4                                                                    y : 1, z : 0
    Sensitive                                            Aggregate                                     Inference     y : 0, z : 1
                                                                                 Student                Queries
      Data                 Data 3       Teacher 3         Teacher                                                    y : 0, z : 0

                            ...            ...
                                                          Labeled               Unlabeled                          unanswered
                           Data 1       Teacher 1                                                                      x1
                                                           Data                   Data
                                                                                                                           answered
                                                                                Public data                                   x0
                                                    Private Model

(a) Various ways to integrate fairness in PATE. For teachers: Pre- 1 /In- 2 /Post-Processing 3 . For the student: (b) Inefficient Privacy Bud-
Pre- 5 /In- 6 /Post-Processing 7 . Dashed line separates public and private data domains. Our FairPATE’s geting can lead to inaccu-
                                                                                                                  rate and/or unfair models.
intervention occurs at 4 .


4      FAIR PATE

In Section 3 we showed that the only viable fairness intervention is at 4 . We now present our design
at this intervention point which allows us to apply the fairness intervention after the noisy argmax
(addressing C1), and provide an accurate privacy accounting (addressing C3). Finally, at 4 , we are
not making any additional passes on teacher data, therefore, also C2 does not apply.


4.1     C ONFIDENT &FAIR GNM AX : A P RIVACY-P RESERVING AND FAIR AGGREGATION
        A LGORITHM

As discussed in Section 2, the privacy of standard PATE is introduced at the level of teacher
aggregation during the labeling of the public dataset where queries with public data are either rejected
if they incur too high privacy costs, or labeled otherwise. We present FairPATE which introduces an
unfairness mitigation to extend this private aggregation. Therefore, we propose a new aggregation
mechanism, namely Confident&Fair-GNMax (CF-GNMax, see Algorithm 1) that extends PATE’s
standard GNMax algorithm (Algorithm 4 in Appendix G.2) with the idea of rejecting queries also
due to their disparate impact on fairness.
Concretely, CF-GNMax, integrates an addi- Algorithm 1 – Confident&Fair-GNMax Aggregator
tional demographic parity constraint within
the aggregator which allows rejecting Input: query data point x, sensitive attribute z, predicted
                                               class label k, subpopulation subclass counts m : Z ×
queries on the basis of fairness. The algo-    K 7→ Z≥0
rithm checks potential demographic dispar- Require: minimum count M , threshold T , noise parameters
ity violations and maintains an upper bound    σ1 , σ2 , fairness violation margin γ
γ on them in the course of answering PATE 1: if maxj {nj (x)} +  N (0, σ12 ) ≥ T then
queries (Line 7 in Algorithm 1). The goal 2:        k ← arg maxj nj (x) + N (0, σ22 )
is to bound the actual Γ(z, k)—here em- 3:            P
                                                    if k̃ m(z, k̃) < M then
pirically estimated. Concretely, we mea- 4:              m(z, k) ← m(z, k) + 1
                              b k) using 5:
sure demographic disparity Γ(z,                          return k
the counter m : Z × K 7→ Z≥0 which tracks 6:        else                             P
                                                                      m(z,k)+1         z̸̃=z m(z̃,k)
per-class, per-subgroup decisions.          7:           if                        −                    <γ
                                                                                              (           )
                                                                    P                P
                                                                        m(z,k̃) +1           m(z̃,k̃)               z̸̃=z,k̃
                                                                                                  k̃
Care must be taken to produce accurate            then
Γ(z, k) estimations: with few samples, 8:                    m(z, k) ← m(z, k) + 1
                                               9:            return k
Γ(z, k) may be a poor estimator of Γ(z, k).
b
                                              10:        else
Therefore, we have a cold-start stage where 11:              return ⊥
there are not yet enough samples to estimate 12: else
Γ(z)
b     accurately. We avoid rejecting queries 13:     return ⊥
due to the fairness constraint at this stage.
Concretely, we require at least, on average, M samples from the query’s subgroup before we reject a
query on the basis of fairness (Line 3).


                                                                        4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


We note that the unfairness mitigation in FairPATE occurs almost exactly at the same point as the
privacy-utility balancing mechanism. This allows us to get as close as possible to the simultaneous
optimization of objectives which avoids the inefficient privacy budgeting (C1) discussed in Section 3.
Privacy Analysis. FairPATE’s query phase (CF-GNMAX, Algorithm 1) has two main differences
to PATE’s (C-GNMAX, Algorithm 4). First, FairPATE involves a cold-start stage during which
fairness violations estimators are inaccurate. During this stage, no fairness-related rejection takes
place until all subgroups have at least M samples. Second, in FairPATE, queries can be rejected
for two reasons. Reason 1: Similar to standard PATE, queries that incur too high privacy costs are
rejected. Reason 2: Additionally, queries whose answer would violate the fairness (γ-DemParity)
constraint are rejected, as well. During the cold-start stage (Line 3), FairPATE follows the privacy
analysis of PATE (Appendix B). Afterwards, queries can be rejected due to fairness.We can calculate
FairPATE’s overall probability of answering query qi as:

                                                                        P
                                          (             m(z,k)+1                m(z̃,k)
                                           0     if                   − P z̸̃=z            >γ
                                                      ( k̃ m(z,k̃))+1
                                                       P
               P[answering qi (z, k)] =                                  z̸̃=z,k̃ m(z̃,k̃)

                                            q̃   otherwise
where k is the noisy argmax (Line 2 in Algorithm 1), q̃ is calculated using Proposition 1 in Appendix B
(as before), and the left side of the condition is simply calculating the new tentative demographic
disparity violation Γ(z, k) if the query is accepted. Note that in PATE (and by extension FairPATE)
queries come from a public (and therefore non-private) dataset, and are labeled, noised and only then
used to increment m(z, k). Therefore, since the value of the counter m(z, k) is only conditioned on
the value of the noisy argmax, by the post-processing property of DP (Dwork & Roth, 2013), m(z, k)
and by extension, Line 7 do not add any additional privacy cost, i.e., rejecting queries on the basis of
fairness, does not incur additional privacy cost.

4.2   E XTENDING FAIR PATE TO OTHER FAIRNESS METRICS

Many group fairness metrics use not only the sensitive subgroup information Z and prediction label
(or score) Ŷ , but also ground truth labels Y . These include Equality of Odds (EO) (Hardt et al.,
2016), Error (loss) Disparity (Bagdasaryan et al., 2019) and Equality of False Positives (Zafar et al.,
2019). This is not an issue for unfairness mitigations that occur at training time (aka, in-processing).
However, at inference time we do not have access to Y . Since PATE, and FairPATE by extension, are
inference-time algorithms, the noisy mechanism which aggregates teacher votes does not have access
to Y and therefore cannot reject queries due to a violation of, for example, EO.
We propose to remedy this issue by using a calibration set DC which has ground-truth Y labels. This
dataset can be a small labeled subset of the public data. Next, we re-formulate a given group fairness
metric’s probability terms into ones that involve only Ŷ , Z, and the rest of the terms that involve
(Ŷ , Y, Z). We then estimate the latter terms on the calibration set DC . We provide the theoretical
decomposition for EO next and differ decomposition of other metrics to Appendix C.
Decomposing Equality of Odds (EO). The fairness metric for EO is ΓEO (Y, Ŷ , z) =
maxk′ ∈Y Pr[Ŷ = k ′ | Y = k, Z = z] − Pr[Ŷ = k ′ | Y = k, Z ̸= z]. We only decompose
the first term (for z = Z) using law of total probabilities. The second term is similar.
                                  PD [Ŷ = k ′ | Z = z] − PDC [Ŷ ̸= k ′ | Y ̸= k, Z = z]PD [Ŷ ̸= k ′ ]
Pr[Ŷ = k ′ | Y = k, Z = z] ≈
                                                                   PD [Ŷ = k ′ ]
                                             ′
                                  PD [Ŷ = k | Z = z]           PD [Ŷ ̸= k ′ ]
                              =                             −             PDC [Ŷ ̸= k ′ | Y ̸= k, Z = z]
                                     PD [Ŷ = k ′ ]        PD [Ŷ = k ′ ]
where PD and PDC are empirical probability estimations on the query set D and the calibration set
DC . We provide a similar decomposition for loss disparity in Appendix C. In practice, the PDC
term(s) are constant calibration factors in the form of ratios of counts that estimate various marginal
probabilities over (Y, Ŷ , Z). We calculate them offline once for every dataset before any query is
actually answered.
We make a note that a public labeled dataset can also be used to fine-tune a trained model with a
fairness regularized training loss. If used on its own, as a post-DP intervention, fine-tuning is also


                                                       5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


subject to inaccurate privacy budgeting (see C3 in Section 3); and therefore, it is not a replacement for
the calibration technique we discussed in this section. However, the two can be used in conjunction,
to achieve both an accurate privacy accounting and tighter fairness guarantees for the model. We
explore this in Appendix D.

4.3   E NSURING E XACT FAIRNESS AT I NFERENCE -T IME VIA A R EJECT O PTION

In this section, we extend FairPATE (independent of the used metric) within a larger decision making
context where no unfair algorithmic decisions are tolerated. In this case, the model is allowed to
refuse to answer rather than produce an unfair decision.
To guarantee and enforce the required degree of fair- Algorithm 2 Inference-time Post-
ness at inference-time, we propose an inference-time post- Processor (IPP)
processor (IPP) highlighted in Algorithm 2. Our design
is inspired by our fairness mitigation in FairPATE, but is Input: data point x, sensitive attribute
model-agnostic and generally applicable. At its core, IPP           z, predicted label ŷ, subpopulation-
adds a reject option to the classification (often referred to as    class counts m : Z × Y 7→ Z≥0
selective classification (Geifman & El-Yaniv)). In selective Require: minimum count M , fairness
classification the trade-off is between accuracy and cover-         violation
                                                                       P       margin γ
age (the percentage of queries that are answered). However,      1: if    ỹ m(z,  ỹ) < M then
our use of the reject option trades off coverage with fairness   2:     m(z,   y)   ← m(z, ŷ) + 1
at inference-time. That is we reject queries to ensure a 3:             return ŷ
bound on fairness violations. At inference time, our IPP 4: else
keeps track of the counts of positive predictions per sub- 5:   if                        P
                                                                         m(z,ŷ)+1                m(z̃,ŷ)
populations. For every query posed to the model, it first                              − P z̸̃=z               <γ
                                                                       ( ỹ m(z,ỹ))+1     z̸̃=z,ỹ m(z̃,ỹ)
                                                                        P
calculates the demographic disparity based on the current
counters. Then, it returns a label only if the resulting suc-       then
cess rate of the current sub-population (in comparison to the    6:          m(z, y) ← m(z, ŷ) + 1
other sub-populations) stays within the tolerated fairness 7:                return ŷ
violation. Since, at the beginning of inference, the model       8:     else
has not returned enough predictions to reliably estimate the 9:              return ⊥
per-sub-population success rates, we propose a cold-start phase (line 1-3), similar to in FairPATE,
during which all queries are answered.

5     E MPIRICAL E VALUATION
In our evaluation of FairPATE, we seek to (a) compare our solution to the state-of-the-art in training
fair and private ML models; (b) validate the claims in Section 3, and subsequently the design choice
for FairPATE; and (c) evaluate FairPATE in a classification setup with reject option (see Section 4.3).
Experimental Setup. We evaluate FairPATE on tabular fairness and privacy benchmark datasets
from Lowy et al. (2023), namely, Adult (Becker & Kohavi, 1996), Retired Adult (Ding et al., 2022),
German Credit Card (Hofmann, 1994), and Parkinson’s (Little, 2008), as well as the vision dataset
UTKFace (Zhang et al., 2017). The classification task for Credit-Card and Parkinson’s is “whether
the user will default payment the next month”, and “whether the total UPDRS score of the patient is
greater than the median or not,” respectively. For Adult and Retired Adult, the task is “whether the
individual will make more than $50K.” In all tasks, the sensitive attribute is gender.
For the tabular data, we adopt the experimental setup of Lowy et al. (2023) (including classification
task, pre-processing, etc.) and report the baselines results directly from the official repository (Gupta,
2023). For UTKFace, we evaluate DP-FERMI (Lowy et al., 2023) on gender classification task using
the same architecture (ResNet-50) and pre-training on ImageNet, as we do for FairPATE and our
other baselines. See Table 1 in Appendix F for more details on the experimental setup. All tabular
baselines use logistic regression for student and teacher models.
SOTA Baseline Comparisons. We evaluate FairPATE against DP-FERMI (Lowy et al., 2023) (the
current state-of-the-art) and also include their reported results for Tran et al. (2021a) and Jagielski
et al. (2019). We show our results on the Credit-Card and Parkinson’s datasets in Figure 2 under the
Demographic Parity (DemParity), and in Figure 3 for Equality of Odds (EqOdds). As an overall trend,
we observe that FairPATE outperforms the baselines in terms of fairness-accuracy trade-offs for most


                                                      6
 Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                                          =1                                 =3                                                                            =1                                                  =3                                                                            =1                                        =3


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0.00 0.05 0.10 0.15 0.20
                 0.000 0.005 0.010 0.015 0.020 0.025 0.000 0.005 0.010 0.015 0.020 0.025


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Disparity (DemParity)
                                                                                                                                                                    Disparity (DemParity)
Disparity (DemParity)


                                                                                                                                                                                     0.00 0.02 0.04 0.06 0.08
                                                                                                          =9                                = inf                                                                          =9                                                  = inf                                                                         =9                                        = inf
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               DP-FERMI


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0.00 0.05 0.10 0.15 0.20
                                                                                                                                                                    Disparity (DemParity)
Disparity (DemParity)


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Tran et al. (2021)


                                                                                                                                                                                     0.00 0.02 0.04 0.06 0.08


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Disparity (DemParity)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               FairPATE



                                                                                                                                      DP-FERMI                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  DP-FERMI
                                                                                                                                      Tran et al. (2021)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Tran et al. (2021)
                                                                                                                                      FairPATE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  FairPATE
                                                                        0.18                             0.19            0.200.18          0.19             0.20                                                0.050     0.075     0.100                        0.050     0.075         0.100                                         0.14           0.16        0.18          0.20 0.14       0.16        0.18     0.20
                                                                                                  Classification Error              Classification Error                                                         Classification Error                             Classification Error                                                             Classification Error                     Classification Error

                                                                                                            (a) Credit-Card                                                                                                   (b) Parkinson’s                                                                                                                            (c) Adult

 Figure 2: Demographic Parity on Credit-Card, Parkinson’s and Adult datasets. DP-FERMI produces
 better trade-offs at smaller ε levels, but FairPATE does better for larger ε’s. On average, FairPATE matches
 DP-FERMI with very similar disparity and classification errors (within 1%)


                                                                                                          = 0.5                                    =1                                                                     =3                                                             = 0.5                                                                    =1                                           =3
                                                                                                                                             DP-FERMI                                                                                                                                                                                                        DP-FERMI
Disparity (EqOdds)


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Disparity (EqOdds)
                   0.04


                                                                                                                                             Jagielski et al. (2019)                                                                                                                                                                                         Jagielski et al. (2019)

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0.2
                                                                                                                                             FairPATE                                                                                                                                                                                                        FairPATE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0.1
                   0.02


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0.0
                   0.00


                                                                                           0.20             0.25           0.30 0.2               0.3         0.4                      0.18                        0.20           0.22                                   0.2           0.3       0.4                                  0.5                0.20            0.25        0.300.15            0.20         0.25
                                                                                                  Classification Error                 Classification Error                                                     Classification Error                                           Classification Error                                                   Classification Error                        Classification Error

                                                                                                                                    (a) Credit-Card                                                                                                                                                                                                    (b) Adult

 Figure 3: Equality of Odds on Credit-Card and Adult datasets. FairPATE consistently produces better
 fairness-accuracy trade-offs. On average, FairPATE achieves 2% lower disparity with slightly lower error.



privacy budgets on these datasets. In particular, under EqOdds, FairPATE consistently produces
better fairness-accuracy trade-offs. On average, FairPATE achieves on average 2% lower disparity
with a slightly lower error. Under DempParity, DP-FERMI produces better trade-offs at smaller ε
levels, but FairPATE does better for larger ε’s (see Figure 2c). On average, however, FairPATE
matches DP-FERMI with very similar disparity and classification errors (within 1%). We present
further experimental results in Appendix E. In Figure 6 we repeat our comparisons for a Imagenet
pre-trained resnet-50 model trained and evaluated on UTKFace under Demographic Parity; and
observe similar outcomes.
The previous comparisons highlight a key difference between DP-FERMI and our FairPATE. DP-
FERMI extends further to lower disparity regions compared to FairPATE. This is because DP-FERMI
employs a regularization technique which operates in the model’s weight space and can enforce
the fairness constraint with a large penalty. However, this comes at the expense of generalization
performance (Figure 2a). FairPATE, on the other hand, operates in the sample space where the
fairness intervention is limited to rejecting samples that violate the fairness constraint. Depending
on the data distribution, this lower bounds the degree to which the fairness gap can be reduced. For
instance, in Parkinson’s (Figure 2b) which is a label-balanced dataset, FairPATE matches or improves
on DP-FERMI for most ε’s, whereas in Adult (with a 1:3 ratio of labels) this is not the case. As
additional ablation, in Appendix D, we present a weight space intervention on a trained FairPATE
model that allows us to further enforce the fairness constraint with a moderate cost to generalization.
 FairPATE Design Validation. We empirically validate claims in Section 3 by comparing FairPATE
 to two other PATE-based baselines which use the standard PATE’s query selection process. PATE-
 Spre ( 5 in Figure 1a) incorporates an unfairness pre-processor for the Student model. This pre-filters
 the training data points on which the student will be trained on (see Algorithm 3 for a full description
 of the pre-processor). PATE-Sin 6 , has a fairness-regularized training loss (an in-processor for
 the Student). This implies training the student on all the queries labeled by the teachers, but
 setting additional constraints during training. For tabular data, we use fairlearn implementation
 of Exponentiated Gradient (Agarwal et al., 2018; Weerts et al., 2023). Both baselines serve to


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                 = 0.5                                             =1                                                                                              =3                                         =5
                        0.20                                  FairPATE
                                                                                                                                                                        0.25
                                                              PATE-Sin


                                                                                                                                                Disparity (DemParity)
Disparity (DemParity)   0.15                                  PATE-Spre                                                                                                 0.20

                        0.10                                                                                                                                            0.15
                                                                                                                                                                                      FairPATE
                        0.05                                                                                                                                            0.10          PATE-Sin
                                                                                                                                                                                      PATE-Spre
                        0.00                                                                                                                                            0.05
                                  0.16       0.18        0.20          0.22       0.16       0.18        0.20        0.22                                                      0.20    0.25        0.30    0.35   0.40          0.20           0.25       0.30
                                         Classification Error                            Classification Error                                                                         Classification Error                       Classification Error


Figure 4: Baseline Comparisons: Demographic Parity on Adult (left) and UTKFace (right) datasets. While
the performance of FairPATE and the two baselines are similar, FairPATE generally achieves better accuracy at
the same fairness and privacy levels.


                               Classification with a Reject Option                Normal Classification

                        0.25
                                                                                                                                                                                              =3                                         =5
                                                                                                                                              0.25                                                    DP-FERMI
                        0.20                                                                                          Disparity (DemParity)                                                           FairPATE
                                                                                                                                              0.20
     Achieved γ


                        0.15
                                                                                                                                              0.15
                                                                                    Coverage              Accuracy
                        0.10
                                                                                    0.80                  69
                                                                                                                                              0.10
                                                                                    0.85                  72
                        0.05                                                        0.90                  75                                  0.05
                                                                                    0.95                  78
                                                                                    1.00                  81                                  0.00
                        0.00
                                                                                                                                                         0.2                           0.3                0.4            0.20          0.25        0.30   0.35
                                 2        4       6
                                          Achieved ε
                                                          8       10          2      4
                                                                                     Achieved ε
                                                                                               6     8        10
                                                                                                                                                                                  Classification Error                     Classification Error


Figure 5: Reject Option for Fairness. Inference- Figure 6: DP-FERMI Comparisons: Demographic Parity
time query rejections helps achieve small fairness on UTKFace dataset. At low privacy budget, FairPATE
violations by decreasing coverage. It preserves high produces higher accuracy at the same fairness level. At
model accuracy in low fairness violation settings. higher privacy budget, DP-FERMI has better trade-offs.


understand the impact of implementing fairness after the noisy aggregation of teachers, i.e., a post-DP
intervention.
Figure 4 compares FairPATE to the two baselines on Adult and UTKFace datasets. On both datasets,
the PATE-based models have similar behavior, particularly at low privacy budgets. PATE-Sin exhibits
a similar pattern to DP-FERMI as both use in-processor operating in the weight space: tighter
disparity control (up to 3% at ε = 1 on Adult) at the expense of lower generalization performance
(up to 2%). PATE-Spre is the closest PATE-based baseline to FairPATE, with the only difference
being the privacy accounting. On Adult, we observe an slightly improved fairness-privacy trade-off
as a result of the more accurate privacy accounting of FairPATE. The improvements are more stark
on UTKFace, especially in low fairness violation regions (Figure 4; figures on the right). Overall,
FairPATE outperforms PATE-Spre in most settings.
Reject Option for Fairness. We evaluate FairPATE under the setting where no fairness violations are
tolerated at inference time. Rejecting queries at inference introduces “coverage” into the trade-offs.
Coverage indicates the percentage of classification requests answered. We showcase the resulting
4-way Pareto frontier of fairness, privacy, accuracy, and coverage in Figure 5. As expected, fairness
no longer has a significantly impact on accuracy, but it is now in trade-offs with coverage instead, with
lower fairness violations corresponding to lower coverages. Interestingly, we observe a substantially
different privacy-accuracy trade-off under the reject option. Notably, a decrease in privacy budget
(right to left, almost constant size) does not show a trade-off with accuracy until very low (ε < 2)
privacy budgets. That is, under the reject option, privacy, fairness and accuracy need not be in
trade-off. We attribute the sudden decrease in accuracy below ε = 2 to the fact that very few queries
get answered, and that therefore the student model is not well-generalized.


                                                                                                                                      8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


6       R ELATED W ORK

In terms of privacy notion, the majority of the prior work considers DP that only protects pri-
vacy of individuals with respect to particular sensitive features (which we denote by DP-S from
hereon) (Jagielski et al., 2019; Mozannar et al., 2020). DP-S is a different privacy notion than Defi-
nition 2. DP-S does not protect the privacy of other (presumed non-sensitive) features. Since these
features are not considered during the privatization process, they can still lead to catastrophic privacy
failures (Dwork & Roth, 2013) that Definition 2 protects against.
While Tran et al. (2022b) implement a demographic parity intervention in PATE Student and Teacher
models ( 2 , and 6 in Figure 1a), they still operate under a DP-S privacy notion. FairPATE in
contrast, is a general framework for central DP training, compatible with any group fairness metric.
To the best of our knowledge, the only other work that provides a central DP guarantee together with
a group fairness intervention is Lowy et al. (2023). They propose a DP-SGD-based method with
fairness-specific privacy accounting which initially considers a DP-S setting but extends it to central
DP. Given the proximity to our work, we rely on Lowy et al. (2023) as a main basis for comparison.
Zhang et al. (2021) also proposed a DP-SGD-based method but do not feature a fairness-specific
privacy analysis. Instead, they rely on typical DP-SGD privacy accounting and early stopping criteria
to reduce the number of training steps and, as a consequence, the privacy cost.
In the intersection between privacy and fairness, there is work that considers the fairness impact
of DP learning itself (Esipova et al., 2022; Kulynych et al., 2022; Tran et al., 2021a; 2022a;
Suriyakumar et al., 2021; Farrand et al., 2020). In particular, several works have considered and
provided mitigations for the disparate impact on accuracy of DP-SGD, under a loss parity notion
of fairness. For instance, Kulynych et al. (2022) present DP-IS-SGD which adds an importance
sampling step to DP-SGD training with Poisson sampling and RDP accounting . There is a debate
whether DP learning presents a trade-off with loss parity fairness (Berrada et al., 2023). Indeed,
in Appendix E.3, we show that for FairPATE, error (loss) parity results are least affected by the
introduction of differential privacy training compared to demographic parity and equality of odds.


7       D ISCUSSION

We presented FairPATE, the first PATE-based framework that provides (central) DP (i.e., privacy
guarantees for all features) with a group fairness intervention. Given the two-model architecture
of PATE, we analyzed several possible fairness intervention points. We found out that placing the
intervention with respect to the training process of either model—as is common in algorithmic fairness
literature—leads to sub-optimal privacy-fairness-accuracy trade-offs. Our FairPATE intervention
occurs in between, as close as possible to the privacy intervention which affords us an accurate
privacy accounting.
As a result of the accurate privacy accounting, FairPATE is competitive with the state-of-the-art
DP-SGD-based solution (DP-FERMI). However, the two methods have a key difference. In DP-
FERMI both the fairness and privacy intervention occur in the weight space (i.e., space of model
parameters) while in FairPATE, both interventions occur in the sample space. From an algorithmic
fairness perspective, this difference is akin to a pre-processors and in-processor.1 Both have their
stenghts and shortcomings. For instance, since in-processors allow for a larger degree of freedom
to reduce the fairness gap (as we have also observed empirically). However, in-processing comes
at the cost of stability (Huang & Vishnoi, 2019; Friedler et al., 2018). Being in the sample space,
FairPATE inherits the advantages of PATE and is, for instance, architecture-agnostic and amenable to
distributed learning under confidentiality (secrecy) à la Choquette-Choo et al. (2021).
Finally, regarding the rejecti-option for fairness, we note that in a human-in-the-loop system, the
mistakes of the human would ultimately be mistakes of the end-to-end system; and therefore,
measuring the efficacy of the system should consider the human error as well. We have shown that
FairPATE and IPP enable such applications but whether such a system is the appropriate choice for a
given application is out of the scope of the current study.

    1
        From the student model point of view, FairPATE is a pre-processor


                                                        9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Martin Abadi, Andy Chu, Ian Goodfellow, H Brendan McMahan, Ilya Mironov, Kunal Talwar, and
 Li Zhang. Deep learning with differential privacy. In Proceedings of the 2016 ACM SIGSAC
 conference on computer and communications security, pp. 308–318, 2016.
Alekh Agarwal, Alina Beygelzimer, Miroslav Dudik, John Langford, and Hanna Wallach. A
  reductions approach to fair classification. In Jennifer Dy and Andreas Krause (eds.), Proceedings
  of the 35th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 80 of Proceedings of Machine
  Learning Research, pp. 60–69. PMLR, 10–15 Jul 2018. URL https://proceedings.mlr.
  press/v80/agarwal18a.html.
Martin Arjovsky, Léon Bottou, Ishaan Gulrajani, and David Lopez-Paz. Invariant risk minimization.
 arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.02893, 2019.
Eugene Bagdasaryan, Omid Poursaeed, and Vitaly Shmatikov. Differential privacy has disparate
  impact on model accuracy. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 32.
  Curran Associates, Inc., 2019.
Barry Becker and Ronny Kohavi. Adult.           UCI Machine Learning Repository, 1996.          DOI:
  https://doi.org/10.24432/C5XW20.
Amos Beimel, Shiva Prasad Kasiviswanathan, and Kobbi Nissim. Bounds on the sample complexity
 for private learning and private data release. In Theory of Cryptography Conference, pp. 437–454.
 Springer, 2010.
Leonard Berrada, Soham De, Judy Hanwen Shen, Jamie Hayes, Robert Stanforth, David Stutz, Push-
  meet Kohli, Samuel L. Smith, and Borja Balle. Unlocking Accuracy and Fairness in Differentially
  Private Image Classification, 2023. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2308.10888.
Toon Calders and Sicco Verwer. Three naive bayes approaches for discrimination-free classification.
  Data mining and knowledge discovery, 21(2):277–292, 2010.
Christopher A. Choquette-Choo, Natalie Dullerud, Adam Dziedzic, Yunxiang Zhang, Somesh Jha,
  Nicolas Papernot, and Xiao Wang. CaPC learning: Confidential and private collaborative learning,
  2021. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2102.05188.
Frances Ding, Moritz Hardt, John Miller, and Ludwig Schmidt. Retiring adult: New datasets for fair
  machine learning, 2022.
Cynthia Dwork and Aaron Roth.          The algorithmic foundations of differen-
  tial privacy.  9(3):211–407, 2013.   ISSN 1551-305X, 1551-3068.    doi: 10.
 1561/0400000042.           URL   http://www.nowpublishers.com/articles/
  foundations-and-trends-in-theoretical-computer-science/TCS-042.
Maria S Esipova, Atiyeh Ashari Ghomi, Yaqiao Luo, and Jesse C Cresswell. Disparate impact in
 differential privacy from gradient misalignment. In The Eleventh International Conference on
 Learning Representations, 2022.
Tom Farrand, Fatemehsadat Mireshghallah, Sahib Singh, and Andrew Trask. Neither private nor fair:
  Impact of data imbalance on utility and fairness in differential privacy. In Proceedings of the 2020
  Workshop on Privacy-Preserving Machine Learning in Practice, pp. 15–19, 2020.
Sorelle A. Friedler, Carlos Scheidegger, Suresh Venkatasubramanian, Sonam Choudhary, Evan P.
  Hamilton, and Derek Roth. A comparative study of fairness-enhancing interventions in machine
  learning, 2018. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1802.04422.
Yonatan Geifman and Ran El-Yaniv.        Selective classification for deep neural net-
  works.    In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 30. Curran
  Associates, Inc. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2017/hash/
  4a8423d5e91fda00bb7e46540e2b0cf1-Abstract.html.
Devansh    Gupta.              Stochastic-Differentially-Private-and-Fair-Learning,
  2023.                URL      https://github.com/devanshgupta160/
  Stochastic-Differentially-Private-and-Fair-Learning.


                                                 10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Moritz Hardt, Eric Price, and Nati Srebro. Equality of opportunity in supervised learning. Advances
 in neural information processing systems, 29, 2016.
Hans Hofmann. Statlog (German Credit Data). UCI Machine Learning Repository, 1994. DOI:
  https://doi.org/10.24432/C5NC77.
Lingxiao Huang and Nisheeth Vishnoi. Stable and fair classification. In Kamalika Chaudhuri
  and Ruslan Salakhutdinov (eds.), Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on Machine
  Learning, volume 97 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 2879–2890. PMLR,
  09–15 Jun 2019. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v97/huang19e.html.
Jeremy Irvin, Pranav Rajpurkar, Michael Ko, Yifan Yu, Silviana Ciurea-Ilcus, Chris Chute, Henrik
  Marklund, Behzad Haghgoo, Robyn Ball, Katie Shpanskaya, et al. Chexpert: A large chest
  radiograph dataset with uncertainty labels and expert comparison. In Proceedings of the AAAI
  conference on artificial intelligence, volume 33, pp. 590–597, 2019.
Matthew Jagielski, Michael Kearns, Jieming Mao, Alina Oprea, Aaron Roth, Saeed Sharifi-Malvajerdi,
 and Jonathan Ullman. Differentially private fair learning. In International Conference on Machine
 Learning, pp. 3000–3008. PMLR, 2019.
Peter Kairouz, Brendan McMahan, Shuang Song, Om Thakkar, Abhradeep Thakurta, and Zheng Xu.
  Practical and private (deep) learning without sampling or shuffling. In International Conference
  on Machine Learning, pp. 5213–5225. PMLR, 2021.
Kimmo Karkkainen and Jungseock Joo. Fairface: Face attribute dataset for balanced race, gender,
  and age for bias measurement and mitigation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Winter Conference
  on Applications of Computer Vision, pp. 1548–1558, 2021.
Bogdan Kulynych, Yao-Yuan Yang, Yaodong Yu, Jarosław Błasiok, and Preetum Nakkiran. What
  you see is what you get: Distributional generalization for algorithm design in deep learning. 2022.
Max Little.        Parkinsons.    UCI Machine Learning Repository,                 2008.       DOI:
 https://doi.org/10.24432/C59C74.
Ziwei Liu, Ping Luo, Xiaogang Wang, and Xiaoou Tang. Deep learning face attributes in the wild. In
  Proceedings of International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), December 2015.
Andrew Lowy, Devansh Gupta, and Meisam Razaviyayn. Stochastic differentially private and fair
  learning. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023. URL
  https://openreview.net/forum?id=3nM5uhPlfv6.
Ilya Mironov. Rényi differential privacy. In 2017 IEEE 30th computer security foundations symposium
   (CSF), pp. 263–275. IEEE, 2017.
Hussein Mozannar, Mesrob Ohannessian, and Nathan Srebro. Fair learning with private demographic
  data. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 7066–7075. PMLR, 2020.
Nicolas Papernot, Martín Abadi, Ulfar Erlingsson, Ian Goodfellow, and Kunal Talwar. Semi-
  supervised knowledge transfer for deep learning from private training data. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1610.05755, 2016.
Nicolas Papernot, Shuang Song, Ilya Mironov, Ananth Raghunathan, Kunal Talwar, and Úlfar
  Erlingsson. Scalable private learning with pate. arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.08908, 2018.
Laleh Seyyed-Kalantari, Guanxiong Liu, Matthew McDermott, Irene Y Chen, and Marzyeh Ghassemi.
  Chexclusion: Fairness gaps in deep chest x-ray classifiers. In BIOCOMPUTING 2021: proceedings
  of the Pacific symposium, pp. 232–243. World Scientific, 2020.
Vinith M. Suriyakumar, Nicolas Papernot, Anna Goldenberg, and Marzyeh Ghassemi. Chasing
  your long tails: Differentially private prediction in health care settings. In Proceedings of the
  2021 ACM Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency, FAccT ’21, pp. 723–734,
  New York, NY, USA, 2021. Association for Computing Machinery. ISBN 9781450383097. doi:
  10.1145/3442188.3445934. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3442188.3445934.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Cuong Tran, My H Dinh, and Ferdinando Fioretto. Differentially private deep learning under the
  fairness lens. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.02674, 2021a.
Cuong Tran, Ferdinando Fioretto, and Pascal Van Hentenryck. Differentially private and fair deep
  learning: A lagrangian dual approach. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial
  Intelligence, 2021b.
Cuong Tran, My H Dinh, Kyle Beiter, and Ferdinando Fioretto. A fairness analysis on private
  aggregation of teacher ensembles. 2022a.
Cuong Tran, Keyu Zhu, Ferdinando Fioretto, and Pascal Van Hentenryck. SF-PATE: Scalable,
  Fair, and Private Aggregation of Teacher Ensembles, 2022b. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/
  2204.05157.
US US Census Bureau. Formal privacy methods for the 2020 census, 2020.                        URL
 https://www.census.gov/programs-surveys/decennial-census/
 decade/2020/planning-management/plan/planning-docs/
 privacy-methods-2020-census.html. Section: Government.
Salil Vadhan. The complexity of differential privacy. Tutorials on the Foundations of Cryptography:
  Dedicated to Oded Goldreich, pp. 347–450, 2017.
Jiaqi Wang, Roei Schuster, Ilia Shumailov, David Lie, and Nicolas Papernot. In differential privacy,
   there is truth: on vote-histogram leakage in ensemble private learning. Advances in Neural
   Information Processing Systems, 35:29026–29037, 2022.
Hilde Weerts, Miroslav DudÃk, Richard Edgar, Adrin Jalali, Roman Lutz, and Michael Madaio.
  Fairlearn: Assessing and improving fairness of ai systems. Journal of Machine Learning Research,
  24(257):1–8, 2023. URL http://jmlr.org/papers/v24/23-0389.html.
Muhammad Bilal Zafar, Isabel Valera, Manuel Gomez-Rodriguez, and Krishna P. Gummadi. Fairness
 constraints: A flexible approach for fair classification. 20(75):1–42, 2019. URL http://jmlr.
 org/papers/v20/18-262.html.
Tao Zhang, Tianqing Zhu, Kun Gao, Wanlei Zhou, and S Yu Philip. Balancing learning model privacy,
  fairness, and accuracy with early stopping criteria. IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and
  Learning Systems, 2021.
Zhifei Zhang, Yang Song, and Hairong Qi. Age progression/regression by conditional adversarial
  autoencoder. In IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR). IEEE,
  2017.


                                                12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A       P RIVACY C OST OF P RE -P ROCESSING

Algorithm 3 Pre-Processor Ppre
Input: data point x, sensitive attribute z, true label y, subpopulation-class counts m : Z × Y 7→ Z≥0
      P minimum count M , fairness violation margin γ
Require:
 1: if ỹ m(z, ỹ) < M then
 2:     m(z, y) ← m(z, y) + 1
 3:     return x
 4: else                        P
               m(z,ŷ)+1           z̸̃=z m(z̃,ŷ)
 5:     if                   − P                     < γ then
             ( ỹ m(z,ỹ))+1     z̸̃=z,ỹ m(z̃,ỹ)
              P

 6:         m(z, y) ← m(z, y) + 1
 7:         return x
 8:     else
 9:         return ⊥

Fairness pre-processing can lead to increased privacy costs during private training. A consequence of
differential privacy is the privacy consumption regime Mironov (2017): just by observing the data for
the purposes of equalizing a fairness measure between subpopulations, we may consume from the
privacy budget.2 This budget could otherwise be spent, for instance, on more training passes on data
to yield higher accuracy. We formalize this observation in Theorem 1 for the case when a universal
ordering exists.

Proof. We will proceed to show that using a pre-processing that sorts through data following some
ordering defined over the whole input space 3 and, for any given label y, removes the last datapoints
(following the ordering)lin themmajority subclass until it satisfies the γ-constraint will produce datasets
                           2γ
at most 2 + Kγ = 2 + 1−γ        apart. One then applies group privacy to obtain the final claim of the
theorem.
Let D′ = D ∪ x∗ , and the label of x∗ is y ∗ . We now proceed to analyze how far apart Ppre (D) and
Ppre (D′ ) can be. First note, they are the same on all labels not y ∗ , so we need only consider the
difference on this label. First, let m be the size of the minority subclass for label y ∗ and let m + c
                                                                     m       m+c
be the admissible size of the majority class. That is, we have 2m+c       − 2m+c   < γ. From this we
                      γ
can conclude c = ⌊ 1−γ 2m⌋. Given this relation between the size of majority class a function of the
minority class, we proceed to go through all logical cases to show the maximum difference is as
claimed above.
Suppose x∗ belongs to the minority subclass for y ∗ in D. Then we have m → m + 1 and hence
        γ
c → ⌊ 1−γ   2(m + 1)⌋. Thus we see Ppre (D′ ) now admits one more point in the minority class of y ∗
                      2γ
and at most 1 + ⌈ 1−γ     ⌉ more points to the the majority subclass (note we do not replace existing
points as we follow the ordering on the input space). Thus the max change between Ppre (D) and
                     2γ
Ppre (D′ ) is 2 + ⌈ 1−γ  ⌉
Now suppose x∗ belongs to majority subclass for y ∗ in D. In this case we have either x∗ appears
early enough in the ordering that it now replaces another point in the majority class when applying P ,
or it is not added. In the former case, this mean we have changed Ppre (D) by 2: we first removed a
point and then added x∗ . In the latter case, x∗ did not get added into the dataset, more so because of
the ordering, Ppre (D′ ) = Ppre (D) as the order of points before x∗ is still the same. So in this case,
                                                                             2γ
once again, the change between Ppre (D) and Ppre (D′ ) is less than 2 + ⌈ 1−γ   ⌉.
Thus we have by group privacy (see lemma 2.2 in Vadhan (2017)) that M ◦ Ppre gives the claimed
                                    2γ
DP-guarantee, as we set Kγ = 2 + ⌈ 1−γ ⌉


    2
      Note that this disadvantage does not hold for fairness post-processing which does not incur additional
privacy costs due to the differential privacy post-processing property.
    3
      An example of such ordering would be to order images based on their pixel values in some specified order
of height, width and channel starting by checking the first pixel, then the second pixel, and so on.


                                                     13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B    S TANDARD PATE P RIVACY A NALYSIS
Papernot et al. Papernot et al. (2018) use Rényi differential privacy (RDP) Mironov (2017) for
accounting of the privacy budget expanded in answering each query. While the true privacy cost for
each query is not known, an upporbound is estimated and summed over the course of the query phase.
Answering queries stop when a pre-defined budget is exhausted. A student model is then trained on
the answered queries.
Theorem 2 establishes that the upperbound is a function of the probability of not answering a query i
with the plurality vote i∗ . Unsurprisingly, this privacy cost function must tends to zero when the said
event is very unlikely (i.e., strong consensus):
Theorem 2 (From Papernot et al. (2018)). Let M be a randomized algorithm with (µ1 , ε1 ) − RDP
and (µ2 , ε2 ) − RDP guarantees and suppose that given a dataset D, there exists a likely outcome i∗
such that Pr [M(D) ̸= i∗ ] ≤ q̃. Then the data-dependent Rényi differential privacy for M of order
λ ≤ µ1 , µ2 at D is bounded by a function of q̃, µ1 , ε1 , µ2 , ε2 , which approaches 0 as q̃ → 0.

In practice, Proposition 1 is used to find q̃i in Theorem 2, and µ1 , µ2 are optimized to achieve the
lowest upperbound on the privacy cost of each query for every order λ of RDP.
Proposition    1 (From Papernot et al. (2018)). For any i∗ ∈ [m], we have Pr [Mσ (D) ̸= i∗ ] ≤
1
  P             ni∗ −ni
2   i̸=i∗ erfc     2σ   , where erfc is the complementary error function.

C    FAIRNESS M ETRIC D ECOMPISITIONS
Loss Disparity. Consider Loss (Error) Disparity as our fairness notion:
                    Γerror (Y, Ŷ , z) = Pr[Y ̸= Ŷ | Z = z] − Pr[Y ̸= Ŷ | Z ̸= z].


                         X
Pr[Y ̸= Ŷ | Z = z] =          Pr[Y = k, Ŷ ̸= k | Z = z] Pr[Y = k]
                         k
                         X
                     =         Pr[Ŷ ̸= k | Z = z] Pr[Y = k | Ŷ ̸= k, Z = z] Pr[Y = k]
                         k
                         XX
                     =                Pr[Ŷ = k ′ | Z = z] Pr[Y = k | Ŷ = k ′ , Z = z] Pr[Y = k]
                         k k′ ̸=k estimate on unlabeled public data
                                      |       {z         } |                {z                  }
                                                                            estimate on labeled public data
                         XX
                     ≈                           ′
                                    PD [Ŷ = k | Z = z] PDC [Y = k | Ŷ = k ′ , Z = z]PDC [Y = k]
                         k k′ ̸=k
                         XX
                     =              PD [Ŷ = k ′ | Z = z] PDC [Y = k | Ŷ = k ′ , Z = z]PDC [Y = k]⊮{k′ ̸=k}
                         k′     k
                         X                               X
                     =         PD [Ŷ = k ′ | Z = z]             PDC [Y = k | Ŷ = k ′ , Z = z] ⊮{k′ ̸=k} PDC [Y = k]
                             ′
                               |        {z         }             |           {z               } | {z } |       {z   }
                         k                                   k
                                     A:|Y|×|Z|                            |Y|×|Z|×|Y|                   |Y|×|Y|   |Y|×1
                                                         |                                 {z                             }
                                                                                       B:|Y|×|Z|

                     = 1⊤
                        |Y|×1 · (A ⊙ B)


D    M ODEL FAIR -T UNING
Our goal is to further reduce the disparity gap that a FairPATE student model has without accumulating
additional privacy cost. We start by making two key observations: (a) in private training, we care
about the privacy of training data but not inference data, and (b) in providing fairness guarantees
for models, we care about the fairness gaps at inference-time. Therefore, we present a fine-tuning
mechanism that takes advantage of public data to adjust the model post-training but pre-inference.
The effect is that no privacy budget is spent as data used to calibrate the model is public, and on the
other hand, the model exhibits better fairness gaps as a result.


                                                         14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                        Dtrain        Training            Inference
                                              Model     θtr
                                       Model                Fair-Tuning       θft   y
                                       Arch. Training
                                        Θ              Dpub = {(xpub, ypub)} x

Figure 7: Fair-Tuning using Public Data. Note that model θ ∈ Θ can be any trained model. Here we assume a
FairPATE student.



Method. In Section 4.2, we introduced a calibration method where we used a labeled public dataset
to estimate probability factors over ground truth labels offline. This enabled us to apply ground-truth-
based fairness losses for PATE query answering. We required a relatively small dataset since the
estimates were only for 3-dimensions (Ŷ , Y, Z). If we have access to a larger sample of labeled
queries, we can fair-tune our models. Figure 7 depicts our approach. Given any trained (student)
model θtr as our initialization, we perform additional training steps using the following loss on a
public dataset Dpub = {(x, z, y)}:

                                              1     X
         ℓfair-tune (θ; Dpub ) =                      ℓtrain (θ(xi ), yi ) + λ max{0, Γ(θ(xi ), yi , zi ) − γ},                                               (1)
                                            |Dpub |
                                                        i∈|Dpub |


where ℓtrain is the original training loss used for the student model. λ is a hyper-parameter that ensures
the balance between fine-tuned model accuracy and fairness.

                                                                                              80
         Calibration

      No Calibration                                                                          78

                       0       20              40           60          80
                                            Accuracy                                          76
                                                                                   Accuracy


         Calibration                                                                          74
      No Calibration
                                                                                              72
                   0.00    0.05         0.10        0.15         0.20       0.25
                                    Achieved Fairness Gap
                                                                                              70                                            Setting
         Calibration                                                                                                                        Calibration
                                                                                              68                                            No Calibration
      No Calibration

                       0   1            2           3            4      5                          0.10   0.12   0.14    0.16     0.18   0.20   0.22   0.24
                                  Achieved Privacy Budget                                                               Achieved γ


    Figure 8: Model Fair-Tuning trade-off fairness for accuracy without impacting the privacy budget


Empirical Results. Our empirical result in Figure 8 on
UTKFace using FairPATE without IPP, shows that fair-                                                      Fair-tuned            No Fair-tuning
tuning helps reduce the fairness gap by about 9% (from 24%
to 15%) with less than 2% drop in accuracy, for the model
on the Pareto frontier shown in Figure 8 (right).
Our more extensive Pareto frontier in Figure 9 confirms
our findings. In low privacy and low-fairness violation re-
gions in particular, we see the largest gains from calibration.
Calibration allows us to achieve better utility for the same
privacy and fairness level of guarantees. In one case, for
ε = 1.48 and γ = 0.14 we achieve a 9% improvement to
accuracy (from 69% to 78%).

                                                                                                      Figure 9: FairPATE (w/o IPP) With (blue)
E     A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS                                                              and Without (red) model fair-tuning on
                                                                                                      UTKFace
In this section, we present additional experimental results.


                                                                               15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E.1                 BASELINE C OMPARISONS WITH IPP

We present baseline comparisons with IPP in this section. We compare FairPATE to DP-SGD, PATE,
PATE-Spre , and PATE-Sin . We apply IPP to all methods for consistency.
Figure 10 shows sampled points from the Pareto frontier in 2d with size indicating accuracy and
hue, coverage. We observe that at the same privacy budget and fairness violation, FairPATE usually
has larger points with darker colours, indicating higher accuracy and higher coverage. This is shown
clearly in low fairness violation regions at the bottom of the figures.
Figure 11 plots the Pareto frontier surface for each method. We plot achieved ε, achieved γ, and
model accuracy on three axes. We show the model coverage with colours where lighter colours
indicate lower coverage. The results show that FairPATE outperforms the baselines in terms of
accuracy in high privacy budget low fairness violation regions. FairPATE also simultaneously
achieves higher coverage than the baselines in these regions. Both DP-SGD and PATE do not have
unfairness mitigation mechanisms, so it is not surprising that FairPATE outperforms them in regions
with tight fairness constraints. FairPATE also performs better than PATE-Spre because it is able to
save privacy budget when rejecting points that violate fairness constraint. It is then able to accept
more data points to train a better student model. In low privacy budget regions and high fairness
violation regions, FairPATE performs similarly to other methods because its fairness mechanism is
not activated. The mechanism is not activated either due to having insufficient data point to move
past the warm-up stage or fairness constraint being too loose.


                     Coverage          0.75        0.80       0.85   0.90       0.95        1.00    Accuracy        54       60          66       72       78



                                FairPATE with IPP                                PATE with IPP                                    DP-SGD with IPP
             0.25



             0.20
Achieved γ


             0.15



             0.10



             0.05



             0.00
                                                                                                                         2          4         6        8        10
                                                                                                                                        Achieved ε
                            PATE-Spre with IPP                                  PATE-Sin with IPP
             0.25



             0.20
Achieved γ


             0.15



             0.10



             0.05



             0.00
                       2          4           6           8     10          2      4         6      8          10
                                      Achieved ε                                       Achieved ε


Figure 10: FairPATE and baseline comparisons with IPP. The size of the points indicates accuracy
and the hue indicates coverage. FairPATE usually achieves higher accuracy and coverage than the
baselines at the same privacy budget and fairness violation.


                                                                                       16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                    DP-SGD with IPP   FairPATE with IPP                                                PATE with IPP   FairPATE with IPP
   1                                                                                  1


   0.9                                                                                0.9

         Coverage


                                                                                            Coverage
   0.8                                                                                0.8


   0.7                                                                                0.7


                                                          PATE-Spre with IPP        FairPATE with IPP
                                         1


                                         0.9
                                               Coverage



                                         0.8


                                         0.7


Figure 11: FairPATE and baseline Pareto surface comparisons with IPP. Colour of the surfaces
shows model coverage. FairPATE outperforms baselines in most regions in both accuracy and
coverage, especially in regions with high privacy budget and low fairness violations.



E.2           I MPACT OF DATA I MBALANCE ON IPP

In Figure 12 we show the fairness-accuracy trade-off curves of FairPATE under various privacy
budgets; and with and without the presence of class imbalance. We show our results on Adult, since
it is an imbalanced dataset with a 3:4 ratio of majority to minority class labels. In Figure 12b we
balance the ratio 1:1 using sklearn’s imbalanced-learn undersampler. We are quick to note
that error rates between Figure 12a and Figure 12b are not comparable (i.e., a random classifier
achieves 25% error rate on the former and 50% on the latter).
Under class-imbalance for every percentage of coverage degradation, the fairness-privacy curve
improves consistently (to lower left on the plot, with lower error and lower disparity). For the
balanced case, we observe that the disparity levels are much higher. This is because random (non-
stratified) sampling is not conducive to demographic parity. IPP’s overall behavior is similar as before
but the curves are much closer to each other and the rejection rates are higher due to high disparity
levels of the initial models caused by random sampling.



E.3           C OMPARISONS BETWEEN DIFFERENT GROUP FAIRNESS METRICS

In Figure 13, we show three FairPATE instances with different fairness notions, and compare their
fairness-accuracy trade-offs. We observe that the model with error (loss) parity fairness is least
affected by the introduction of the privacy intervention (DP) while the model with demographic parity
intervention is most affected. Our observation regarding error parity is consistent with prior work
(from Berrada et al. (2023), for instance) that has shown that for well-generalized models, differential
privacy does not result in additional unfairness. We attribute this to the fact that error parity, is
inherently a notion of generalization measured for sub-populations instead of over the whole dataset.
A well-generalized model should in principle also generalize well for its marginal distributions as
well.


                                                                               17
 Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                          =1                                        =3                                                                   =1                                  =3


                 0.4


                                                                                                                               0.4
Disparity (DemParity)


                                                                                                              Disparity (DemParity)
                 0.3


                                                                                                                               0.3
                 0.2


                                                                                                                               0.2
                 0.1


                                                                                                                               0.1
                 0.4 0.0


                                                                                                                               0.4 0.0
                                          =9                                        = inf                                                                =9                                  = inf
                                                                                  FairPATE (w/o IPP)
Disparity (DemParity)


                                                                                                              Disparity (DemParity)
                 0.3


                                                                                                                               0.3
                                                                                                                                                                                           FairPATE (w/o IPP)
                 0.2


                                                                                                                               0.2
                 0.1


                                                                                                                               0.1
                 0.0


                                                                                                                               0.0
                           0.15            0.20                 0.25 0.15            0.20              0.25                              0.15            0.20            0.25 0.15            0.20              0.25
                                  Classification Error                      Classification Error                                                Classification Error                 Classification Error
                        0.60      0.65    0.70          0.75     0.80     0.85     0.90     0.95       1.00                           0.60      0.65     0.70    0.75     0.80     0.85     0.90     0.95       1.00
                                                               Coverage                                                                                                 Coverage
                                    (a) Adult (label-imbalanced 3:4)                                                                                   (b) Adult (label-balanced)

Figure 12: IPP on Adult (label-imbalanced 3:4, left) vs. IPP on label-balanced Adult (right).
The colorbar marks the coverage (1-rejection rate) of the queries answered at inference time. Due to
the balancing, the error rates are not comparable between (a) and (b).

                                                                                    =1                                                                          =3
                                                   0.20


                                                                                                                                                              Error Parity
                                                                                                                                                              Demographic Parity
                                                   0.15


                                                                                                                                                              Equality of Odds
                                            Disparity
                                                   0.10
                                                   0.05
                                                   0.00


                                                                                    =9                                                                          = inf
                                                   0.20
                                                   0.15
                                            Disparity
                                                   0.10
                                                   0.05
                                                   0.00


                                                          0.15            0.20            0.25          0.30                          0.15             0.20        0.25          0.30
                                                                        Classification Error                                                      Classification Error
Figure 13: Error Parity vs. Demographic Parity vs. Equality of Odds on Adult. Models trained
with loss parity notion of fairness are least affected by the introduction of differential privacy noising.


  F                        E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP

We split each dataset into a training set, an unlabeled set, and a test set. The sizes of these three
datasets are determined based on the dataset sizes specified in original PATE Papernot et al. (2016;


                                                                                                              18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


2018), and adapted to the difficulties of the prediction tasks. For CheXpert, we only use the data
from two races that have the most data. The other groups have too few data points for our fairness
intervention to perform effectively.
In FairPATE, the training set is further split into equal partitions to train the teacher models. We
train as many teachers as possible while still achieving good ensemble accuracy overall. In FairDP-
SGD, the whole training set is used to train the private model. The test set is used to evaluate the
performance of the final model.

F.1        FAIR PATE

For FairPATE, we first train the teacher ensemble models, then query them with the public dataset,
and aggregate their predictions using the FairPATE algorithm. The student model is trained on
the public dataset with obtained labels. The model architectures, as well as the parameters used
in querying the teacher models are detailed in Table 1 for each dataset, respectively. The model
architectures are chosen by referencing what is used in related works for each dataset.
We tune the amount of noise injected into the aggregation mechanism of FairPATE by varying the
standard deviation of the Gaussian distribution while ensuring the accuracy of the labels produced by
the teacher ensemble models to maximize the accuracy of student models. We used a small validation
set taken from the dataset to tune the FairPATE hyperparameters by training student models with
different combinations of the hyperparameters and selecting the values that lead to the highest student
model accuracy. The validation set is taken from the original training set and the size is half the size
of the unlabeled set. When tuning, we vary the threshold T between 0.5 to 1.5 multiplied by the
number of teacher models, σ1 between 0 to the number of teacher models, and σ2 between 0 to 0.5
multipled by the number of teacher models.
We train the models using Adam optimizer. We use cross entropy loss function when training on
ColorMNIST and binary cross entropy with logits on all the other datasets.

 Dataset                                                        Prediction Task   C    Sens. Attr.    SG    Total     U                  Model                 Number of Teachers   T     σ1    σ2
 ColorMNIST (Arjovsky et al., 2019)                                 Digit         10    Color         2    60 000    1 000   Convolutional Network (Table 2)          200           120   110   20
 CelebA (Liu et al., 2015)                                         Smiling         2    Gender        2    202 599   9 000   Convolutional Network (Table 3)          150           130   110   10
 FairFace (Karkkainen & Joo, 2021)                                 Gender          2     Race         7     97 698   5 000        Pretrained ResNet50                  50           30    30    10
 UTKFace (Zhang et al., 2017)                                      Gender          2     Race         5     23 705   1 500        Pretrained ResNet50                 100           50    40    15
 CheXpert(Irvin et al., 2019) (Seyyed-Kalantari et al., 2020)      Disease        2      Race         3    152 847   4 000      Pretrained DenseNet121                50            30    20    10



Table 1: Datasets used for evaluation. Abbreviations: C: number of classes in the main task; SG: number
of sensitive groups; U: number of unlabeled samples for the student training . Summary of parameters used
in training and querying the teacher models for each dataset. The selection of σ1 is in accordance with the
threshold T . The selection process of σ2 , is shown in the Appendix F The pre-trained models are all pre-trained
on ImageNet. We use the most recent versions from PyTorch.


                                                                                                     Layer                                       Description
                                                                                                     Conv2D                                      (3, 64, 3, 1)
                                                                                                     Max Pooling                                     (2, 2)
                                                                                                     ReLUS
           Layer                                        Description                                  Conv2D                                   (64, 128, 3, 1)
                                                                                                     Max Pooling                                   (2, 2)
           Conv2D with ReLU                             (3, 20, 5, 1)
                                                                                                     ReLUS
           Max Pooling                                      (2, 2)
                                                                                                     Conv2D                                  (128, 256, 3, 1)
           Conv2D with ReLU                            (20, 50, 5, 1)
                                                                                                     Max Pooling                                  (2, 2)
           MaxPool                                          (2, 2)
                                                                                                     ReLUS
           Fully Connected 1                          (4*4*50, 500)
                                                                                                     Conv2D                                  (256, 512, 3, 1)
           Fully Connected 2                             (500, 10)
                                                                                                     Max Pooling                                  (2, 2)
                                                                                                     ReLUS
Table 2: Convolutional network architecture used                                                     Fully Connected 1                  (14 * 14 * 512, 1024)
in ColorMNIST experiments.                                                                           Fully Connected 2                       (1024, 256)
                                                                                                     Fully Connected 2                         (256, 2)

                                                                                            Table 3: Convolutional network architecture used
                                                                                            in CelebA experiments.



                                                                                                     19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


F.2    WALL T IME M EASUREMENTS

We measure the wall time of running FairPATE compared to standard PATE. The setting we use and
the results are shown in Table 4.

      Method       ϵ     γ     Fairness Factor     Batch Size    Number of Epochs           Time
      FairPATE     4   0.01          N/A                100               30             6min 14sec
      PATE         4   N/A           N/A                100               30             6min 43sec

       Table 4: Wall time measurements of different methods. All experiments use UTKFace dataset.


G     E XTENDED BACKGROUND

In the following, we assume a classification task where a model θ : X × Z 7→ K maps the features
(x, z) ∈ X × Z to a label y ∈ K, where: X is the domain of non-sensitive attributes, Z is the
domain of the sensitive attribute (as a categorical variable), and K is the domain of the output label
(also categorical). Without loss of generality, we will assume Z = [Z] (i.e. Z = {1, . . . , Z}) and
K = [K].


G.1    FAIRNESS N OTION : D EMOGRAPHIC PARITY

We note that in a multi-class setting (i.e., K > 2), and even in the binary-class settings where
the problem does not admit a reasonable notion of the “desirable outcome”, there can be multiple
formulations of the notion of demographic parity. We adopt a natural extension of the well-known
binary notion that requires equal rates for any class. Let us first define demographic disparity:
The demographic disparity Γ(z, k) of subgroup z for class k is the difference between the probability
of predicting class k for the subgroup z and the probability of the same event for any other subgroup:
Γ(z, k) := P[Ŷ = k | Z = z] − P[Ŷ = k | Z ̸= z].


G.2    P RIVACY N OTION : D IFFERENTIAL P RIVACY

In (ε, δ)-DP, the parameter ε bounds the maximal difference between the analysis results on the
neighboring datasets while the second parameter δ represents a relaxation of the bound by allowing
the results to vary more than the factor eε . Hence, the total privacy loss is bounded by ε with a
probability of at least 1 − δ Dwork & Roth (2013). Note that smaller ε correspond to better privacy
guarantees for the data.
PATE. (Figure 1a), takes advantage of an unlabeled public data set Dpublic to conserve the privacy of
sensitive data Dprivate . Therefore, an ensemble of B teacher models {θi }B i=1 is trained using disjoint
subsets of Dprivate and their knowledge is transferred to a separate student model that can be publicly
released. For the knowledge transfer, trained teachers label query data points from Dpublic . The final la-

bel of the query is a noisy argmax over the vote counts as N (x) = arg max [ni,j ]B×K + N (0, σ12 ) ,
where K is the number of classes (see aggregation in Algorithm 4). Noising the argmax enables to
implement the privacy guarantees according to DP.
PATE estimates the privacy cost of answering queries (i.e. labeling data) through teachers consensus
with higher consensus revealing less information about individual teachers, and, thereby, consuming
less privacy costs. To take advantage of the fact that estimating consensus is less privacy-costly than
answering queries, PATE rejects high-cost queries to save on the privacy budget (see Algorithm 4).
Both consensus estimation and vote aggregation (answering the query) are noised with N (0, σ12 ) and
N (0, σ22 ), respectively; where σ1 , σ2 are tuned for better student accuracy.
We include the standard Confident-GNMax Aggregator Algorithm from Papernot et al. (2018) below.


                                                   20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 4 – Confident-GNMax Aggregator (from Papernot et al. (2018)) given a query,
consensus among teachers is first estimated in a privacy-preserving way to then only reveal confident
teacher predictions.
             P x, threshold T , noise parameters σ1 and σ2
Require: input
 1: if maxj { i∈[B] ni,j (x)} + N (0, σ12 ) ≥ T then
        return arg maxj { i∈[B] ni,j (x) + N (0, σ22 )}
                          P
 2:
 3: else
 4:     return ⊥


DP-SGD extends standard stochastic gradient descent (SGD) with two additional steps to implement
privacy guarantees. First, the individual data points’ gradients are clipped to a maximum gradient
norm bound C. This bounds the gradients’ sensitivity, which ensures that no data points can incur
changes to the model above magnitude C. After clipping, Gaussian noise with scale N (0, σ 2 C 2 )
is added to mini-batches of clipped gradients. The noise distribution has zero mean and standard
deviation proportional to a pre-defined noise multiplier σ and the clipping norm C. We detail the
DP-SGD algorithm in Algorithm 5.
To yield tighter privacy bounds, DP-SGD implements a privacy amplification through subsam-
pling Beimel et al. (2010): Training data points are sampled into mini-batches with a Poisson
sampling per training iteration, in contrast to grouping the entire training data into mini-batches prior
to every epoch as done in standard SGD. Hence, the traditional concept of an epoch (as a full training
on the entire training data) does not exist in DP-SGD. Instead, each data point is sampled in every
iteration according to a given sampling probability. Privacy amplification through subsampling allows
to scale down the noise σ by the factor L/N (with L being the expected mini-batch size, N the total
number of data points, and L ≪ N ) while still ensuring the same ε as with σ Kairouz et al. (2021)
which is crucial to the practical performance (privacy-utility trade-offs) of DP-SGD.
We include the standard DP-SGD algorithm (Algorithm 5):

Algorithm 5 Standard DP-SGD, adapted from Abadi et al. (2016).
Require: Private training set Dprv = {(xi , yi ) | i ∈ [Nprv ]}, loss function L(θ, xi ), Parameters:
    learning rate ηt , noise scale σ, group size L, gradient norm bound C.
 1: Initialize θ0 randomly
 2: for t ∈ [T ] do
 3:     Sample mini-batch Lt with sampling probability L/N                      ▷ Poisson sampling
 4:     For each i ∈ Lt , compute     g t (x i ) ←  ∇θ
                                                      t L(θ t , xi )            ▷ Compute gradient
                                        ∥gt (xi )∥2
 5:     ḡt (xi ) ← gt (xi )/ max 1,         C                                       ▷ Clip gradient
                  1
                     P                           2 2

 6:     g̃t ← |Lt |     i ḡt (xi ) + N 0, σ C I                                         ▷ Add noise
 7:      θt+1 ← θt − ηt g̃t                                                                ▷ Descent
 8: Output θT and compute the overall privacy cost (ε, δ) using a privacy accounting method.


H    PARETO FRONTIERS FOR C LASSIFICATION WITH R EJECT O PTION

In this section, we provide additional Pareto frontiers for classification with the reject option. In Fig-
ure 14, we show the Pareto frontier for the same task (gender classification) but for two different
datasets. The Pareto frontiers are very similar with the exception of a difference in the baseline of
accuracy for both models. In Figure 15a and Figure 15b we show the Pareto frontier for CelebA and
CheXpert, respectively.

I   E XTENDED R ELATED W ORK & G UIDANCE ON C HOICE OF F RAMEWORK

In the literature, different fairness notions have been implemented within DP-SGD and PATE
frameworks.


                                                   21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                   UTKFace   FairFace
                                 1


                                 0.95


                                 0.9


                                        Coverage
                                 0.85


                                 0.8


                                 0.75


                                 0.7


                                 0.65


Figure 14: Pareto Frontier of FairPATE results on UTKFace and FairFace. The two surface have very
similar shapes despite the differences in accuracy.


                                                                                                                 Pareto Surface
                                                                        Pareto Surface


 Coverage                                                          Coverage
   1                                                                    1



   0.98                                                                 0.99



   0.96                                                                 0.98



   0.94                                                                 0.97



   0.92                                                                 0.96


   0.9                                                                  0.95


                 (a) FairPATE-CelebA                                                     (b) FairPATE-CheXpert

Figure 15: FairPATE on CelebA and CheXpert. The figure plots the model results that are on the Pareto
frontier. We observe that in both figures, accuracy increases with higher privacy budget ε, and that looser fairness
constraints yield higher coverage.


                                                                         22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


The main contribution of FairPATE is to enable practical and (ε, δ)-DP training with respect to all
features and not just the sensitive ones in a PATE-type framework. Prior attempts at PATE-based
frameworks such as Tran et al. (2022a;b) only consider the differential privacy w.r.t. to the sensitive
attribute (see our discussion in Section 7 and Lowy et al. (2023, Definition 2.2) for an independent
definition.
Comparisons to other PATE-based models. Tran et al. (2022a) study fairness properties of PATE
and identified both algorithmic properties of the training (number of teachers, regularizer, privacy
noise), and properties of the student data (magnitude of the input norm, and distance to the decision
boundary) as factors influencing prediction fairness. To mitigate tensions, they proposed releasing
the teacher models’ prediction histogram as soft labels to train the student model. However, it has
been shown that releasing the histograms leaks significant amounts of private information Wang et al.
(2022), which makes their method leaks privacy above the promised DP guarantees. In contrast, in
this work, we integrate fairness in the aggregation process while keeping the teachers’ votes private,
and, thereby providing the promised privacy guarantees.
Comparisons to Tran et al. (2021b). The authors proposed applying a Lagrangian dual approach
for solving the joint optimization of fairness and privacy in ML. Therefore, they rely on a fairness
constraint plus adaptive clipping and make the computations of the primal and dual update steps
differentially private w.r.t. the considered sensitive attributes. However, their method adds a significant
computational overhead, especially for larger ML models and mini-batch sizes (increase of up to
factor 100).
Comparisons to Kulynych et al. (2022). The only prior work that we are aware of that has a sampling
step for fairness within a private-learning setup is Kulynych et al. (2022). Our work implements a
PATE mechanism for private learning whereas Kulynych et al. (2022) is DP-SGD based. This is
crucial because the privacy analysis of the DP-SGD models is based on releasing every intermediate
model weights and accumulating the privacy budget over samples (or mini-batches). Similar to us,
Kulynych et al. (2022) adjust the probability of subgroups being sampled. But different from us, this
probability goes to inform the Poisson distribution in the RDP accountant which then accumulates
the privacy budget per mini-batch. As before, in this DP-SGD-based method, the privacy accounting
happens at the weights-level whereas PATE’s privacy analysis is done at the level of samples and
labels.
Table 5 summarizes some of the frameworks we have highlighted in this section.

I.1   C HOICE OF F RAMEWORK

The appropriate choice of privacy notion is application-dependent. However, a (ϵ, δ)-DP is a much
stronger guarantee and it is by far the most prevelant notion of privacy. If interpretability is of
concern, sample-space interventions are more appropriate since reasoning about the membership
(or probability of membership) of a certain sample is easier than reasoning about high-dimensional
gradients in the weight-space. Finally, all PATE-based frameworks assume access to an unlabeled
public dataset due to its semi-supervised nature while DP-SGD-type methods do not require such
dataset. This need can be addressed by using a subset of the training data, throwing out its labels, and
employing it in place of the unlabeled dataset in PATE-based models. This is how the original PATE
papers were evaluated, and we have evaluated FairPATE similarly.
In practice, however, the unlabeled dataset can come from a public dataset which is different than
the sensitive training set. From a privacy accounting perspective only, the use of such public data
is similar to the use of public data to pre-train DP-SGD models: in both cases, privacy cost, by
definition, is not being accumulated for the public data. The difference is that pre-training requires
labels, while the PATE’s public dataset need not be labeled.


                                                    23
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                 DP w.r.t.        DP Accounting                      Fairness
         Method                    (ϵ, δ)-DP                                      Public Data
                                               Sensitive Attr.     for Fairness                 Intervention Space
         FairPATE                  ✓           -                  ✓               Unlabeled     Samples
         DP-FERMI                  ✓           -                  ✓               -             Weights
         SF-PATE                   -           ✓                  ✓               Unlabeled     Weights
         Jagielski et al. (2019)   -           ✓                  ✓               -             Weights
         Mozannar et al. (2020)    -           ✓                  ✓               -             Weights
         DP-IS SGD                 ✓           -                  ✓               -             Samples
                                                                                                Optimization
         Zhang et al. (2021)       ✓           -                  x               -
                                                                                                Hyper-parameters


Table 5: Summary of Various Fair and DP Training Models, their privacy notion, their dependency
on public data, whether they account for the privacy leakage of their fairness intervention, and the
space where that intervention takes place


                                                             24
