Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D OES P ROGRESS O N O BJECT R ECOGNITION B ENCH -
MARKS I MPROVE P ERFORMANCE ON C ROWDSOURCED ,
G LOBAL DATA ?
 Megan Richards1 , Polina Kirichenko1,2 , Diane Bouchacourt1 , & Mark Ibrahim1
 Meta AI1 , New York University2
 {meganrichards,polkirichenko,dianeb,marksibrahim}@meta.com



                                            A BSTRACT

         For more than a decade, researchers have measured progress in object recognition
         on the ImageNet dataset along with its associated generalization benchmarks such
         as ImageNet-A, -C, and -R. Recent advances in foundation models, trained on
         orders of magnitude more data, have begun to saturate performance on these
         benchmarks. Despite this progress, even today’s best models are brittle in practice.
         As a step toward more holistic measurement of model reliability, we propose
         studying performance on crowdsourced, global datasets, which contain natural
         distribution shifts seen practically in deployment. We perform a comprehensive
         empirical study on two crowdsourced, globally representative datasets, evaluating
         nearly 100 vision models to uncover several concerning empirical trends: first, that
         progress on crowdsourced, global data has significantly lagged behind standard
         benchmarks, with advances on ImageNet occurring at 2.5x the rate of progress on
         crowdsourced, global data. Second, we find that progress on standard benchmarks
         has failed to improve or exacerbated geographic disparities: geographic disparities
         between the least performant models and today’s best models have more than
         tripled. We showcase the promise of using more curated and/or representative
         training datasets for mitigating these trends, and emphasize curation of web-scale,
         geographically representative training datasets as a critical open problem for the
         research community.


1   I NTRODUCTION

ImageNet (Russakovsky et al., 2015), the standard benchmark for object recognition, has set the bar
for progress in computer vision. Since its release in 2010, ImageNet along with other generalization
benchmarks such as ImageNet-A,-C and -R (Hendrycks et al., 2021b; Hendrycks and Dietterich,
2019; Hendrycks et al., 2021a) has spurred numerous advances in deep learning. Now, more than a
decade later, advances in scaling and multi-modal modeling have saturated these standard benchmarks.
Most prominently, large-scale vision-language models such as CLIP have been shown to achieve
high accuracies on in- and out-of-distribution generalization benchmarks (Radford et al., 2021; Fang
et al., 2022a; Miller et al., 2021).
Despite high performance on these benchmarks, model generalization remains an open problem —
both vision and text models, as well as state-of-the-art (SOTA) multimodal models, have been
found to lack robustness outside of standard benchmarks, even under natural distribution shifts. For
example, recent works have shown how CLIP (Radford et al., 2021) remains vulnerable to changes in
pose, background, size, position, and lighting (Ibrahim et al., 2022; Madan et al., 2021; Abbas and
Deny, 2022; Li et al., 2023a). These results highlight the limitations of commonly used ImageNet
generalization benchmarks (also referred to as Out-of-Distribution, or OOD, benchmarks), which
focus on controlled, predefined or synthetic alterations of images and do not reflect the rich diversity
of data observed during model’s deployment (Hendrycks and Dietterich, 2019; Hendrycks et al.,
2021b; Madan et al., 2020). We summarize commonly used generalization benchmarks in Table 1.
As a step toward more holistic measurement of model reliability, we propose studying performance
on crowdsourced, globally representative datasets. We argue that such datasets offer two distinct


                                                  1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                 Benchmark progress is 2.5x progress on                  Geographic disparities have tripled between least
                      real-world, geographic shifts                           performant models and today’s best


                                                           +59.2%
                       ImageNet OOD                                                               42%
                        Benchmarks
                                                                                                 Δ
                                                    CLIP
                                                                                                             28%

                                                                                                 23%
      Accuracy
                      ResNet18
                                   Real World,                                     37%
                                 Geographic Shift
                                  Benchmarks


                                                    CLIP   + 18.9%
                     ResNet18
                                                                                   ΔDisparity = Europe − Africa

                                   Progress
                        (Scaling, Multimodal Modeling)


Figure 1: Progress rate on ImageNet generalization benchmarks is over 2.5x the progress rate on
crowdsourced, global data (Section 4). Further, geographic disparity between regions is exacerbated
with progress on standard benchmarks, tripling over our range of models (Section 5).


advantages missing from current benchmarks. First, they allow us to assess models’ performance
under naturally occurring distribution shifts without simulated environments, preselected variations,
or artificially injected transformations. Second, they enable the measurement of geographic disparities
between regions, a measure of generalization that is, by definition, relevant across the world, and a
critical component of model safety in deployment which is often hidden in the commonly reported
average accuracy.
Using these datasets, we offer an extensive empirical analysis of progress, evaluating nearly 100
vision models spanning 16 architectures, 8 distinct pretraining datasets, and a comprehensive set
of foundation models. In addition, we systematically study of the impact of common robustness
interventions as well as scaling of both model size and data. Our contributions are:

       • As a step toward more holistic measurement of model reliability, we propose to measure per-
         formance on globally crowdsourced datasets (Section 3), which contain natural distribution
         shifts relevant to model deployment.
       • We identify a significant progress gap, finding progress on ImageNet results in up to 2.5x
         progress on standard benchmarks than on crowdsourced, global data (Section 4). We
         illustrate this in the left part of Figure 1.
       • We find, contrary to conventional wisdom, that improvements on standard benchmarks
         exacerbate performance disparities across geographies: disparities in performance have
         tripled between early models and today’s best models (Section 5) as shown in the right part
         of Figure 1.
       • We study the impact of common robustness interventions and scaling, finding these two di-
         rections are not sufficient to close the progress gap. We explore curating more representative
         datasets as a promising path to mitigating the trade-offs we uncover (Section 6).

We hope our work will inspire researchers to look beyond standard benchmarks to measure model
reliability. To support these efforts, we will release our model test bed and evaluation code in a
ready-to-use package, allowing researchers to run their own evaluations with just 4 lines of code.

2   R ELATED WORK
Generalization benchmarks have significant limitations. Model generalization is a major chal-
lenge in deep learning. Consequently, a myriad of benchmarks were proposed to evaluate general-
ization capabilities of image classification models (Recht et al., 2019). For example, ImageNet-A
(Hendrycks et al., 2021b) was collected by intentionally mining challenging examples that fool a pre-
selected model. A complementary approach involves applying corruptions to images such as blurring,
noise, or style alterations (Hendrycks and Dietterich, 2019; Geirhos et al., 2018a). Other benchmarks
such as ImageNet-9 (Xiao et al., 2020), ImageNet-R (Hendrycks et al., 2021a), ImageNet-S (Wang


                                                                     2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


       Benchmark               shift type              is natural   # shift types   crowdsourced
       ImageNet                         -                   -             -              ✗
       ImageNet-V2                      -                   -             -              ✗
       ImageNet-Sketch         drawing                     ✓              1              ✗
       ImageNet-Rendition      drawing                     ✓              1              ✗
       ObjectNet               pose, background            ✓              3              ✗
       ImageNet-C              corruptions                 ✗              5              ✗
       ImageNet-A              adversarial                 ✓              1              ✗
       DollarStreet            geographic                  ✓         unlimited           ✓
       GeoDE                   geographic                  ✓         unlimited           ✓


Table 1: Crowdsourced, global data benchmarks enable measuring performance on naturally
occurring distribution shifts without simulated environments, preselected variations, or artifi-
cially injected transformations.


et al., 2019) and ObjectNet (Barbu et al., 2019) consist of images with a few predefined axes of
generalization in mind: e.g. sketches in ImageNet-S or background variations in ImageNet-9. While
being useful measures of model performance under dataset shifts, such benchmarks carry signficant
limitations in the kinds of shifts they represent, relying on artificially induced transformations or a
predefined criteria, which provide limited measures of object variation in natural settings (DeGrave
et al., 2021; Taori et al., 2020).
Foundation models and robustness interventions. Many advances from robustness interventions
to learning methods leveraging large scale data were proposed to improve generalization. Some
robustness interventions are tailored to improve specific generalization axes such as to corruptions
(Hendrycks and Dietterich, 2019), texture (Geirhos et al., 2018a), or background shift (Ryali et al.,
2021). Data augmentation is a widely used technique which improves generalization (Pinto et al.,
2023; Hendrycks et al., 2019; Yun et al., 2019; Li et al., 2023b). Recent work finds that while
robustness interventions improve generalization to the intended shift, they may degrade performance
to other shifts (Geirhos et al., 2020; Kamath et al., 2021; Moayeri et al., 2022). In parallel, self-
supervised models (Goyal et al., 2022; Shi et al., 2022) and more recent foundation models (Pan
et al., 2022) trained on much larger datasets (400M text-image pairs) show significant improvements
on standard generalization benchmarks (Bommasani et al., 2022). However, in controlled synthetic
settings, even large-scale foundation models were found to struggle with common variations in pose,
background, and scale, among others (Abbas and Deny, 2022; Ibrahim et al., 2022; Madan et al.,
2023). These results highlight that out-of-distribution generalization still remains an open challenge.
The role of geography in classification. Geography presents an important axis for measuring model
generalization, leveraging a natural distribution shift to measure the consistency of model performance.
In recent years, several classification datasets containing images from diverse geographic regions
have been developed to study the role of geography in object classification models (Gustafson et al.,
2023; Goyal et al., 2021; 2022; Rojas et al.; Ramaswamy et al., 2023).Particularly, Ramaswamy et al.
(2023) perform a last-layer retraining experiment with a ResNet50 model and a mixture of ImageNet
and GeoDE data, reporting improved performance on GeoDE and DollarStreet datasets. We perform
a similar experiment in Sec 6.3 on a ViT model, with only GeoDE data, in order to evaluate last
layer retraining as a method to improve region performance disparities. Their analysis reveals that
classification models perform much better on some regions compared to others: accuracy gaps across
regions can be as high as 20% (DeVries et al., 2019). In conjunction, Shankar et al. (2017a); Dulhanty
and Wong (2019); Birhane and Prabhu (2021); Shankar et al. (2017b) present a possible explanation
for this performance difference emphasizing over-representation of training images originating from
Western geographies. Akin to Dubey et al. (2021) Kalluri et al. (2023) Yin et al. (2023), and Prabhu
et al. (2022) which formulates geography as a benchmark for domain adaption, our work presents
classification performance gaps across geographic regions as a window into generalization progress.
Does better in-distribution performance lead to better out-of-distribution generalization?
Chan et al. (2022) shows that generalization in transformer models stems from aspects of the training
distribution such as the number and rarity of training classes. Specifically for foundation models
such as CLIP, Fang et al. (2022b); Nguyen et al. (2023) show that the main factor driving improved


                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


generalization is the training data quality and distribution (Shi et al., 2023). Miller et al. (2021); Baek
et al. (2022) explicitly describe the relationship between in-distribution (ID) and out-of-distribution
(OOD) performance, showing ID performance is linearly correlated with OOD generalization. Other
work casts doubt on how well ID performance can predict natural OOD generalization (Recht et al.,
2019; Teney et al., 2022). Abnar et al. (2021) show improved ID accuracy does not necessarily lead
to downstream improvements. Fang et al. (2023) show improvements on ID ImageNet classification
does not lead to improvements on non-web scraped data. Our work complements these studies by
exploring how ID advancements on ImageNet and related benchmarks have translated poorly to
crowdsourced, global data.


3     M EASURING P ROGRESS ON C ROWDSOURCED , G LOBAL DATA

The ImageNet dataset has been an instrumental measure of progress for object recognition (Rus-
sakovsky et al., 2015). Alongside, standard ImageNet benchmarks such as ImageNet-A, ImageNet-C,
and ObjectNet, have been developed to assess how well models generalize (see Section 2). However,
with recent advances in foundation models such as CLIP, performance on the standard ImageNet
distribution shifts benchmarks has begun to saturate (Radford et al., 2021). A key limitation of
standard generalization benchmarks is that they rely on artificially induced corruptions or predefined
criteria. While they represent important distribution shifts, we argue that crowdsourced, global data
can provide an insightful view of model consistency in a natural setting.

3.1 G EOGRAPHICALLY DIVERSE DATASETS
Recently, two datasets of household objects spanning the globe were introduced: DollarStreet (Rojas
et al.) and GeoDE (Ramaswamy et al., 2023). DollarStreet contains 38K images, with 96 classes,
and spans 54 countries and 4 regions, while GeoDE contains 61K images with 40 classes, and spans
6 regions. Both datasets are commonly used in fairness literature to study performance disparities
across images from different socioeconomic groups and regions (DeVries et al., 2019; Gustafson
et al., 2023; Rojas et al.; Goyal et al., 2021; 2022; Ramaswamy et al., 2023). To study the largest
catalogue of models possible, we use the ImageNet-1k class mappings released for DollarStreet and
generated a similar mapping for GeoDE classes. These class mappings (see Appendix A) allow us
to evaluate any vision model compatible with the original 1k ImageNet classes. Geographically
labeled datasets such as GeoDE or DollarStreet allow us to measure generalization as it occurs in the
crowdsourced data collected across geographies.

Controlling for image quality. Can performance differences be simply be attributed to a lack of
geographic representation or regional differences in image quality? As shown in Ramaswamy et al.
(2023) and Gustafson et al. (2023) both DollarStreet and GeoDE have consistent image quality and
contain roughly balanced numbers of samples per region. In both datasets, images are crowdsourced
and labeled by the households who took the photo. This process produces high-quality ground truth
class labels.

3.2   M EASURING GENERALIZATION BEYOND AVERAGE ACCURACY

The most commonly reported measure of progress for standard object recognition benchmarks is
the average classification accuracy. While using an average accuracy provides a high-level view
of model performance, a holistic understanding of model reliability requires a more fine-grained
evaluation. We show how using crowdsourced, global data offers a unique lens for evaluation through
region subgroup disparities. In this work, we complement average benchmark accuracy with two
additional metrics for assessing the rate of progress and uncovering disparities not revealed by average
accuracy.
First, we are interested in measuring the rate at which each type of benchmarks (geographical or
standard) benefit from advances in the field. Thus, we measure the accuracy increases for each
benchmark relative to ImageNet accuracy, where the rate of progress is the slope of a linear fit.
We compute the difference of progress rates between standard generalization benchmarks and
geographical shift benchmarks and consider Progress Gap defined as:


                                                    4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


           Progress Gap := Progress Rate Standard − Progress Rate Geographical                       (1)
                          Standard Improvement − Geographic Improvement
                        =                                                  .                         (2)
                                        ImageNet Improvement

Progress gap indicates how much of the progress on standard benchmarks transfers to crowdsourced,
global datasets. For example, a progress gap of 2x indicates improvements on standard benchmarks
progress twice as fast as improvements on our crowdsourced benchmarks. The Progress gap measure
relies on a linear fit of the accuracy trends, which are well supported by statistically significant with
high Coefficients of Determination (R2 ) seen in Table 2 (details in Appendix B).
However, there is a blind spot when using average accuracy: it may conceal poor performance on
some groups relative to others (Idrissi et al., 2022). For example, a model may perform well on
average, but generalize quite poorly to some regions. Fortunately, datasets with geographic labels,
such as DollarStreet and GeoDE, offer an opportunity to reveal when such disparities arise.
To complement average accuracy, we propose measuring geographic disparity on crowdsourced
datasets as more holistic measure of model reliability. For DollarStreet and GeoDE, we do so by
measuring the maximum absolute difference in a model’s classification performance across any two
regions, which we refer to as Geographic Disparity and is defined as:
                          ∆Disparity := max{|Pi − Pj | : i, j ∈ 1, . . . , k}                        (3)
where Pi indicates the performance on the ith region and k is the number of regions. This definition
can be applied broadly to any geographically labeled dataset and groupings other than regions such
as country, zip code, or continent.
Progress gap, together with geographical disparity in both GeoDE and DollarStreet datasets, gives us
a more holistic understanding of model reliability and progress in object recognition.

3.3   A SSESSING PROGRESS ON CROWDSOURCED , GLOBAL DATA
Equipped with two geographically diverse datasets and metrics of improvement, we now turn to the
question: to what extent has progress on standard ImageNet benchmarks improved generalization on
crowdsourced, global datasets? First, we compare progress rates on standard benchmarks relative to
progress based on average classification accuracy of household objects around the globe (i.e. with
Progress Gap from Equation 2). We go beyond average accuracy to probe how progress on standard
benchmarks affects generalization in terms of geographic disparities (i.e. with ∆Disparity from
Equation 3) using DollarStreet and GeoDE described in Section 3.1.
We investigate a testbed of 98 models, which spans 16 architectures and includes recent foundation
models such as CLIP, FLAVA, and DINOv2. We primarily use weights available in the Timm library
(Wightman, 2019) for ImageNet trained models, use the OpenCLIP library for CLIP models (Ilharco
et al., 2021), and use HuggingFace (Wolf et al., 2020) implementations of other foundation models.
We include a comprehensive table of testbed metadata in Appendix A. Our testbed includes models
trained on up to 2 billion images and with over 100 million parameters.

4     T HERE IS A P ROGRESS G AP B ETWEEN S TANDARD B ENCHMARKS AND
      C ROWDSOURCED , G LOBAL DATA
Here we measure the rates of progress on standard ImageNet benchmarks, along with progress
on crowdsourced, global datasets. If standard benchmarks faithfully reflect object variation in
natural settings, we would expect both sets of benchmarks to have consistent rates of progress.
We compare the improvements on standard generalization benchmarks to crowdsourced, global
benchmarks as a function of ImageNet accuracy. As shown below, we find accuracy on standard
generalization benchmarks to improve by 62.75% on average, while progress on the geographically
diverse DollarStreet dataset only improves by 18.9% (33.5% for GeoDE).
To isolate these progress trends, we compute linear trend lines for each benchmark. We find the
trend lines are statistically significant with high Coefficients of Determination (R2 ) as shown in


                                                   5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 2 (details in Appendix B). We discover a striking progress gap between standard generalization
benchmarks and crowdsourced, global data: progress on standard benchmarks is 2.5× the progress
on crowdsourced, global datasets. The progress gap is consistent for both DollarStreet and GeoDE,
despite these benchmarks containing different classes and collection procedures. This suggests the
progress gap isn’t an artifact of a particular dataset. Both the difference in progress rates, and the net
improvement values point to a substantial gap in progress between the commonly reported standard
benchmarks and crowdsourced, global datasets.

    Benchmark                 Net Improvement (↑)       Progress Rate (↑)    Progress Gap      R2 (↑)
    DollarStreet (baseline)   +18.92%                   0.53                 1.0x              0.93
    In-Distribution
    ImageNet-V2               +37.74%                   1.18                 2.2x              0.99
    Out-Of-Distribution
    ImageNet-Sketch           +63.00%                   1.37                 2.6x              0.75
    ImageNet-Rendition        +73.42%                   1.50                 2.8x              0.74
    ObjectNet                 +51.84%                   1.46                 2.8x              0.90
    OOD Average               +62.75%                   1.44                 2.7x              0.82

Table 2: There is a striking progress gap between standard ImageNet benchmarks and geo-
graphic shift benchmarks, with all benchmarks improving at over double the rate of DollarStreet.
This translates to a net improvement on average OOD datasets that is more than 3x the net improve-
ment on DollarStreet. We measure progress rate as the slope of a linear fit between ImageNet accuracy
and benchmark accuracy, and include the coefficient of determination (R2 ) for each.


5     P ROGRESS ON S TANDARD B ENCHMARKS E XACERBATES P ERFORMANCE
      D ISPARITIES

We found progress on crowdsourced, global data in terms of average accuracy lags considerably
behind progress on standard benchmarks. While useful, average accuracy can conceal large disparities
in performance indicative of poor geographic generalization. Here we address average accuracy’s
blind spots by studying performance disparities across regions. We measure performance disparity
as the top-1 accuracy difference between the best (Europe) and least (Africa) performing regions
in DollarStreet and GeoDE. We then study whether progress on standard ImageNet benchmarks
improves or exacerbates geographic disparities.

5.1    E VEN SOTA M ODELS H AVE L ARGE P ERFORMANCE D ISPARITIES B ETWEEN R EGIONS
We first measure the maximum performance disparity across regions. If a model generalizes well
across geographies, we would expect a small performance disparity; whereas, poor geographic
generalization would lead to large disparities. We find all models have substantial disparities between
regions, from ResNets to the largest CLIP models trained on 2 billion image-text pairs. In our study,
ResNet models have average geographic disparities of 14.5% on DollarStreet and 5.0% on GeoDE.
The best performing CLIP model actually had even more considerable disparities, with a disparity
of 17.0% on DollarStreet and 6.5% on GeoDE. These considerable geographic disparities suggest
average accuracy is concealing a crucial axis of generalization that remains unsolved by today’s best
models. Next, we study how progress on standard ImageNet benchmarks has affected geographic
disparities.

5.2    P ROGRESS ON I MAGE N ET FAILS TO RESOLVE DISPARITIES , OFTEN EXACERBATING THEM
Has progress on standard ImageNet benchmarks improved or exacerbated geographic disparities?
To answer this question, we compare geographic disparities as a function of progress on ImageNet
and standard generalization benchmarks. Contrary to modern intuition, we discover, as shown in
Figure 2, progress on ImageNet and its generalization benchmarks not only fails to resolve geographic
disparities, but actually exacerbates disparities. We find for DollarStreet disparities between the least
performant models and today’s best models have more than tripled. We also analyze performance


                                                    6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


disparities in GeoDE finding that that improvements on standard benchmarks are not predictive of
any improvement in geographic disparity (see Appendix C).


               Improvement on Standard Benchmarks Exacerbates Regional                                    Exploring the Widening Gap Between
                          Accuracy Disparities on DollarStreet                                             Region Accuracies on DollarStreet

                In-Distribution (ImageNet V2)              Out-Of-Distribution (OOD Average)


                                                                                                                                           Δ19.1 %
ΔDisparity                                                                                      Region
DollarStreet                                                                                   Accuracy

                                                                                                                Δ5.4 %


                                                Accuracy                                                           ImageNet Accuracy


Figure 2: Model improvement on standard ID and OOD benchmarks exacerbates the region
disparity on DollarStreet, measured as the accuracy difference between Europe and Africa subsets.
Left: DollarStreet region disparity exacerbated with both ID and OOD improvements. Right: Per
region accuracy on DollarStreet as a function of ImageNet accuracy shows the exacerbated region
disparity.


5.3       E XPLORING THE W IDENING P ERFORMANCE D ISPARITIES B ETWEEN R EGIONS
To further explore the growing disparities, we isolate region performance as a function of improving
ImageNet accuracy to understand individual effect on the rate of progress in each region. In Figure 2,
we show accuracy in the best (Europe) and least (Africa) performing regions as ImageNet accuracy
improves. While overall models also improve on each region, they improve on for Europe at almost
double the rate of that for Africa, leading to a widening performance disparity between them. For
GeoDE, we see much more similar rates of improvement across regions (see Appendix C).
Our analysis indicates that progress as measured by average accuracy is an incomplete picture. We
find that models across architectures and datasets have large, meaningful disparities between regions,
and that improvement on current benchmarks fails to improve on these disparities.


6      G ENERALIZATION ACROSS GEOGRAPHY: OPEN CHALLENGES AND
       PROMISING DIRECTIONS

Next, we explore directions for improving the concerning empirical trends we uncover about model
failures across geographies. We investigate multiple avenues from common robustness interventions
such MixUp to scaling of both data/model size as well as forms of data curation. We find many
avenues known to improve generalization on standard benchmarks fail to address generalization to
crowdsourced, geographic shifts. Finally, we perform a last layer retraining (Kirichenko et al., 2022)
experiment to approximate the impact of training on a more geographically representative dataset.

6.1       ROBUSTNESS INTERVENTIONS OFFER LIMITED IMPROVEMENTS
We evaluate popular interventions that have been shown to improve generalization on standard
benchmarks: Deep AugMix, AugMix, Texture Debiasing, CutMix, and AntiAliasing ((Hendrycks
et al., 2019), (Geirhos et al., 2018b), (Yun et al., 2019), (Zhang, 2019)). We evaluate these techniques
using pretrained ResNet50 models. In Table 3, we show accuracy on standard benchmarks as well
as geographic disparities for DollarStreet and GeoDE for models trained with each intervention
compared to a baseline ResNet50 model (trained without any interventions). The majority of
robustness interventions improved one benchmark’s regional gap slightly, while degrading the other.
The exception is AugMix, which improved the GeoDE and DollarStreet gaps by 1.86% and 0.94%
respectively. Common robustness interventions overall offer limited improvements to geographic
disparities, indicating a need for more holistic solutions.

                                                                               7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   Intervention        ImageNet (↑) OOD Avg (↑) ∆Disparity GeoDE (↓) ∆Disparity DS (↓)
   Baseline         76.34                 30.28        4.96                        15.16
   Deep AugMix      76.73                 32.92        5.22                        13.53
   Texture Debiased 76.73                 31.13        4.70                        16.20
   Ant-Aliased      77.41                 30.09        5.54                        13.46
   AugMix           77.53                 32.51        3.10                        14.22
   CutMix           78.58                 29.43        4.38                        16.10

Table 3: Benchmarking Robustness Interventions. Most robustness interventions produced mixed
results, with the exception of AugMix, which provided small improvements to geographic disparities
and ImageNet accuracy. DS refers to DollarStreet.


6.2   F OUNDATION V ISION M ODELS AND S CALING
Model and data scaling have driven many recent advances (Radford et al., 2021). Here we study
whether scaling’s success on standard benchmarks translates to progress on crowdsourced, global
datasets. We measure geographic disparity ∆Disparity as a function of scale in terms of data (+200
million) and model size (+100 million parameters) in Figure 3. We find neither scaling data nor model
size improves geographic disparities. While error bars don’t allow us to draw any conclusive trends,
in terms of averages scaling both model and data sizes seems to exacerbate geographic disparities.
We replicate the GeoDE plots in Appendix D, which contain the same relationship. We also show the
scaling trend per architecture type in Appendix D, but did not find any promising scaling trends by
architecture.


                     Data Scaling, All Models                      Architecture Scaling, CLIP


  Figure 3: Dataset and architecture scaling exacerbates region disparities on DollarStreet.

Our results suggest scaling alone is insufficient for robustness to geographic distribution shifts. Even
CLIP models have these persistent performance disparities between regions, which are not mitigated
by scaling the data or architecture size.

6.3   T HE P ROMISE OF C URATING R EPRESENTATIVE BALANCED DATA
Finally, we explore data curation as a promising direction for addressing geographical generalization.
Prior work has highlighted data quality as a critical component of robustness improvements (Fang
et al., 2022a; Idrissi et al., 2022). Recent work has also found that careful data pruning can help
surpass existing performance scaling laws (Sorscher et al., 2022). In turn, we ask: to what extent can
curating balanced, representative training data address geographic distribution shifts? We take a first
step to answering this question by 1) analyzing the performance of DINOv2, a recent self-supervised
foundation model trained with auto-curated video data, and 2) last layer retraining (Kirichenko et al.,
2022) of ImageNet-pretrained ViT model on DollarStreet data. Both experiments approximate the
benefits of having curated representative data for pretraining or fine-tuning stages, however, we would
like to highlight that balancing web-scale data is a challenging open problem.


                                                   8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


DINOv2. Despite being a mid-size model at 86 million parameters, DINOv2 achieved the smallest
GeoDE region performance disparity of our testbed, with just a 2.46% accuracy difference between
Europe and Africa subsets. While the model still had a significant region disparity on DollarStreet, the
GeoDE improvement is remarkable for its size, and highlights that data curation offers a promising
path to mitigating the tradeoff between geographic performance disparity and standard benchmarks.
Last layer retraining on geographically representative data. Do we need to retrain a model from
scratch to reap the benefits of curated data? Inspired by Kirichenko et al. (2022) and Ramaswamy
et al. (2023),
we fine-tune the last linear head of a ViT model (Dosovitskiy et al., 2020) on the training split of
DollarStreet. We train the last layer for 5 epochs using Adam optimizer, learning rate 10−5 and batch
size 32. We then evaluate this model on both DollarStreet and GeoDE. For GeoDE, we evaluate
generalization and disparity on the subset of classes overlapping with DollarStreet classes (full details
in Appendix E). We find, as shown in Table 4, last layer retraining improves average accuracy and
geographic disparities on both DollarStreet and GeoDE. The average accuracy on DollarStreet’s
evaluation set improves by a dramatic 53.4% with geographic disparity also improving by 11.7%.
Remarkably, despite retraining only on DollarStreet, we observe improvements on GeoDE of 11.5%
on average accuracy and 3.2% in geographic disparities. We expand on Ramaswamy et al. (2023)
by showing how last layer retraining is not just improving total performance on geographically
diverse data, but improves geographic disparities, counter to our results on scaling and common
robustness interventions. Our results indicate careful use of more representative data holds great
promise to consistently improve both average performance and geographic disparity. We include
extensions of this experiment with varying amounts of DollarStreet data in the Appendix E, as well
as a rough approximation of western bias in a filtered version of LAION and a finetuning experiment
in Appendix H.
Motivating future work to curate geographically representative, web-scale training datasets.
Our analyses provide promising evidence that the concerning empirical trends we uncover could
be mitigated through data. While these analyses (and mitigations presented in previous work) have
shown promise, we do not present them as sufficient solutions themselves, as they are limited to
the very small number of classes available in geographically diverse datasets. Our analysis suggests
that these problems are not specific to architecture, training procedure, or even dataset scale. Rather,
we highlight geographic bias as a common problem across web-scraped datasets, and present these
analyses as motivating evidence for the field to contribute to the open research challenge of curating
geographically representative, effective, web-scale training datasets.

                          Average Accuracy (↑)                          ∆ Disparity (↓)
                DollarStreet           GeoDE                  DollarStreet        GeoDE
    ViT     23.46                65.44                17.12               4.86
    LLR-ViT 76.84 ± 0.1 (+53.41) 76.97 ± 0.9 (+11.53) 5.47 ± 1.2 (-11.65) 1.64 ± 0.6 (-3.22)


Table 4: Last layer retraining on DollarStreet improves geographic disparity and overall
performance on both DollarStreet and GeoDE. As explained in text, we report GeoDE overlapping
with ImageNet. LLR-ViT refers to Last-Layer Retrained ViT.

7    D ISCUSSION
In this work, we uncover a set of concerning empirical trends: first, that progress on crowdsourced,
global data has significantly lagged behind standard benchmarks, with advances on ImageNet
occurring at 2.5x the rate of progress on crowdsourced, global data. Second, we find that progress on
standard benchmarks has failed to improve or exacerbated geographic disparities, with geographic
disparities tripling between earliest models and today’s best. We showcase the promise of using more
curated and/or representative data for mitigating these trends, and emphasize curation of web-scale,
geographically representative training datasets as a critical open problem for the research community
(See Appendix I for discussion). Our analysis suggests that if we do not make geographic fairness an
explicit desideratum in our development and benchmarking, the systems we build will continue to
reinforce existing geographic disparities. We release our code and models to support future work.


                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Amro Abbas and Stéphane Deny. Progress and limitations of deep networks to recognize objects in
 unusual poses. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.08034, 2022.

Samira Abnar, Mostafa Dehghani, Behnam Neyshabur, and Hanie Sedghi. Exploring the limits of
  large scale pre-training, 2021.

Christina Baek, Yiding Jiang, Aditi Raghunathan, and Zico Kolter. Agreement-on-the-line: Predicting
  the performance of neural networks under distribution shift, 2022.

Andrei Barbu, David Mayo, Julian Alverio, William Luo, Christopher Wang, Dan Gutfreund, Josh
 Tenenbaum, and Boris Katz. Objectnet: A large-scale bias-controlled dataset for pushing the limits
  of object recognition models. Advances in neural information processing systems, 32, 2019.

Abeba Birhane and Vinay Uday Prabhu. Large image datasets: A pyrrhic win for computer vision?
  In 2021 IEEE Winter Conference on Applications of Computer Vision (WACV), pages 1536–1546,
  2021. doi: 10.1109/WACV48630.2021.00158.

Rishi Bommasani, Drew A. Hudson, Ehsan Adeli, Russ Altman, Simran Arora, Sydney von Arx,
  Michael S. Bernstein, Jeannette Bohg, Antoine Bosselut, Emma Brunskill, Erik Brynjolfsson,
  Shyamal Buch, Dallas Card, Rodrigo Castellon, Niladri Chatterji, Annie Chen, Kathleen Creel,
  Jared Quincy Davis, Dora Demszky, Chris Donahue, Moussa Doumbouya, Esin Durmus, Stefano
  Ermon, John Etchemendy, Kawin Ethayarajh, Li Fei-Fei, Chelsea Finn, Trevor Gale, Lauren
  Gillespie, Karan Goel, Noah Goodman, Shelby Grossman, Neel Guha, Tatsunori Hashimoto, Peter
  Henderson, John Hewitt, Daniel E. Ho, Jenny Hong, Kyle Hsu, Jing Huang, Thomas Icard, Saahil
  Jain, Dan Jurafsky, Pratyusha Kalluri, Siddharth Karamcheti, Geoff Keeling, Fereshte Khani, Omar
  Khattab, Pang Wei Koh, Mark Krass, Ranjay Krishna, Rohith Kuditipudi, Ananya Kumar, Faisal
  Ladhak, Mina Lee, Tony Lee, Jure Leskovec, Isabelle Levent, Xiang Lisa Li, Xuechen Li, Tengyu
  Ma, Ali Malik, Christopher D. Manning, Suvir Mirchandani, Eric Mitchell, Zanele Munyikwa,
  Suraj Nair, Avanika Narayan, Deepak Narayanan, Ben Newman, Allen Nie, Juan Carlos Niebles,
  Hamed Nilforoshan, Julian Nyarko, Giray Ogut, Laurel Orr, Isabel Papadimitriou, Joon Sung
  Park, Chris Piech, Eva Portelance, Christopher Potts, Aditi Raghunathan, Rob Reich, Hongyu
  Ren, Frieda Rong, Yusuf Roohani, Camilo Ruiz, Jack Ryan, Christopher Ré, Dorsa Sadigh,
  Shiori Sagawa, Keshav Santhanam, Andy Shih, Krishnan Srinivasan, Alex Tamkin, Rohan Taori,
  Armin W. Thomas, Florian Tramèr, Rose E. Wang, William Wang, Bohan Wu, Jiajun Wu, Yuhuai
  Wu, Sang Michael Xie, Michihiro Yasunaga, Jiaxuan You, Matei Zaharia, Michael Zhang, Tianyi
  Zhang, Xikun Zhang, Yuhui Zhang, Lucia Zheng, Kaitlyn Zhou, and Percy Liang. On the
  opportunities and risks of foundation models, 2022.

Stephanie C. Y. Chan, Adam Santoro, Andrew K. Lampinen, Jane X. Wang, Aaditya Singh, Pierre H.
  Richemond, Jay McClelland, and Felix Hill. Data distributional properties drive emergent in-
  context learning in transformers, 2022.

Alex J DeGrave, Joseph D Janizek, and Su-In Lee. Ai for radiographic covid-19 detection selects
  shortcuts over signal. Nature Machine Intelligence, 3(7):610–619, 2021.

Terrance DeVries, Ishan Misra, Changhan Wang, and Laurens van der Maaten. Does object recogni-
  tion work for everyone?, 2019.

Alexey Dosovitskiy, Lucas Beyer, Alexander Kolesnikov, Dirk Weissenborn, Xiaohua Zhai, Thomas
  Unterthiner, Mostafa Dehghani, Matthias Minderer, Georg Heigold, Sylvain Gelly, et al. An
  image is worth 16x16 words: Transformers for image recognition at scale. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2010.11929, 2020.

Abhimanyu Dubey, Vignesh Ramanathan, Alex Pentland, and Dhruv Mahajan. Adaptive methods for
  real-world domain generalization. CoRR, abs/2103.15796, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/
  abs/2103.15796.

Chris Dulhanty and Alexander Wong. Auditing imagenet: Towards a model-driven framework for
  annotating demographic attributes of large-scale image datasets, 2019.


                                                10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Alex Fang, Gabriel Ilharco, Mitchell Wortsman, Yuhao Wan, Vaishaal Shankar, Achal Dave, and
  Ludwig Schmidt. Data determines distributional robustness in contrastive language image pre-
  training (CLIP). In Kamalika Chaudhuri, Stefanie Jegelka, Le Song, Csaba Szepesvari, Gang Niu,
  and Sivan Sabato, editors, Proceedings of the 39th International Conference on Machine Learning,
  volume 162 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pages 6216–6234. PMLR, 17–23 Jul
  2022a. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v162/fang22a.html.
Alex Fang, Gabriel Ilharco, Mitchell Wortsman, Yuhao Wan, Vaishaal Shankar, Achal Dave, and
  Ludwig Schmidt. Data determines distributional robustness in contrastive language image pre-
  training (clip), 2022b.
Alex Fang, Simon Kornblith, and Ludwig Schmidt. Does progress on imagenet transfer to real-world
  datasets?, 2023.
Robert Geirhos, Patricia Rubisch, Claudio Michaelis, Matthias Bethge, Felix A Wichmann, and
  Wieland Brendel. Imagenet-trained cnns are biased towards texture; increasing shape bias improves
  accuracy and robustness. arXiv preprint arXiv:1811.12231, 2018a.
Robert Geirhos, Patricia Rubisch, Claudio Michaelis, Matthias Bethge, Felix A Wichmann, and
  Wieland Brendel. Imagenet-trained cnns are biased towards texture; increasing shape bias improves
  accuracy and robustness. arXiv preprint arXiv:1811.12231, 2018b.
Robert Geirhos, Carlos R. Medina Temme, Jonas Rauber, Heiko H. Schütt, Matthias Bethge, and
  Felix A. Wichmann. Generalisation in humans and deep neural networks, 2020.
Priya Goyal, Mathilde Caron, Benjamin Lefaudeux, Min Xu, Pengchao Wang, Vivek Pai, Mannat
  Singh, Vitaliy Liptchinsky, Ishan Misra, Armand Joulin, et al. Self-supervised pretraining of visual
  features in the wild. arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.01988, 2021.
Priya Goyal, Quentin Duval, Isaac Seessel, Mathilde Caron, Ishan Misra, Levent Sagun, Armand
  Joulin, and Piotr Bojanowski. Vision models are more robust and fair when pretrained on uncurated
  images without supervision, 2022.
Laura Gustafson, Megan Richards, Melissa Hall, Caner Hazirbas, Diane Bouchacourt, and Mark
  Ibrahim. Pinpointing why object recognition performance degrades across income levels and
  geographies, 2023.
Dan Hendrycks and Thomas G. Dietterich. Benchmarking neural network robustness to common
  corruptions and perturbations. CoRR, abs/1903.12261, 2019. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/
  1903.12261.
Dan Hendrycks, Norman Mu, Ekin D Cubuk, Barret Zoph, Justin Gilmer, and Balaji Lakshmi-
  narayanan. Augmix: A simple data processing method to improve robustness and uncertainty.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.02781, 2019.
Dan Hendrycks, Steven Basart, Norman Mu, Saurav Kadavath, Frank Wang, Evan Dorundo, Rahul
  Desai, Tyler Zhu, Samyak Parajuli, Mike Guo, Dawn Song, Jacob Steinhardt, and Justin Gilmer.
  The many faces of robustness: A critical analysis of out-of-distribution generalization, 2021a.
Dan Hendrycks, Kevin Zhao, Steven Basart, Jacob Steinhardt, and Dawn Song. Natural adversarial
  examples, 2021b.
Matthew Honnibal, Ines Montani, Sofie Van Landeghem, and Adriane Boyd. spaCy: Industrial-
 strength Natural Language Processing in Python. 2020. doi: 10.5281/zenodo.1212303.
Mark Ibrahim, Quentin Garrido, Ari Morcos, and Diane Bouchacourt. The robustness limits of sota
 vision models to natural variation, 2022.
Badr Youbi Idrissi, Martin Arjovsky, Mohammad Pezeshki, and David Lopez-Paz. Simple data
  balancing achieves competitive worst-group-accuracy. In Bernhard Schölkopf, Caroline Uhler,
  and Kun Zhang, editors, Proceedings of the First Conference on Causal Learning and Reasoning,
  volume 177 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pages 336–351. PMLR, 11–13 Apr
  2022. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v177/idrissi22a.html.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Gabriel Ilharco, Mitchell Wortsman, Ross Wightman, Cade Gordon, Nicholas Carlini, Rohan Taori,
  Achal Dave, Vaishaal Shankar, Hongseok Namkoong, John Miller, Hannaneh Hajishirzi, Ali
  Farhadi, and Ludwig Schmidt. OpenCLIP, July 2021.
Tarun Kalluri, Wangdong Xu, and Manmohan Chandraker. Geonet: Benchmarking unsupervised
  adaptation across geographies, 2023.
Sandesh Kamath, Amit Deshpande, Subrahmanyam Kambhampati Venkata, and Vineeth N Balasub-
  ramanian. Can we have it all? on the trade-off between spatial and adversarial robustness of neural
  networks. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:27462–27474, 2021.
Polina Kirichenko, Pavel Izmailov, and Andrew Gordon Wilson. Last layer re-training is sufficient
  for robustness to spurious correlations, 2022.
Xiaodan Li, Yuefeng Chen, Yao Zhu, Shuhui Wang, Rong Zhang, and Hui Xue. Imagenet-e:
  Benchmarking neural network robustness via attribute editing, 2023a.
Zhiheng Li, Ivan Evtimov, Albert Gordo, Caner Hazirbas, Tal Hassner, Cristian Canton Ferrer,
  Chenliang Xu, and Mark Ibrahim. A whac-a-mole dilemma: Shortcuts come in multiples where
  mitigating one amplifies others, 2023b.
Spandan Madan, Timothy Henry, Jamell Dozier, Helen Ho, Nishchal Bhandari, Tomotake Sasaki,
  Frédo Durand, Hanspeter Pfister, and Xavier Boix. When and how do cnns generalize to out-of-
  distribution category-viewpoint combinations? arXiv preprint arXiv:2007.08032, 2020.
Spandan Madan, Tomotake Sasaki, Tzu-Mao Li, Xavier Boix, and Hanspeter Pfister. Small in-
  distribution changes in 3d perspective and lighting fool both cnns and transformers. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2106.16198, 2021.
Spandan Madan, Tomotake Sasaki, Hanspeter Pfister, Tzu-Mao Li, and Xavier Boix. Adversarial
  examples within the training distribution: A widespread challenge, 2023.
John P Miller, Rohan Taori, Aditi Raghunathan, Shiori Sagawa, Pang Wei Koh, Vaishaal Shankar,
  Percy Liang, Yair Carmon, and Ludwig Schmidt. Accuracy on the line: on the strong correlation
  between out-of-distribution and in-distribution generalization. In International Conference on
  Machine Learning, pages 7721–7735. PMLR, 2021.
Mazda Moayeri, Kiarash Banihashem, and Soheil Feizi. Explicit tradeoffs between adversarial and
 natural distributional robustness. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.07592, 2022.
Thao Nguyen, Gabriel Ilharco, Mitchell Wortsman, Sewoong Oh, and Ludwig Schmidt. Quality not
  quantity: On the interaction between dataset design and robustness of clip, 2023.
Xuran Pan, Tianzhu Ye, Dongchen Han, Shiji Song, and Gao Huang. Contrastive language-image
  pre-training with knowledge graphs, 2022.
Francesco Pinto, Harry Yang, Ser-Nam Lim, Philip H. S. Torr, and Puneet K. Dokania. Regmixup:
  Mixup as a regularizer can surprisingly improve accuracy and out distribution robustness, 2023.
Viraj Prabhu, Ramprasaath R. Selvaraju, Judy Hoffman, and Nikhil Naik. Can domain adaptation
  make object recognition work for everyone?, 2022.
Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, Gretchen Krueger, and Ilya Sutskever.
  Learning transferable visual models from natural language supervision, 2021.
Vikram V Ramaswamy, Sing Yu Lin, Dora Zhao, Aaron B Adcock, Laurens van der Maaten, Deepti
  Ghadiyaram, and Olga Russakovsky. Beyond web-scraping: Crowd-sourcing a geographically
  diverse image dataset. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.02560, 2023.
Benjamin Recht, Rebecca Roelofs, Ludwig Schmidt, and Vaishaal Shankar. Do imagenet classifiers
  generalize to imagenet? In International conference on machine learning, pages 5389–5400.
  PMLR, 2019.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


William A Gaviria Rojas, Sudnya Diamos, Keertan Ranjan Kini, David Kanter, Vijay Janapa Reddi,
 and Cody Coleman. The dollar street dataset: Images representing the geographic and socioe-
 conomic diversity of the world. In Thirty-sixth Conference on Neural Information Processing
 Systems Datasets and Benchmarks Track.
Olga Russakovsky, Jia Deng, Hao Su, Jonathan Krause, Sanjeev Satheesh, Sean Ma, Zhiheng Huang,
  Andrej Karpathy, Aditya Khosla, Michael Bernstein, Alexander C. Berg, and Li Fei-Fei. Imagenet
  large scale visual recognition challenge, 2015.
Chaitanya K. Ryali, David J. Schwab, and Ari S. Morcos. Characterizing and improving the robustness
  of self-supervised learning through background augmentations, 2021.
Shreya Shankar, Yoni Halpern, Eric Breck, James Atwood, Jimbo Wilson, and D. Sculley. No
  classification without representation: Assessing geodiversity issues in open data sets for the
  developing world, 2017a.
Shreya Shankar, Yoni Halpern, Eric Breck, James Atwood, Jimbo Wilson, and D. Sculley. No
  classification without representation: Assessing geodiversity issues in open data sets for the
  developing world, 2017b.
Yuge Shi, Imant Daunhawer, Julia E. Vogt, Philip H. S. Torr, and Amartya Sanyal. How robust is
  unsupervised representation learning to distribution shift?, 2022.
Zhouxing Shi, Nicholas Carlini, Ananth Balashankar, Ludwig Schmidt, Cho-Jui Hsieh, Alex Beutel,
  and Yao Qin. Effective robustness against natural distribution shifts for models with different
  training data, 2023.
Ben Sorscher, Robert Geirhos, Shashank Shekhar, Surya Ganguli, and Ari Morcos. Beyond neural
  scaling laws: beating power law scaling via data pruning. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 35:19523–19536, 2022.
Rohan Taori, Achal Dave, Vaishaal Shankar, Nicholas Carlini, Benjamin Recht, and Ludwig Schmidt.
  Measuring robustness to natural distribution shifts in image classification, 2020.
Damien Teney, Yong Lin, Seong Joon Oh, and Ehsan Abbasnejad. Id and ood performance are
  sometimes inversely correlated on real-world datasets. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.00613, 2022.
Haohan Wang, Songwei Ge, Zachary Lipton, and Eric P Xing. Learning robust global representations
  by penalizing local predictive power. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32,
  2019.
Ross Wightman.  Pytorch image models.                    https://github.com/rwightman/
  pytorch-image-models, 2019.
Thomas Wolf, Lysandre Debut, Victor Sanh, Julien Chaumond, Clement Delangue, Anthony Moi,
  Pierric Cistac, Tim Rault, Rémi Louf, Morgan Funtowicz, Joe Davison, Sam Shleifer, Patrick
  von Platen, Clara Ma, Yacine Jernite, Julien Plu, Canwen Xu, Teven Le Scao, Sylvain Gugger,
  Mariama Drame, Quentin Lhoest, and Alexander M. Rush. Transformers: State-of-the-art natural
  language processing. In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
  Language Processing: System Demonstrations, pages 38–45, Online, October 2020. Associa-
  tion for Computational Linguistics. URL https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/2020.
  emnlp-demos.6.
Kai Xiao, Logan Engstrom, Andrew Ilyas, and Aleksander Madry. Noise or signal: The role of image
  backgrounds in object recognition, 2020.
Da Yin, Feng Gao, Govind Thattai, Michael Johnston, and Kai-Wei Chang. Givl: Improving
  geographical inclusivity of vision-language models with pre-training methods, 2023.
Sangdoo Yun, Dongyoon Han, Seong Joon Oh, Sanghyuk Chun, Junsuk Choe, and Youngjoon Yoo.
  Cutmix: Regularization strategy to train strong classifiers with localizable features. In Proceedings
  of the IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision, pages 6023–6032, 2019.
Richard Zhang. Making convolutional networks shift-invariant again. In ICML, 2019.


                                                 13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A PPENDIX

A    M EASURING G ENERALIZATION ON C ROWDSOURCED , G LOBAL DATA
TestBed and Evaluation Procedure: We include a list of the models in our testbed below, in-
cluding the architecture group, evaluation type, training dataset, and the library or github source
we used for model weights. For data augmentation, for all models we used the ImageNet nor-
malization available in PyTorch, resize images to 256 pixels, and center crop to 224 pixels. Our
evaluation code can be found on github at https://github.com/facebookresearch/
Geographic_Generalization.

  Model                        Architecture      Evaluation Type     Dataset         Source
  eva-clip                     CLIP              1K                  Laion-2B        Timm
  convnext-base                ConvNext          1K                  1K              Timm
  convnext-large               ConvNext          1K                  1K              Timm
  convnext-small               ConvNext          1K                  1K              Timm
  dla102                       DLA               1K                  1K              Timm
  dla102x                      DLA               1K                  1K              Timm
  dla169                       DLA               1K                  1K              Timm
  dla34                        DLA               1K                  1K              Timm
  dla46c                       DLA               1K                  1K              Timm
  dla46xc                      DLA               1K                  1K              Timm
  dla60                        DLA               1K                  1K              Timm
  dla60x                       DLA               1K                  1K              Timm
  edgenet-base                 EdgeNext          1K                  1K              Timm
  edgenet-s                    EdgeNext          1K                  1K              Timm
  edgenet-xs                   EdgeNext          1K                  1K              Timm
  edgenet-xxs                  EdgeNext          1K                  1K              Timm
  hrnet18                      HRNet             1K                  1K              Timm
  hrnet18small                 HRNet             1K                  1K              Timm
  hrnet30                      HRNet             1K                  1K              Timm
  hrnet32                      HRNet             1K                  1K              Timm
  hrnet40                      HRNet             1K                  1K              Timm
  hrnet44                      HRNet             1K                  1K              Timm
  hrnet48                      HRNet             1K                  1K              Timm
  hrnet64                      HRNet             1K                  1K              Timm
  lcnet100                     LCNet             1K                  1K              Timm
  lcnet50                      LCNet             1K                  1K              Timm
  lcnet75                      LCNet             1K                  1K              Timm
  mlpmixer                     MLP               1K                  1K              Timm
  mlpmixerlarge                MLP               1K                  1K              Timm
  mobilenet-lamb100            MobileNet-V3      1K                  1K              Timm
  mobilenet-lamb50             MobileNet-V3      1K                  1K              Timm
  mobilenet-lamb75             MobileNet-V3      1K                  1K              Timm
  regnet                       RegNet            1K                  1K              Timm
  regnet120                    RegNet            1K                  1K              Timm
  regnet16                     RegNet            1K                  1K              Timm
  regnet2                      RegNet            1K                  1K              Timm
  regnet32                     RegNet            1K                  1K              Timm
  regnet320                    RegNet            1K                  1K              Timm
  regnet6                      RegNet            1K                  1K              Timm
  regnet64                     RegNet            1K                  1K              Timm
  regnet8                      RegNet            1K                  1K              Timm
  seer1280                     RegNet            1K                  Instagram       Github∗
  seer320                      RegNet            1K                  Instagram       Github∗
  seer640                      RegNet            1K                  Instagram       Github∗
  regnet120x                   RegNetX           1K                  1K              Timm
  regnet16x                    RegNetX           1K                  1K              Timm


                                                14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 regnet2x                     RegNetX           1K         1K            Timm
 regnet320x                   RegNetX           1K         1K            Timm
 regnet32x                    RegNetX           1K         1K            Timm
 regnet4x                     RegNetX           1K         1K            Timm
 regnet64x                    RegNetX           1K         1K            Timm
 regnet6x                     RegNetX           1K         1K            Timm
 regnet8x                     RegNetX           1K         1K            Timm
 resnet101                    ResNet            1K         1K            Timm
 resnet152                    ResNet            1K         1K            Timm
 resnet18                     ResNet            1K         1K            Timm
 resnet34                     ResNet            1K         1K            Timm
 resnet50                     ResNet            1K         1K            Timm
 resnet50anti                 ResNet            1K         1K            Timm
 resnet50augmix               ResNet            1K         1K            Timm
 resnet50cutmix               ResNet            1K         1K            Timm
 resnet50cutmixbaseline       ResNet            1K         1K            Timm
 resnet50deepaug              ResNet            1K         1K            Timm
 resnet50deepaugmix           ResNet            1K         1K            Timm
 resnet50texture              ResNet            1K         1K            Timm
 rexnet100                    RexNet            1K         1K            Timm
 rexnet130                    RexNet            1K         1K            Timm
 rexnet150                    RexNet            1K         1K            Timm
 rexnet200                    RexNet            1K         1K            Timm
 tinynet-a                    TinyNet           1K         1K            Timm
 tinynet-b                    TinyNet           1K         1K            Timm
 tinynet-c                    TinyNet           1K         1K            Timm
 tinynet-e                    TinyNet           1K         1K            Timm
 vgg-11                       VGG               1K         1K            Timm
 vgg-13                       VGG               1K         1K            Timm
 vgg-16                       VGG               1K         1K            Timm
 vgg-19                       VGG               1K         1K            Timm
 DINOv2                       ViT               1K         LVD-142M      GitHub∗∗
 vit                          ViT               1K         21K           Timm
 vitlarge                     ViT               1K         21K           Timm
 clip-convnext-laion2b        CLIP              Zeroshot   Laion-2B      OpenCLIP
 clip-convnext-laion2b-a      CLIP              Zeroshot   Laion-2B      OpenCLIP
 clip-convnext-laion2b-aug    CLIP              Zeroshot   Laion-2B      OpenCLIP
 clip-convnextlarge-laion2b   CLIP              Zeroshot   Laion-2B      OpenCLIP
 clip-r101-openai             CLIP              Zeroshot   OpenAI        OpenCLIP
 clip-r101-yfcc               CLIP              Zeroshot   YFCC          OpenCLIP
 clip-r50-cc12m               CLIP              Zeroshot   CC12M         OpenCLIP
 clip-r50-openai              CLIP              Zeroshot   OpenAI        OpenCLIP
 clip-r50-yfcc                CLIP              Zeroshot   YFCC          OpenCLIP
 clip-vit14-laion2b           CLIP              Zeroshot   Laion-2B      OpenCLIP
 clip-vit14-laion400m         CLIP              Zeroshot   Laion-400M    OpenCLIP
 clip-vit14-openai            CLIP              Zeroshot   OpenAI        OpenCLIP
 clip-vit16-laion2b           CLIP              Zeroshot   Laion-2B      OpenCLIP
 clip-vit16-laion400m         CLIP              Zeroshot   Laion-400M    OpenCLIP
 clip-vit16-openai            CLIP              Zeroshot   OpenAI        OpenCLIP
 clip-vit32-laion400m         CLIP              Zeroshot   Laion-400M    OpenCLIP
 clip-vit32-openai            CLIP              Zeroshot   OpenAI        OpenCLIP
 flava                        PMD               Zeroshot   HuggingFace   OpenCLIP


∗
   The SEER Github can be found here: https://github.com/facebookresearch/
vissl/tree/main/projects/SEER.
∗∗
   The DINOv2 Github can be found here: https://github.com/facebookresearch/
dinov2.


                                               15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Class Maps For DollarStreet and GeoDE datasets, we use a class mapping to ImageNet-1K to
evalute 1K models, and use the original labels for DollarStreet and GeoDE to evalaute zero-shot
models. We use the released mapping for DollarStreet and generate mapping for GeoDE. We generate
the GeoDE mapping using the spacey model (Honnibal et al., 2020) to calculate the most similar
ImageNet classes for each GeoDE class, manually selecting the most reasonable results and correcting
as needed. We successfully create mappings for 36 of the 40 GeoDE classes. Below are the class
mappings:

                     DollarStreet Class                    ImageNet Class(es)
                    home                                   manufactured home
                    street view                            street sign
                    tv                                     television
                    washing clothes/cleaning               washing machine
                    toilet                                 toilet seat
                    kitchen sink                           washbasin
                    drinking water                         water bottle
                    stove/hob                              stove
                    salt                                   salt shaker
                    bed                                    day bed
                    toys                                   toyshop
                    everyday shoes                         running shoe
                    plate of food                          plate
                    cooking pots                           skillet
                    social drink                           soda bottle
                    phone                                  cellphone
                    place where eating dinner              dining table
                    lock on front door                     padlock
                    wardrobe                               wardrobe
                    soap for hands and body                soap dispenser
                    ceiling                                tile roof
                    refrigerator                           refrigerator
                    bathroom/toilet                        toilet seat
                    dish washing brush/cloth               dishrag
                    toilet paper                           toilet paper
                    plates                                 plate
                    dish washing soap                      soap dispenser
                    trash/waste                            trash can
                    dish racks                             plate rack
                    shower                                 shower curtain
                    cups/mugs/glasses                      cup
                    armchair                               rocking chair
                    light sources                          table lamp
                    light source in livingroom             table lamp
                    books                                  bookcase
                    switch on/off                          switch
                    light source in kitchen                table lamp
                    couch                                  studio couch
                    sofa                                   studio couch
                    roof                                   tile roof
                    cutlery                                wooden spoon
                    cooking utensils                       spatula
                    medication                             medicine cabinet
                    source of cool                         electric fan
                    pen/pencils                            ballpoint
                    street detail                          street sign
                    turning lights on and off              switch
                    music equipment                        speaker
                    tools                                  tool kit
                    cleaning equipment                     dishrag


                                                 16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                  bed kids                               day bed
                  table with food                        dining table
                  get water                              water jug
                  paper                                  paper towel
                  radio                                  radio
                  shoes                                  running shoe
                  starting stove                         igniter
                  freezer                                icebox
                  source of heat                         space heater
                  computer                               desktop computer
                  jewelry                                necklace
                  knifes                                 paper knife
                  wall clock                             wall clock
                  pouring water                          water jug
                  doing dishes                           dishwasher
                  guest bed                              day bed
                  mosquito protection                    mosquito net
                  bike                                   all-terrain bike
                  pouring drinking water                 water bottle
                  oven                                   stove
                  place where serving guests             eating place
                  glasses or lenses                      dark glasses
                  necklaces                              necklace
                  source of light                        table lamp
                  parking lot                            parking meter
                  waste dumps                            trash can
                  eating                                 restaurant
                  car                                    passenger car
                  reading light                          table lamp
                  lightsources by bed                    table lamp
                  family eating                          eating place
                  arm watch                              digital watch
                  taking a teaspoon of salt              salt shaker
                  using toilet                           toilet seat
                  sitting and watching tv                television
                  opening and closing the freezer        icebox
                  diapers (or baby-pants)                diaper
                  moped/motorcycle                       moped
                  cleaning after toilet                  toilet paper
                  dishwasher                             dishwasher
                  opening and closing the refrigerator   refrigerator
                  answering the phone                    mobile phone
                  alarm clock                            analog clock
                  wheel barrow                           wheelbarrow
                  listening to the radio                 radio
                  dinner guests                          eating place


                                               17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 GeoDE Class              ImageNet Class(es)
 bag                      backpack, purse, punching bag, sleeping bag, plastic bag, messenger bag,
                          shopping basket, pencil case
 hand soap                soap dispenser, lotion
 dustbin                  bucket, trash can, plastic bag, barrel
 toothbrush               -
 toothpaste toothpowder   -
 hairbrush comb           -
 chair                    barber chair, folding chair, rocking chair, couch, throne
 hat                      cowboy hat, swimming cap, football helmet, poke bonnet, sombrero
                          military hat (bearskin or shako), shower cap
 light fixture            table lamp, spotlight, lampshade, candle
 light switch             electrical switch
 plate of food            plate, tray
 spices                   -
 stove                    Dutch oven, stove
 cooking pot              frying pan, hot pot, Crock Pot, cauldron, Dutch oven, wok
 cleaning equipment       vacuum cleaner, washing machine, mop, broom, bucket, soap dispenser
 lighter                  lighter
 medicine                 pill bottle, medicine cabinet
 candle                   candle
 toy                      teddy bear, toy store
 jug                      water jug, whiskey jug, water bottle, drink pitcher
 streetlight lantern      torch, pole
 front door               sliding door
 tree                     -
 house                    cliff dwelling, mobile home, barn, home theater, boathouse
 backyard                 patio
 truck                    garbage truck, semi-trailer truck, tow truck, pickup truck
 waste container          plastic bag, trash can, barrel, bucket
 car                      garbage truck, recreational vehicle, semi-trailer truck, tow truck, sports car, railroad car,
                          minivan, station wagon, minibus, jeep, limousine, taxicab, convertible, pickup truck
                          moving van, police van, race car
 fence                    chain-link fence, picket fence, split-rail fence
 road sign                traffic or street sign
 dog                      Bernese Mountain Dog, Sealyham Terrier, Toy Poodle, toy terrier, African wild dog, husky,
                          Maltese, Beagle, Labrador Retriever, Cairn Terrier, dingo, Australian Kelpie
                          German Shepherd Dog, Golden Retriever, Malinois, Norwegian Elkhound, Chihuahua,
                          Tibetan Mastiff, Staffordshire Bull Terrier, American Staffordshire Terrier
                          Pembroke Welsh Corgi, Miniature Poodle, Basenji, Rhodesian Ridgeback,
                          Appenzeller Sennenhund, Ibizan Hound
 wheelbarrow              wheelbarrow
 religious building       mosque, church, monastery, bell tower, altar
 stall                    -
 boat                     motorboat, canoe, fireboat, lifeboat, sailboat, submarine, ocean
                          liner, trimaran, catamaran
 monument                 triumphal arch, obelisk, stupa, pedestal, brass memorial plaque, megalith
 flag                     flagpole
 bus                      minibus, school bus, trolleybus
 storefront               grocery store, tobacco shop, bookstore, toy store, barbershop, candy store, shoe store
 bicycle                  tricycle, mountain bike, tandem bicycle, unicycle


                                               18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Benchmark Use Our analysis relies on two benchmarks, DollarStreet and GeoDE, to characterize
geographical disparity, and our results (as with all research analyses), should be interpreted con-
sidering the datasets used. However, we emphasize that these benchmarks are reliable measures
of geographical disparities, as they are 2-6x larger than existing robustness benchmarks, and are
supported by a wealth of research use in fairness (DeVries et al., 2019; Gustafson et al., 2023; Rojas
et al.; Goyal et al., 2021; 2022; Ramaswamy et al., 2023). DollarStreet and GeoDE have 61K and
38K respectively, compared to 10K in ImageNet-A and 30K samples in ImageNet Sketch.
There are some significant differences between these benchmarks, which we discuss below: Dol-
larStreet is more diverse in terms of geography and household income. DollarStreet was curated to
explicitly capture a broad set of households, sending photographers to over 63 countries to people’s
homes, and selecting households with a variety of incomes. GeoDE was crowdsourced among internet
users from 19 countries and was designed to show the importance of crowdsourced data compared to
internet scraped data. GeoDE has a 1-to-many label mapping, whereas DollarStreet has a 1:1 label
mapping (but has several original labels). As shown below, GeoDE classes are coarser as there are
GeoDE classes that map to as many as 25 ImageNet classes, while DollarStreet has 1 ImageNet label
for each DollarStreet label. This makes GeoDE an easier dataset than DollarStreet for ImageNet
models (we also evaluate a large number of zero-shot models that use the ground truth labels, without
requiring mapping).
Despite the large differences in dataset curation and difficulty, we find very similar results on
DollarStreet and GeoDE, indicating that the problems we discover are not specific to a given dataset
curation, or labeling. We find that both datasets have large geographic disparities, even with SOTA
models. Most critically, we find for both benchmarks that disparities are not resolved by progress on
standard generalization benchmarks, dataset scaling, standard robustness interventions, or architecture
scaling.


                                                  19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                           ImageNet-V2            ImageNet-R              ObjectNet


          Accuracy       ImageNet-Sketch          ImageNet-A             OOD Average


                                             ImageNet Accuracy



Figure 4: Progress on each benchmark (blue) as a function of ImageNet, compared to DollarStreet
(orange).

                          ImageNet-V2             ImageNet-R             ObjectNet


           Accuracy
                         ImageNet-Sketch          ImageNet-A            OOD Average


                                             ImageNet Accuracy



Figure 5: Progress on each benchmark (blue) as a function of ImageNet accuracy, compared to
GeoDE (orange).


B    T HE P ROGRESS G AP BETWEEN S TANDARD AND C ROWDSOURCED ,
     G LOBAL G ENERALIZATION DATASETS

In Figure 4 and Figure 5 we show the performance on each standard ImageNet benchmark as a
function on ImageNet performance, comparing the progress rates with DollarStreet and GeoDE
respectively.


C    P ERFORMANCE D ISPARITIES

We show the GeoDE version of Figure 2 below in Figure 7, finding that improvement on standard
imagenet benchmarks does not significantly impact regional accuracy disparities on GeoDE. We also
show the relationships between Europe and Africa subsets of DollarStreet and GeoDE individually in
Figure 6 and Figure 8.


                                                20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                ImageNet                         ImageNet-V2                          ImageNet-R


             Subset
            Accuracy,
           DollarStreet          ObjectNet                    ImageNet-Sketch                         ImageNet-A


                                                              Accuracy



Figure 6: Model improvement on both in-distribution and out-of-distribution benchmarks
exacerbates the region disparity on DollarStreet. Region disparity is measured as the accuracy
difference between Europe and Africa subsets.


                          Improvement on Standard Benchmarks Does Not Impact Regional
                                         Accuracy Disparities on GeoDE

                            In-Distribution (ImageNet V2)                      Out-Of-Distribution (OOD Average)


            Regional
            Accuracy
             Drop,
             GeoDE


                                                             Accuracy



Figure 7: Model improvement on both in-distribution and out-of-distribution benchmarks fails
to improve the region disparity on GeoDE. Region disparity is measured as the accuracy difference
between Europe and Africa subsets.


    DS Income Quartile        Europe Acc (%)                Africa Accuracy (%)                    Region Disparity (%)
           Q3                      51.9                             45.2                                   6.6
           Q2                      61.1                             52.5                                   8.7

Table 8: There are significant performance disparities across Region, when controlling for
Income Quartile in DollarStreet. Accuracy numbers from OpenAI’s ViT32 CLIP model.



D    F OUNDATION M ODELS AND S CALING

We replicate the plots in Figure 3 for GeoDE in Figure 10.


                                                            21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                              ImageNet           ImageNet-V2          ImageNet-R


                 Subset
                Accuracy,     ObjectNet         ImageNet-Sketch       ImageNet-A
                 GeoDE


                                                   Accuracy


Figure 8: Model improvement on both in-distribution and out-of-distribution benchmarks does not
improve the region disparities on GeoDE.


Figure 9: Similar trends occur with other region subset relative to the best performing subgroup
(Europe), where there is a lower progress rate compared to the European subset.


E    R EPRESENTATIVE DATA
The GeoDE classes with overlapping ImageNet labels of DollarStreet include: hand soap, dustbin,
chair, light fixture, light switch, plate of food, stove, cooking pot, cleaning equipment, lighter,
medicine, toy, jug, house , waste container, car, road sign, wheelbarrow, storefront, bicycle.

F   LAION C LUSTERING E XPERIMENTS
In order to estimate the regional distribution of LAION, we perform an experiment to cluster samples
by their relation to DollarStreet images in the embedding spaces. We use OpenCLIP’s model
(trained on LAION400M) to generate embeddings for DollarStreet images according to West (Europe,
Americas) and Non West (Asia, Africa) categories. We then use KNN (testing a range from k=3 to
k=113) to evaluate a filtered version of LAION. Our results approximate almost 60% of LAION
samples are from western regions, and strikingly, that Europe has 2.24X more images represented


                                                22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                       Data Scaling, All Models                         Architecture Scaling, CLIP


    Figure 10: Dataset and architecture scaling fails to reduce region disparities on GeoDE.


than Africa. Our results very closely match previous work conducted on ImageNet and OpenImages
? This analysis further sheds light on the pervasiveness of western bias in large, web-scale datasets
used to train SOTA models.


G    E XTENSION OF L AST L AYER R ETRAINING E XPERIMENTS


 DS Subset (%)     DS Avg Acc (%)                 DS Disp. (%)   GeoDE Avg Acc (%)              GeoDE Disp. (%)
         5            52.79±1.52                   9.20±0.49         71.51±2.98                      3.97±0.60
        10            62.13±0.58                   5.93±0.86         77.87±1.32                      4.00±0.73
        25            69.50±0.30                   3.27±0.40         75.77±1.09                      3.25±1.50
        50            73.51±0.81                   3.11±0.20         76.20±1.89                      2.59±0.85
        75            75.71±0.12                   2.69±0.62         76.23±0.32                      3.82±0.33
       100            76.90±0.15                   1.82±0.70         76.56±1.15                      4.29±0.78

Table 9: Last layer fine-tuning experiment with varying amounts of DollarStreet training data.



H    A PPROXIMATING THE I MPACT OF W ESTERN DATASET B IAS ON
     P ERFORMANCE D ISPARITY T HROUGH D OLLAR S TREET F INETUNING

To explore the relationship between western training data and Europe-Africa performance disparities,
we conduct a finetuning experiment with varying proportions of Western DollarStreet data. We use
an ImageNet pretrained ViT from Timm (vit_base_patch16_224), finetuning it on the DollarStreet
training dataset that is subsampled to have increasing proportions of Western data (from 50% western,
which is balanced, to 100% western, which uses only the western subset). We control for the total
number of samples, and sample with a common random seed. Given the small size of the finetuning
dataset, we use a smaller learning rate of 0.00001, training for 30 epochs, which did not show
significant evidence of overfitting. We find in Figure 11 that increasing the Western bias in the
finetuning dataset results in significantly larger performance disparities in the resulting model. We
hope that this experiment provides more evidence that training dataset imbalance likely plays a
significant role in the performance disparities we uncover in this work.


                                                         23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                     DollarStreet Disparity Increases With Western Dataset Bias
                                             in Finetuning


Figure 11: Europe-Africa Performance Disparity doubles with increasingly Western dataset
distributions during Finetuning..



I   I MPLICATIONS FOR DATA S ELECTION AND C URATION

Our work has several implications for dataset evaluation and benchmarking:

      • Geography as an important axis of generalization. Our empirical evidence indicates
        that geographical diversity is a missing axis from standard benchmarks, yet geographic
        shifts remain a pervasive failure mode of existing models. Our work suggests the need for
        more diverse datasets with data collected from multiple regions. The development of these
        benchmarks and training datasets may require more detailed curation efforts than standard
        webscraping. We hope that our empirical findings provide ample motivation for such work.

      • Designing Evaluation Benchmarks: Our work provides evidence that data sources, label
        curation, geographic representation, and income information should all be closely considered.
        In this work, we focus on geographic representation, providing some evidence that these
        disparities are data driven. As a result, we believe our work highlights the need for for
        geographically diverse benchmarks, including datasets that are grounded in real-world use.
        This is often a significant advantage of crowdsourced data, which can be collected to better
        reflect use-cases than internet-scraped datasets.

      • Designing Precise, Useful Metrics Our work also highlights the utility of analyzing sub-
        groups within generalization benchmarks, and the limitations of analyzing an average
        accuracy. By analyzing regional subgroups, we were able to discover disparate progress
        trends in the field which are unsolved by scaling and standard robustness intereventions. We
        believe that this analysis approach could similarly be used in other subgroup contexts, and
        hope that our work motivates future work looking more closely at how models improved
        (the kinds of accuracy gains made, improvement on which portions of data). Particularly,
        we hope that our progress gap measure will be analyzed with respect to other important
        subgroups in relevant datasets, which can ensure that accuracy improvements improve
        reliability across groups.

Overall, we suggest that there is no one particular benchmark or tool that can perfectly measure
model reliability, but that having a comprehensive suite of measures, and by analyzing subgroups
more precisely, we can improve our understanding of model behavior and its reliability.


                                                24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


J   D RIVING M ECHANISMS OF G EOGRAPHICAL P ERFORMANCE D ISPARITIES
Our work primarily focuses on highlighting geographical disparity as an understudied and open
research challenge for the community by providing comprehensive empirical evidence that this
problem is pervasive across architectures and training paradigms. While the exact underlying
mechanisms for models’ disparities across geographies (as well as a solution to this problem) is an
open question, below we outline our main hypotheses for the driving reasons behind these disparities:

      • Dataset imbalance: Our work shows that the geographical disparities are persistent across
        100+ models with a variety of training architectures and paradigms. This suggests that the
        disparities are driven by geographical data imbalance in pretraining datasets. Moreover,
        prior works showed ImageNet is heavily western biased Shankar et al. (2017a), and in
        our paper Appendix F we present a kNN clustering experiment, where we analyze CLIP
        embeddings of LAION and DollarStreet to approximate the regional distribution of LAION.
        We find that our proxy measure indicates an extreme imbalance in LAION, which aligns
        with existing work on ImageNet. Additionally, in Section 6.3 we show that fine-tuning the
        last layer of a ViT model on DollarStreet improves disparities on **both** DollarStreet and
        GeoDE, showing the promise of interventions using geographically diverse data.
      • Distribution shifts and factors of variations between geographies: Gustafson et al
        Gustafson et al. (2023) annotated factors of variation in DollarStreet and found that variations
        in texture, occlusion, and lighting were among the factors most associated with performance
        disparities. Models pre-trained on ImageNet may overrely on these factors and other spurious
        features such as backgrounds Xiao et al. (2020) which also contributes to geographical
        disparities.
      • Household income: In addition to geographical labels, DollarStreet also has income group
        labels, which is correlated with geography. We hypothesize that the lower income group is
        underrepresented in pre-training data and also presents a distribution shift in terms of factors
        of variations discussed above.

Importantly, scaling up model or dataset size as well as standard robustness interventions such as
data augmentation, while being effective on standard ImageNet OOD benchmarks, don’t lead to
improvements in geographical generalization, highlighting the unique challenges of geographical
distribution shifts. We hope that our empirical insights motivate future work into these driving
mechanisms.


                                                  25
