Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A DATA -C ENTRIC A PPROACH FOR F INANCIAL L ARGE
L ANGUAGE M ODELS WITH A BDUCTIVE AUGMENTA -
TION R EASONING

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                           A BSTRACT

         Large language models (LLMs) show promise for natural language tasks but strug-
         gle when applied directly to complex domains like finance. LLMs have diffi-
         culty reasoning about and integrating all relevant information. We propose a data-
         centric approach to enable LLMs to better handle financial tasks. Our key insight
         is that rather than overloading the LLM with everything at once, it is more effec-
         tive to preprocess and pre-understand the data. We create a financial LLM (FLLM)
         using multitask prompt-based finetuning to achieve data pre-processing and pre-
         understanding. However, labeled data is scarce for each task. To overcome man-
         ual annotation costs, we employ abductive augmentation reasoning (AAR) to au-
         tomatically generate training data by modifying the pseudo labels from FLLM’s
         own outputs. Experiments show our data-centric FLLM with AAR substantially
         outperforms baseline financial LLMs designed for raw text, achieving state-of-
         the-art on financial analysis and interpretation tasks. We also open source a new
         benchmark for financial analysis and interpretation. Our methodology provides a
         promising path to unlock LLMs’ potential for complex real-world domains.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Large language models (LLMs) such as GPT-3 (Brown et al., 2020), GPT-4 (OpenAI, 2023), and
Llama (Touvron et al., 2023) have revolutionized natural language processing tasks, excelling in text
understanding, reasoning, and human-like response generation. While general LLMs are trained on
broad corpora to acquire general knowledge about language, recent research (Li et al., 2023; Wu
et al., 2023; Yang et al., 2023) has explored developing domain-specific LLMs by incorporating
knowledge from specific fields. Domain-specific LLMs aim to achieve superior performance on
domain-relevant tasks compared to general LLMs. Strategies like fine-tuning, prompt-based tuning,
and in-context learning have been employed to incorporate domain knowledge into LLMs. The core
challenge is developing effective techniques to inject the right domain knowledge into the LLMs
and align their Language Modeling objective with domain-specific goals (Chu et al., 2023).
LLMs’ attempt to directly access and utilize all domain knowledge in one shot is unrealistic. There
are two main approaches to injecting knowledge into LLMs with or without additional training.
One is to utilize prompt engineering to conduct in-context learning without any training, inserting
information into prompts. However, token limitations arise when cramming excessive prompts into
the context. Although tools like LangChain (Wu et al., 2022) can utilize embeddings instead of raw
text, embedding provides a less direct means to integrate such external knowledge sources. They are
limited in representing more complex conceptual relationships that are clear from linguistic context.
A second technique involves leveraging new data to further train the large language model, fine-
tuning its parameters on specific domains or tasks in order to adapt it for improved performance.
While fine-tuning the large language model on new data can enhance its capabilities for certain
applications, this approach has limitations in scale. As the model grows ever larger and more data is
generated continuously, it becomes infeasible to retrain the model on all new information.
Therefore, in our work, we take the finance domain as an example. To enable language models
to reason like financial experts, they must comprehend financial information multifariously. This
necessitates integrating assorted tasks to acquire domain knowledge, such as event matching and
analogy, assessing viewpoint quality, and extracting key points, among others. Thus, we propose a


                                                 1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 1: Our framework utilizes two key components - a large language model (FLLM) trained on
financial data to preprocess domain-specific texts and an abductive reasoning module that augments
data to improve FLLM. This differs from LangChain which operates directly on raw text corpora
without any deep understanding and analysis of the raw financial data.
data-centric financial large language model named FLLM in Figure 1, based on a multitask prompt-
based finetuning to achieve these different objectives. However, labeled data is limited for each
specialized task in the complex financial domain, and annotators without domain expertise cannot
competently label such data. We employ abductive learning to automatically generate training data
by modifying pseudo labels from fledgling FLLM’s own outputs to overcome the high cost of expert
manual annotation. Our framework is highly adaptable, enabling the development of knowledgeable
assistants across many domains. In summary, our proposed data-centric AI approach has two key
facets. First, the financial knowledge base provides large language models with a preprocessed
and parsed text corpus via data-centric FLLM. Second, abductive augmentation reasoning (AAR)
addresses the scarcity of labeled data for specialized tasks to help train the FLLM. This combination
of a financial large language model and abductive learning enables both knowledge injection into
large language models and more sophisticated reasoning by conducting complex domain-specific
tasks. The adaptable data-centric framework paves the way for knowledgeable AI assistants across
finance and many other specialized fields.

2     BACKGROUND
2.1   I N - CONTEXT L EARNING
Large language models (LLMs) such as GPT-3 (Brown et al., 2020), GPT-4 (OpenAI, 2023), and
Llama (Touvron et al., 2023) have shown impressive performance on a wide range of natural lan-
guage tasks through a method known as in-context learning (Brown et al., 2020). This approach
differs from traditional supervised learning which requires large labeled datasets. Instead, in-context
learning allows models to acquire new skills and knowledge simply by being exposed to demonstra-
tions of the task framed as natural language prompts (Liu et al., 2023). By conditioning the model
on new prompts that provide examples, LLMs can exhibit zero-shot capabilities ranging from trans-
lation and summarization to mathematics and dialog, without updating the model parameters (Lu
et al., 2021). Our work on abductive augmentation reasoning also relies on prompt-based in-context
learning, with three core modules that leverage this technique to enable intuitive reasoning.

2.2   M ULTITASK P ROMPT- BASED F INETUNEING
By providing input-output examples as prompts, GPT-3 (Brown et al., 2020) showed an ability to
solve NLP problems without full fine-tuning. This led to many prompt design techniques following
a ”pre-train, prompt, and predict” approach (Liu et al., 2021b). Some methods (Jiang et al., 2020;
Shin et al., 2020; Liu et al., 2021a; Gao et al., 2021; Lu et al., 2022) search over discrete prompts,
while others use continuous vector embeddings. Instruction-based prompts are more flexible and
natural, containing detailed task descriptions. As human-like prompts enable learning from crowd-
sourced data, instruction tuning of large language models is a promising approach for general NLP
capabilities (Weller et al., 2020; Efrat & Levy, 2020). Similar to Geng et al. (2023), our work uses
multi-task prompt finetuning on a financial corpus for data preprocessing and understanding, which
unifies various financial subtasks in a shared model.

2.3   A BDUCTIVE R EASONING
Reasoning is the process of using logic to draw conclusions based on available information (Wang
et al., 2023). There are three main types of reasoning: deductive, inductive, and abductive. Deduc-


                                                  2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 2: The framework of the financial large language model (FLLM), which specifically prepro-
cesses the original corpus information, so as to establish a bridge between the input to be analyzed
and the knowledge sources. Small labeled datasets are insufficient for finetuning large FLLM. AAR
corrects pseudo labels from the fledgling FLLM to augment the labeled training data.

tive reasoning involves starting with a general premise or theory and drawing a specific conclusion
based on that premise. Inductive reasoning works in the opposite direction - moving from specific
observations to a general conclusion that is probable but not certain based on the evidence. Finally,
abductive reasoning (Walton, 2014; Kovács & Spens, 2005; Zhou, 2019) starts with an observation
and then seeks the simplest explanation that would lead to that observation. It generates hypothe-
ses to explain a phenomenon rather than drawing conclusions. For example, upon observing that
the grass is wet, one could abductively reason that it rained last night as a possible explanation.
Abductive reasoning is useful for generating theories and new insights that can then be tested.
Our approach leverages the semantic reasoning abilities of large language models to augment train-
ing data through abductive inference. Rather than relying on symbolic rule formulations, we directly
prompt the model with natural language descriptions of reasoning tasks. Recent work has shown
that large language models learn rich semantic representations that allow them to make plausible in-
ferences in context, despite lacking explicit symbolic reasoning capabilities (Tang et al., 2023). This
pseudo-logical reasoning emerges from the models’ ability to build robust connections between to-
kens, forming chains of reasoning that appear logically sound on the surface. Our method provides
a more scalable approach to dataset augmentation through abductive logic compared to previous
methods that require hand-crafted symbolic knowledge bases (Zhong et al., 2023).


3     M ETHODOLOGY
3.1   P ROBLEM S TATEMENT
Large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated impressive capabilities across a variety of do-
mains, enabling applications for medical diagnosis and legal assistance. However, LLMs still strug-
gle with complex reasoning and analysis tasks that require understanding, reasoning, and integrating
information from diverse sources. This limitation is particularly evident in specialized domains like
finance, where interpreting events, news, policies, and regulations requires integrating nuanced do-
main knowledge, synthesizing insights from multiple sources, elaborating logical reasoning, and
generating an insightful point of view. In this work, our proposed system includes one fine-tuned
financial large language model with access to external knowledge sources such as search engines,
domain databases, and expert systems. This allows conducting financial sub-tasks to provide ma-
terials in a data-centric manner for final frozen LLM generation. Our ultimate goal is to utilize
this deeply processed corpus to produce sophisticated financial analysis and interpretations. While
we focus on financial analytics, our approach is designed to be generalizable across domains that
require abundant information and complex reasoning.

3.2   DATA - CENTRIC F INANCIAL L ARGE L ANGUAGE M ODEL
For the financial analysis and interpretation task, unlike the plain LangChain framework directly
utilizing the raw information from different data sources, we establish one financial large language
model (FLLM), which specifically preprocess the original corpus information, so as to establish
a bridge between the input to be analyzed and the knowledge sources, including domain expert
knowledge, financial databases, and search engines. As shown in Figure 2, our designed FLLM
is a multitask prompt-based fine-tuning LLM that is designed to handle three key subtasks for this


                                                  3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 Figure 3: The example to instantiate the workflow of FLLM and the specific role of each subtask.
financial analysis and interpretation task, i.e., (1) event matching and analogy, (2) viewpoint quality
evaluation, and (3) key point extraction. The model first matches the input news to relevant materials
in the databases and finds analogous cases and reports. Then, the matched materials are evaluated
for quality of opinion and analysis. Only the most insightful sentences are selected. Finally, the
model extracts key details like industry, evaluation dimensions, sentiment, etc. to construct the
structure for text generation. In this way, our financial large language model acts as an interpretive
bridge between the input text and background knowledge sources. By preprocessing the data and
learning correlations between events, viewpoints, and details, it can better leverage the information
to produce high-quality financial analyses.
Specifically, we will use the example in Figure 3 to instantiate the end-to-end workflow of FLLM
and the specific role of each subtask. The input is a new piece of government financial policy, about
Guangzhou optimizes the standards for determining the number of housing units in personal hous-
ing loans. Firstly, we use a sub-ability of FLLM to match this financial policy with more materials,
and get more analysis reports, although they may be inaccurate, scattered, or biased. Next, in step 2,
FLLM selects the most insightful statements from this information and scores them to filter out irrel-
evant noise and distills the content down to concise prompts suitable for the language model’s length
limits later on. step 3, FLLM extracts high-level key information, such as industry, main indicators,
analysis perspectives, sentiment, etc., to grasp and guide the direction, angle, and tone (positive or
negative) for generating coherent text later. Through this series of FLLM modules, refined, focused,
and filtered textual data has been prepared. In step 4, all this pre-processed information is formatted
into a prompt template. Finally, in step 5, a large language model like ChatGPT utilizes this re-
fined prompt to fluently generate useful interpretation and analysis of the policy’s implications. By
systematically preparing and guiding the input in a data-centric workflow, FLLM enables the final
language model to produce focused, logical explanations of new financial policies. The end result is
a cogent analysis specifically tailored to the original policy statement.

3.3   DATA - CENTRIC A BDUCTIVE AUGMENTATION R EASONING
The workflow of the Financial Large Language Model has been detailed, but training such a multi-
task prompt-based fine-tuning system poses challenges. These three financial subtasks demand
strong domain knowledge, beyond what typical annotators possess. Thus, our labeled data is
severely limited for these subtasks. Small labeled datasets are insufficient for finetuning large mod-
els. We must expand the data in a scalable way to improve the FLLM’s performance. Although
large language models show promise for text annotation (Dai et al., 2023), complex professional
tasks remain difficult. Empirically, we have demonstrated that ChatGPT and GPT-4 struggle with
these financial annotation tasks in the following experimental section. More advanced methods are
needed to obtain quality labeled data. With better and more labeled data, the potential of FLLM can
be realized for specialized subtasks.


                                                  4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 4: The example of AAR on viewpoint quality evaluation task. The examples of AAR on
event matching and analogy and key point evaluation tasks are provided in the Appendix.


3.4   F RAMEWORK OF AAR
We propose an Abductive Augmentation Reasoning (AAR) algorithm to augment the training data
for our fledgling FLLM in an abductive manner. The AAR takes as input the pseudo-labels produced
for unlabeled data by the FLLM, which was trained on a small labeled dataset. These generated
labels from fledgling FLLM may be erroneous due to the limited training data, making it challenging
to achieve strong performance. To address this, the AAR refines the pseudo-labels through three key
modules, i.e., Further Analysis Prompting through Dynamic Knowledge Questioning (FAP), Further
Analysis Enabling through Consistent Knowledge Answering (FAE), and Further Analysis-Driven
Output Modification through Knowledge-Enriched Question-Answer Fusion (FADOM). These three
modules are driven by LLM such as ChatGPT or GPT-4 and interact with domain expert knowledge
to refine the preliminary pseudo-labels, aiming to enhance the fledgling model’s performance. This
abductive reasoning process is used to correct faulty labels and provide higher-quality training data.

FAP. Further Analysis Prompting through Dynamic Knowledge Questioning (FAP) takes the orig-
inal input text, the initial output predictions from the fledgling FLLM, and domain expert knowledge
as inputs. FAP automatically generates a comprehensive series of analysis questions that aim to ad-
dress any gaps, inconsistencies, or need for clarification in the fledgling FLLM’s output. These
questions are dynamically generated based on the specific output, prompting further reasoning and
exploration. Example analysis questions can request more details on ambiguous conclusions, ask for
the reasoning or evidence behind claims, probe hypothetical scenarios to check consistency, identify
missing links in an argument, etc. The key is producing questions tailored to the output that can elicit
a more complete, well-reasoned analysis when answered. Answering these questions will prompt
further reasoning and lead to a more complete, logical analysis.

FAE. Further Analysis Enabling through Consistent Knowledge Answering (FAE) takes the orig-
inal input text, the fledgling FLLM’s initial output, the analysis questions from FAP, and the domain
knowledge as inputs. FAE answers the analysis questions in a robust, consistent manner based on
the domain knowledge. This provides broader, logically valid reasoning that aligns with known
facts, relationships, and rules in the domain. FAE ensures the analysis is expanded in a knowledge-
grounded way to fully address the gaps identified by the FAP questions.

FADOM. Further Analysis-Driven Output Modification through Knowledge-Enriched Question-
Answer Fusion (FADOM) takes the original input, the fledgling FLLM’s initial output, the analysis


                                                   5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


questions and answers from FAP and FAE as inputs. FADOM selectively fuses the original output
with the question-answer pairs in a way that incorporates the expanded analysis, reasoning, clari-
fications, and details provided by the QA process. This produces an improved output that benefits
from abductive augmentation. The result is a more complete output aligned with domain expertise.
In summary, the automated AAR framework leverages abductive learning and dynamic QA over
knowledge to augment FLLM’s training data. This drives the fledgling FLLM to make more well-
reasoned, detailed outputs consistent with the domain. As shown in Figure 4, the detailed prompt
design, domain knowledge, input, and output of these three subtasks are provided, which shows that
the three modules work together to enable systematic enhancement for each subtask.

4     E XPERIMENTS
In this section, we conduct experiments to evaluate the effectiveness of data-centric FLLM to en-
hance the generation by preprocessing the corpus information and data-centric AAR to improve
FLLM by providing higher-quality and more training data. Specifically, we aim to address the fol-
lowing research questions:

      1. Does AAR provide higher-quality data augmentation compared to annotations generated
         solely by large language models?
      2. Can AAR boost performance on key financial subtasks addressed by our Financial Large
         Language Model?
      3. Can providing pre-processed financial text data to LangChain through a financial language
         model lead to better financial analysis and interpretation compared to giving LangChain
         access to only raw financial text data?

Through these experiments, we aim to demonstrate that abductive reasoning based on LLM is an
effective technique for data augmentation and model improvement. Further, the preprocessing and
deep processing of corpus information in a data-centric manner is necessary and critical for complex
text understanding, analysis, reasoning, and generation tasks in the field of expertise, such as finance.

4.1   DATASET AND TASK
The data were obtained from three main sources - web crawling (real-time storage of high-quality
public opinion and analysis from across the web), purchasing (procurement of industry-specific an-
alytical reports and exclusive information), and in-house data (large amounts of user discussions,
influencer perspectives, and high-quality works accumulated within the platform ecosystem). Tens
of millions of text corpus are stored daily. We also open source a new benchmark for financial anal-
ysis and interpretation. In this work, we take three financial subtasks as examples. Event matching
and analogy. This task involves matching input news to relevant materials in databases to find
analogous cases and reports. Evaluation metrics are precision, recall, and F1 score. These metrics
measure the accuracy of matching input news to relevant materials. Higher scores indicate better
performance. Viewpoint quality evaluation. This task evaluates the quality of opinion and analysis
in the matched materials. Only the most insightful sentences are selected. The evaluation metric is
classification accuracy. Measures how accurately the model classifies sentence quality into 2 or 4
categories like good/bad or excellent/good/fair/poor. Higher accuracy indicates better performance.
Key point extraction. This task extracts key details like industry, evaluation dimensions, sentiment
etc from materials to construct text summaries. Evaluation metrics are accuracy and BLEU score.
Accuracy measures the correct extraction of key points. BLEU measures how close the constructed
summary is to a human reference summary. Higher scores indicate better performance.

4.2   Q UESTION 1: DOES AAR PROVIDE HIGHER - QUALITY DATA AUGMENTATION ?
To answer whether abductive augmentation reasoning (AAR) provides higher-quality data augmen-
tation compared to annotations generated solely by large language models, we designed a series of
experiments to compare the annotation effects of AAR versus directly using existing large language
models for annotation. We used ChatGPT and GPT-4 respectively to directly annotate 1000 unla-
beled data points for each of three tasks: (1) event matching and analogy (EMA), (2) viewpoint
quality evaluation (VQE), and (3) key point extraction (KPE).


                                                   6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Since our AAR includes three modules, and each module is built on top of the LLM, in order to
explore the effects of different foundation models on AAR annotation, we also conducted a series
of ablation studies, using ChatGPT, GPT-4, ChatGLM, ChatGLM2, Alpaca2, and LLama2 respec-
tively as the foundation model for AAR. From Table 1, we can observe that simply using large
language models makes it difficult to achieve annotation for these three complex financial tasks,
while our AAR based on GPT-4 achieved the best results. In addition, we can see that AARs built
on ChatGLM, ChatGLM2, Alpaca2, and LLama2 have difficulty directly running through the entire
AAR workflow, with more or less issues existing, leading to the abductive reasoning process be-
ing unable to proceed smoothly. In summary, our experiments demonstrate that AAR can provide
higher quality and more robust annotations compared to solely using LLMs, especially for complex
domain-specific tasks. The choice of foundation model is also important, with more capable LLMs
like GPT-4 better supporting the reasoning capabilities of AAR. There are still challenges in suc-
cessfully implementing end-to-end abductive reasoning across different LLMs that require further
research.
There are three modules in abductive augmentation reasoning (AAR), namely FAP, FAE, and
FADOM. We incorporated domain expert knowledge to guide each of these three modules. To
further explore the impact of AAR on data annotation and the role of domain expert knowledge
in each module, we designed a series of experiments. As shown in Table 2, one or two modules
contain expert knowledge to verify the impact of their knowledge on the overall AAR annotation
results. From the table, we can observe that domain expert knowledge is useful for all three modules
- removing any one of them affects the AAR annotation performance. The experiments provide
insights into how expert knowledge can be effectively incorporated into AAR to improve its data
annotation capabilities. This allows AAR to be customized for different domains by plugging in rel-
evant knowledge bases. Overall, explicitly encoding domain knowledge is shown to be an important
aspect of developing robust AAR systems.

       Table 1: The comparison of AAR data augmentation and direct annotation by LLM.
                       Settings                      KPE                            VQE                      EMA
           Strategy    Base Model Prompt Precision Recall        F1   Accuracy(2) Accuracy(4) Accuracy BLEU
            Direct      ChatGPT    1 shot   0.014    0.023 0.018             0.47           0.21          0.67   0.399
          annotation     GPT-4     1 shot   0.009    0.016 0.011             0.60           0.22          0.80   0.482
                        ChatGPT    1 shot   0.004    0.008 0.005             0.52           0.32          0.75   0.316
                         GPT-4     1 shot   0.226    0.414 0.293             0.71           0.40          0.87   0.533
                       ChatGLM     1 shot     -        -     -                 -              -             -      -
            AAR
                       ChatGLM2    1 shot     -        -     -                 -              -             -      -
                        Alpaca2    1 shot     -        -     -                 -              -             -      -
                        LLama2     1 shot     -        -     -                 -              -             -      -


 Table 2: The influence of domain expert knowledge of three modules on the AAR performance.
                       Settings                KPE                            VQE                     EMA
               AAR       Knowledge    Precision Recall     F1    Accuracy(2) Accuracy(4) Accuracy BLEU
              GPT-4      No            0.000    0.000    0.000        0.40           0.14          0.78      0.465
              GPT-4     FAP            0.005    0.008    0.006        0.40           0.18          0.82      0.477
              GPT-4     FAE            0.041    0.062    0.050        0.42           0.15          0.84      0.496
              GPT-4   FADOM            0.042    0.070    0.053        0.58           0.27          0.82      0.504
              GPT-4 FAP+FAE            0.027    0.039    0.032        0.36           0.15          0.87      0.511
              GPT-4 FAP+FADOM          0.029    0.047    0.036        0.56           0.33          0.84      0.483
              GPT-4 FAE+FADOM          0.163    0.234    0.192        0.59           0.36          0.84      0.520
              GPT-4      All           0.226    0.414    0.293        0.71           0.40          0.87      0.533



4.3   Q UESTION 2: CAN AAR BOOST THE PERFORMANCE OF OUR FLLM?
To explore whether AAR can boost performance on key financial subtasks addressed by our Fi-
nancial Large Language Model, we designed three strategies with our FLLM. First, we leveraged
state-of-the-art general-purpose large language models like ChatGPT and GPT-4 without any train-
ing, using prompt engineering with one-shot and few-shot demonstrations to guide the FLLM on
the three financial tasks. Second, we fine-tuned the openly available large language models on a
small amount of expert-annotated financial data. Third, we utilized the AAR technique to augment
the small amount of expert-labeled data into a larger high-quality labeled dataset for fine-tuning our
FLLM foundation model.


                                                            7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 3: The performance comparison of different training strategies of FLLM on three tasks. Red:
the best, Blue: the second best.
                          Settings                        KPE                       VQE              EMA
             Strategy         FLLM     Prompt Precision Recall     F1     Accuracy(2) Accuracy(4) Accuracy BLEU
                             ChatGPT    1 shot    0.014   0.023   0.018      0.47         0.21    0.67    0.399
                              GPT-4     1 shot    0.009   0.016   0.011      0.60         0.22    0.80    0.482
            No training
                             ChatGPT   20 shots   0.179   0.203   0.190      0.52         0.32    0.75    0.357
                              GPT-4    20 shots   0.245   0.266   0.255      0.71         0.49    0.84    0.535
                            ChatGLM     1 shot    0.057   0.047 0.052        0.53         0.30    0.60    0.328
             Finetune       ChatGLM2    1 shot    0.093   0.133 0.109        0.50         0.36    0.60    0.353
                             Alpaca2    1 shot    0.160   0.164 0.162        0.57         0.34    0.55    0.295
                         ChatGLM        1 shot    0.260   0.305 0.281        0.63         0.26    0.68    0.379
          AAR + Finetune ChatGLM2       1 shot    0.182   0.344 0.238        0.62         0.34    0.67    0.389
                          Alpaca2       1 shot    0.209   0.367 0.266        0.69         0.39    0.83    0.485


Figure 5: The performance of fine-tuned FLLMs as the amount of labeled training data increases.

As shown in Table 3, While GPT-4 with 20 shots prompting demonstrates impressive capabilities
out-of-the-box, our approach of applying AAR data augmentation and then fine-tuning tailors the
model more specifically to the financial domain. This allows our FLLM to reach comparable per-
formance to GPT-4 on the key metrics across all three financial analysis subtasks. The augmented
training dataset created through AAR provides the FLLM with sufficient coverage of the problem
space to match the few-shot generalization abilities of a cutting-edge general-purpose LLM like
GPT-4. Our results highlight the potential of targeted data augmentation techniques like AAR to
unlock specialized performance in limited resource contexts where acquiring substantial direct hu-
man annotations is infeasible. With further development, AAR data augmentation could enable
high-performance financial LLMs without the need for massive human labeling efforts. The key
advantage of AAR is that it provides an efficient way to generate more labeled data from a small
seed set, which is especially valuable in specialized domains like finance where expert-labeled data
is scarce. By leveraging AAR to amplify the limited human annotations, we were able to signif-
icantly boost our FLLM’s performance on core financial analysis subtasks relevant to real-world
applications.
Furthermore, to further explore the effects of abductive augmentation reasoning (AAR) on finan-
cial large language models (FLLMs), we conducted a series of experiments by annotating different
amounts of FLLM training data with AAR annotations. We then fine-tuned the FLLMs and ob-
served how their performance changed across all tasks and metrics as the amount of annotated data
increased. The results, shown in Figure 5, demonstrate that metrics across all three tasks improved
as more annotated data was used. This suggests that incorporating AAR into the training process
can enhance FLLMs’ reasoning and generalization abilities for financial applications. Specifically,
AAR’s iterative generation and evaluation of hypotheses appears to provide a form of inductive bias
that helps the model better capture financial reasoning patterns and semantics from limited data.
Overall, our experiments reveal the promise of AAR for imbuing FLLMs with more robust finan-
cial intelligence. Further research is warranted to determine optimal AAR annotation strategies and
model architectures to maximize the financial reasoning capacity of large language models.

4.4   Q UESTION 3: CAN FLLM HELP L ANG C HAIN TO GENERATE BETTER OUTPUT ?
We will evaluate LangChain’s ability to provide insightful financial analysis and interpretations
when given pre-processed via FLLM vs. raw financial text data, rating it on four dimensions: Rel-
evance (0-5): The analysis should focus on interpreting the core events described, without straying
into unrelated topics or generic background. Accuracy (0-5): The analysis’s viewpoint and reason-
ing should seem reasonable. It should consistently express a positive or negative outlook, without
exaggerating or downplaying the event’s impact on the industry. Logic (0-5): The analysis should


                                                            8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 Table 4: The comparison of LangChain and our pipeline on financial analysis and interpretations.
                    Metric     LangChain FLLM w/ 1,2,3 FLLM w/ 1 FLLM w/ 1,2
                    Relevance 4.28 ± 0.57   4.85 ± 0.14   4.42 ± 0.61   4.57 ± 0.61
                    Accuracy 4.14 ± 1.14    4.78 ± 0.15   4.35 ± 0.55   4.50 ± 0.25
                    Logic     3.71 ± 0.23   4.28 ± 0.23   3.42 ± 0.28   3.57 ± 0.62
                    Expertise 3.57 ± 0.28   4.71 ± 0.23   3.78 ± 0.15   3.85 ± 0.14


    Figure 6: Real financial analysis and interpretation examples with detailed reasons and scores.
flow smoothly and logically, with clear causality and relationships between points. It should not
simply restate event details or repeat the same point in different words. The overall meaning should
be coherent and well-structured. Expertise (0-5): The analysis should examine the event’s impacts
from multiple professional investing angles. It should demonstrate sound financial logic and insight-
ful consideration of how the event could affect valuations. There should be a clear, layered structure
to the interpretation.
To robustly evaluate the capabilities of plain LangChain versus enhanced LangChain via FLLM,
we conducted a rigorous comparative experiment. 1000 recent news articles were analyzed and
interpreted using both plain LangChain and LangChain enhanced with the FLLM. To obtain objec-
tive assessments, five independent human annotators were then invited to carefully review the 1000
sample outputs across the four dimensions mentioned above. By averaging the annotators’ scores in
each dimension, we could quantify the improvements afforded by integrating FLLM into LangChain
in an unbiased, statistically-sound manner. From Table 4, we observed that our method significantly
outperformed plain LangChain on all metrics.
Additionally, to evaluate the contribution of our 3 subtasks of FLLM - (1) event matching and
analogy, (2) viewpoint quality evaluation, and (3) key point extraction - we designed 2 additional
ablation studies. In our original design (FLLM w/ 1,2,3), the outputs from all 3 subtasks are injected
into the final prompt of ChatGPT to guide generation. In the first ablation study (FLLM w/ 1), we
only input the results from subtask 1 on event matching and analogy, containing only the matched
corpus resources. In the second ablation study (FLLM w/ 1,2), we input the results from subtask
1 and 2, including the matched corpus resources and high-quality viewpoints selected. From the
results, we observed that all 3 subtasks play necessary and complementary roles in producing the
final generated text. In addition, as shown in Figure 6, we give a real example with detailed reasons.

5     C ONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
This paper proposes a data-centric approach based on FLLM to improve LLMs’ capabilities on
financial analysis tasks. To overcome the scarcity of labeled data, they employ abductive augmen-
tation reasoning to automatically generate training data. Experiments demonstrate their data-centric
financial LLM with abductive augmentation reasoning substantially outperforms baseline LLMs,
achieving state-of-the-art on financial analysis and interpretation benchmarks. The data-centric
methodology provides a promising direction to unlock the potential of LLMs for complex real-
world domains. The introduction of a new benchmark for financial analysis and interpretation is
also a valuable contribution. Besides, an interesting direction for future work is to combine the
data-centric approach with other methods like prompting and self-supervised pretraining on finan-
cial texts. Integrating multi-modal data like financial reports, earnings calls, and stock prices could
also enable more nuanced financial analysis.


                                                  9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are
  few-shot learners. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:1877–1901, 2020.
Zhixuan Chu, Hongyan Hao, Xin Ouyang, Simeng Wang, Yan Wang, Yue Shen, Jinjie Gu, Qing Cui,
  Longfei Li, Siqiao Xue, et al. Leveraging large language models for pre-trained recommender
  systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.10837, 2023.
Haixing Dai, Zhengliang Liu, Wenxiong Liao, Xiaoke Huang, Yihan Cao, Zihao Wu, Lin Zhao,
  Shaochen Xu, Wei Liu, Ninghao Liu, Sheng Li, Dajiang Zhu, Hongmin Cai, Lichao Sun,
  Quanzheng Li, Dinggang Shen, Tianming Liu, and Xiang Li. Auggpt: Leveraging chatgpt for
  text data augmentation, 2023.
Avia Efrat and Omer Levy. The turking test: Can language models understand instructions? arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2010.11982, 2020.
Tianyu Gao, Adam Fisch, and Danqi Chen. Making pre-trained language models better few-shot
  learners. In ACL-IJCNLP, 2021.
Shijie Geng, Shuchang Liu, Zuohui Fu, Yingqiang Ge, and Yongfeng Zhang. Recommendation as
  language processing (rlp): A unified pretrain, personalized prompt predict paradigm (p5), 2023.
Zhengbao Jiang, Frank F Xu, Jun Araki, and Graham Neubig. How can we know what language
  models know? Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 8:423–438, 2020.
Gyöngyi Kovács and Karen M Spens. Abductive reasoning in logistics research. International
  journal of physical distribution & logistics management, 35(2):132–144, 2005.
Yunxiang Li, Zihan Li, Kai Zhang, Ruilong Dan, Steve Jiang, and You Zhang. Chatdoctor: A
  medical chat model fine-tuned on a large language model meta-ai (llama) using medical domain
  knowledge, 2023.
Jiachang Liu, Dinghan Shen, Yizhe Zhang, Bill Dolan, Lawrence Carin, and Weizhu Chen. What
   makes good in-context examples for gpt-3? arXiv preprint arXiv:2101.06804, 2021a.
Pengfei Liu, Weizhe Yuan, Jinlan Fu, Zhengbao Jiang, Hiroaki Hayashi, and Graham Neubig. Pre-
  train, prompt, and predict: A systematic survey of prompting methods in natural language pro-
  cessing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.13586, 2021b.
Pengfei Liu, Weizhe Yuan, Jinlan Fu, Zhengbao Jiang, Hiroaki Hayashi, and Graham Neubig. Pre-
  train, prompt, and predict: A systematic survey of prompting methods in natural language pro-
  cessing. ACM Computing Surveys, 55(9):1–35, 2023.
Kevin Lu, Aditya Grover, Pieter Abbeel, and Igor Mordatch. Pretrained transformers as universal
  computation engines. arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.05247, 1, 2021.
Yao Lu, Max Bartolo, Alastair Moore, Sebastian Riedel, and Pontus Stenetorp. Fantastically ordered
  prompts and where to find them: Overcoming few-shot prompt order sensitivity. In Proceedings
  of the 60th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 2022.
OpenAI. Gpt-4 technical report, 2023.
Taylor Shin, Yasaman Razeghi, Robert L Logan IV, Eric Wallace, and Sameer Singh. Autoprompt:
  Eliciting knowledge from language models with automatically generated prompts. In EMNLP,
  2020.
Xiaojuan Tang, Zilong Zheng, Jiaqi Li, Fanxu Meng, Song-Chun Zhu, Yitao Liang, and Muhan
  Zhang. Large language models are in-context semantic reasoners rather than symbolic reasoners.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.14825, 2023.
Hugo Touvron, Thibaut Lavril, Gautier Izacard, Xavier Martinet, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Timothée
  Lacroix, Baptiste Rozière, Naman Goyal, Eric Hambro, Faisal Azhar, et al. Llama: Open and
  efficient foundation language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.13971, 2023.


                                               10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Douglas Walton. Abductive reasoning. University of Alabama Press, 2014.
Yan Wang, Zhixuan Chu, Tao Zhou, Caigao Jiang, Hongyan Hao, Minjie Zhu, Xindong Cai, Qing
  Cui, Longfei Li, James Y Zhang, et al. Enhancing event sequence modeling with contrastive
  relational inference. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.02868, 2023.
Orion Weller, Nicholas Lourie, Matt Gardner, and Matthew E Peters. Learning from task descrip-
  tions. In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Pro-
  cessing (EMNLP), pp. 1361–1375, 2020.
Shijie Wu, Ozan Irsoy, Steven Lu, Vadim Dabravolski, Mark Dredze, Sebastian Gehrmann, Prab-
  hanjan Kambadur, David Rosenberg, and Gideon Mann. Bloomberggpt: A large language model
  for finance, 2023.
Tongshuang Wu, Ellen Jiang, Aaron Donsbach, Jeff Gray, Alejandra Molina, Michael Terry, and
  Carrie J Cai. Promptchainer: Chaining large language model prompts through visual program-
  ming, 2022.
Hongyang Yang, Xiao-Yang Liu, and Christina Dan Wang. Fingpt: Open-source financial large
  language models, 2023.
Tianyang Zhong, Yaonai Wei, Li Yang, Zihao Wu, Zhengliang Liu, Xiaozheng Wei, Wenjun Li, Jun-
  jie Yao, Chong Ma, Xiang Li, et al. Chatabl: Abductive learning via natural language interaction
  with chatgpt. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.11107, 2023.
Zhi-Hua Zhou. Abductive learning: towards bridging machine learning and logical reasoning. Sci-
  ence China Information Sciences, 62:1–3, 2019.


                                               11
