Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


M ITIGATING U NI - MODAL S ENSORY B IAS IN M ULTI -
MODAL O BJECT D ETECTION WITH C OUNTERFACTUAL
I NTERVENTION AND C AUSAL M ODE M ULTIPLEXING
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                             A BSTRACT

         Multimodal object detection using RGB and thermal sensors (RGBT) has emerged
         as a promising solution for safety-critical vision applications that require non-stop
         operations all day/night. However, there are unsolved issues in multimodal ob-
         ject detection, including uni-modal sensory bias, where models tend to rely on
         one modality over the other instead of referring to multimodal reasoning. We ana-
         lyze that training differential multimodal data (i.e., RXTO1 ) on correlation-based
         symmetrical fusion topology structures provoke such skewed preference. To ad-
         dress this problem, we propose a novel Causal Mode Multiplexing (CMM) frame-
         work using the tools of counterfactual intervention. Different from the symmet-
         rical fusion topology of existing methods, the proposed approach leverages two
         distinct causal graphs based on the input data type. The counterfactual interven-
         tion is performed on differential inputs (RXTO, ROTX), while the total effect of
         the symmetrical fusion topology is learned for common inputs (ROTO). Then, we
         propose a Causal Mode Multiplexing (CMM) Loss to optimize the interchange
         between two causal graphs. Overall, the CMM framework enables learning the
         causality links between the multimodal inputs and predictions, eliminating the
         uni-modal sensory bias. To assess the effectiveness of CMM, we introduce the
         ROTX Multispectral Pedestrian (ROTX-MPed) dataset which we will release in
         public. This dataset mainly includes counterexamples that are not present in exist-
         ing data. Extensive experiments on KAIST, CVC-14, FLIR, and our ROTX-Mped
         dataset demonstrate that our CMM framework effectively learns multimodal rea-
         soning and generalizes well on ROTX test data with only training conventional
         ROTO and RXTO data.


1    I NTRODUCTION
Object detection is a foundational computer vision task that has achieved significant progress due to
the advancements of Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) (Ren et al., 2015; Tan et al., 2020; Redmon &
Farhadi, 2017; Hosang et al., 2017; Carion et al., 2020). Such detection models play a critical role in
many safety-critical systems such as smart surveillance cameras (CCTVs) and autonomous vehicles
(AVs). As these real-world applications are demanded to operate both day and night, technologies
leveraging multi-sensory fusion are being supported to develop multimodal object detection. To this
end, multimodal object detection utilizing RGB and thermal sensors (RGBT) has evidenced notable
progress as the latter can provide solid object signatures under low light and adverse conditions.
Such progress on multimodal object detection is anchored on the infrastructure of multimodal
datasets (Hwang et al., 2015; Choi et al., 2018; FLIR Systems, 2021; González et al., 2016),
advanced neural network architectures (Ren et al., 2015; Tan et al., 2020; Redmon & Farhadi, 2017),
enhanced multi-sensor fusion technologies (Kim et al., 2021; Cao et al., 2021), and meticulously
devised training methods (Qingyun et al., 2022; Zhou et al., 2020). Despite comprehensive endeav-
ors, there exist several unexplored challenges persist in multimodal object detection. First, one often
overlooked factor is the poor generalizability due to uni-modal sensory bias. This bias stems when
a significant portion of the training data contains scenes where one sensor significantly outperforms
   1
     R⋆T⋆ refers to the multimodal data type, where ⋆ denotes the perceptibility (O/X) of the ground truth
object from the RGB (R) sensor and thermal (T) sensor.


                                                    1
 Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                           (a) Conventional Method                                    (b) Uni-modal Sensory Bias Problem
                                           Train Model                      Test Model
                                           RO                                                         <New ROTX Data>             <Inference on ROTX>

             Night (RXTO) Day (ROTO)
                                                              YO


                                                                     Data
                                                𝑿𝑿𝑹𝑹
                                           TO           𝑴𝑴     𝒀𝒀                                                                   RO
                                                                                                                                                           YX
Train Data


                                                𝑿𝑿𝑻𝑻                     𝑿𝑿𝑹𝑹                                                            𝑿𝑿𝑹𝑹
                                                                                𝑴𝑴       𝒀𝒀                                         TX             𝑴𝑴      𝒀𝒀
                                       …


                                                        …
                                           RX                 YO         𝑿𝑿𝑻𝑻                                                            𝑿𝑿𝑻𝑻
                                                𝑿𝑿𝑹𝑹                             Uni-modal
                                                        𝑴𝑴     𝒀𝒀               sensory bias                                                      Wrong
                                           TO                                                                                                   Prediction !
                                                𝑿𝑿𝑻𝑻
                                                       Skewed training                             RGB                  T
                                                𝑿𝑿𝑹𝑹 : RGB ROI Feature 𝑿𝑿T : T ROI Feature      Left person: ROTO -> Detected
                                                M : Multimodal Knowledge Y : Prediction        Right person: ROTX -> Undetected

 Figure 1: (a) Existing multimodal object detection methods based on a symmetrical fusion topology
 graph derive uni-modal sensory bias when trained on nighttime (RXTO) data. (b) Left: We discover
 a new multimodal pair, ROTX data, which is not presented in existing multimodal datasets. Right:
 Existing models generalize poorly on ROTX data due to uni-modal sensory bias.



 the other sensory type. In such scenarios, spurious correlations (i.e., statistical biases) can easily
 form between the significant modality and target labels, leading to a skewed training preference for
 one modality in canonical supervised learning. Given that thermal modality plays a significant role
 in RGBT data, especially in nighttime (RXTO) scenes, models are prone to memorize the strong
 uni-modal priors in the training set. As a result, models tend to rely on the uni-modal sensory bias
 as a shortcut instead of multimodal reasoning and thus fail to generalize on counterexamples (e.g.,
 ROTX) as in Fig. 1 (b).
   We point out another problem regarding symmetrical fusion topology and correlation-based
 learning schemes but ignored by previous models. They adapt to the situation of ROTO and guide
 the model to fuse multimodality with a symmetrical topology graph. However, these methods cannot
 acquire correct multimodal knowledge when trained on disparate multimodal pairs (RXTO), often
 prompting the learning of spurious correlations to achieve high accuracy. We argue that uni-modal
 sensory biases are derived from these learning strategies which often lack of understanding causal
 relations between the multimodal inputs and predictions.
 In this paper, we propose a novel Causal Mode Multiplexing (CMM) framework to mitigate
 uni-modal sensory bias and guide correct multimodal reasoning based on causality. Specifically,
 the CMM framework facilitates the multimodal learning process in 1) common mode, and 2)
 differential mode causal graphs. First, common mode is defined as the situation where the model
 gets common inputs, such as daytime (ROTO) data. For the common mode, we guide the model
 to learn the total effect (Pearl, 2022) of the symmetrical fusion topology structure. Second, the
 differential mode is when differential inputs (RXTO, ROTX) are given. In this case, we utilize
 the tools of counterfactual intervention to eliminate the effect of the uni-modal sensory bias. We
 formulate uni-modal sensory bias as the direct link and eliminate the bias by subtracting it from the
 total effect. To this end, we modify the training objective from maximizing the posterior probability
 likelihood to maximizing the total indirect effect (Pearl, 2022). Finally, to combine two different
 learning schemes and guide the CMM framework to optimize the interchange between two causal
 graphs, we propose a Causal Mode Multiplexing (CMM) Loss.
 Furthermore, we discover intriguing ROTX samples, unobserved in the existing datasets (Hwang
 et al., 2015; González et al., 2016; FLIR Systems, 2021), that challenge models due to their inherent
 uni-modal sensory biases. In most of the existing datasets, instances are either ROTO (day) or
 RXTO (night). Different from these data, ROTX samples are only perceivable in RGB which causes
 models to produce false-negative errors attributed to their unimodal bias as showcased in Fig.1
 (b). To test the generalizability of the CMM framework, we collect a new ROTX multispectral
 pedestrian dataset, namely ROTX-MPed. ROTX-MPed comprises 1.5k RGBT image pairs captured
 from real-world scenes highly related to critical applications of multimodal object detection. Our
 experimental results demonstrate that our CMM framework generalizes well under ROTX-MPed
 even without ROTX samples in the training set while performing robustly on the conventional
 datasets.
 The main contributions of our paper are:



                                                                                               2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


      1. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first work exploring uni-modal sensory bias in
         a multisensor fusion model. Especially, we introduce the ROTX Multispectral Pedestrian
         (ROTX-MPed) dataset, which presents a notable challenge to multimodal object detection
         models due to their inherent uni-modal sensory biases.
      2. We propose a Causal Mode Multiplexing (CMM) framework that interchangeably learns
         multimodal representations between two distinct causal graphs. Consequently, our CMM
         framework learns the causality links between the multimodal inputs and predictions.
      3. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our CMM framework generalizes well under
         ROTX test data with even ROTO and RXTO training data.

2     R ELATED W ORK
2.1   M ULTISPECTRAL P EDESTRIAN D ETECTION

Multimodal object detection jointly leverages multiple sensors to help machines locate target objects
better. Using RGBT in particular, becomes attractive in applications such as autonomous vehicles
(AVs) that face low-light or adverse environments. Current research on multimodal object detection
mainly focuses on developing effective fusion strategies. For instance, MBnet (Zhou et al., 2020)
adaptively fuses the RGBT complementary features according to illumination conditions. Recent
works improve each modal feature through cross-modal learning. Kim et al. (2022) proposed an
uncertainty-aware feature fusion (UFF) network that alleviates miscalibration and modality discrep-
ancy problems. Cross-Modality Fusion Transformer (Qingyun et al., 2022) introduces a new cross-
modality fusion mechanism based on self-attention. However, they all suffer from the uni-modal
sensory bias problem, constraining practical applicability. In this paper, we propose a novel CMM
framework to mitigate the bias by learning multimodal causal representations, achieving satisfying
generalization.
2.2 C AUSALTY-I NSPIRED M ACHINE L EARNING
Causal inference and counterfactual reasoning encourage machines to explore causality behind ob-
servational likelihood, a proven and effective analytical approach in many machine learning prob-
lems (Monteiro et al., 2022; Wu et al., 2021). Several works leveraged counterfactual reasoning aim-
ing to endow models with the capability to explore and understand causal effects. Niu et al. (2021)
mitigate the direct language effect on visual question answering (VQA) by guiding the model to
learn the total indirect effect (TIE). Zhang et al. (2023) introduce the layout-based soft Total Di-
rect Effect (L-sTDE) to adjust the prediction of the navigation policy in object navigation. Different
from them, we propose a Causal Mode Multiplexing (CMM) framework which interchangeably
learns between total effect (TE) and total indirect effect (TIE) depending on the data type.

3     P RELIMINARIES
3.1 S TRUCTURAL C AUSAL M ODEL (SCM)
Before introducing our method, we present the fundamental concepts of causal inference (Pearl
et al., 2000; Pearl, 2022; Pearl & Mackenzie, 2018; Robins, 2003).
Structural Causal Models reflect the cause-and-effect relationships (links E) between the set of vari-
ables (nodes V). The causality links (cause→effect) are represented in a acyclic graph G= {V, E}.
For random variables X and Y which the direct effect of X is on Y , the causality link could be
formulated as X → Y . If an indirect effect of X is on Y through the variable M , M is considered
a mediator between X and Y (X → M → Y in Fig.2 (a)). With structural causal models, the ex-
amination of causality links among variables can be achieved through variable intervention, which
involves modifying the value of particular variables and subsequently observing the outcomes.

3.2   C OUNTERFACTUAL I NTERVENTION

Counterfactual intervention can break the causality link and eliminate the effect of particular
variables. The key point of counterfactual intervention is to measure the effect Y from two different
treatments to the cause variable X: factual and counterfactual. Take the SCM in Fig. 2 (a) as an
example i.e., X → M → Y . Suppose that X = x represents the “treatment condition” and X = x*


                                                  3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


represents the “no-treatment condition” (lowercase letter indicates the observed value of the random
variable). Then we can consider factual and counterfactual scenarios.
Notations. We denote the value that Y
would obtain in the factual scenario if
                                                                               𝑴𝑴 = 𝒎𝒎𝒙𝒙∗
X is assigned x and M assigned m as                                       𝒙𝒙∗
                                                           𝑴𝑴                    𝑴𝑴                  𝑴𝑴
Yx,mx = Y (X = x, M = mx ). Similarly,
in the counterfactual scenario, Y would have                            -                      =
the value Yx,mx* = Y (X = x, M = mx* )              𝑿𝑿           𝒀𝒀         𝑿𝑿                   𝑿𝑿        𝒀𝒀
when X = x, M = mx* = M (X = x*).                              𝒀𝒀𝒙𝒙,𝒎𝒎 𝑿𝑿 = 𝒙𝒙        𝒀𝒀𝒙𝒙,𝒎𝒎𝒙𝒙∗          𝒀𝒀𝑻𝑻𝑻𝑻𝑻𝑻
X is set to a value x* (usually zero value or        (a) Factual      (b) Counterfactual (c) Total Indirect Effect
mean features) and can break the causality link
between M and its parent node X. We note Figure 2: Strcture Causal Models (SCMs) of (a)
that in the counterfactual scenario, X can be factual, (b) counterfactual, and (c) total indirect
simultaneously assigned to different values x effect scenarios. The direct effect of X → Y can
and x*. So when the intervention is conducted be eliminated due to counterfactual intervention.
on M , the variable X retains its original value
of x as if x (observation on X) had existed as
in Fig.2 (b).
Total Indirect Effect. Now we can estimate the total indirect effect (TIE) by comparing two
hypothetical scenarios.

                                          T IE = Yx,mx − Yx,mx* .                                             (1)

Total indirect effect (TIE), as in Fig.2 (c) breaks the causality link of X → Y and eliminates the
direct effect Y of cause X. Furthermore, Total indirect effect (TIE) can be decomposed into total
effect (TE) and natural direct effect (NDE).
                            T IE = T E − N DE
                                                                                                              (2)
                                 = (Yx,mx − Yx*,mx* ) − (Yx,mx* − Yx*,mx* ).
When we examine the total effect (TE), we compare two hypothetical scenarios: one where X = x
and the other where X = x*. In contrast, the natural direct effect (NDE) represents the effect of X on
Y while keeping the mediator M blocked. It measures the change in Y as X transitions from x* to
x, with M assigned to the value of the no-treatment X = x*, thereby nullifying M ’s response to the
treatment X = x. In the subsequent section, we will take a more in-depth look at the interpretations
of these effects in the context of multimodal object detection.

4    S TRUCTURAL C AUSAL M ODEL OF M ULTIMODAL O BJECT D ETECTION

Before performing counterfactual interventions, we first formulate the task in a causal graph.
Multimodal object detection models require RGB and thermal input images and base features are
extracted using uni-modal encoders. Then RGB and thermal ROI (Region of interests) features,
denoted as XR = xR and XT = xT , are generated. These features are fused, producing fusion
features of multimodal knowledge M that contain the information of both RGB and thermal. Final
predictions are made through the head network and predict class labels Y . Bounding boxes are
determined by Non-maximum suppression (NMS).
Now we formulate this multimodal object detection framework in a structural causal model (SCM).
We delve into the causal relationship between the multimodal knowledge M and the predicted class
labels Y , which differs for daytime (ROTO) and nighttime (RXTO) data. For daytime (ROTO)
data, the class label Y can be derived directly from the multimodal knowledge M which contains
common informations of both modalities. On the other hand, for nighttime (RXTO) data, the
multimodal knowledge M contains differential information about each modality. In this case, the
intended behavior of the model is to make predictions based on correct reasoning based on the
multimodal knowledge M . However, machine-learning models learn simple correlations based
on maximizing likelihoods, as class labels Y are skewed toward thermal xT . We formulate this
uni-modal sensory bias as the direct link between XT and Y (XT → Y ). Bringing such factors at
once, we can represent two causal graphs for each ROTO and RXTO scenario as shown in Fig.3
(a)-(b). The below describe each node and causality link in detail.


                                                        4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Link XR → M ← XT (Feature Fusion).
RGB and thermal ROI features (XR and XT )                        Day (ROTO)                 Night (RXTO)
are fused to generate ROI fusion features of                    𝑿𝑿𝑹𝑹                       𝑿𝑿𝑹𝑹
multimodal knowledge M .                                               𝑴𝑴    𝒀𝒀                   𝑴𝑴    𝒀𝒀
Link M → Y (Class Label Prediction with                         𝑿𝑿𝑻𝑻                       𝑿𝑿𝑻𝑻
Multimodal Knowledge). Using the multi-                                (a)                        (b)
modal knowledge M , the head network outputs
                                                             𝑿𝑿𝑹𝑹 /𝑿𝑿𝑻𝑻 : RGB/T feature 𝑴𝑴: Multimodal knowledge
class prediction scores Y for each fused ROI
                                                        𝒀𝒀: label           : Causal links  : Uni-modal Sensory Bias
feature.
Link XT → Y (Uni-modal Sensory Bias)
This direct link is unintentionally formed dur-     Figure 3: Strcture Causal Models (SCMs) on
ing training on nighttime (RXTO) data. We aim       training (a) ROTO and (b) RXTO samples. (b):
to eliminate this direct link and guide the model   The uni-modal sensory bias can be viewed as the
to correctly utilize multimodal knowledge M         direct effect on Y of XT .
for predicting Y .

5     P ROPOSED M ETHOD
5.1   C AUSAL M ODE M ULTIPLEXING

Learning Two Distinct Causal Graphs. Our proposed method is strategically designed to inter-
changeably learn between common and differential modes based on the following rationales: 1) First,
common mode is when ROTO input is given. We learn the causal graph devised by the symmetrical
fusion topology, as it can effectively guide correct multimodal reasoning on ROTO. 2) Second, the
differential mode is when differential (RXTO, ROTX) inputs are given. In such cases, the model is
guided to learn the “total indirect effect” which is based on a counterfactual intervention to prune the
direct effect of the uni-modal sensory bias. Note that our purpose is to learn multimodal causality
from ROTO and RXTO contained in datasets to obtain satisfactory generalizability on ROTX. Thus
we use ROTO and RXTO samples and not ROTX when training.
1. Common Mode - ROTO Train/Test Graph. We formulate the structural causal model of com-
mon mode as in Fig.4 (a). Also, we intentionally add the link XR → Y and XT → Y to estimate the
uni-modal direct effect of XR on Y and XT on Y . Adding these links provides a way to measure
direct effects while preserving the symmetrical fusion topology. To implement this direct link, we
train a uni-modal neural model denoted as HθXR (·) and HθXT (·). We denote the prediction scores
obtained from direct links as YxCMR
                                       and YxCM
                                             T
                                                 which can be expressed as below:

                   YmCM = HθM (m), YxCM
                                     R
                                        = HθXR (xR ), YxCM
                                                        T
                                                           = HθXT (xT ),                                         (3)
where the neural network HθM (·) refers to the head network which takes fusion ROI features
M = m and outputs the class scores YmCM (direct link M → Y ).
Then, we design a fusion function F(·) with respect to YmCM , YxCM         R
                                                                              , and YxCMT
                                                                                            i.e.,
                                                         CM
F(Ym , YxR , YxT ) to produce a single prediction score Ym,xR ,xT . From general fusion methods,
we use the nonlinear Log-Harmonic (LH):
                    CM          CM
                   Ym,xR ,xT
                             = YHM = log(σ(YmCM ) × σ(YxCM
                                                        R
                                                           ) × σ(YxCM
                                                                   T
                                                                      )),                                        (4)
where σ denotes the sigmoid function.
Total Effect (TE). For the common mode, we measure the total effect (TE). Note that total effect
considers the “factual scenario” where XR , XT , and M are all accessible. Following the definition
from the preliminary section, the total effect of the common mode causal graph can be written as:
                                          CM           CM
                                   T E = Ym,x R ,xT
                                                    − Ym*,xR *,xT *
                                                                    .                                            (5)
         CM
where Ym*,x  R *,xT *
                      is the no-treatment condition. The implementation details of the no-treatment
condition are described in the supplementary material.
 2. Differential Mode - RXTO Train/RXTO, ROTX Test Graph. Different from the common
mode, we intentionally assign node values and prune the causal link XT → Y . To this end, we
introduce the natural direct effect.
Natural Direct Effect (NDE). We estimate the natural direct effect (NDE), the “counterfactual
scenario”, which refers explicitly to the uni-modal sensory bias i.e., XT → Y in Fig.4 (b). To


                                                    5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


          (a) SCM on ROTO                             (b) SCM on RXTO
                                                                                                                   (d) Causal Mode Multiplexing
              𝑿𝑿𝑹𝑹                                      𝑿𝑿𝑹𝑹
                           𝑴𝑴         𝒀𝒀                         𝑴𝑴            𝒀𝒀                                 Common Mode: ROTO train/test graph
               𝑿𝑿𝑻𝑻                                     𝑿𝑿𝑻𝑻
                                                                                                    Alternately
                                                                                                                                𝑿𝑿𝑹𝑹
     𝑿𝑿𝑹𝑹 /𝑿𝑿𝑻𝑻 : RGB/T feature                 𝑴𝑴: Multimodal knowledge                             Switching
                                                                                                                                            𝑴𝑴      𝒀𝒀
𝒀𝒀: label           : Direct links                  : Uni-modal Sensory Bias
                                                                                             𝑿𝑿𝑹𝑹                               𝑿𝑿𝑻𝑻
          (c) Total Indirect Effect on RXTO, ROTX                                                                                                                𝓛𝓛𝑪𝑪𝑪𝑪𝑪𝑪
                                            : non-treatment                                                                                        𝒙𝒙∗𝑹𝑹
           : Y output                                                                        𝑿𝑿𝑻𝑻                   𝑿𝑿𝑹𝑹

  𝑿𝑿𝑹𝑹
         factual                    𝒙𝒙∗𝑹𝑹     counterfactual
                                                                   𝑿𝑿𝑹𝑹
                                                                                “TIE”                                      𝑴𝑴          𝒀𝒀
                                                                                                                                             -     𝒙𝒙∗𝑻𝑻   𝑴𝑴∗   𝒀𝒀

                                -
                                                                                                                    𝑿𝑿𝑻𝑻
         𝑴𝑴           𝒀𝒀            𝒙𝒙∗𝑻𝑻       𝑴𝑴∗    𝒀𝒀      =               𝑴𝑴       𝒀𝒀                                                         𝑿𝑿𝑻𝑻
  𝑿𝑿𝑻𝑻                                                                𝑿𝑿𝑻𝑻
                                    𝑿𝑿𝑻𝑻
RXTO:                                                                                                             Differential Mode :                RXTO train/
              TE X                              NDE X O X O                  TIE X O X O
ROTX:               O XO                                                                                                                         RXTO, ROTX test graph
                  (score)                              (score)                  (softmax)


Figure 4: Our Structural Causal Model (SCM) formulations on (a) ROTO (day) and (b) RXTO
(night) data. (a) We add links (XR → Y ,XT → Y ) to the conventional causal graph to measure uni-
modal direct effects. (b): The uni-modal sensory bias (red) hinders multimodal reasoning. (c) implies
the total indirect effect on RXTO and ROTX which the direct effect of uni-modal sensory bias is
pruned. (d) We propose a Causal Mode Multiplexing framework that learns correct multimodal
reasoning both on ROTO and RXTO data.

achieve this goal, we measure the direct effect of XT = xT on Y = y by blocking the effect of XR
and M . Using the no-treatment condition definitions in the preliminary section, XT is set to xT and
M would attain the value m* when XT had been xT * and XR is xR *. We obtain the natural direct
effect (NDE) of XT on Y by comparing the counterfactual graph to the no-treatment conditions:
                                                                       d              d
                                                               N DE = Ym*,x R *,xT
                                                                                   − Ym*,x R *,xT *
                                                                                                    ,                                                                  (6)
where m* and xT * represent the no-treatment condition.
Total Indirect Effect (TIE). The elimination of uni-modal sensory bias can be achieved by sub-
tracting the natural direct effect (NDE) from the total effect (TE).
                                                                       CM          d
                                                  T IE = T E − N DE = Ym,xR ,xT
                                                                                − Ym*,x R *,xT
                                                                                               .                                                                       (7)
Fig. 4 (c) shows the illustration of the total indirect effect of the differential mode. Note that the
                             d                 CM
no-treatment conditions Ym*,x    R *,xT *
                                          and Ym*,x R *,xT *
                                                             are the same. For inference, we opt for the
label with the highest TIE, in contrast to the conventional strategies that primarily rely on posterior
probability i.e., p(y|xR , xT ).

5.2      C AUSAL M ODE M ULTIPLEXING (CMM) L OSS

Determination of Causal Modes. To assign causal modes in Fig.4 (d), we leverage the uni-modal
prediction scores YxCM R
                           and YxCM
                                 T
                                      based on the following rationale. For common mode (ROTO
inputs), both of the YxR and YxCM
                         CM
                                   T
                                         value difference between the foreground and the background
will have a same sign while an opposite sign will happen if differential inputs are given such as
RXTO or ROTX. Using these properties, we design a binary translation function to calculate the
mode number. We denote the mode number denoted as Kmode , for which we want the value 1 for
the common mode and -1 for the differential mode. The details of our function design are as follows.
                  f
Let πR = [πR b
               , πR ] and πT = [πTb , πTf ] the approximate representation of the one-hot vector of the
prediction labels derived from the argmax of YxCM   R
                                                       and YxCM
                                                              T
                                                                 where index 0 refers to the prediction
label of being the background, and index 1 to the prediction label of being the foreground (object).
Since the argmax operation is non-differentiable on the gradient descent method, we adopt the
Gumbel-softmax (Jang et al., 2016) estimation. Then we can write πR and πT as:
             πR = softmax gR + log(YxCM         )/τ , πT = softmax gT + log(YxCM

                                             R                                    T
                                                                                     )/τ            (8)
where we set the Gumbel noises gR and gT to zero since we do not need random
sampling
n         variations for our purpose.
                                o     From the formula
                                                  n    of eq.(8), we can obtain values
                                                                                    o
           f               f                                f
   b                b                                b
  πR = 0, πR = 1, πT = 0, πT = 1 for ROTO, and πR = 1, πR      = 0, πTb = 0, πTf = 1 for


                                                                                              6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



            n                                    o
                         f
RXTO, and πR   b
                  = 0, πR  = 1, πTb = 1, πTf = 0 for ROTX. From these values, we can determine
the causal mode number Kmode according to the above rationale.
                                                      f
                        Kmode = ∆πR × ∆πT = (πR          − πR b
                                                                ) × (πTf − πTb ).                  (9)
This Kmode value will obtain 1 for the common mode and -1 for the differential mode. Then we can
design a “switchable total indirect effect” (sTIE) in which the cause-effect is differently calculated
between TE and TIE according to the causal mode number Kmode .
                                                    CM                                 d
  sT IE = T E − ReLU (−Kmode ) × N DE = Ym,x            R ,xT
                                                              − ReLU (−Kmode ) × Ym*,x    R *,xT
                  CM                                                                              (10)

                Ym,xR ,xT                 if Kmode = 1 (Common mode)
         =     CM            d
              Ym,xR ,xT − Ym*,xR *,xT if Kmode = −1 (Differential mode).
in which sTIE is calculated as the total effect in eq.(5) for
ROTO inputs and as the total indirect effect in eq.(7) for Table 1: Cause-effect and Kmode as-
RXTO and ROTX inputs.                                           signment with respect to data type.
Causal Mode Multiplexing Loss. We formulate the sTIE
in a loss function. Before introducing our Causal Mode            Type  ∆πR ∆πT Kmode
Multiplexing Loss, we first revisit the loss function of the      ROTO 1       1     1        TE
                                                                  RXTO -1      1     -1       TIE
conventional model. Given a triplet (xT , xR , y) where y         ROTX 1       -1    -1       TIE
is the ground-truth class label of RGB/T ROI pair:xR /xT ,
the ROI classification branches of the conventional multi-
modal object detection model (Kim et al., 2022) is optimized by:
                                   Lcls = LY (T E, y) (Conventional).                               (11)
Where L denotes the cross-entropy loss. This conventional loss guides the model to learn the total
effect on both ROTO and RXTO, which provoke uni-modal sensory bias toward thermal. Different
from them, Causal Mode Multiplexing (CMM) loss learns the correct multimodal reasoning for both
ROTO and RXTO training data based on two causal modes:
                                       LCM M = LY (sT IE, y),                                       (12)
which sTIE refers to the formula in eq.(10). The overall classification branch loss can be written as:
                         Lcls = LCM M + LY (xR , y) + LY (xT , y) (Ours),                           (13)
where LY (xR , y) and LY (xT , y) are over YxCMR
                                                    and Y  CM
                                                          xT  .

5.3   I MPLEMENTATION .

Training. The final training loss is the combination of Lcls , bounding box regression loss Lbbox , and
Lmodel which include the RPN and the uncertainty module. We follow the implementation details
of the paper (Kim et al., 2022).
                                           X
                            Ltotal =              Lcls + Lbbox + Lmodel .                          (14)
                                     (xR ,xT ,y)∈D
Inference. We use the switchable total indirect effect (sTIE) causal effect for inference.
                                 CM                                 d
                     sT IE = Ym,x   R ,xT
                                          − ReLU (−Kmode ) × Ym*,x      R *,xT
                                                                               .                   (15)

6     N EW ROTX DATASET
Since conventional datasets (Hwang et al., 2015; FLIR Systems, 2021) rarely contain ROTX
samples, we construct a new dataset, namely: the ROTX Multispectral Pedestrian (ROTX-Mped)
Dataset. ROTX-Mped is comprised of 1500 RGBT pairs (train: 500 / test: 1000) in two practical
scenarios related to the critical applications of multimodal object detection.
1. Pedestrian Over a Glass Window. Multimodal object detection is attractive for all-day/night
smart surveillance. However, pedestrians observed through a window are perceivable in RGB but
invisible in thermal, because thermal radiation can not penetrate through glass. The uni-modal sen-
sory bias restricts then multimodal detection range within the window.
2. People Wearing Heat-insulation Cloths. Heat-insulation clothing such as fire protection gears
or low-emissivity clothing provides a way of thermal invisibility or stealth. Wearing fire protection
gear can make firefighters or evacuees undetectable from autopilots in rescue situations. Also, crim-
inals (e.g., bank robbers) can wear low-emissivity clothing to evade multimodal security cameras.
We will release the collected dataset in public for future research.


                                                     7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 2: Comparison on ROTX-Mped and conventional (KAIST, CVC-14, and FLIR) test sets
(without extra ROTX training samples). Best and runners up results obtained are highlighted.

               Train                        KAIST                              CVC-14                           FLIR
                 Test           ROTX-MPed           KAIST            ROTX-MPed          CVC-14          ROTX-MPed FLIR
              Metric              AP(↑)              MR(↓)             AP(↑)            MR(↓)             AP(↑)        AP(↑)
                                   All       Day Night        All       All      Day Night       All       All          All
                                                    Uni-modality Network
       Faster R-CNN     RGB       60.61     27.45 42.27 32.18          34.53     96.34 82.43 93.10        55.08        34.51
       Faster R-CNN       T        5.33     26.70 9.73 20.79            4.66     40.14 25.97 33.81         2.06        47.03
        YOLO-v5         RGB        65.5     22.98 36.08 27.33           35.1     88.96 79.64 84.22         75.7        57.3
        YOLO-v5           T        4.78     22.12 7.22 17.65            9.51     30.86 15.34 23.85         4.64        74.3
                                                    Multi-modality Network
      Halfway Fusion RGB+T          -       24.88 26.59 25.75            -       36.29 26.29 31.99          -            -
      +Faster R-CNN RGB+T         36.95     14.24 10.26 13.04           8.8      50.48 36.05 44.31        13.21        71.2
           CFT          RGB+T      3.64     14.55     8.3    12.29      8.58       -      -       -        5.28        84.1
         MBNet          RGB+T     18.88      9.64     8.26   9.04        -       24.7    13.5    21.1       -            -
        Kim et al.      RGB+T     21.69     10.11 5.05       8.67      13.36     23.87 11.08 18.70        12.23        84.6
       CMM (Ours)       RGB+T     70.44      9.6      5.93   8.54      34.96     27.81 7.71 17.13         57.09        87.8


7     E XPERIMENTS

The CMM framework is introduced to assess the generalizability of multimodal object detection
models when there are substantial differences in the RGBT modality-pair distributions between
the training and test splits. We mainly test CMM on our collected ROTX-MPed dataset, trained
from conventional data splits: KAIST (Hwang et al., 2015), CVC-14 (González et al., 2016),
FLIR (FLIR Systems, 2021) train data. Moreover, we report the experimental results on the KAIST,
CVC-14, and FLIR test data to check whether CMM over-corrects the unimodal sensory bias. Model
performance is evaluated via Log Average Miss-Rate (MR↓) - KAIST, CVC-14, and Average Preci-
sion (AP↑) - FLIR, ROTX-Mped. A low MR and high AP value indicate high detection performance.
We implement CMM based on the baseline model (Kim et al., 2022) proposed, to interchange-
ably estimate between total effects and total indirect effects according to eq.(10). Evaluation of
our method is compared with five baseline multimodal object detection architectures: Uncertainty-
Guided (Kim et al., 2022), Cross-modality Fusion Transformer (CFT) (Qingyun et al., 2022), MB-
Net (Zhou et al., 2020), Halfway Fusion (Park et al., 2018), and Halfway Fusion+Faster RCNN
version. The experimental settings are described in detail in the supplementary material.

7.1   Q UANTITATIVE R ESULTS

The main results are reported in Table 2. Most of the previous multi-modality methods severely
fail on ROTX-Mped test data when trained on conventional datasets. Compared to the RGB uni-
modality model (Yolo-v5 (et. al., 2021) and Faster R-CNN (Ren et al., 2015)), the AP of previ-
ous multi-modality methods trained on KAIST, CVC-14, and FLIR dataset drops by an average of
42.51, 44.03, and 55.46 AP, respectively. This result supports our original claim that models learn
uni-modal sensory bias from conventional data and fail to generalize on ROTX. On the other hand,
CMM shows superior generalizability on ROTX-Mped test data compared to other multi-modality
models, which indicates that uni-modal sensory bias is effectively reduced. Not only that, the CMM
framework achieves great performance on conventional test sets (KAIST, CVC-14, and FLIR) vali-
dating that CMM does not over-correct uni-modal sensory bias. Furthermore, we evaluate the effec-
tiveness of CMM compared to existing debiasing strategies via cause-effects. TE+TIE and TIE+TIE
train/inference are considered. The results are shown in Table 3. From the results, it can be viewed
that TE training is effective in learning conventional data but exhibits poor generalizability on ROTX
samples. TIE training enhances model generalizability for ROTX data but degrades on conventional
data. Compared to them, the CMM framework is designed to adaptively learn between TE and TIE
and show robust performance on both ROTX and conventional test sets. Furthermore, Table 4 attests
to the comparable performance of CMM when compared to conventional methods trained with ad-


                                                               8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 3: The comparison between CMM and existing debiasing strategies. “A+B” denotes the
strategies that train the model with “A” cause-effect and test with “B” cause-effect.

      Train                     KAIST                     Train                     CVC-14                    Train                     FLIR
      Test       ROTX-Mped (AP ↑)    KAIST (MR ↓)          Test       ROTX-Mped (AP ↑)    CVC-14 (MR ↓)        Test       ROTX-Mped (AP ↑) FLIR (AP ↑)
                       All          Day Night     All                       All          Day Night    All                        All            All
    Baseline          21.69         9.68   5.80   8.79   Baseline          13.36         23.87 11.12 19.21   Baseline           12.23          84.67
    TE+TIE            57.05         26.89 27.66 27.27    TE+TIE            27.97         32.85 12.11 22.33   TE+TIE             19.33          64.27
    TIE+TIE           56.45         12.53 9.24 12.10     TIE+TIE           27.75         33.53 9.27 21.63    TIE+TIE            12.02          79.39
      CMM             70.44          9.6   5.93   8.54    CMM              34.96         27.81 7.71 17.13     CMM               57.09          87.8

Table 4: Comparison of CMM and a conventional model. Note that only the conventional model
is trained with extra ROTX samples.

      Train              KAIST+ROTX-Mped                   Train             CVC-14+ROTX-Mped                  Train            FLIR+ROTX-Mped
      Test       ROTX-Mped (AP↑)        KAIST (MR↓)        Test       ROTX-Mped (AP↑)      CVC-14 (MR↓)        Test       ROTX-Mped (AP↑) FLIR (AP↑)
                        All         Day Night     All                        All         Day Night    All                        All            All
    Kim et al.         72.68        30.12 29.52 29.30    Kim et al.         35.27        70.30 32.19 54.16   Kim et al.         55.92          63.30
      Ours             70.44         9.6   5.93   8.54     Ours             34.96        27.81 7.71 17.13      Ours             57.09           87.8


                              (a)                                             (b)                                              (c)
Figure 5: Qualitative comparison on ROTO (blue), and ROTX (red) test data. (b): Conventional
models fail to detect ROTX pedestrians due to uni-modal sensory bias. (c): Our CMM framework
estimates the total effect for ROTO and the total indirect effect for ROTX samples. As a result, it
produces correct detection results for ROTX samples.

ditional ROTX training data. As conventional methods improve accuracy on the ROTX-Mped test
by finetuning, the performance on KAIST, CVC-14, and FLIR test sets drops severely. Comparably,
CMM achieves high performance on both ROTX-MPed and conventional datasets, even without
training ROTX samples.
7.2      Q UALITATIVE R ESULTS

The qualitative results in Fig.5 serve as validation for the effectiveness of the CMM framework in
mitigating unimodal sensory bias while preserving multimodal context. As depicted in Figure 5,
the CMM framework effectively addresses unimodal bias in ROTX samples and produces detection
outputs based on correct multimodal knowledge. Specifically, the CMM framework computes the
total effect for the ROTO samples marked as blue, and the total indirect effect for the ROTX samples
marked as red in Fig.5 (a). In contrast, baseline models fail due to the memorized priors in the
training set. Additionally, CMM consistently delivers high-confidence scores and accurate detection
boxes.

8     C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we reveal the uni-modal sensory bias problem in multimodal object detection and
present our innovative solution: Causal Mode Multiplexing (CMM) framework. Leveraging the tools
of counterfactual intervention, CMM enables the model to interchangeably learn between two dis-
tinct causal graphs depending on the input data type. A Causal Mode Multiplexing (CMM) Loss is
proposed to optimize the interchange between two causal graphs. Additionally, we introduce the
ROTX Multispectral Pedestrian (ROTX-MPed) dataset, which includes counterexamples not in-
cluded in the conventional data to challenge existing models and test the effectiveness of CMM.
Experimental results on KAIST, CVC-14, FLIR, and our ROTX-Mped dataset demonstrate that
CMM effectively learns multimodal reasoning and even performs well on ROTX test data with
training ROTO and RXTO data.


                                                                              9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Jiale Cao, Yanwei Pang, Jin Xie, Fahad Shahbaz Khan, and Ling Shao. From handcrafted to deep
   features for pedestrian detection: a survey. IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine
   intelligence, 2021.
Nicolas Carion, Francisco Massa, Gabriel Synnaeve, Nicolas Usunier, Alexander Kirillov, and
  Sergey Zagoruyko. End-to-end object detection with transformers. In European conference on
  computer vision, pp. 213–229. Springer, 2020.
Yukyung Choi, Namil Kim, Soonmin Hwang, Kibaek Park, Jae Shin Yoon, Kyounghwan An, and
  In So Kweon. Kaist multi-spectral day/night data set for autonomous and assisted driving. IEEE
  Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems, 19(3):934–948, 2018.
Glenn Jocher et. al. ultralytics/yolov5: v6.0 - YOLOv5n ’Nano’ models, Roboflow integration,
  TensorFlow export, OpenCV DNN support, October 2021. URL https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.
  5563715.
Inc FLIR Systems. Free teledyne flir thermal dataset for algorithm training. https://www.flir.com/
  oem/adas/adas-dataset-form/, 2021. Accessed: 2022-08-05.
Alejandro González, Zhijie Fang, Yainuvis Socarras, Joan Serrat, David Vázquez, Jiaolong Xu,
  and Antonio M López. Pedestrian detection at day/night time with visible and fir cameras: A
  comparison. Sensors, 16(6):820, 2016.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image recog-
  nition. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp.
  770–778, 2016.
Jan Hosang, Rodrigo Benenson, and Bernt Schiele. Learning non-maximum suppression. In Pro-
  ceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 4507–4515,
  2017.
Soonmin Hwang, Jaesik Park, Namil Kim, Yukyung Choi, and In So Kweon. Multispectral pedes-
  trian detection: Benchmark dataset and baseline. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on com-
  puter vision and pattern recognition, pp. 1037–1045, 2015.
Eric Jang, Shixiang Gu, and Ben Poole. Categorical reparameterization with gumbel-softmax. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1611.01144, 2016.
Jung Uk Kim, Sungjune Park, and Yong Man Ro. Uncertainty-guided cross-modal learning for
  robust multispectral pedestrian detection. IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems for Video
  Technology, 32(3):1510–1523, 2021.
Jung Uk Kim, Sungjune Park, and Yong Man Ro. Uncertainty-guided cross-modal learning for
  robust multispectral pedestrian detection. IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems for Video
  Technology, 32(3):1510–1523, 2022. doi: 10.1109/TCSVT.2021.3076466.
Chengyang Li, Dan Song, Ruofeng Tong, and Min Tang. Illumination-aware faster r-cnn for robust
  multispectral pedestrian detection. Pattern Recognition, 85:161–171, 2019.
Miguel Monteiro, Fabio De Sousa Ribeiro, Nick Pawlowski, Daniel C Castro, and Ben Glocker.
 Measuring axiomatic soundness of counterfactual image models. In The Eleventh International
 Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.
Yulei Niu, Kaihua Tang, Hanwang Zhang, Zhiwu Lu, Xian-Sheng Hua, and Ji-Rong Wen. Counter-
  factual vqa: A cause-effect look at language bias. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference
  on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 12700–12710, 2021.
Kihong Park, Seungryong Kim, and Kwanghoon Sohn. Unified multi-spectral pedestrian detection
  based on probabilistic fusion networks. Pattern Recognition, 80:143–155, 2018.
Judea Pearl. Direct and indirect effects. In Probabilistic and causal inference: the works of Judea
  Pearl, pp. 373–392. 2022.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Judea Pearl and Dana Mackenzie. The book of why: the new science of cause and effect. Basic
  books, 2018.
Judea Pearl et al. Models, reasoning and inference. Cambridge, UK: CambridgeUniversityPress, 19
  (2):3, 2000.
Fang Qingyun, Han Dapeng, and Wang Zhaokui. Cross-modality fusion transformer for multispec-
  tral object detection, 2022.
Joseph Redmon and Ali Farhadi. Yolo9000: better, faster, stronger. In Proceedings of the IEEE
  conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 7263–7271, 2017.
Shaoqing Ren, Kaiming He, Ross Girshick, and Jian Sun. Faster r-cnn: Towards real-time object
  detection with region proposal networks. Advances in neural information processing systems, 28,
  2015.
James M Robins. Semantics of causal dag models and the identification of direct and indirect effects.
  Oxford Statistical Science Series, pp. 70–82, 2003.
Mingxing Tan, Ruoming Pang, and Quoc V Le. Efficientdet: Scalable and efficient object detection.
 In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp.
 10781–10790, 2020.
Alexander P Wu, Rohit Singh, and Bonnie Berger. Granger causal inference on dags identifies
  genomic loci regulating transcription. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2021.
Heng Zhang, Elisa Fromont, Sébastien Lefevre, and Bruno Avignon. Multispectral fusion for object
  detection with cyclic fuse-and-refine blocks. In 2020 IEEE International conference on image
  processing (ICIP), pp. 276–280. IEEE, 2020.
Lu Zhang, Xiangyu Zhu, Xiangyu Chen, Xu Yang, Zhen Lei, and Zhiyong Liu. Weakly aligned
  cross-modal learning for multispectral pedestrian detection. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
  International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 5127–5137, 2019.
Sixian Zhang, Xinhang Song, Weijie Li, Yubing Bai, Xinyao Yu, and Shuqiang Jiang. Layout-based
  causal inference for object navigation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
  Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 10792–10802, 2023.
Kailai Zhou, Linsen Chen, and Xun Cao. Improving multispectral pedestrian detection by address-
  ing modality imbalance problems. In European Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 787–803.
  Springer, 2020.


A     A PPENDIX
A.1   DATA C OLLECTION

For data collection purposes, we securely mounted the cameras on tripods and recorded videos
capturing 89 surveillance scenarios, including building entrances, hallways, and urban streets. We
employed the FLIR Duo Pro R camera, a product by FLIR Systems, Inc., which supports both RGB
and IR imaging (with a wavelength range of approximately 7.5-13.5m) simultaneously in a pip dual
mode. Twenty volunteers enthusiastically participated in the data collection process, with each in-
dividual consenting to both the procedure and the subsequent release of the data to the public. To
safeguard privacy, facial features were intentionally blurred. Volunteers were photographed in vari-
ous indoor/outdoor settings both day/night, with the camera’s distance from them varying between 1
to 15 meters. Each video involved 2 to 8 volunteers as actors. From the recorded videos, we meticu-
lously curated a dataset comprising a total of 1500 pairs (500 train/ 1000 test) of visible and thermal
images. We took great care to ensure that all visible-thermal image pairs were precisely aligned,
maintaining a Field-of-View (FOV) of 32° × 26° and an image resolution of 640×512. High-quality
image pairs featuring pedestrians were meticulously synchronized and handpicked during the cura-
tion process. We will make the data publicly available after acceptance.


                                                  11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.2   E XPERIMENTAL S ETTING

Datasets. In our work, we conducted experiments on three public datasets on multimodal object
detection. The first of these datasets is the KAIST Multispectral Pedestrian Detection dataset, which
we refer to as the KAIST dataset (Hwang et al., 2015). This dataset comprises an extensive collection
of 95,328 RGBT image pairs, featuring 103,128 pedestrian annotations and 1,182 identities. The
other one is CVC-14 (González et al., 2016) visible and thermal image pairs. Note that visible
images in CVC-14 are in grayscale. For our experiments with the KAIST dataset, we followed the
evaluation protocol outlined in (Li et al., 2019; Zhang et al., 2019; Zhou et al., 2020), utilizing the
annotation labels provided by the authors of (Hwang et al., 2015). Our evaluation was carried out
on a test set consisting of 2,252 images, which we categorized as ’All.’ The test set can be divided
into 1,455 daytime (’Day’) and 797 nighttime (’Night’) images. The image resolution for the KAIST
dataset was maintained at 512 × 640 pixels. Turning to the CVC-14 dataset (González et al., 2016),
we leveraged 7,085 train, and 1,433 test images, all with a resolution of 640 × 471 pixels. For FLIR,
we use the (Zhang et al., 2020) which provides an “aligned” version. Composed of 5,142 aligned
images of 640×512 resolution, divided into 4,129 training data and 1,013 for testing.
Baseline Model We constructed our CMM framework based on the Uncertainty-guided model (Kim
et al., 2022), with the FPN architecture with ResNet-50 (He et al., 2016) as backbone networks. We
follow the implementations in the paper. Specifically, we use the pytorch library and stochastic
gradient descent (SGD) for optimization, synchronizing the process across 4 GTX 1080 Ti GPUs.
Each GPU handles 2 images, resulting in a total of 8 images per mini-batch. Consistent with (Kim
et al., 2022), we first train the model 3 epochs. The learning rate is initialized at 0.006 during the
initial 2 epochs and subsequently applied a 0.1 learning rate decay for the final epoch. We configured
the number of Region of Interests (RoIs) per image to N=300. For other baseline models that we
compare with, such as (Zhou et al., 2020; Qingyun et al., 2022) we use the code and the pre-trained
weights the authors provide in github.

A.3   I MPLEMENTATION OF NO - TREATMENT CONDITION

Following the implementation of (Niu et al., 2021), we assume that the model will randomly guess
with equal probability for no-treatments. In this case, YxR , YxT , and YM can be represented as:

               yxR = hθXR (xR ) if XR = xR                 yxT = hθXT (xT ) if XT = xT
     YxR =                                        YxT =                                           (16)
                 yxR * = c          if XT = ϕ                 yxT * = c        if XT = ϕ

                                ym = hθM (m) if XR = xR and XT = xT
                       Ym =                                                                       (17)
                                   ym* = c          if XR = ϕ or XT = ϕ.
We adopt a learnable parameter for c. The uniform distribution assumption for choosing c.


                                                  12
