Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C ONTROLV IDEO : C ONDITIONAL C ONTROL FOR T EXT-
DRIVEN V IDEO E DITING AND B EYOND

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                             A BSTRACT

         This paper presents ControlVideo for text-driven video editing – generating a video
         that aligns with a given text while preserving the structure of the source video.
         Building on a pre-trained text-to-image diffusion model, ControlVideo enhances
         the fidelity and temporal consistency by incorporating additional conditions (such
         as edge maps), and fine-tuning the key-frame and temporal attention on the source
         video-text pair via an in-depth exploration of the design space. Extensive exper-
         imental results demonstrate that ControlVideo outperforms various competitive
         baselines by delivering videos that exhibit high fidelity w.r.t. the source content, and
         temporal consistency, all while aligning with the text. By incorporating Low-rank
         adaptation layers into the model before training, ControlVideo is further empow-
         ered to generate videos that align seamlessly with reference images. Moreover,
         ControlVideo can be readily extended to the more challenging task of long video
         editing, where maintaining long-range temporal consistency across hundreds of
         frames is crucial. To achieve this, we construct a fused ControlVideo by applying
         basic ControlVideo to overlapping short video segments and key frame videos and
         then merging them by defined weight functions. Empirical results corroborate its
         ability to create visually realistic videos spanning hundreds of frames.


1    I NTRODUCTION

The endeavor of text-driven video editing is to generate videos derived from textual prompts and
existing video footage, thereby reducing manual labor. This technology stands to significantly
influence an array of fields such as advertising, marketing, and social media content. During this
process, it is critical for the edited videos to faithfully preserve the content of the source video,
maintain temporal consistency between generated frames, and align with the provided text. However,
fulfilling all these requirements simultaneously poses substantial challenges. A further challenge
arises when dealing with real-world videos that typically consist of hundreds of frames: how can
long-range temporal consistency be maintained? Additionally, what if textual descriptions fail to
convey the precise desired effects as intended by users, and users wish for the generated video to also
align with reference images?
Previous research (Qi et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2023; Wu et al., 2022; Liu et al., 2023a) has made
significant strides in text-driven video editing, capitalizing on advancements in large-scale text-to-
image (T2I) diffusion models (Rombach et al., 2022; Ho et al., 2022; Ramesh et al., 2022) and image
editing techniques (Hertz et al., 2023; Tumanyan et al., 2022; Parmar et al., 2023). However, despite
these advancements, they still cannot address the aforementioned challenges: (1) empirical evidence
(see Fig. 4) suggests that existing approaches still struggle with faithfully controlling the output while
preserving temporal consistency, and (2) these approaches primarily focus on short video editing and
do not explore how to maintain temporal consistency over extended durations.
To this end, we present ControlVideo for faithful and temporal consistent video editing, building upon
a pre-trained T2I diffusion model. To enhance fidelity, we propose to incorporate visual conditions
such as edge maps as additional inputs into T2I diffusion models to amplify the guidance from the
source video. As ControlNet (Zhang & Agrawala, 2023) has been pre-trained alongside the diffusion
model, we utilize it to process these visual conditions. Recognizing that various visual conditions
encompass varying degrees of information from the source video, we engage in a comprehensive
investigation of the suitability of different visual conditions for different scenes. This exploration


                                                    1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 (a) Single Control



    “a car, autumn”    Canny Edge Maps                    “a Swarovski crystal swan             HED
                                                            is swimming in a river”           Boundary


       “a jeep car is moving                                “Sherlock Holmes is dancing,
                                  Depth                                                          Pose
    on the road, snowy winter”                            on the street of London, raining”


 (b) Multiple Controls
               “a panda is dancing ”                  Control 1                                           Control 2


            Editing with Multiple Controls   Editing with Canny Control                          Editing with Pose Control


 (c) Image-driven Editing
                                             Editing with Reference Images I                      Editing with Reference Images II
   Source
   Video

                                                                                                   “gufeng style, a girl, black hair,
                                              “Evangelinelilly wearing dress”
                                                                                                         long hair, jewelry”
 (d) Long Video Editing
                                                    [140 Frames]



                                               “a girl with rich makeup”


Figure 1: Main results of ControlVideo with (a) single control, (b) multiple controls, (c) image-driven
video editing, and (d) long video editing.

naturally leads us to combine multiple controls to leverage their respective advantages. Furthermore,
we transform the original spatial self-attention into key-frame attention, aligning all frames with a
selected one, and incorporate temporal attention modules as extra branches in the diffusion model to
improve faithfulness and temporal consistency further, which is designed by a systematic empirical
study. Additionally, ControlVideo can generate videos that align with reference images by introducing
Low-rank adaptation (LoRA) (Hu et al., 2021) layers on the diffusion model before training.
Empirically, we validate our method on 50 video-text pair data collected from the Davis dataset
following previous works (Qi et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2023a; Wu et al., 2022) and the internet. We
compare with frame-wise Stable Diffusion and SOTA text-driven video editing methods (Qi et al.,
2023; Liu et al., 2023a; Wu et al., 2022) under objective metrics and a user study. In particular,
following (Qi et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2023a) we use CLIP (Radford et al., 2021) to measure text-
alignment and temporal consistency and employ SSIM to assess faithfulness. Extensive results
demonstrate that ControlVideo outperforms various competitors by fulfilling three requirements of
text-driven video editing simultaneously. Notably, ControlVideo can produce videos with extremely
realistic visual quality and very faithfully preserve original source content while following the text
guidance. For instance, ControlVideo can successfully make up a woman with maintaining her
identity while all existing methods fail (see Fig. 4).
Furthermore, ControlVideo is readily extendable for the more challenging application: video editing
for long videos that encompass hundreds of frames (see Sec. 3.2). To achieve this, we construct


                                                      2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


a fused ControlVideo by applying basic ControlVideo to overlapping short videos and key frame
videos and then merging them by defined weight functions at each denoising step. Intuitively, fusion
with overlapping short videos encourages the overlapping frames to merge features from neighboring
short videos, thereby effectively mitigating inconsistency issues between adjacent video clips. On
the other hand, key frame video, which incorporates the first frame of each video segment, provides
global guidance from the whole video, and thus fusion with it can improve long-range temporal
consistency. Empirical results affirm ControlVideo’s ability to produce videos spanning hundreds of
frames, exhibiting a high degree of visual realism.

2   BACKGROUND
Diffusion Models for Image Generation and Editing. Let q(x0 ) be the data distribution on RD .
Diffusion models (Song et al., 2020b; Bao et al., 2021; Ho et al., 2020) gradually perturb data
x0 ∼ q(x0 ) by a forward diffusion process:
                                T
                                Y                                            √
            q(x1:T ) = q(x0 )         q(xt |xt−1 ),    q(xt |xt−1 ) = N (xt ; αt xt−1 , βt I),     (1)
                                t=1

where βt is the noise schedule, αt = 1 − βt and is designed to satisfy xT ∼ N (0, I). The forward
process {xt }t∈[0,T ] has the following transition distribution:
                                                       √
                               qt|0 (xt |x0 ) = N (xt | ᾱt x0 , (1 − ᾱt )I),                     (2)
              Qt
where ᾱt = s=1 αs . The data can be generated starting from xT ∼ N (0, I) through the reverse
diffusion process, where the reverse transition kernel q(xt−1 |xt ) is learned by a Gaussian model:
pθ (xt−1 |xt ) = N (xt−1 ; µθ (xt ), σt2 I). Ho et al. (2020) shows learning the mean µθ (xt ) can be
derived to learn a noise prediction network ϵθ (xt , t) via a mean-squared error loss:
                                       min Et,x0 ,ϵ ||ϵ − ϵθ (xt , t)||2 ,                         (3)
                                         θ

where xt ∼ qt|0 (xt |x0 ), ϵ ∼ N (0, I). Deterministic DDIM sampling (Song et al., 2020a) generate
samples starting from xT ∼ N (0, I) via the following iteration rule:
                                         √
                            √     xt − 1 − αt ϵθ (xt , t) p
                  xt−1 = αt−1               √             + 1 − αt−1 ϵθ (xt , t).              (4)
                                              αt
Different from unconditional generation, image editing needs to preserve the content from the source
image x0 . Considering the reversible property of ODE, DDIM inversion (Song et al., 2020a) is
adopted to convert a real image x0 to related inversion noise xM by reversing the above process for
faithful image editing:
                               √
                   √ xt−1 − 1 − αt−1 ϵθ (xt−1 , t − 1) √
             xt = αt                 √                      + 1 − αt ϵθ (xt−1 , t − 1).          (5)
                                        αt−1

Latent Diffusion Models and ControlNet. To reduce computational cost, latent diffusion models
(LDM, a.k.a Stable Diffusion) (Rombach et al., 2022) use an encoder E to transform x0 into low-
dimensional latent space z0 = E(x0 ), which can be reconstructed by a decoder x0 ≈ D(z0 ),
and then learns the noise prediction network ϵθ (zt , p, t) in the latent space, where p is the textual
prompts. The backbone for ϵθ (zt , p, t) is the UNet (termed main UNet) that stacks several basic
blocks. To enable models to learn additional conditions c, ControlNet (Zhang & Agrawala, 2023)
adds a trainable copy of the encoder and middle blocks of the main UNet (termed ControlNet) to
incorporate task-specific conditions on the locked Stable Diffusion. The outputs of ControlNet are
then followed by a zero-initialization convolutional layer, which is subsequently added to the features
of the main U-Net at the corresponding layer. We describe and visualize the detailed architecture of
the main UNet and ControlNet in Appendix B.

3   M ETHODS
In this section, we present ControlVideo for faithful and temporally consistent text-driven video
editing via an in-depth exploration of the design space (see Sec. 3.1). As shown in Figure 2, this is


                                                       3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                           Training                                                                          Inference
                Encoder Middle Decoder                                       Basic Block
                 Blocks Block Blocks                                                                                         Gaussian Noise/
                                                                         Pseudo 3D                                       Noisy Source Video/
                                                                          ResNet
 Source Video                                  Predicted Noise                                                            DDIM Inversion
                                                                                            Temporal
                                                                         Key-frame          Attention
                                                                         Attention            Zero            Source Video                           Initial Value
                                                                                           Convolution



                                                                       Cross Attention
                Source Prompt
                   “a car”
                                                                       Feedforward
                                                                      Neural Networks
                                                                                                              Edited Video


                                                                                                                                    ControlVideo
  Controls                                                                                                                                          DDIM
                                                    With                                                                                           Sampling
                                                  Temporal       Key-frame Attention     Temporal Attention
                                                  Attention

                                                   Without
                                                  Temporal
                                                  Attention                                                                    Target Prompt
                                   Zero                                                                                      “a car, autumn”
                                                                          Key, Value       Query
                                Convolutions


Figure 2: Flowchart of ControlVideo. ControlVideo builds on a pre-trained T2I diffusion model and
enhances the fidelity and temporal consistency by incorporating additional conditions, fine-tuning the
key-frame, and temporal attention on the source video-text pair. We can generate the edited video
starting using DDIM sampling based on the target prompt starting from the initial value XM .

achieved by incorporating additional conditions, fine-tuning the key-frame, and temporal attention
on the source video-text pair. By incorporating Low-rank adaptation layers, ControlVideo is further
empowered to generate videos that align seamlessly with reference images. Furthermore, in Sec. 3.2,
we extend ControlVideo for the more challenging application: long video editing.

3.1     C ONTROLV IDEO

3.1.1        A RCHITECTURE
In line with prior studies (Wu et al., 2022; Qi et al., 2023), we first replace the spatial kernel (3 × 3 )
in 2D convolution layers with 3D kernel (1 × 3 × 3) to handle video inputs.
Adding Visual Controls. Recall that a key objective in text-driven video editing is to faithfully
preserve the content of the source video. An intuitive approach is to generate edited videos starting
from DDIM inversion XM in Eq. 5 to leverage information from X0 . However, despite the reversible
nature of ODE, as depicted in Fig. 3, empirically, the combination of DDIM inversion and DDIM
sampling significantly disrupts the structure of the source video. To enhance fidelity, we propose
to introduce additional visual conditions C = {ci }N i=1 , such as edge maps for all frames, into the
main UNet to amplify the source video’s guidance: ϵθ (Xt , C, p, t). Notably, as ControlNet(Zhang
& Agrawala, 2023) has been pre-trained alongside the main UNet in Stable Diffusion, we utilize it
to process these visual conditions C. Formally, let hu ∈ RN ×d and hc ∈ RN ×d denote the hidden
features with dimension d of the same layer in the main UNet and ControlNet, respectively. We
combine these features by summation, yielding h = hu + λhc , which is then fed into the decoder
of the main UNet through a skip connection, with λ serving as the control scale. As illustrated in
Figure 3, the introduction of visual conditions to provide structural guidance from X0 significantly
enhances the faithfulness of the edited videos.
Further, given that different visual conditions encompass varying degrees of information derived
from X0 , we comprehensively investigate the advantages of employing different conditions. As
depicted in Figure 1, our findings indicate that conditions yielding detailed insights into X0 , such
as edge maps, are particularly advantageous for attribute manipulation such as facial video editing,
demanding precise control to preserve human identity. Conversely, conditions offering coarser
insights into X0 , such as pose information, facilitate flexible adjustments to shape and background.
This exploration naturally raises the question of whether we can combine multiple controls to leverage
their respective advantages. To this end, we compute
                                                  P        a weighted sum of hidden features derived
from different controls, denoted as h = hu + i λi hc , and subsequently feed the fused features


                                                                                 4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


into the decoder of the main UNet, where λi represents the control scale associated with the i-th
control. In situations where multiple controls may exhibit conflicts or inconsistencies, we can employ
Grounding-DINO (Liu et al., 2023b) and SAM (Kirillov et al., 2023) or cross-attention map (Hertz
et al., 2023) to generate a mask based on text and feed the masked controls into ControlVideo to
enhance control synergy. As shown in Figure 1, Canny edge maps excel at preserving the background
while having a limited impact on shape modification. In contrast, pose control facilitates flexible
shape adjustments but may overlook other crucial details. By combining these controls, we can
simultaneously preserve the background and effect shape modifications, demonstrating the feasibility
of leveraging multiple controls in complex video editing scenarios.
Key-frame Attention. The self-attention in T2I diffusion models updates the features of each frame
independently, resulting in temporal inconsistencies within the generated videos. To address this issue
and improve temporal consistency, we propose to introduce a key frame that serves as a reference
for propagating information throughout the video. Specifically, drawing inspiration from previous
works (Wu et al., 2022), we transform the spatial self-attention in both main UNet and ControlNet
into key-frame attention, aligning all frames with a selected reference frame. Formally, let v i ∈ Rd
represent the hidden features of the i-th frame, and let k ∈ [1, N ] denote the chosen key frame. The
key-frame attention mechanism is defined as follows:
                                Q = W Q vi , K = W K vk , V = W V vk ,
where W Q , W K , W V are the projected matrix. We initialize these matrices using the original
self-attention weights to leverage the capabilities of T2I diffusion models fully. Empirically, we
systematically study the design of key frame, key and value selection in self-attention and fine-tuned
parameters. A detailed analysis is provided in Appendix C. In summary, we utilize the first frame as
key frame, which serves as both the key and value in the attention mechanism, and we finetune the
output projected matrix W O within the attention modules to enhance temporal consistency.
Temporal Attention. In pursuit of enhancing both the faithfulness and temporal consistency of the
edited video, we introduce temporal attention modules as extra branches in the network, which capture
relationships among corresponding spatial locations across all frames. Formally, let v ∈ RN ×d denote
the hidden features, the temporal attention is defined as follows:
                                  Q = W Q v, K = W K v, V = W V v.
Prior research (Singer et al., 2022) has benefited from extensive data to train temporal attention,
a luxury we do not have in our one-shot setting. To address this challenge, we draw inspiration
from the consistent manner in which different attention mechanisms model relationships between
image features. Accordingly, we initialize temporal attention using the original spatial self-attention
weights, harnessing the capabilities of the T2I diffusion model. After each temporal attention module,
we incorporate a zero convolutional layer (Zhang & Agrawala, 2023) to retain the module’s output
prior before fine-tuning. Furthermore, we conduct a comprehensive study on the incorporation
of local and global positions for introducing temporal attention. Detail analyses are provided in
Appendix C. Concerning local positions, we find that the most effective placement is both before
and within the self-attention mechanism within the transformer block. This choice is substantiated
by the fact that the input in these two positions matches that of self-attention, serving as the initial
weights for temporal attention. With self-attention location exhibits higher text alignment, ultimately
making it our preferred choice. For global location, our main finding is that the effectiveness of
positions is correlated with the amount of information they encapsulate. For instance, the main
UNet responsible for image generation retains a full spectrum of information, outperforming the
ControlNet, which focuses solely on extracting condition-related features while discarding others. As
a result, we incorporate temporal attention alongside self-attention at all stages of the main UNet,
with the exception of the middle block.

3.1.2   T RAINING AND S AMPLING F RAMEWORK
Let C = {ci }N i=1 denote the visual conditions (e.g., Canny edge maps) for X0 and ϵθ (Xt , C, p, t)
denote the ControlVideo network. Let ps and pt represent the source prompt and target prompt,
respectively. Similar to Eq. 3, we finetune ϵθ (Xt , C, p, t) on the source video-text pair (X0 , ps ) using
the mean-squared error loss, defined as follows:
                                   min Et,ϵ ||ϵ − ϵθ (Xt , C, ps , t)||2 ,
                                     θ



                                                     5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                           (a) Ablation Study for Long Video Editing                                         (b) Ablation Study for Key Components in ControlVideo
                                                                                                                             Source    DDIM               +Ker-frame +Temporal Full
                                                                 [100 Frames]                                                                   +Controls
                                                                                                                             Video    Inversion              At.        At.   Version
“a car”→ “a car, Vincent van Gogh style”


                                                                Source Video


                                                                                                      “a car”→ “a red car”
                                                      Editing Short Videos Independently


                                                      Fusion with Neighboring Short Videos


                                           Fusion with Neighboring Short Videos and Key Frame Video

Figure 3: (a) Ablation studies for long video editing. See detailed analysis in Sec. 3.2. (b) Ablation
studies for key components in ControlVideo. At. denote attention. See detailed analysis in Sec. 5.2.

where ϵ ∼ N (0, I), Xt ∼ qt|0 (Xt |X0 ). Note that during training, we exclusively optimize the
parameters within the attention modules (as discussed in Sec. 3.1.1), while keeping all other
parameters fixed.
Choice of Initial Value XM . Built upon ϵθ (Xt , C, p, t), we can generate the edited video starting
from the initial value XM using DDIM sampling (Song et al., 2020a), based on the target prompt pt .
For XM , we employ DDIM inversion as described in Eq. 5 for local editing tasks, such as attribute
manipulation. For global editing such as style transfer, different from previous work (Wu et al., 2022;
Qi et al., 2023), we can also start from noisy source video XM ∼ qM |0 (XM |X0 ) using forward
transition distribution in Eq. 2 with large M and even XM ∼ N (0, I) to improve editability because
visual conditions have already provided structure guidance from X0 .

Algorithm 1 Extended ControlVideo for Long Video Editing
Require: initial value XM , controls C, short video length L, overlapped length a, fusion function
  F (·), weight w, model ϵθ (·, ·, ·, ·), prompt p
  n = ⌊N/(L − a)⌋ + 1                                                     {number of short videos}
  for t = M to 1 do
     for j = 1 to n do
         ϵjθ ← ϵθ (Xtj , C j , p, t)                            {ControlVideo for each short video}
     end for
     ϵ̂θ ← F (ϵ1θ , . . . , ϵnθ )                  {fusion with neighboring short videos via Eq. 7}
     ϵKθ  ←   ϵ θ (Xt
                     K
                       , C  K
                               , p, t)                         {ControlVideo for key frame video}
     ϵθ ← wO(ϵK     θ )  +   (1   −  w)ϵ̂ θ                {fusion with key frame video via Eq. 8}
     Xt−1 ← DDIM_Sampling(ϵθ , Xt , p, t)                                  {denoising step in Eq. 4}
  end for
  return X0



3.1.3                                           I MAGE - DRIVEN V IDEO E DITING

In certain scenarios, textual descriptions may fall short of fully conveying the precise desired effects
from users. In such cases, users may wish for the generated video to also align with given reference
images. Here, we show a simple way to extend ControlVideo for image-driven video editing.
Specifically, we can first add the Low-rank adaptation (LoRA)(Hu et al., 2021) layer on the main
UNet to facilitate the learning of concepts relevant to reference images and then freeze them to train
ControlVideo following Sec. 3.1.2. Since the training for reference images and video is independent,
we can flexibly utilize models in the community like CivitAI (Civ).


                                                                                                      6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


3.2   E XTENDED C ONTROLV IDEO FOR L ONG V IDEO E DITING

Although ControlVideo described in the above section has the appealing ability to generate highly
temporal consistent videos, it is still difficult to deal with real-world videos that typically encompass
hundreds of frames due to memory limitations. A straightforward approach to address this issue
involves dividing the entire video into several shorter segments and applying ControlVideo to
each segment with a strategy that initializes all frames with the same value xiM = ϵ for i ∈
[1, N ], where ϵ ∼ N (0, I). However, as depicted in Figure 3, this method still results in temporal
inconsistencies between video clips. To tackle this problem, inspired by recent advances in scene
composition (Jiménez, 2023), we propose to apply ControlVideo for overlapping short videos and
then fuse them together using a defined weight function at each denoising step. This strategy
encourages the overlapping frames to merge features from neighboring short videos, effectively
mitigating inconsistency issues between adjacent video clips. In the subsequent denoising step, both
non-overlapping and overlapping frames within a short video clip are fed into ControlVideo together,
which brings the features of non-overlapping frames closer to those of the overlapping frames, thus
indirectly improving global temporal consistency. Formally, the j-th short video clip Xtj and the
corresponding visual conditions C j are defined as:
                      min((j−1)(L−a)+L,N )                 min((j−1)(L−a)+L,N )
         Xtj = {xit }i=(j−1)(L−a)+1          ,   C j = {ci }i=(j−1)(L−a)+1        ,   j ∈ [1, n]     (6)

where n = ⌊N/(L − a)⌋ + 1 is the number of short video clips, L is the length of short video clip
and a is the overlapped length. Let ϵjθ ∈ RL×D = ϵθ (Xtj , C j , p, t) denote the ControlVideo for j-th
short video and ϵ̂θ ∈ RN ×D denote the fused ControlVideo for entire video. The fusion function
F (·) : Rn×L×D → RN ×D is defined as follows:

                 ϵ̂θ = F (ϵ1θ , . . . , ϵnθ ) = Sum(Normalize(O(wj ⊗ 1D )) ⊙ O(ϵjθ )),               (7)
where wj ∈ RL                                                    D
               + is the weight for the j-th short video, 1D ∈ R is the vector with all elements being
                                     L×D         N ×D
1, ⊗ is Kronecker product, O(·) : R        →R          denote the operation for padding with zero, ⊙ is
the element-wise multiplication, Normalize(·) denote the operation that scales each element in the
matrix by dividing it with the sum of all elements in the same position and Sum(·) is the operation
for adding the elements at corresponding positions in matrix. In this work, we define normal random
variables wj ∼ N (L/2, σ 2 ). As shown in Figure 3 (row 3), this fusion strategy significantly enhances
temporal consistency between short videos.
However, this approach directly fuses nearby videos to ensure local consistency between adjacent
video clips, and global consistency for the entire video is improved indirectly during repeated
denoising steps. Consequently, as illustrated in Figure 3, temporal consistency deteriorates when
video clips are spaced farther apart, exemplified by the degradation of the black car into the green
car. In light of these observations, a natural question arises: can we fuse more global features
directly to enhance long-range temporal consistency further? To achieve this, we create a keyframe
video by incorporating the first frame of each short video segment to provide global guidance
directly. ControlVideo is then applied to this keyframe video, which is subsequently fused with
                                                      (j−1)(L−a)+1 n
the previously obtained ϵ̂θ . Formally, let XtK = {xt              }j=1 denote the keyframe video
       K       (j−1)(L−a)+1 n
and C = {c                  }j=1 denote the corresponding visual conditions. The final model ϵθ is
defined as follows:
                                     ϵθ = wO(ϵK
                                              θ ) + (1 − w)ϵ̂θ ,                                     (8)
where w ∈ [0, 1] is the weight, ϵK            K    K
                                    θ = ϵ(Xt , C , p, t). The complete algorithm is presented in
Algorithm 1. As depicted in Figure 3 (row 4), with the keyframe video fusion strategy, the color of
the car is consistently retained throughout the entire video.

4     R ELATED W ORK
Diffusion Models for Text-driven Image Editing. Building upon the remarkable advances of T2I
diffusion models (Rombach et al., 2022; Ho et al., 2022), numerous methods have shown promising
results in text-driven image editing. In particular, several works such as Prompt-to-Prompt (Hertz
et al., 2023), Plug-and-Play (Tumanyan et al., 2022) and Pix2pix-Zero (Parmar et al., 2023) explore


                                                    7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    Source
    Video
                      “a girl with exquisite and rich makeup”   “a girl, red hair”   “a person wearing blue jeans is dancing”


    Ours


  Stable
 Diffusion

 Tune-A-
  Video


 Vid2vid-
    zero

    Video-
     P2P

 FateZero



Figure 4: Comparison with baselines. ControlVideo achieves better visual quality by fulfilling three
requirements simultaneously. For instance, in the "a girl with red hair" example, ControlVideo not
only successfully changes the hair color but also keeps the identity of the female unchanged.
the attention control over the generated content and achieve SOTA results. Such methods usually
start from the DDIM inversion and replace attention maps in the generation process with the attention
maps from source prompt, which retrain the spatial layout of the source image. Despite significant
advances, directly applying these image editing methods to video frames leads to temporal flickering.
Diffusion Models for Text-driven Video Editing. Gen-1 (Esser et al., 2023) trains a video diffusion
model on large-scale datasets, achieving impressive performance. However, it requires expensive
computational resources. To overcome this, recent works build upon T2I diffusion models on a single
text-video pair. In particular, Tune-A-Video (Wu et al., 2022) inflates the T2I diffusion model to
the T2V diffusion model and finetunes it on the source video-text data. Inspired by this, several
works (Qi et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2023a; Wang et al., 2023) combine it with attention map injection
methods, achieving superior performance. Despite advances, empirical evidence suggests that they
still struggle to faithfully and adequately control the output while preserving temporal consistency.

5        E XPERIMENTS

5.1          S ETUP

For short video editing, following previous research (Wang et al., 2023), we use 8 frames with 512 ×
512 resolution for fair comparisons. We collect 50 video-text pair data from DAVIS dataset (Pont-
Tuset et al., 2017) and website1 . We compare ControlVideo with Stable Diffusion and the following
SOTA text-driven video editing methods: Tune-A-Video (Wu et al., 2022), Vid2vid-zero (Parmar
et al., 2023), Video-P2P (Liu et al., 2023a) and FateZero (Qi et al., 2023). For evaluation, following
the previous work (Qi et al., 2023), we report CLIP-temp for temporal consistency and CLIP-text
for text alignment. We also report SSIM (Wang et al., 2004) within the unedited area between
input-output pairs for faithfulness. Additionally, we perform a user study to quantify text alignment,
temporal consistency, faithfulness, and overall all aspects by pairwise comparisons between the
baselines and ControlVideo. More details are available in the Appendix A.

5.2          R ESULTS

Applications. The main results are shown in Figure 1. Firstly, under the guidance of different single
controls, ControlVideo delivers videos with high visual realism in attributes, style, and background
editing. For instance, HED boundary control helps to change the swan into a Swarovski crystal
swan faithfully. Pose control allows shape modification flexibly by changing the man into Sherlock
Holmes with a black coat. Secondly, in the “person” → “panda” case, ControlVideo can preserve the
     1
         https://www.pexels.com


                                                                8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                                                                           0.30                           Stable Diffusion
  Stable                                                            Stable
                       44%                       56%                            18%                 82%                                                                   Tune-A-Video
 Diffusion                                                         Diffusion                                                                                              Vid2vid-zero
  Tune-A-                                                           Tune-A-                                                                0.27                           Fatezero
                      36%                    64%                                    24%                 76%                                                               Video-P2P
   Video                                                             Video


                                                                                                                             CLIP-text ↑
                                                                                                                                                                          Ours


                                                           Ours


                                                                                                                      Ours
Video-P2P 4%                           96%                        Video-P2P           36%                 64%                              0.24

    Vid2vid           38%                    62%                    Vid2vid         20%              80%
                                                                                                                                           0.21

    Fatezero          32%                   68%                    Fatezero          30%                70%
                                                                                                                                           0.18
               0%          25%       50%         75%    100%                   0%         25%     50%         75%   100%                          0.50   0.60   0.70   0.80    0.90     1.00

                             Text Alignment                                               Temporal Consistency                                                   SSIM ↑

     Stable                                                         Stable                                                                 0.97
              8%                      92%                                    10%                   90%
    Diffusion                                                      Diffusion
     Tune-A-                                                       Tune-A-
             12%                       88%                                      14%                 86%
      Video                                                         Video                                                                  0.95


                                                                                                                      Ours
                                                          Ours


                                                                                                                             CLIP-temp ↑
 Video-P2P             38%                   62%                  Video-P2P     18%                 82%
                                                                                                                                           0.93
                                                                                                                                                                        0.61
                                                                                                                                                                         Stable Diffusion
     Vid2vid         20%                   80%                      Vid2vid         20%              80%                                                                0.64
                                                                                                                                                                         Tune-A-Video
                                                                                                                                                                        0.64
                                                                                                                                                                         Vid2vid-zero
                                                                                                                                           0.91                         0.71
                                                                                                                                                                         Fatezero
     Fatezero        22%                   78%                     Fatezero         26%                 74%                                                             0.91
                                                                                                                                                                         Video-P2P
                                                                                                                                                                        0.74
                                                                                                                                                                         Ours
                0%          25%      50%          75%   100%                   0%         25%     50%         75%   100%                   0.89
                                                                                                                                                  0.50   0.60   0.70   0.80    0.90     1.00
                                 Faithfulness                                                   Overall                                                          SSIM ↑

                                                   (a) User Preference                                                                            (b) Objective Metrics

Figure 5: Quantitative results under user study and objective metrics. ControlVideo outperforms all
baselines from overall aspects. See detailed analysis in Sec. 5.2.

background and change the shape simultaneously by combining multiple controls (Canny edge maps
and pose control) to utilize the advantage of different control types. Moreover, in image-driven video
editing, ControlVideo successfully changes the woman in the source video into Evangeline Lilly to
align the reference images. Finally, we can preserve the identity of the woman across hundreds of
frames, demonstrating the ability of ControlVideo to maintain long-range temporal consistency.
Comparisons. The quantitative and qualitative results are shown in Figure 5 and Figure 4 respectively.
We emphasize that text-driven video editing should fulfill three requirements simultaneously and a
single objective metric cannot reflect the edited results. For instance, Video-P2P with high SSIM
tends to reconstruct the source video and fails to align the text. As shown in Figure 4, in the "a girl
with red hair" example, it cannot change the hair color. Stable Diffusion and Vid2vid-zero with high
CLIP-text generate a girl with striking red hair, but entirely ignore the identity of the female from the
source video, leading to unsatisfactory results.
As shown in Figure 5(a), for overall aspects conducted by user study, our method outperforms all
baselines significantly. Specifically, 86% persons prefer our edited videos to Tune-A-Video. What’s
more, human evaluation is the most reasonable quantitative metric for video editing tasks and we can
observe ControlVideo outperforms all baselines in all aspects. The qualitative results in Figure 4 are
consistent with quantitative results, where ControlVideo not only successfully changes the hair color
but also keeps the identity of the female unchanged while all existing methods fail. Overall, extensive
results demonstrate that ControlVideo outperforms all baselines by delivering temporal consistent,
and faithful videos while still aligning with the text prompt.
Ablation Studies for Key Components in ControlVideo. As shown in Figure 3, adding controls
provides additional guidance from the source video, thus improving faithfulness a lot. The key-frame
attention improves temporal consistency a lot. The temporal attention improves faithfulness and
temporal consistency. Combining all the modules achieves the best performance. The quantitative
results are shown in Appendix C.


6       C ONCLUSION

In this paper, we present ControlVideo, a general framework to utilize T2I diffusion models for
one-shot video editing, which incorporates additional conditions such as edge maps, the key frame and
temporal attention to improve faithfulness and temporal consistency. We demonstrate its effectiveness
by outperforming state-of-the-art text-driven video editing methods.


                                                                                            9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENTS
We submit the code for reproducibility including basic text-driven video editing, image-driven video
editing, and long video editing. Please refer to README.md for specific instructions.

E THICS S TATEMENT
We must exercise caution in the application of this method to prevent any potential adverse social
consequences, such as the creation of deceptive videos intended to mislead individuals.

R EFERENCES
https://civitai.com/.
Fan Bao, Chongxuan Li, Jun Zhu, and Bo Zhang. Analytic-dpm: an analytic estimate of the optimal
  reverse variance in diffusion probabilistic models. In International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2021.
Patrick Esser, Johnathan Chiu, Parmida Atighehchian, Jonathan Granskog, and Anastasis Ger-
  manidis. Structure and content-guided video synthesis with diffusion models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2302.03011, 2023.
Amir Hertz, Ron Mokady, Jay Tenenbaum, Kfir Aberman, Yael Pritch, and Daniel Cohen-Or. Prompt-
 to-prompt image editing with cross attention control. International Conference on Learning
 Representations, 2023.
Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:6840–6851, 2020.
Jonathan Ho, William Chan, Chitwan Saharia, Jay Whang, Ruiqi Gao, Alexey Gritsenko, Diederik P
  Kingma, Ben Poole, Mohammad Norouzi, David J Fleet, et al. Imagen video: High definition
  video generation with diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.02303, 2022.
Edward J Hu, Yelong Shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang,
  and Weizhu Chen. Lora: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2106.09685, 2021.
Álvaro Barbero Jiménez. Mixture of diffusers for scene composition and high resolution image
  generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.02412, 2023.
Alexander Kirillov, Eric Mintun, Nikhila Ravi, Hanzi Mao, Chloe Rolland, Laura Gustafson, Tete
  Xiao, Spencer Whitehead, Alexander C. Berg, Wan-Yen Lo, Piotr Dollár, and Ross Girshick.
  Segment anything. arXiv:2304.02643, 2023.
Shaoteng Liu, Yuechen Zhang, Wenbo Li, Zhe Lin, and Jiaya Jia. Video-p2p: Video editing with
  cross-attention control. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.04761, 2023a.
Shilong Liu, Zhaoyang Zeng, Tianhe Ren, Feng Li, Hao Zhang, Jie Yang, Chunyuan Li, Jianwei
  Yang, Hang Su, Jun Zhu, et al. Grounding dino: Marrying dino with grounded pre-training for
  open-set object detection. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.05499, 2023b.
Gaurav Parmar, Krishna Kumar Singh, Richard Zhang, Yijun Li, Jingwan Lu, and Jun-Yan Zhu.
  Zero-shot image-to-image translation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.03027, 2023.
Jordi Pont-Tuset, Federico Perazzi, Sergi Caelles, Pablo Arbeláez, Alex Sorkine-Hornung, and
  Luc Van Gool. The 2017 davis challenge on video object segmentation. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1704.00675, 2017.
Chenyang Qi, Xiaodong Cun, Yong Zhang, Chenyang Lei, Xintao Wang, Ying Shan, and Qifeng Chen.
  Fatezero: Fusing attentions for zero-shot text-based video editing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.09535,
  2023.


                                                 10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual
  models from natural language supervision. In International conference on machine learning, pp.
  8748–8763. PMLR, 2021.
Aditya Ramesh, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alex Nichol, Casey Chu, and Mark Chen. Hierarchical text-
  conditional image generation with clip latents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.06125, 2022.
Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer. High-
  resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Confer-
  ence on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 10684–10695, 2022.
Chaehun Shin, Heeseung Kim, Che Hyun Lee, Sang-gil Lee, and Sungroh Yoon. Edit-a-video: Single
  video editing with object-aware consistency. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.07945, 2023.
Uriel Singer, Adam Polyak, Thomas Hayes, Xi Yin, Jie An, Songyang Zhang, Qiyuan Hu, Harry
  Yang, Oron Ashual, Oran Gafni, et al. Make-a-video: Text-to-video generation without text-video
  data. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.14792, 2022.
Jiaming Song, Chenlin Meng, and Stefano Ermon. Denoising diffusion implicit models. arXiv
   preprint arXiv:2010.02502, 2020a.
Yang Song, Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Diederik P Kingma, Abhishek Kumar, Stefano Ermon, and Ben
  Poole. Score-based generative modeling through stochastic differential equations. In International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2020b.
Narek Tumanyan, Michal Geyer, Shai Bagon, and Tali Dekel. Plug-and-play diffusion features for
  text-driven image-to-image translation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.12572, 2022.
Wen Wang, Kangyang Xie, Zide Liu, Hao Chen, Yue Cao, Xinlong Wang, and Chunhua Shen. Zero-
 shot video editing using off-the-shelf image diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.17599,
 2023.
Zhou Wang, Alan C Bovik, Hamid R Sheikh, and Eero P Simoncelli. Image quality assessment: from
  error visibility to structural similarity. IEEE transactions on image processing, 13(4):600–612,
  2004.
Jay Zhangjie Wu, Yixiao Ge, Xintao Wang, Weixian Lei, Yuchao Gu, Wynne Hsu, Ying Shan,
  Xiaohu Qie, and Mike Zheng Shou. Tune-a-video: One-shot tuning of image diffusion models for
  text-to-video generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.11565, 2022.
Lvmin Zhang and Maneesh Agrawala. Adding conditional control to text-to-image diffusion models.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.05543, 2023.


A    S ETUP
Implementation Details. By default, we train the ControlVideo for 80, 300, 500, and 1500 iterations
for canny edge maps, HED boundary, depth maps, and pose respectively with a learning rate 3 × 10−5 .
The control scale λ is set to 1. For multiple controls, we set λi = 0.5 by default. The DDIM
sampler (Song et al., 2020a) with 50 steps and 12 classifier-free guidance are used for inference.
The Stable Diffusion 1.5 (Rombach et al., 2022) and ControlNet 1.0 (Zhang & Agrawala, 2023)
with canny edge maps, HED boundary, depth maps, and pose are adopted in the experiment. For
image-driven video editing, we employ the Lora weight from (Civ) and merge it into Stable Diffusion.
Evaluation. The metric for faithfulness only consider the unedited area. The unedited area is
computed by Grounding-DINO (Liu et al., 2023b) and SAM (Kirillov et al., 2023) according to text.
We evaluate the human preference from text alignment, faithfulness, temporal consistency, and all
three aspects combined. A total of 10 subjects participated in this section. Taking faithfulness as an
example, given a source video, the participants are instructed to select which edited video is more
faithful to the source video in the pairwise comparisons between the baselines and ControlVideo.
Reproductions. All baselines are reproduced based on the public code. All used codes in this paper
and its license are listed in Table 1.


                                                 11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                  Table 1: The used codes and license.


                                   URL                                                          citations                                License
  https://github.com/showlab/Tune-A-Video                                      (Wu et al., 2022)                               Apache V2.0 License
 https://github.com/ChenyangQiQi/FateZero                                       (Qi et al., 2023)                                 MIT License
  https://github.com/baaivision/vid2vid-zero                                 (Wang et al., 2023)                                   Unknown
 https://github.com/ShaoTengLiu/Video-P2P                                     (Liu et al., 2023a)                                  Unknown
   https://github.com/lllyasviel/ControlNet                               (Zhang & Agrawala, 2023)                             Apache V2.0 License
          https://github.com/CompVis
                                                                                 (Rombach et al., 2022)                              MIT License
                 /latent-diffusion

                                                                 UNet Basic Block


                                                                    2D ResNet
               Encoder Middle Decoder Stable Diffusion                                                             Encoder Middle Decoder
                Blocks Block Blocks                                                                                 Blocks Block Blocks
                                                                       Self
                                                                     Attention
   Input                                      Output:                                                  Input                                      Output:
 (Image)                                  Predicted Noise                                             (Video)                                 Predicted Noise
                                                                  Cross Attention

                                                                  Feedforward
                                                                 Neural Networks


 Control                                                       Modified Basic Block
                                                                                                      Control
 (Image)                                                                                              (Video)                                        with
                                                              3D ResNet                                                                            Temporal
                                                                                                                                                   Attention
                                                              Key-frame          Temporal Attention
                                                              Attention          Zero Convolution
                                                                                                                                                    without
                                                                                                                                                   Temporal
                                                                                                                                                   Attention
             Trainable Copy       Zero                      Cross Attention                                       Trainable Copy       Zero
           of Stable Diffusion Convolutions   ControlNet                                                        of Stable Diffusion Convolutions ControlVideo
                                                             Feedforward
                                                            Neural Networks


Figure 6: A brief introduction to structures of Stable Diffusion, ControlNet and ControlVideo,
highlighted with our modification.

B      D ETAILS OF BACKGROUND

In this section, we describe and visualize (see Figure 6) the detailed architecture of Stable Diffusion
and ControlNet. Specifically, the U-Net in Stable Diffusion consists of an encoder, a middle block,
and a decoder. The encoder and decoder each consist of 12 blocks, while the full model encompasses
a total of 25 blocks. Within these blocks, 8 are utilized for down-sampling or up-sampling convolution
layers, and the remaining blocks constitute the basic building blocks. Each basic block is composed
of a transformer block and a residual block. The transformer block incorporates a self-attention
layer, a cross-attention layer, and a feedforward neural network. The text embeddings, processed by
CLIP text encoder, are integrated into the U-Net via the cross-attention layer. As for ControlNet, it
introduces an additional trainable copy of the encoder and middle block from Stable Diffusion to
incorporate additional conditions. The outputs of ControlNet are then followed by a zero-initialization
convolutional layer, which is subsequently added to the features of the U-Net at the corresponding
layer.


C      S YSTEMATIC E MPIRICAL S TUDY FOR K EY C OMPONENTS OF
       C ONTROLV IDEO

In this section, we conduct a systematical empirical study by analyzing results on 20 video-text pair
data and evaluate CLIP-temp, CLIP-text and SSIM. Recognizing that the quantitative results may
diverge from human evaluation, we ultimately prioritize human evaluation as our primary measure,
while utilizing the quantitative results as supplementary references.


                                                                          12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


        Table 2: Quantitative results about different choices of key and value in self-attention.


         Method                                                CLIP-text↑    CLIP-temp↑       SSIM ↑
         vi                                                      0.263           0.905          0.635
         [v m ; v i ] (Qi et al., 2023)                          0.260           0.939          0.642
         [v 1 ; v i−1 ] (Wu et al., 2022; Shin et al., 2023)     0.264           0.953          0.639
         [v 1 ; v i−1 ; v i+1 ]                                  0.261           0.941          0.637
         [v 1 ; v i ; v i−1 ; v i+1 ]                            0.261           0.955          0.648
         vk , k = 1                                              0.263           0.954          0.655
         vk , k = 3                                              0.263           0.961          0.654
         vk , k = 5                                              0.261           0.958          0.657
         vk , k = 7                                              0.260           0.958          0.650


           Table 3: Quantitative results about fine-tuned parameters of key-frame attention.


      Method                                                     CLIP-text↑      CLIP-temp↑       SSIM ↑
      WQ                                                            0.253           0.951          0.634
      W K, W V                                                      0.241           0.957          0.635
      W Q, W K , W V                                                0.241           0.958          0.635
      W Q, W K , W V , W O                                          0.244           0.961          0.641
      add Lora (Hu et al., 2021) on W Q , W K , W V , W O           0.237           0.957          0.630
      WO                                                            0.246           0.960          0.643



C.1     T HE D ESIGN OF K EY AND VALUE IN S ELF -ATTENTION AND F INE - TUNED PARAMETERS

Let [; ] denote the concat operation. We consider using these embeddings as key and value: (1) v i :
original spatial self-attention in T2I models. (2) v k , which is our key-frame attention. We select
four different key frames. (3) [v m ; v i ] (Qi et al., 2023), where m = Round( N2 ). (4) [v 1 ; v i−1 ] (Wu
et al., 2022; Shin et al., 2023). (5) [v 1 ; v i−1 ; v i+1 ], which includes bi-directional information.
(6) [v 1 ; v i ; v i−1 ; v i+1 ]. As shown in Figure 7, key-frame attention shows the highest temporal
consistency, implying that utilizing a key frame to propagate throughout videos is useful. As shown
in Table 2, selecting a key-frame as key and value achieves high temporal consistency performance,
which is consistent with the qualitative results. There is no significant difference in different key
frame selections. In addition, adding the current frame features v i shows less temporal inconsistency
because the v i contains different information between frames. For example, the color of the car
turned red in [v m ; v i ], [v 1 ; v i ; v i−1 ; v i+1 ] following v i (column 2). Further, we conduct following
experiments to investigate finetune which parameters is more useful: (1) W Q . (2) W O . (3) W K , W V .
(4)W Q , W K , W V . (5) W Q , W K , W V , W O . (6) add Lora (Hu et al., 2021) on W Q , W K , W V , W O .
Based on the results presented in Table 3, we observe that fine-tuning W O yields superior performance
while utilizing fewer parameters, making it our ultimate selection.


             source video


Figure 7: Comparisons with different designs of key and value in self-attention. The green color
marked our choice.
                                              13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   Table 4: Quantitative results about different local locations for introducing temporal attention.


            Method                                                             CLIP-text↑           CLIP-temp↑               SSIM ↑
            before self-attention                                                  0.225                  0.917                0.589
            after self-attention                                                   0.241                  0.909                0.629
            after cross-attention                                                  0.241                  0.902                0.616
            after FNN                                                              0.251                  0.908                0.630
            with self-attention (random initialization)                            0.230                  0.909                0.585
            with self-attention                                                    0.238                  0.920                0.621


 (a) Comparison with different initialization (b) Comparison with different local locations of temporal attention in transformer block
                    random        using pretrain                      before            with             after            after
  source video                                     source video                                                                        after FNN
                 initialization      weights                      self-attention   self-attention   self-attention   cross-attention


 “the back view of a woman with beautiful                                “the back view of a woman with beautiful
        scenery”→ “···, starry sky”                                      scenery”→ “···, sunrising , early morning”
(c) Comparison with different global locations of temporal attention
                 ControlNet +                                       encoder          decoder        block 1,2,3         block 1,2       block 2,3
  source video      UNet          ControlNet          UNet
                                                                    of UNet          of UNet         in UNet             in UNet         in UNet


                                           “a person is dancing”→ “a panda is dancing”


Figure 8: Ablation studies of (a) the way to initialize and the incorporation of (b) local positions and
(c) global positions for introducing temporal attention. The green color marked our choice.
C.2     T HE WAY TO I NITIALIZATION AND THE I NCORPORATION OF L OCAL AND G LOBAL
        P OSITIONS FOR I NTRODUCING T EMPORAL ATTENTION

As shown in Figure 8(a), using pretrain spatial self-attention weights as initialization achieves better
performance. Next, we explore following potential locations to incorporate temporal attention in
transformer blocks: (1) before self-attention. (2) with self-attention. (3) after self-attention. (4)after
cross-attention. (5) after FNN. As shown in Figure 8(b), before self-attention and with self-attention
result in the best temporal consistency. This is because the input of these two locations is the same
as spatial self-attention, which serves as the initial weight of temporal attention. Notably, with
self-attention shows higher text alignment, making it our final choice. Moreover, we find the after
FNN location yields the worst temporal consistency and should be avoided. The quantitative results
are shown in Table 4, which is consistent with the qualitative results.
To investigate the optimal global location for adding temporal attention, we first conduct the following
experiments: (1) ControlNet+UNet. (2) ControlNet. (3) UNet. (4) Encoder of UNet. (5) Decoder
of UNet. As shown in Figure 8(c), incorporating temporal attention only to the ControlNet fails to
preserve the background and removing it does not decrease performance (all vs UNet). This suggests
that ControlNet only extracts condition-related features (e.g. pose) and discards the other features
(e.g. background), while U-Net, which is used for generation task, preserves all image information.
As such, we ultimately choose to add temporal attention to UNet. Additionally, the decoder location


                                                                       14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 5: Quantitative results about different global locations for introducing temporal attention. These
quantitative results diverge from human evaluation and we ultimately prioritize human evaluation as
our primary measure and list them as references.


                        Method          CLIP-text↑      CLIP-temp↑         SSIM ↑
                        all                0.235           0.955           0.621
                        controlnet         0.243           0.959           0.643
                        unet               0.237           0.955           0.629
                        encoder            0.241           0.956           0.669
                        decoder            0.239           0.955           0.638
                        Block 1,2          0.239           0.957           0.632
                        Block 1,3          0.237           0.954           0.640
                        Block 2,3          0.242           0.956           0.656
                        Block 1,2,3        0.236           0.958           0.630


                   Table 6: Ablation studies for key components in ControlVideo.


                  Method                      CLIP-text↑      CLIP-temp↑       SSIM ↑
                  Stable Diffusion                 0.282           0.898           0.608
                  w/o temporal attention           0.264           0.936           0.724
                  w/o key-frame attention          0.262           0.922           0.712
                  w/o control                      0.276           0.956           0.642
                  Our full version                 0.266           0.964           0.738



achieves better performance than the encoder. This may be because, in U-Net, the decoder contains
more information than the encoder by using skip connections to incorporate features from the encoder.
Next, we investigate the location in UNet by following experiments: (1) all; (2) Block 1,2; (3) Block
1,3; (4) Block 2,3; (5) Block 1,2,3, which is UNet except middle block. As shown in Figure 8(c), the
Block 1,2,3 shows similar performance with all while with less parameters, which is chosen as the
final design. The quantitative results are shown in Table 5, which diverges from human evaluation.
We ultimately prioritize human evaluation as our primary measure and list them as references. From
human evaluation aspects (see Figure 4 in the main text), we find adding temporal attention on Block
1,2,3 in UNet achieves good performance.


C.3   A BLATION STUDIES FOR K EY C OMPONENTS IN C ONTROLVIDEO

As shown in Table 6, the quantitative results are consistent with the qualitative results in the main
text. We can observe that introducing additional control mainly contributes to faithfulness a lot. The
key-frame attention and temporal attention mainly contribute to temporal consistency and faithfulness.


                                     Table 7: Quantitative results.


          Method                                        CLIP-text↑    CLIP-temp↑           SSIM ↑
          Stable Diffusion(Rombach et al., 2022)           0.282            0.898          0.608
          Tune-A-Video(Wu et al., 2022)                    0.262            0.939          0.636
          Videp-P2P(Liu et al., 2023a)                     0.184            0.960          0.912
          Vid2vid-zero(Wang et al., 2023)                  0.269            0.951          0.638
          Fatezero(Qi et al., 2023)                        0.255            0.955          0.711
          Ours                                             0.266            0.964          0.738


                                                   15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D    C OMPARISONS
In this section, we list the automatic metrics in Table 7 as a reference.


                                                  16
